@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel hybrid gravitational search and pattern search algorithm for load frequency control of nonlinear power system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Selection of objective function and controller structure is vital for controller design.An objective function using ITAE, damping ratio and settling times is proposed.The concept is applied to design an hGSA-PS-based PI/PID controller for LFC.Nonlinear interconnected power system model with GRC, GDB and time delay is considered.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Load frequency control (LFC),PID controller,Gravitational search algorithm (GSA),Pattern search (PS),Governor dead-band non-linearity,Generation rate constraint (GRC),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a hybrid gravitational search algorithm (GSA) and pattern search (PS) technique is proposed for load frequency control (LFC) of multi-area power system. Initially, various conventional error criterions are considered, the PI controller parameters for a two-area power system are optimized employing GSA and the effect of objective function on system performance is analyzed. Then GSA control parameters are tuned by carrying out multiple runs of algorithm for each control parameter variation. After that PS is employed to fine tune the best solution provided by GSA. Further, modifications in the objective function and controller structure are introduced and the controller parameters are optimized employing the proposed hybrid GSA and PS (hGSA-PS) approach. The superiority of the proposed approach is demonstrated by comparing the results with some recently published modern heuristic optimization techniques such as firefly algorithm (FA), differential evolution (DE), bacteria foraging optimization algorithm (BFOA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), hybrid BFOA-PSO, NSGA-II and genetic algorithm (GA) for the same interconnected power system. Additionally, sensitivity analysis is performed by varying the system parameters and operating load conditions from their nominal values. Also, the proposed approach is extended to two-area reheat thermal power system by considering the physical constraints such as reheat turbine, generation rate constraint (GRC) and governor dead band (GDB) nonlinearity. Finally, to demonstrate the ability of the proposed algorithm to cope with nonlinear and unequal interconnected areas with different controller coefficients, the study is extended to a nonlinear three unequal area power system and the controller parameters of each area are optimized using proposed hGSA-PS technique.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The main objective of a power system utility is to maintain continuous supply of power with an acceptable quality to all the consumers in the system. The system will be in equilibrium, when there is a balance between the power demand and the power generated. There are two basic control mechanisms used to achieve power balance, reactive power balance (acceptable voltage profile) and real power balance (acceptable frequency values). The former is called the automatic voltage regulator (AVR) and the latter is called the automatic load frequency control (LFC). For multiarea power systems, which normally consist of interconnected control area, in this regard LFC is an important aspect to keep the system frequency and the interconnected area tie-line power as close as possible to the intended values [1]. The mechanical input power to the generators is used to control the system as it is affected by the output electrical power demand and to maintain the power exchange between the areas as planned. LFC monitors the system frequency and tie-line flows, calculates the net change in the generation required according to the change in demand and changes the set position of the generators within the area so as to keep the time average of the ACE (area control error) at a low value. ACE is generally treated as controlled output of LFC. As the ACE is adjusted to zero by the LFC, both frequency and tie-line power errors will become zero [2].Several control strategies for LFC of power systems have been proposed in order to maintain the system frequency and tie-line power flow at their scheduled values during normal and disturbed conditions. In [3], a critical literature review on the LFC of power systems has been presented. It is observed that considerable research work is going on to propose better LFC systems based on modern control theory [4], neural network [5], fuzzy system theory [6], reinforcement learning [7] and ANFIS approach [8]. But, these advanced approaches are complicated and need familiarity of users to these techniques thus reducing their applicability. Alternatively, a classical proportional integral derivative (PID) controller and its variant remain an engineer's preferred choice due to its structural simplicity, reliability and the favourable ratio between performances and cost. Additionally, it also offers simplified dynamic modelling, lower user-skill requirements and minimal development effort, which are major issues of in engineering practice. In recent times, new artificial intelligence-based approaches have been proposed to optimize the PI/PID controller parameters for LFC system. In [9], several classical controllers structures such as Integral (I), proportional integral (PI), integral derivative (ID), PID and integral double derivative (IDD) have been applied and their performance has been compared for LFC system. Nanda et al. [10] have demonstrated that bacterial foraging optimization algorithm (BFOA) optimized controller provides better performance than GA-based controllers and conventional controllers for an interconnected power system. Ali and Abd-Elazim [11] have employed a BFOA to optimize the PI controller parameters and shown its superiority over GA in a two area non-reheat thermal system. Shabani et al. [12] employed an imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA) to optimize the PID controller parameters in a multiarea multi unit power system. In [13], a modified objective function using integral of time multiplied by absolute value of error (ITAE), damping ratio of dominant eigenvalues and settling time is proposed where the PI controller parameters are optimized employed differential evolution (DE) algorithm and the results are compared with BFOA and GA optimized ITAE-based PI controller to show its superiority.Recently, new hybrid/modified optimization techniques have been proposed in the literature. A self-organizing migration algorithm (SOMA) has been proposed in [14] for online tuning of an actively compensated Langmuir probe system. The results are compared with simulated annealing (SA) and differential evolution (DE) algorithm to show the superiority of SOMA. In [15], support vector regression (SVR) model with chaotic GA (SVRCGA) has been proposed to forecast the tourism demands where the superiority of SVRCGA model is demonstrated by comparing the results of other approaches reported in the literature. In [16], an enhanced cultural algorithms by diversified social networks has been employed to resolve complex mechanical design optimization problems and is compared to other well known algorithms from literature to illustrate its efficiency. An improved algorithm based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) by trying to increase the ability of local search around optimum with focusing on best found peak in each environment is proposed for optimization in dynamic environments [17]. The results of the proposed approach are evaluated on moving peak benchmarks and are compared with results of several state of the art algorithms to show its advantage. A cat swarm optimization (CSO) algorithm is applied in [18] to determine the best optimal impulse response coefficients of FIR filters, while trying to meet the respective ideal frequency response characteristics. The results of the CSO-based approach have been compared to those of other well known optimization methods such as real coded genetic algorithm (RCGA), standard PSO and DE to verify its superiority.It obvious from literature survey that the performance of the power system not only depends on the artificial techniques employed, but also on the controller structure and chosen objective function. Hence, proposing and implementing new high-performance heuristic optimization algorithms to real world problems are always welcome. Gravitational search algorithm (GSA) is a newly developed heuristic optimization method based on the law of gravity and mass interactions [19]. It has been reported in the literature that GSA is more efficient in terms of CPU time and offers higher precision with more consistent results [20]. However, the success of GSA in solving a specific problem crucially depends on appropriately choosing its control parameter values namely gravitational constant G0, population size NP, number of iteration T and constant α. It is highly desirable to determine appropriate control parameter values which are often problem-dependent. The key to achieving high performance for any meta-heuristic algorithm is to maintain a good balance between exploitation and exploration during search. GSA being a global optimizing method is designed to explore the search space and most likely gives an optimal/near-optimal solution if used alone. On the other hand, local optimizing methods like pattern search (PS) are designed to exploit a local area, but they are usually not good at exploring wide area and hence not applied alone for global optimization [21,22]. Due to their respective strength and weakness, there is motivation for the hybridization of GSA and PS.In a PID controller, the derivative mode improves stability of the system and increases speed of the controller response but it produces unreasonable size control inputs to the plant. Also, any noise in the control input signal will result in large plant input signals which often lead to complications in practical applications. The practical solution to these problems is to put a first filter on the derivative term and tune its pole so that the chattering due to the noise does not occur since it attenuates high frequency noise. In view of the above, an attempt has been made in the present paper for the optimal design of hybrid GSA and PS (hGSA-PS)-based PI/PIDF controller for LFC in a multi-area interconnected power system.The aim of the present work is(i)to study the effect of objective function of the system performanceto tune the control parameters of GSAto demonstrate the advantages of proposed hGSA-PS technique over other techniques such as GSA, FA, PSO, hBFOA-PSO, NSGA-II, DE, BFOA and GA for the similar problemto show advantages of using a modified controller structure and objective function to further increase the performance of the power systemto study the effect of the physical constraints such as time delay, generation rate constraints and governor dead band nonlinearity on the system performance and design the controllers for this conditions.Load frequency control (LFC) provides the control only during normal changes in load which are small and slow. So the nonlinear equations which describe the dynamic behaviour of the system can be linearized around an operating point during these small load changes and a linear incremental model can be used for the analysis, thus making the analysis simpler. The linear model of LFC for an interconnected power system is presented in this section. Each area of the power system consists of speed governing system, hydraulic valve actuator (governor), turbine, generator and load as shown in Fig. 1. To simplify the frequency-domain analyses, transfer functions are used to model each component of the area [2].The speed governing system has two inputs reference power setting ΔPref and frequency ΔF and one output, i.e. governor output command ΔPG(s) given by(1)ΔPG(s)=ΔPref(s)−1RΔF(s)The governor valve is represented by transfer function as(2)GG(s)=ΔPV(s)ΔPG(s)=11+sTgThe transfer function of turbine is given by(3)GT(s)=ΔPT(s)ΔPV(s)=11+sTtThe generator and load is represented by the transfer function:(4)GP(s)=KP1+sTPwhere KP=1/D and TP=2H/FD.Each area has three inputs and two outputs. The inputs are the controller input ΔPref (also denoted as u), load disturbance ΔPD and tie-line power error ΔPtie. The outputs are the generator frequency ΔF and area control error (ACE) given by equation (5).(5)ACE=BΔF+ΔPtiewhere B is the frequency bias parameter.The generator load system has two inputs ΔPT(s) and ΔPD(s) with one out put ΔF(s) given by(6)ΔF(s)=GP(s)[ΔPT(s)−ΔPD(s)]The generator always adjusts its output so as to meet the power demand. In normal steady state, the turbine power PT keeps balance with the total power demand PD resulting in zero acceleration and a constant speed or frequency. Perturbations ΔPT and ΔPD in these powers will upset the above balance and if the difference power ΔPT−ΔPD is positive, then the generator rotor unit will accelerate and vice versa. The turbine power increment ΔPT depends on the valve power increment ΔPV which in turn depends on the governor output command ΔPG.The system under investigation consists of two-area interconnected power system of non-reheat thermal plant as shown in Fig. 2. Each area has a rating of 2000MW with a nominal load of 1000MW. The system is widely used in literature is for the design and analysis of automatic load frequency control of interconnected areas [11,13]. In Fig. 2, B1 and B2 are the frequency bias parameters; ACE1 and ACE2 are area control errors; u1 and u2 are the control outputs from the controller; R1 and R2 are the governor speed regulation parameters in pu Hz; Tg1 and Tg2 are the speed governor time constants in s; ΔPG1 and ΔPG2 are the governor output command (pu); Tt1 and Tt2 are the turbine time constant in sec; ΔPT1 and ΔPT2 are the change in turbine output powers; ΔPD1 and ΔPD2 are the load demand changes; ΔPTie is the incremental change in tie-line power (pu); KPS1 and KPS2 are the power system gains; TPS1 and TPS2 are the power system time constant in s; T12 is the synchronizing coefficient and ΔF1 and ΔF2 are the system frequency deviations in Hz. The relevant parameters are given in Appendix.Nonlinear control systems usually pose substantially higher data, design, implementation, and maintenance demands than linear control systems. Power electronics and power system applications employ various forms of linear controllers such as proportional-integral (PI) and proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controllers, to achieve control objectives mainly specified by the required transient and steady-state requirements. The classical PID controller and its variants are preferred because of their structural simplicity, reliability, and the favourable ratio between performance and cost. Beyond these benefits, these controllers also offer simplified dynamic modelling, lower user-skill requirements, and minimal development effort, which are issues of substantial importance to engineering practice. A control without derivative (D) mode is used when: fast response of the system is not required, large disturbances and noises are present during operation of the process, and there are large transport delays in the system. PID controllers are used when stability and fast response are required. Derivative mode improves stability of the system and enables increase in proportional gain and decrease in integral gain which in turn increases speed of the controller response. However, when the input signal has sharp corners, the derivative term will produce unreasonable size control inputs to the plant. Also, any noise in the control input signal will result in large plant input signals. These reasons often lead to complications in practical applications. The practical solution to the these problems is to put a first filter on the derivative term and tune its pole so that the chattering due to the noise does not occur since it attenuates high frequency noise [26]. In view of the above, a filter is used for the derivative term in the present paper.The structure of PID controller with derivative filter is shown in Fig. 3where KP, KI, and KD are the proportional, integral, and derivative gains, respectively, and N is the derivative filter coefficient. When used as PI controller, the derivative path along with the filter is removed from Fig. 3. The error inputs to the controllers are the respective area control errors (ACE) given by(7)e1(t)=ACE1=B1ΔF1+ΔPtie(8)e2(t)=ACE2=B2ΔF2−ΔPtieThe control inputs of the power system u1 and u2 are the outputs of the controllers. The transfer function of the controller is given by(9)TFPID=KP+KI1s+KDNss+NWhile designing a controller, the objective function is first defined based on the desired specifications and constraints. The design of objective function to tune controller parameters is generally based on a performance index that considers the entire closed loop response. Some of the realistic control specifications for load frequency control (LFC) are [2]:(i)The frequency error should return to zero following a load change.The integral of frequency error should be minimum.The control loop must be characterized by a sufficient degree of stability.Under normal operating conditions, each area should carry its own load and the power exchange between control areas following a load perturbation should maintained at its prescheduled value as quickly as possible.To determine the optimum values of controller parameters, conventional objective functions are considered at the first instance. The objective functions considered are IAE, ISE, ITSE and ITAE as given below:(10)J1=ISE=∫0tsimΔF1+ΔF2+ΔPtie2dt(11)J2=IAE=∫0tsimΔF1+ΔF2+ΔPtiedt(12)J3=ITSE=∫0tsimΔF1+ΔF2+ΔPtie2tdt(13)J4=ITAE=∫0tsimΔF1+ΔF2+ΔPtie⋅tdtIn the above equations, ΔF1 and ΔF2 are the system frequency deviations, ΔPtie is the incremental change in tie-line power, and tsim is the time range of simulation.The problem constraints are the PI/PIDF controller parameter bounds. Therefore, the design problem can be formulated as the following optimization problem:(14)MinimizeJSubject toFor PI controller:(15)KPmin≤KP≤KPmax,KImin≤KI≤KImaxFor PIDF controller:(16)KPmin≤KP≤KPmax,KImin≤KI≤KImax,KDmin≤KD≤KDmax,Nmin≤N≤Nmaxwhere J is the objective function (J1, J2, J3, and J4) and KPIDmin and KPIDmax, are the minimum and maximum value of the PI/PID control parameters, respectively. As reported in the literature [10,13,28], the minimum and maximum values of PID controller parameters are chosen as −2.0 and 2.0, respectively. The range for filter coefficient N is selected as 1 and 300 [26–28].Gravitational search algorithm (GSA) is one of the newest heuristic algorithms inspired by the Newtonian laws of gravity and motion [20]. In GSA, agents are considered as objects and their performance is measured by their masses. All these objects attract each other by the force of gravity and this force causes a global movement of all objects towards the objects with a heavier mass. Hence masses co-operate using a direct form of communication through gravitational force. The heavy masses which correspond to good solution move more slowly than lighter ones, this guarantees the exploitation step of the algorithm.In GSA, each mass (agent) has four specifications: position, inertial mass, active gravitational mass, and passive gravitational mass. The position of the mass corresponds to a solution of the problem and its gravitational and inertia masses are determined using a fitness function. In other words, each mass presents a solution and the algorithm is navigated by properly adjusting the gravitational and inertia masses. By lapse of time, it is expected that masses be attracted by the heavier mass. This mass will present an optimum solution in the search space. The GSA could be considered as an isolated system of masses. It is like a small artificial world of masses obeying the Newtonian laws of gravitation and motion. Masses obey the following laws [19,20,23,24].Each particle attracts every other particle and the gravitational force between the two particle is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the distance between them R. It has been reported in literature that R provides better results than R2 in all experiment cases [19].The current velocity of any mass equals the sum of the fraction of its previous velocity and the variation in the velocity. Variation in the velocity or acceleration of any mass is equal to the force acted on the system divided by mass of inertia.For a system with n agents (masses), the ith position of an agent Xiis defined by(17)Xi=(xi1,…,xid,…,xin)fori=1,2,…,nwherexidrepresents the position of ith agent in the dth dimension.At a specific time t, the force acting on mass i from mass j is defined as(18)Fijd(t)=G(t)Mpi(t)*Maj(t)Rij(t)+∈(xjd(t)−xid(t))where Majis the active gravitational mass related to agent j, Mpiis the passive gravitational mass related to agent i, G(t) is the gravitational constant at time t, ∈ is small constant, and Rij(t) is the Euclidian distance between two agents i and j given by(19)Rij(t)=Xi(t),Xj(t)2The stochastic characteristic in GSA algorithm is incorporated by assuming that the total forces that act on agent i in a dimension d be a randomly weight sum of dth components of the forces exerted from other agents as(20)Fid(t)=∑j=1,j≠inrandjFijd(t)where randjis a random number in the interval [0,1].The acceleration of the agent i at the time t and in the direction dth,aid(t)is given by the law of the motion as(21)aid(t)=Fid(t)Mii(t)where Mii(t) is the inertia mass of ith agent.The velocity of an agent is updated depending on the current velocity and acceleration. The velocity and position are updated as(22)vid(t+1)=rand*ivid(t)+aid(t)(23)xid(t+1)=xid(t)+vid(t+1)where randiis a uniform random variable in the interval (0, 1). The random number is used to give a randomized characteristic to the search process.The gravitational constant G is initialized at the beginning. To control the search accuracy, it is reduced with time and expressed as function of the initial value (G0) and time t as(24)G(t)=G0e−αt/Twhere α is a constant and T is the number of iteration.The masses (gravitational and inertia) are evaluated by the fitness function. Efficient agents are characterized by heavier masses. Assuming the equal gravitational and inertia mass, the values of masse are calculated using the map of fitness. The gravitational and inertial masses are updated as(25)Mai=Mpi=Mii=Mi,i=1,2,…,n(26)mi(t)=fiti(t)−worst(t)best(t)−worst(t)(27)Mi(t)=mi(t)∑j=1Nmj(t)where fiti(t) represents the fitness value of the agent i at time t and best(t) is defined for a minimization problem as(28)Best(t)=minj∈{1,…,n}fitj(t)(29)Worst(t)=maxj∈(1,…,n)fitj(t)To achieve a good compromise between exploration and exploitation, the number of agents is reduced with lapse of Eq. (20) and therefore a set of agents with bigger mass are used for applying their force to the other.The performance of GSA is improved by controlling exploration and exploitation. To avoid trapping in a local optimum, GSA must use the exploration at beginning. By lapse of iterations, exploration must fade out and exploitation must fade in. In GSA only the Kbest (which is a function of time, with the initial value K0 at the beginning and decreasing with time) agents attract the others. At the beginning, all agents apply the force, and as time passes Kbest is decreased linearly and at the end there is just one agent applying force to the others. Therefore, Eq. (20) is modified as(30)Fid(t)=∑j∈Kbest,j≠irandjFijd(t)where Kbest is the set of first K agents with the best fitness value and biggest mass k.The different steps of the GSA are the followings:i.Identify the search space of parameters to be searched.Initialize the variables.Evaluate the fitness of each agent.Update G(t), best(t), worst(t), and Mi(t) for i=1,2, …, n.Calculate the total force in various directions.Calculate the acceleration and velocity.Update the position of the agents.Repeat steps (iii) to (vii) until the stop criteria is reached.EndGSA is characterized as a simple concept which is easy to implement and computationally efficient. In order to improve exploration and exploitation capabilities, GSA has a flexible and balanced mechanism. More precise search is achieved by assuming a higher inertia mass which causes a slower motion of agents in the search space. Faster convergence is obtained by considering a higher gravitational mass which causes a higher attraction of agents. GSA is a memory-less algorithm but works powerfully like the other memory-based algorithms. The nature inspired population-based techniques have proved themselves to be effective solutions to optimization problems control parameters and objective function are involved in these optimization techniques, and appropriate selection of these is a key point for success. It has been reported that GSA tends to find the global optimum faster than other algorithms and has a higher convergence rate for unimodal high-dimensional functions. The performance of GSA for multi-modal functions is comparable to other algorithms [19].The pattern search (PS) optimization technique is a derivative free evolutionary algorithm suitable to solve a variety of optimization problems that lie outside the scope of the standard optimization methods. It is simple in concept, easy to implement, and computationally efficient. It possesses a flexible and well-balanced operator to enhance and adapt the global search and fine tune local search [25]. The PS algorithm computes a sequence of points that may or may not approaches to the optimal point. The algorithm starts with a set of points called mesh, around the initial points. The initial points or current points are provided by the GSA technique. The mesh is created by adding the current point to a scalar multiple of a set of vectors called a pattern. If a point in the mesh is having better objective function value, it becomes the current point at the next iteration [22].The PS method consists of a sequence of polls or iterations xk, k∈N. A number of trial stepsskiwith i=1, 2, …, p are added to the iteration xkto obtain a number of trial pointsxki=xk+skiat each iteration k. The objective function J to be optimized is evaluated on these trial points through a series of exploratory moves, which describe a method in which the trial points are evaluated, and the obtained values are compared with J(xk). Then, the trial stepsk*corresponding to minimum value ofJ(xk+ski)−J(xk)<0is selected to produce the subsequent estimation of the patterns pollsxk+1=xk+sk*. The trial stepsskiare produced by a step length parameterΔk∈R+nwhich is also updated through time depending on the value of xk+1. The evolution of Δkestablishes the convergence properties of the algorithm. These elements are explained in more details below.The aim of a pattern is to provide a direction to produce the new trial points. A pattern is defined by two elements: a basis matrix B and a generating matrix Ck. These matrixes are used to find out the possible directions of the trial steps which will shape the next pattern. The basis matrix can be any non-singular matrix B∈Rn×n. The generating matrix is a matrix Ck∈Zn×p, where p>2n and essentially contains the directions in the space Rnon which the trial points are to be produced. The structure of matrix Ckis given by(31)Ck=[Mk⋮−Mk⋮Lk]Generally, the matrix Ckis composed of a set of search directions defined as the columns of a matrix Mk∈Zn×nalong with its opposites, −Mkand a matrix Lk∈Zn×(p−2n). Lkensures that the original iterate xkis also a possible trial point. The size of Mkand Lkare determined in function on the size of the domain of J, i.e. n.A pattern is then defined by the columns of the matrix Pk=BCk. The length of the direction vectors is adjusted through the step size parameter Δk. The final trial step is formed by the columns of the following equation:(32)ski=ΔkBckiwhereckidenotes a column ofCk=[ck1…ckp]. Δkprovides as a step length parameter as it acts to adjust the length ofski. At iteration k, it defines a sequence of trial pointxk+skiwith i=1, 2, …, p as any point of the formJ(xki)=J(xk+ski), where xkis the current iterate.PS methods progress by calculating the value of the objective function J on each trial point before computing xk+1. The choice of exploratory moves must ensure two things to allow the broadest possible choice of exploratory moves.The direction of any step skaccepted at iteration k is defined by the pattern Pkand its length is determined by Δk. Mathematically, this can be expressed as(33)sk=ΔkPk≡ΔkBCkA legitimate exploratory moves algorithm would be one that by some means guesses which of the steps defined by ΔkPkwill produce a less value and then calculates the function at only one such step. At worst case, a legitimate exploratory moves algorithm is one that evaluates all skmodifications and returns the step that produced the least function value. This step trial is then used to generate the new estimate xk+1. This can be expressed mathematically as(34)If0≤min{f(xk+ski),ski∈Δk[Mk,−Mk]}<f(xk),thenxk+1=xk+sk*This process repeated until the minimum is reached.A PS method has the following operation sequence. First, the objective function is evaluated in each trial pointsxk+ski, and the valuesk*associated with the minimum ofρk=f(xk+ski)−f(xk)is chosen subject to ρk<0. Otherwise, xk+1=xk. Finally, the PS proceeds to update the values of Ckand Δkto produce a new series of exploratory moves. The aim of the updating for Δkis to forceρki=f(xk+ski)−f(xk)<0. A poll with ρk<0 is successful; otherwise, the poll is unsuccessful.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
