@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated intuitionistic fuzzy AHP and SWOT method for outsourcing reverse logistics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study a criteria evaluation system for outsourcing reverse logistics (ORL).A hybrid SWOT and intuitionistic fuzzy AHP model evaluates strategic factors in ORL.Triangular intuitionistic fuzzy numbers are used to model ambiguity and uncertainty.The proposed model is validated through a case study.Focusing on core business is shown to be the organization's strategic priority.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reverse logistics,Decision making factors,Outsourcing,SWOT analysis,Intuitionistic fuzzy AHP,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider the problem faced by a company that must outsource reverse logistics (RL) activities to third-party providers. Addressing RL outsourcing problems has become increasingly relevant issue in the management science and decision making literatures. The correct evaluation and ranking of the decision criteria/priorities determining the selection of the best third-party RL providers (3PRLPs) is essential for the competitive performance of the outsourcing company. The method proposed in this study allows to identify and classify these decision criteria. First, the relevant criteria and sub-criteria are identified using a SWOT analysis. Then, Intuitionistic Fuzzy AHP is used to evaluate the relative importance weights among the criteria and the corresponding sub-criteria. These relative weights are implemented in a novel extension of Mikhailov's fuzzy preference programming method to produce local weights for all criteria and sub-criteria. Finally, these local weights are used to assign a global weight to each sub-criterion and create a ranking. We discuss the results obtained by applying the proposed model to a case study of a real company. In particular, these results show that the most important priority for the company when delegating RL activities to 3PRLPs is to focus on the core business, while reducing costs constitutes one of its least important priorities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Reverse logistics (RL) is one of the key features of a company that affect customers’ purchasing decisions in a competitive environment. RL can be defined as “the process of planning and implementing the efficient and cost effective control of the flow of raw materials, inventory being processed, final goods, and relevant information, from consumption point to origin point, aimed at reevaluation or proper disposal” [1]. RL is about the processing of returned goods, how to deal with these items properly and all the operations related to the reuse of goods and materials in order to improve the productivity, profitability, and efficiency of the company. Thus, RL involves all supply chain activities which occur in a reverse order: it is the process comprising the movement and transfer of goods and products that can be returned in the supply chain [2].RL can increase the competitive advantage of the company by accepting returned goods and gaining customers’ trust in purchasing decisions [3]. Immediate and effective RL can enhance customer satisfaction [4] which is highly important for maintaining and improving competitive advantages. However, as observed by Kannan et al. [5], Krumwiede and Sheu [6], and Meyer [7], RL processes can be remarkably complex.Due to resource constraints, most companies are not able to control complicated networks and implement an effective RL plan. As a result, companies need to outsource part or all of their RL activities. Busi [8] simply defined outsourcing as the “strategic decision of an enterprise to prevent doing an activity in-house (p. 8)”. In other words, outsourcing means subcontracting to a third party one or more of the operations that cannot adequately performed in-house [26]. In many cases, organizations choose other companies (or firms) to investigate RL advantages and problems, returned goods management, and customer service operations and, hence, delegate the relevant processes to them. These firms are known as “third-party RL providers” (3PRLPs). In this sense, outsourcing RL processes turn out to be particularly interesting from the strategic viewpoint [5,9].Outsourcing, however, is not always successful [10] and it is actually profitable for the company only if it is done properly. A proper implementation of the outsourcing procedure is possible through a set of data analyses associated with the organization's strategies about risk taking, profitable outlooks, focus on core operations, strategic alignment, internal processes, external environment, human resources, etc. The correct evaluation and ranking of the decision criteria/priorities determining the selection of the best third-party RL providers (3PRLPs) is essential for the competitive performance of the outsourcing company.Although outsourcing is being considered an important issue in several scientific fields, the number of studies concerning the analysis of outsourcing RL is very limited. Thus, despite the existence of some interesting and recent literature on outsourcing RL (see, for example [11–13]), the study of outsourcing RL decision making is still to be considered in its early stages. In particular, most of conducted studies discuss how to select 3PRLPs without proposing a detailed analysis of the strategic aspect of outsourcing RL.We consider the problem of outsourcing RL activities faced by a company or organization that must sub-contract to a third party operations that cannot be adequately performed in-house. The company must decide which ones are the RL activities to outsource and to which third party so as to guarantee a competitive performance on the market.In order to select the best third-party RL provider (3PRLP), the company managers need to correctly identify and evaluate the factors that play a relevant role in the outsourcing process and to rank the decision criteria (or priorities) that must be met by the available 3PRLPs. Thus, the problem becomes to design a suitable method that allows the managers to both identify and rank the factors (and the corresponding decision criteria) to refer to when taking RL outsourcing decisions. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are no previous studies that attempt to identify the elements of success and/or failure in outsourcing RL decision making.In the current paper, we focus our attention on the identification and evaluation of the important factors affecting manages’ decisions about outsourcing RL. The method we propose to rank the priorities of the outsourcing company combines Strengths-Weaknesses-Opportunities-Threats (SWOT) analysis with an Intuitionistic Fuzzy (IF) version of Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), where local weights of decision criteria and sub-criteria are obtained through a novel intuitionistic fuzzy extension of group preference programming.The integrated method can be outlined as follows. First, we use a SWOT analysis to identify the criteria and sub-criteria that are considered relevant by the company when selecting a 3PRLP. Then, we use an Intuitionistic Fuzzy AHP (IF-AHP) to evaluate the relative importance weights among the criteria and the corresponding sub-criteria. The relative weights are given in terms of Tringular Intuitionistic Fuzzy Numbers (TIFNs), while the consistency rate (CR) of each comparison matrix is measured by the standard Chang's Method [14,15]. We implement the relative weights in an intuitionistic fuzzy preference programming (IFPP) model to produce local weights for all criteria and sub-criteria. Finally, as in AHP, local weights of sub-criteria are combined with those of the corresponding main criteria to produce global weights which are in turn used to rank all the sub-criteria. Fig. 1provides a graphical representation of the phases just described.The IFPP model that we use to derive the local priorities (local weights) from uncertain pair-wise comparison judgments (comparison matrices) expressed by TIFNs is an extension of the fuzzy preference programming (FPP) method proposed by Mikhailov [16], Mikhailov [17] to derive priority vectors from a set of crisp or interval comparisons. This novel expansion of the FPP model to an IF setting represents the main contribution of the paper from the technical point of view.We discuss the results obtained by applying the proposed model to a case study of a real company. In particular, these results show that the most important priority for the company when delegating RL activities to 3PRLPs is to focus on the core business, while reducing costs constitutes one of the least important priorities.The specific objectives of our research can be outlined as follows.a)Designing an efficient methodology to determine and evaluate the main elements that play a role in successfully outsourcing RL activities.Developing an effective analytic hierarchy process with intuitionistic fuzzy numbers supported by a verifiable IFPP method.Synthesizing IF-AHP and SWOT so as to obtain an integrated method for analyzing strategic decision making processes.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review on RL outsourcing, the key role it plays in attracting costumers in competitive environments and the reasons for RL outsourcing decisions. Section 3 discusses the methodology and tools that we employ to develop our method. In Section 4 we define the IFPP model that will be used for local rankings, while in Section 5 we explain how to integrate the IFPP model with AHP-SWOT. Section 6 shows the results obtained by applying the proposed method to a real case study. These results are discussed and interpreted in Section 7, while Section 8 presents our conclusion.Addressing RL outsourcing problems has become an increasingly relevant issue in the management science and decision making literatures (see, Oshri et al. [18] and Zhu [19], among the most recent work).RL is a component of closed loop supply chains (CLSCs). CLSCs are a combination of forward supply chains and RL, usually organized and managed by the original equipment manufacturer that supports its own production line [20]. The RL component is often used to dispose of low consumption products. 3PRLPs have being showing their potential in this context especially in relation with and their involvement with the return of goods in international associations has expanded [4]. In fact, companies constantly have particular problems with accepting returned goods and recovering missing valuables. Thus, most of the existing research on the topic (Kannan et al., 2008; [5,9,21]) has focused on selecting and evaluating 3PRLPs for supply chains.A proper implementation of RL operations increases both customers’ satisfaction and competitiveness on the market [4]. This implementation depends on a correct choice of third-party providers when outsourcing RL so that the company can focus on other production activities and the efficiency of its supply chains increase.The main objective of outsourcing is then clear. It is to guarantee or increase the efficiency of the production processes of the company. However, the factors and the strategic priorities leading to outsourcing decisions are multiple.Mello et al. [22] state that the two most common reasons to employ outsourcing are cost reduction and quality improvement. Numerous researchers support this point of view. For example, according to Lee and Walsh [23], the most important criterion to consider when deciding whether or not to outsource and to which third-party providers is cost savings. However, it should be noted that in most cases, the objective of outsourcing in reverse supply chains is not just cost savings, but also to increase the productivity and improve the service so as to increase the overall competitiveness [12,24,25]. Previous studies conducted on outsourcing clearly show that outsourcing increase the organizational efficiency through minimizing and controlling organization costs [26,27].Moreover, outsourcing can significantly improve the expected quality level, until guaranteeing an overall quality improvement [23]. Delegating operations to a third party can improve an organization's performance when this party has the appropriate potential skills to run the operations [4,23,27,28].Another incentive for outsourcing is the lack of internal capability to perform RL operations within the organization, a fact corroborated by other studies such as those conducted by Elmuti and Kathawala [29] and Baldwing et al. [28]. Developing the necessary skills to fulfill specific tasks through constant training can be very time consuming, require much effort and be very expensive. Therefore, outsourcing is often preferred to “in-house operations”: it allows the company to concentrate time and energy on performing the tasks where it is actually competent [23].Outsourcing RL is very common in business [5,8,9]. In this regard, Ordoobadi [12] studied outsourcing RL from the economic viewpoint as a business strategy. Building on the results of [25,95], Ordoobadi [12] emphasizes that both strategic factors (i.e. outsourcing factors) and financial issues must be considered in an outsourcing model. Therefore, he recommends applying economic feasibility tools to evaluate outsourcing and explicitly states that the core activities of an organization should be managed by the organization itself, while the activities that are less important should be outsourced. Ordoobadi's model investigates the gap between in-house operation costs and outsourcing RL activities to a 3PRLP. However, this model is far from performing a complete and strategic analysis of the important factors that lead to outsourcing decision making. It does not evaluate or identify the factors related to RL outsourcing, and proposes just a few questions for identifying the core factors of the organization.Summarizing, all the existing literature agrees on the importance of identifying the factors and incentives to decide which activities must be performed in-house and which ones must be outsourced. However, none of the study conducted so far proposes a verifiable method to identify and classify outsourcing decision criteria.The methodology we propose in this research is novel and it is herein applied for the first time to perform evaluations related to outsourcing RL. As outlined in Section 1.2, we use a SWOT analysis to evaluate external and internal decision making factors in outsourcing RL. In order to overcome the quantitative restrictions intrinsic to SWOT, we integrate SWOT with AHP. We use intuitionistic fuzzy numbers (IFNs) to express in quantitative terms the otherwise linguistic assessments generally employed in the pair-wise comparisons of AHP to model individuals’ subjective judgments about the factors selected for the analysis.The literature related to the methodology proposed herein demonstrates that many studies have used a hybrid model of SWOT and AHP. See, among the most recent [30–34,92]. This kind of hybrid models is often used to improve and complement the results obtained by a SWOT analysis. In fact, AHP can quantitatively determine the importance of the factors or groups of factors considered by SWOT [35].We include below a brief review of SWOT and AHP highlighting the drawbacks of both methods that make the adoption an hybrid AHP-SWOT method necessary for a proper evaluation of decision criteria. We also dedicate a subsection to discuss the advantage of using intuitionistic fuzzy numbers instead of crisp values to express the relative weights in the hybrid AHP-SWOT model. Finally, we review some basic notions on intuitionistic fuzzy numbers.The most popular method used in strategic analysis is the analytic model known as SWOT analysis. This method simultaneously evaluates strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats [36]. In order to successfully and effectively operate on the market, organizations must be aware of internal and external factors that can influence their success or failure. In their study, Learned et al. [36] present SWOT analysis as a simple but effective tool in strategic planning that can be used by the organizations to identify such factors.Internal factors of SWOT analysis include strengths and weaknesses. Analyzing these factors means to identify and evaluate the organizational aspects that can affect the success or failure of the strategies adopted by the organization itself. External factors include opportunities and threats. Analyzing these factors means to investigate the environmental factors that cannot be controlled by the organization, but can affect its performances.SWOT analysis does not in general provide complete measures and evaluations but, if used properly, it represents a basic reference point for formulating a valid strategy. The main shortcoming of SWOT is that it provides only qualitative evaluations for the indentified factors. It does neither quantify the factors nor allow for an objective raking of the alternatives [33,35,37,92]. Integrating SWOT with AHP allows to overcome this problem.The Analytic hierarchy process (AHP) is a well-known technique used in multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) to analyze complicated decision making problems. It comprises several steps: structuring the problem, identifying decision making factors, evaluating the importance of such factors, and synthesizing all decision making factor weights [14,38–40]. For the sake of completeness, we outline the main phases of conventional AHP.I.Structuring the decision problem as a hierarchy. The overall objective of the problem occupies the top level of this hierarchy, the intermediate levels represent the decision criteria and sub-criteria, while the bottom level corresponds to the possible alternatives.Calculating the relative importance weights of the decision criteria in each level of the hierarchy. These weights are usually obtained through an averaging method so as to avoid errors derived from a single datum [39,40]. Pair-wise comparisons matrices are constructed using the fundamental scale 1 (equal importance) to 9 (extreme importance) defined by Saaty [14]. The ij element of a comparison matrix represents the priority score assigned to the ith criterion over the jth criterion. The element ji is the reciprocal value.Calculating the local weights (average weights) of the decision criteria.Ranking the alternatives. The local alternative scores are combined with the weights of the criteria to assign a final score to each alternative.The AHP method can be applied to evaluate both qualitative and quantitative elements [39], transforming also intangible factors into quantitative values that can be systematically weighted through a series of pair-wise comparisons.AHP has been proven to be one of the most practical MCDM methods [41]. In particular, Peniwati [42] showed that, when compared to other decision making methods in terms of pre-determined relevant criteria, AHP proves to be really effective. However, AHP has also been widely criticized. Perhaps the most challenging problem of AHP is that it allows for changes in the produced “rankings”. Most of the research conducted by MCDM researchers has discussed ranking changing criteria (see, for example [43–46]). In this regard, Saaty [47] points out both the remarkable characteristics and the sensitive points of AHP. He believes that ranking changes follow from structural changes that are reflected by the implementation of diverse relative scales. Thus, the non-stability of the ranking merely expresses the flexibility of the analytical structure.Recently, AHP has been also employed in outsourcing models (see, among others, the works of Yang and Peng [48], Peng [49], Lai [50] and Scott et al. [51]) and in logistic outsourcing model (see, for example [52,53]). To the best of our knowledge, none of the studies conducted in this direction has focused on a strategic analysis of the factors affecting decisions concerning outsourcing logistics (either forward or reverse).All the pair-wise comparisons that produce the relative weights of the criteria appearing in the intermediate levels of AHP are made by the decision makers (DMs) on the basis of the knowledge and information they have on the company under analysis. That is, the pair-wise comparisons which constitute the AHP key “ingredient” are based on a subjective interpretation and evaluation of the company needs. As a consequence, DMs's personal viewpoints can deeply affect the ultimate results [34,54–56].The uncertainty derived from the subjectivity and imprecision to which the evaluation process necessarily undergoes makes conventional AHP an inadequate tool to deal with situations characterized by the vagueness of linguistic assessments.This shows the necessity to upgrade a crisp SWOT-AHP model to a fuzzy one. Using intuitionistic fuzzy numbers instead of fuzzy numbers allows for an even more reliable analysis of decision problems showing increasing levels of uncertainty. Fuzzy AHP and Intuitionistic Fuzzy AHP, as well as, Fuzzy SWOT are extensively used in the current literature. See, among others, [50,52,57] for Fuzzy AHP; [58,59] for Intuitionistic Fuzzy AHP; [37,60,61] for Fuzzy SWOT.Modeling uncertainty in decision analysis is usually based on fuzzy set (FS) theory. In order to analyze any set, Zadeh (the inventor of fuzzy logic and fuzzy sets) associates a number belonging to the range [0,1] to each element of the set, this number indicating the membership degree of that element to the set [62]. Assigning just one value to an element to measure how much (membership degree) it can be part of a set is the main feature of FS theory. The membership idea has further developed in the last few years and new functions have been defined to deal with uncertainty, namely, non-membership functions and uncertainty functions [63]. Uncertainty functions reflect the fact that DMs won’t always be able to select a given membership degree. Furthermore, Atanassov [63] formalized uncertainty degrees as a function of the hesitancy shown by DMs when making decisions. Atanassov [63] called such a function an intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS). Indeed, IFSs are generalizations of standard FSs, which are considered in conditions where there is not enough information to define and operate with traditional FSs [64]. The research involving IFSs is vast and the number of applications to multi-criteria decision making surprisingly large (see, [65,66,96]).In the following, we introduce some basic concepts related to fuzzy sets, intuitionistic fuzzy sets and triangular intuitionistic fuzzy numbers (TIFNs).Definition 1[62]Let X be a nonempty set and A be a subset of X. The fuzzy setA⃛is defined as follows:Let X be a nonempty set and A be a subset of X. The intuitionistic fuzzy setA˜is defined as follows:Every fuzzy setA⃛is a particular case of an intuitionistic fuzzy set and can, therefore, be shown written as an intuitionistic fuzzy set:(3)A⃛={〈x,μA⃛(x),1−μA⃛(x)〉|x∈X}Moreover, Szmidt and Kacprzyk [67] interpretedπA˜(x)=1−μA˜(x)−νA˜(x)as an intuitionistic index of A in X.πA˜(x)measures the degree of indeterminacy of the element x in A and reflects the hesitancy degree of x in A (see also Atanassov [63]).Based upon the theory of triangular fuzzy numbers presented by Dubois and Prade [68], the concept of triangular intuitionistic fuzzy numbers is defined as follows:Definition 3A triangular intuitionistic fuzzy number (TIFN) is an intuituinistic fuzzy set corresponding to a real interval of the form[a_,a¯], witha_≤a¯. A TIFN is usually denoted byThe membership functionμa˜and the non-membership functionνa˜associated to the TIFNa˜of Eq. (4) are shown in Eqs. (5) and (6), respectively.(5)μa˜=(x−a_)δa˜/(a−a_)ifa_≤x<aδa˜ifx=a(a¯−x)δa˜/(a¯−a)ifa<x≤a¯0ifx<a_orx>a¯(6)νa˜=[a−x+(x−a_)εa˜]/(a−a_)ifa_≤x<aεa˜ifx=a[x−a+(a¯−x)εa˜]/(a¯−a)ifa<x≤a¯1ifx<a_orx>a¯Fig. 2represents the functionsμa˜andνa˜, the maximum membership degreeδa˜and the minimum non-membership degreeεa˜.The role of DMs in multi-criteria decision making is undeniable. DMs evaluate alternatives and criteria estimating their relative performances. However, the information available to DMs is often very limited, making it extremely important to create more effective decision making methods to work in uncertain environments. As mentioned above (Section 3.3), in order to account for the uncertainty component, we model the pair-wise comparisons on which AHP is based using intuitionistic fuzzy numbers.Mikhailov and Singh [69] used fuzzy preference programming to derive priority vectors from a set of interval comparisons. More precisely, given a prioritization problem with n elements, the DM is assumed to provide a set of m=1/2n(n−1) fuzzy comparisons that he uses to form an interval decision matrix:(7)A=([lij,uij])i=1,2,…,n,j=2,3,…,n,i<j,where lijand uijare the lower and upper bounds of the corresponding uncertain judgments.We extend this approach to include intuitionistic fuzzy numbers. That is, we assume lijand uijin Eq. (7) to be the bounds of the following TIFN:(8)a˜ij=〈(lij,mij,uij);δij,εij〉For more details on fuzzy preference programming please refer to [16,17,70], among others.Interval judgments are considered consistent if there exists a priority vectorw=(w1,w2,...,wn)tthat satisfies the following inequalities:(9)lij≤˜wiwj≤˜uiji=1,2,…,n,j=2,3,…,n,i<j,where≤˜stands for “fuzzy less than or equal to”.The inequalities in Eq. (9) can be represented as a set of 2m fuzzy linear constraints if we define the following membership and non-membership functions where the ratiowi/wjis linear:(10)μa˜ijwiwj=wiwj−lijδij/(mij−lij)iflij≤wiwj<mijδijifwiwj=mijuij−wiwjδij/(uij−mij)ifmij<wiwj≤uij0ifwiwj<lijorwiwj>uij(11)νa˜ijwiwj=mij−wiwj+wiwj−lijεij/(mij−lij)iflij≤wiwj<mijεijifwiwj=mijwiwj−mij+uij−wiwjεij/(uij−mij)ifmij<wiwj≤uij1ifwiwj<lijorwiwj>uijEq. (11) shows that, unlike triangular fuzzy data, the maximum of the membership function of intuitionistic fuzzy data can be a value less than 1. Moreover, it is clear that the membership and non-membership functions linearly increase on (−∞, mij) and (mij, +∞), respectively, while they linearly decrease on (mij, +∞) and (−∞, mij), respectively.The set of 2m fuzzy linear constraints that can derived from Eq. (9) gives rise to a matrix inequality usually denoted as follows:(12)Rw≤˜0where the matrix R has dimension 2m×n, or, equivalently, as the following system of fuzzy linear constraints:(13)Rkw≤˜0,k=1,2,…,2mwhere Rkdenotes the kth row of R. The kth constraint is characterized by one of the linear membership functions defined in Eq. (10). Anyway, to simplify the notation, we will use μkto denote the membership function of the kth constraintRkw≤0.The priority vectors w solving the prioritization problem correspond to the nonempty feasible fuzzy areaP˜on the simplex(14)Qn−1=w=(w1,w2,…,wn)|∑i=1nwi=1,wi>0That is, w is a solution to the problem if it belongs to the fuzzy set described by the following membership function:(15)μP˜(w)={min{μ1(R1w),μ2(R2w),…,μm(Rmw)}|w1+w2+⋯+wn=1}.The maximizing solution is a vectorwmax*for which the maximum of the fuzzy feasible area is obtained, that is:(16)μP˜(wmax*)=max{min{μ1(R1w),μ2(R2w),…,μm(Rmw)}|w1+w2+⋯+wn=1}A general method for finding the maximizing solution to decision making problems with fuzzy objectives and constraints has been proposed by Bellman and Zadeh [71]. This method is based on the max-min operator. Define the variable α as follows:(17)α=min{μ1(R1w),μ2(R2w),…,μm(Rmw)}The max-min fuzzy linear problem can be changed into a crisp linear problem. Consequently, the objective function in terms of membership functions is defined as follows:(18)maxαα≤μk(Rkw)k=1,2,…,2mSince we are working in an intuitionistic fuzzy setting, we also need to consider and solve the prioritization problem for the minimum solution with respect to the fuzzy constraints. Thus, we need to find the vectorwmin*for which the minimum of the fuzzy feasible area is obtained, that is:(19)μP˜(wmin*)=min{max{μ1(R1w),μ2(R2w),…,μm(Rmw)}|w1+w2+⋯+wn=1}In order to obtain the minimizing solution, we can use the min-max operator. Thus, we can define the variable β as follows:(20)β=max{ν1(R1w),ν2(R2w),…,νm(Rmw)}and, consequently, obtain the objective function in terms of the non-membership functions, as follows:(21)minββ≥νk(Rkw)k=1,2,…,2mwhere vkis the linear membership function characterizing the kth constraintRkw≤˜0.We can now combine models (18) and (21) in a final model that accounts for both the membership and non-membership constraints:(22)maxαminβα≤μk(Rkw)β≥νk(Rkw)w1+w2+⋯+wn=1k=1,2,…,2mTo solve the above model, we use a maximizing set with two objective functions. To fuzzify α and β we calculate their minimum and maximum values solving the following set of optimization problems:(23)f0:minαα≤μk(Rkw)β≥νk(Rkw)∑i=1nwi=1k=1,2,…,2mf1:maxαα≤μk(Rkw)β≥νk(Rkw)∑i=1nwi=1k=1,2,…,2mg0:minβα≤μk(Rkw)β≥νk(Rkw)∑i=1nwi=1k=1,2,…,2mg1:maxβα≤μk(Rkw)β≥νk(Rkw)∑i=1nwi=1k=1,2,…,2mThe membership functions of α and β interpreted as fuzzy variables are defined as follows:(24)μα=0ifα<f0(α−f0)/(f1−f0)iff0≤α≤f11ifα>f1(25)μβ=1ifβ<g0(g1−β)/(g1−g0)ifg0≤β≤g10ifβ>g1Through Eqs. (24) and (25), the priority vector that solves our intuitionistic fuzzy programming problem (and, hence, maximizes the feasible fuzzy area) becomes the vector w* solving the following problem:(26)μP˜(w*)=max{min{μα,μβ}}By using the max-min operator and the variable θ defined by:(27)θ=min{μα,μβ}The problem of Eq. (26) can be transformed into the following one:(28)maxθθ≤μαθ≤μβUsing Eqs. (10), (11), (24) and (25), it can be shown that the final model (or the maximizing objective function) is equivalent to the following model:(29)maxθα−θ(f1−f0)≥f0β+θ(g1−g0)≤g1mijwj−wi+(wi−lijwj)εij−βwj(mij−lij)≤0wi−mijwj+(uijwj−wi)εij−βwj(uij−mij)≤0αwj(mij−lij)−(wi−lijwj)δij≤0αwj(uij−mij)−(uijwj−wi)δij≤0w1+w2+⋯+wn=1w1,w2,…,wn≥0i=1,2,…,n;j=2,3,…,n;i<j.To assure a certain quality level of the final decision, we need to compute the consistency rate (CR) of each of the comparison matrices produced by IF-AHP.Recall [14,15] that the CR of a crisp comparison matrixA=(aij)i,j=1,...,nof dimension n is defined as the ratio between the consistency index (CI) and a random consistency index (RI),(30)CR=CIRICI=(λmax−n)(n−1)where λmax is the largest eigenvalue of the matrix, that is:(31)λmax=1n∑i=1n∑j=1naijωjωiωi=1n∑j=1naij∑i=1naijRandom indices for matrices of sizes less than 16 are given in [14]. The value of CR should not exceed 0.1 for a matrix larger than 4×4. In the case when CR≥0.1, the DMs must decrease the inconsistencies by reviewing their evaluations [44].Since the elements of the comparison matrices of our IF-AHP method are TIFNs,a˜ij=〈(lij,mij,uij);δij,εij〉, we need to follow a more general approach, namely, the one proposed by Gogus and Boucher [72].According to Gogus and Boucher [72], to check the consistency a the fuzzy comparison matrixA˜=(a˜ij)i,j=1,…,nof dimension n, whose ijth element is a TFNa˜ij=(lij,mij,uij), we must check the consistency of the following two crisp matrices:(32)Am=(mij)i,j=1,…,nAg=(uij⋅lij)i,j=1,…,nThe CR of both crisp matrices must be less than 0.1 for the fuzzy matrixA˜to express a consistent judgment on the side of the DMs. Thus, the following CRs must be computed:CRm=CImRIwhere(33)CIm=(λmaxm−n)(n−1)λmaxm=1n∑i=1n∑j=1nmijωjmωimωim=1n∑j=1nmij∑i=1nmijandCRg=CIgRIwhere(34)CIg=(λmaxg−n)(n−1)λmaxg=1n∑i=1n∑j=1nuij⋅lijωjgωigωig=1n∑j=1nuij⋅lij∑i=1nuij⋅lijThe model of Eq. (29) is a new IFPP model. In the proposed IF-AHP-SWOT method, we implement this model to assign the local weights of all the decision criteria and sub-criteria identified and hierarchically decomposed through AHP-SWOT. That is, we use IFPP model (29) in the phase III of conventional AHP (see the AHP outline in Section 3.2).Finally, we rank all the sub-criteria under consideration by assigning them global weights as follows:(35)globalweightof"subcriterion"=(localweightof"subcriterion")×(localweightofcorrespondingSWOTgroup)Eq. (35) describes the standard computing procedure employed in AHP to assign global weights to the criteria/factors within each level and sublevel of the hierarchy of the problem at hand.We have applied the proposed framework at Pipex,22The name has been changed to protect the anonymity of the manufacturing company.a manufacturer of composite pipes in West Virginia. Pipex is the leading manufacturer of pipes, joints, and composite tanks in West Virginia.Decisions on outsourcing RL are taken on the basis of criteria and factors that vary from company to company. Therefore, the first step was to select selecting qualified individuals (experts in logistics and academics) to compose a first decision making committee (logistics panel). A questionnaire was prepared in order to implement the SWOT analysis.Considering the goals of the research, the questionnaire respondents were selected from two spectra: academics that had participated in scientific and research activities on RL and those who have had experience in the logistics industry. A total of 5 academic experts were chosen for the first SWOT analysis. The second analysis of SWOT was done by four experts of Pipex. Each member of the logistics panel was asked to identify different strengths and weaknesses, but also the opportunities and threats in relation to outsourcing. After performing both SWOT analyses, the panel selected 39 factors as those properly representing the important decision making factors in outsourcing RL for Pipex.To avoid a large number of factors (which would lead to the increase of pair-wise comparisons and make the subsequent analyses difficult), an attempt was made to rank the factors based on their importance. Therefore, a questionnaire was designed based on the Likert scale and was submitted to the experts online and in a wide geographical spectrum. Fifty-six answers were collected, which was sufficient for such an analysis since the main objective was basically to identify the most important factors so that the least important factors could be eliminated or ignored. To deal with the discrepancies emerging from this process among the number of respondents, it was necessary an adjustment of the sample size that was made by using SPSS MVA [93]. Therefore, to achieve the missing data values, the Tabachnick and Fidell [73] method was used. However, according to the percentage results of the means, most criteria were classified in two classes: “very important” and “extremely important”. As a consequence, it was necessary to use the cut-off value method to reduce the number of factors. Finally, 21 important factors were identified as the most important ones: they are reported in Table 1.Note that the issue of reducing the number of factors has already been addressed in many studies related to hybrid models of SWOT and AHP (see, for example, [23,74]). More in general, one can follow Saaty's [39] approach and to limit the number of subcriteria corresponding to each criterion to a number between 7 and 9. This is necessary in order to make an accurate and effective model of a problem since it has been proven that the human brain is not able to examine/compare more than 9 factors at the same time.By using the factors obtained through the SWOT analysis, the hierarchical structure of the problem was created. The structure that has been used to apply IF-AHP is shown in Fig. 3. The symbolWxnindicates the weight of the factor xnbelonging to one of the main factor groups of SWOT.Given the hierarchical structure in Fig. 3, a questionnaire was prepared in order to perform all the possible pair-wise comparisons among the factors. The respondents were asked to answer the questions based on their own beliefs. In this stage, logical pair-wise comparisons were provided both among all the sub-factors composing a fixed factor and among all the main factors. The number of binary comparisons depends on the number of factors available in each level of the hierarchy. That is, if the level contains n elements, it is necessary to make n(n−1)/2 pair-wise comparisons. Since the AHP model of our study is based on fuzzy evaluations, the verbal scales of Table 2were used for the comparisons. Each evaluation was assigned a degree of membership or a degree of non-membership with respect to the corresponding decision criterion.Reza and Vassilis [75] suggested the number of DMs to be involved in the pair-wise comparison phase to be between five and fifteen. Following their suggestion, the AHP questionnaire was submitted to 10 logistics experts at Pipex. Seven of these experts answered the questionnaire; the remaining three said that they were unable to understand the questionnaire method. The small sample size has not been considered a constraint in this study since the AHP method is capable of performing a reliable analysis even when the number of DMs carrying out the pair-wise comparisons is small [35,74]. Before submitting the questionnaire, a workshop was set up to explain the AHP method to the selected experts/DMs. The DMs were asked to make 51 pair-wise comparisons. The averaging method was used to aggregate all the DMs’ answers, and 5 matrices of pair-wise comparisons formed. Tables 3–7show these comparison matrices.Each one of the comparison matrices was then used to determine the local weights of the criteria or sub-criteria composing it. The local weights were obtained by implementing the relative weights composing the comparison matrices in the IFPP model of Eq. (29). The corresponding problems were analyzed using the software LINGO 11.0. The results returned by LINGO 11.0 for the local weights corresponding to each comparison matrix are reported in the last column of Tables 3–7.We also performed a consistency rate analysis using LINGO 11.0. All the comparison matrices exhibited a good consistency rate (CR). For instance, relative to the comparison matrix in Table 5 (the matrix of pair-wise comparisons among the weakness sub-criteria), the software returned CRm=0.005<0.1 and CRg=0.027<0.1 as results. Table 8summarizes the CR values (both CRmand CRg) returned by LINGO 11.0 for all the comparison matrices.The local weights in the last column of Tables 3–7 represent the relative importance of the elements within the corresponding level of the hierarchy described in Fig. 3. Table 9shows the local weights of all the criteria in all the hierarchical levels and sublevels. The local weights of the criteria in the first level (i.e., strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) appear in the first column (Local weights of SWOT criteria). The second column (Local weights of sub-criteria) consists of four blocks: each block corresponds to a sublevel of the second level of the hierarchy and shows the local weights of the corresponding sub-criteria. Clearly, the sum of the local priorities corresponding to each hierarchical level and sublevel is 1.According to the results reported in the first column of Table 9, the DMs evaluated strengths (0.436) as the most important strategic factor, followed in order of importance by opportunities (0.317), weaknesses (0.144) and threats (0.103). Furthermore, strengths were considered 3.03 times as important as weaknesses, 1.38 times as important as opportunities and 4.23 times as important as threats.For what concerns the sub-factors of each SWOT factor, the second column of Table 9 show the relative importance that was assigned by the DMs to each sub-factor within its corresponding SWOT group. For instance, in the strengths group, the “focus on the main business” was considered to be the most important factor, followed in order of importance by “risk sharing”, “product quality”, “customer satisfaction”, “increased return on investment”, and “cost management”. Moreover, “hidden outsourcing costs”, “market share increases” and “increases of inventory” were classified as the most preferred factors in the weaknesses, opportunities and threats groups, respectively.Finally, a global weight was assigned to each SWOT sub-criterion using Eq. (32). The resulting global weights are reported in the third column of Table 9. For example, the global weight of the sub-criterion “risk sharing” (S2) was obtained as follows:(localweightof"subcriterion(S2)")×(localweightofstrengthsgroup)=0.227×0.436=0.099while the global weight of the sub-criterion “organizational control” (W3) was obtained by:(localweightof"subcriterion(W3)")×(localweightofweaknessesgroup)=0.187×0.144=0.027The overall ranking (fourth column of Table 9) of the global weights showed that the “focus on the main business” of the organization was ranked as the most important factor in a RL outsourcing strategy. The factors “increase of market share”, “risk sharing”, “product quality”, “environmental compatibility”, “customer satisfaction”, and “increase of inventory” were the next ones to be prioritized.The results of this research show that DMs considered the strengths more important than the other three factor groups, i.e. weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. This reflects the special importance assigned to the organizational resources in a RL outsourcing decision making process.In the classification of the sub-criteria in the strengths group, “focus on main business” was ranked as the top priority. This result is in line with the literature pointing out how outsourcing RL activities makes the organizations concentrate on issues relative to their main business. The factor “risk sharing” was ranked in second place showing that, even though the customers are not willing to share risk with a third party (“Third party logistics”, 2007, para. 3), Pipex has considered the risk sharing as one of the most important factors when outsourcing RL. On the other hand, “product quality” was ranked in the third place confirming the fact that an excellent management of good suppliers not only delivers efficient and suitable services, but also provides a long-term relationship between the suppliers and the users [76].The first position in the ranking of the sub-criteria composing the weaknesses group is occupied by the “hidden outsourcing costs”, that is, the costs deriving from the fulfillment of a contract. Freight costs [25], consultant costs, and also management costs [91] fall into this category. Sometimes these costs exceed the initial costs, which can be one of the reasons behind the relatively high importance value assigned to this factor. In order to outsource their RL activities, organizations expect the 3PRLPs to keep such costs low. The second place in the ranking is occupied by “reduction of flexibility”, while “organizational control” was considered of moderate importance and occupies the third position. The third position assigned to the sub-criterion “organizational control” indicates that DMs were concerned with losing organizational control if too much authority was given to the 3PRLPs. This issue is addressed, for example, by Lee [27] who centered his study on the loss of organization control due to outsourcing, and by Lee and Walsh [23] who referred to the loss of organizational control in relation to sportive activities in the facilities. Therefore, organizational control should be managed accurately and its enhancement should be a main concern.In the opportunities category, “environmental compatibility” was ranked as the top priority. This fact confirms, in particular, the results of the research conducted by King et al. [77] indicating RL as one of the solutions to the problem of protecting the environment besides repairment, renovation, and restoration.In the ranking of the sub-criteria in the threats group, “increase of inventory” appears as the most important factor. Thus, the 3PRLPs should try to prevent the increase of inventory as much as possible due to the costs that are imposed on the organization. Often, inaccurate analyses and wrong estimations are made by contractors due to insufficient skills and expertise in this field. This is why this factor turned out to be so important in the outsourcing decisions of the case study.This simply emphasizes the fact that RL outsourcing leads the organizations to concentrate on the core issues relative to their business.This suggests that the DMs of our study have been aiming at occupying a major share of the market by increasing competitive advantages. It is quite obvious that the main objective of a company in selecting 3PRLPs for outsourcing is the constant profitability of the contractor. Therefore, contracting companies should see an annual profit increase in order to be able to participate effectively and profitably in the distribution of growing products and services [78].This indicates that the company has taken into account the possibility of future crises.This means that DMs of our study have considered the quality of the products as one of the key factors in RL outsourcing. In this regard, the reciprocal relationships between organizational performance criteria (OPC) and product life cycle (PLC) should not be ignored. For example, product quality is important in the growth stage of PLC and it is a component of OPC. The revenue derived from product sales is a relevant matter. Thus, the development of the “product quality” in PLC would basically become the most important factor in order to increase the profit. The importance assigned to this factor is consistent with the results of the research conducted by Bailey et al. [79], which was based on improving the quality according to outsourcing.This shows that the DMs of our study have considered environmental implications of taking RL outsourcing decisions. In fact, besides repairment, renovation, and restoration, RL is one of the solutions to the problem of protecting the environment through recycling [77]. Furthermore, an appropriate ecological image attracts customers who are more and more willing to pay for goods that are respectful of the environment. That is, paying attention to environmental issues is rewarded by an increase in profit terms.This confirms that, in order to survive in a competitive environment, manufacturing organizations need to improve their services. According to recent studies, belonging to a well-functioning network service very much contributes to increase customer satisfaction [80].Thus, we can concluded that DMs of our study aimed at selecting the 3PRLPs so as to maximize the profit in a given time period determined by the necessity of avoiding/reducing delays in the company activities. Inventory is generally used to assess the performance of supply chain management [81]. Determining the amount of goods to order is a key issue: the unsuitable design of the structure of the supply chain, the irrational analysis of the inventories, the wrong estimation of the demand are some of the reasons that can lead to the loss of opportunities and the storing of too much inventory [82].This shows that DMs of our study focused their attention on global markets. The increase of standardization can be a competitive advantage. On the other hand, outsourcing decision making should be coherent with the mission and objectives of the organization [83] and, hence, with the growth of the company.This result was unexpected! Indeed, flexibility has been identified as one of the main factors to consider when selecting 3PRLPs [5,9,21]. Flexibility is a key feature that can enhance customer service since it usually relates to special and non-routine orders [84]. Moreover, “flexibility” is a sub-criterion of OPC and shows a direct relationship with PLC. More precisely, it influences all the stages of a product's life cycle, from the initial to the final one, so that a decrease in flexibility could actually cause somewhat irreparable damages.Considering that “hidden outsourcing costs” were ranked first among the weaknesses factors, we can conclude that the criteria of the weaknesses group were not really considered so important by the DMs of our case study.This result was also unexpected! The position eleventh for “return on investment” shows that that DMs of our study did not look at outsourcing as a source of income. At the same time, “tax risk” in position twelve means that the DMs of our study have paid relatively little attention to potential changes in financial markets and the risks that these changes could imply for the company.In general, organizations that are willing to outsource know quite well that delegating activities to contractors increases the risk of losing data and materials [25]. The position of moderate importance occupied by “organizational control” in the final ranking shows that the company under analysis had paid relatively close attention to this factor and attempted to manage it properly. In addition, organizations try to hire third-party providers that will provide appropriate coverage for the commitments and risks ahead of them. This is in line with the fact that the criterion of “giving the full power of attorney to a third party” shares the position thirteen with “organizational control”, while “commitment and risk coverage” is ranked next (position fourteen).This is an interesting result since it also implies proper relationships between third-party providers and the staff so as to encourage and motivate the employers to work to achieve the organization's goals. The lack of such relationships may give rise to strikes, boycotts and similar actions, which constitute an inappropriate context for logistic measures [85]. Nevertheless, the ideas of cooperation and reciprocal help were only marginally accounted for by the DMs of our case study. In the cases where this factor is ignored or not completely analyzed while selecting 3PRLPs, it is recommendable to assess and evaluate the relationships among the staff after outsourcing. A useful technique in this sense is SERVQUAL.The remarkable point about these positions is that they include the strength sub-criterion “Cost management”. Cost reduction is one of the basic pillars of outsourcing in many studies [22–24,26,79,86–88,94]. However, the results of our case study showed something different. “Cost management” in the RL section was considered of little importance by the DMs of our study and ranked among the last priorities. Therefore, we can conclude that RL outsourcing does not necessarily means reducing costs and improving efficiency [89]. This is a very interesting conclusion considering that many companies wrongly start to outsource their core activities with the only objective of reducing costs [90].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
