@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The application of one rank cuckoo search algorithm for solving economic load dispatch problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new improved meta-heuristic algorithm, one rank cuckoo search algorithm (ORCSA), is applied for solving economic load dispatch problem.The advantages of the proposed ORCSA are few control parameters, high solution quality and fast computational time.The proposed ORCSA is very efficient for the problem via the result comparison with many other methods.The proposed ORCSA can be a very favorable method for the problems with complex objective and constraints.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Economic load dispatch,Lévy flights,One rank cuckoo search algorithm,Nonconvex fuel cost function,Valve point loading effects,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a one rank cuckoo search algorithm (ORCSA) is proposed for solving economic load dispatch (ELD) problems. The main objective of the ELD problem is to minimize total cost of thermal generators while satisfying power balance constraint, prohibited operating zones, ramp rate constraints and operating limits of generators. Moreover, the generating units considered in this paper have different characteristics such as quadratic fuel cost function, nonconvex fuel cost function and multiple fuel options. The proposed ORCSA method has been developed by performing two modifications on the original cuckoo search algorithm (CSA) to improve optimal solution quality and computational time. The first modification is to merge new solution generated from both Lévy flights and replacement a fraction of egg together and to evaluate and rank the solutions at once only. A bound by best solution mechanism has been used in the second modification for properly handling the inequality constraints. The proposed ORCSA method has been tested on different systems with different characteristics of thermal units and constraints. The results obtained by ORCSA have been compared to those from other methods available in the literature and the result comparison has indicated that the ORCSA method can obtain better solution quality than many other methods. Therefore, the proposed ORCSA can be a very effective and efficient method for solving ELD problems.fuel cost coefficients of unit ifuel cost coefficients of unit i reflecting valve-point effectsfuel cost coefficients for fuel type j of unit ifuel cost coefficients for fuel type j of unit i reflecting valve-point effectsB-matrix coefficients for transmission power losstotal number of generating unitspower output of unit imaximum power output of unit iminimum power output of unit iminimum power output for fuel j of unit iupper bound for prohibited zone k of unit ilower bound for prohibited zone k of generator itotal system load demandtotal transmission lossspinning reserve of unit imaximum spinning reserve contribution of unit itotal system spinning reserve requirement

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Economic load dispatch (ELD) problem is one of the most popular and important problems and has been widely studied in optimal power system operation in recent decades. The main objective of the ELD problem is to determine power generation among a set of available generating units so that the objective of minimum total fuel cost is gained while all physical and operational constraints are satisfied [1]. The most conventional ELD problem was first introduced considering convex fuel cost function for the objective and linear constraints [1,2]. However, it is more realistic to consider the valve point effects on thermal units and this curve thus contains higher order nonlinearity and discontinuity [3,4]. The characteristic of the ELD problem becomes more complicated as generating units can be supplied with multiple fuel (MF) sources (such as gas and oil) to produce electricity [5]. Moreover, the ELD problem will be more complicated by a combination of the segmented piece-wise quadratic function and the nonconvex fuel cost function in objective function [6] and each generating unit has to satisfy its own physical constraints including limits on generation and prohibited operating zones, and system spinning reserve constraint [7].In the past, a large number of conventional methods were widely and successfully applied for solving the ELD problem such as gradient method [8], Lagrangian relaxation algorithm [9], dynamic programming (DP) [10], lambda iteration method [11], Newton's method [1], quadratic programming (QP) [12] and linear programming (LP) [13]. The conventional methods share the common fact that the solution is only obtained after one run on the ELD problem. Moreover, these methods also have the same advantages including few control parameters, short execution time and small standard deviation. However, these methods suffer difficulty when dealing with the problems with complex constraints and nonconvex objective functions. On the contrary to the conventional methods, artificial intelligence-based methods have become widely used for solving the ELD problem with more complex constraints and nonconvex objective function recently since these methods can properly deal with nonconvex optimization problem with near optimal solution.In recent decades, several artificial intelligence-based methods have applied for solving the ELD problem and obtained promising results. Most of the methods have many advantages such as ability to handle complex constraints, capability of searching global optimal solution for nonconvex objective function problems and the potential for dealing with large-scale systems. These methods can be classified into the groups including swarm intelligence, evolutionary algorithms, neural networks and hybrid algorithms. The swarm intelligence (SI) is the collective behavior of decentralized, self-organized, natural inspired systems consisting of particles swam optimization (PSO) [14,15], cuckoo search algorithm [16], gravitational search algorithm (GSA) [17], firefly algorithm (FA) [18], simulated annealing (SA) [19], bacterial foraging algorithm (BFA) [20], invasive weed optimization (IWO) [21], oppositional invasive weed optimization (OIWO) [22], modified artificial bee colony algorithm (MABCA) [23], harmony search (HS) [24] and biogeography-based optimization (BBO) [25]. Among these methods, SA is considered the less effective method since its optimal solutions are usually trapped in the local optimum rather than global optimum as well as it must suffer a difficult task for setting control parameters in addition to the long execution time. Several other new algorithms such as IWO, FA and MABCA have a good capability of searching for high solution quality for systems with nonconvex fuel cost function of thermal units. However, the execution time from these methods is still long. Moreover, a series of experiments must be done to determine the values of control parameters for OIWO [22]. This disadvantage causes the method to have long simulation time and large number of trial runs. The methods in the evolutionary algorithms group are derived from the evolutionary progress including genetic algorithm (GA) [26,27], evolutionary programming (EP) [3,28], and differential evolution algorithm (DE) [29,30]. Among these methods, GA is the method early applied for solving optimization problems in engineering field, especially in electrical engineering. Although the GA has the ability of handling complex constraints and nonconvex objective function as well as simplicity of implementation for optimization problems, it still suffers several disadvantages such as low quality optimization solution and long execution time. The DE method can be considered as a more powerful method than the others since it can obtain better solution quality with shorter computation time for optimization problems and this method has been widely used in power system optimization problems in power systems. On the contrary to the two mentioned groups, the methods in the neural network group comprising of Hopfield neural network (HNN) [31,32] and augmented Lagrange Hopfield network (ALHN) [33–35] can deal with large-scale problems but they cannot deal with the ELD problem with non-differentiable objective function. Both the HLN and ALHN methods have been developed by combing the Lagrange function with Hopfield network. Therefore, these methods can overcome the drawbacks that the conventional Hopfield network (HNN) suffers such as simpler implementation, higher solution quality, higher convergence speed, and larger system scale. Finally, the hybrid group is totally different among the mentioned groups since it is built based on the combination between the conventional methods and meta-heuristic search methods or among the meta-heuristic search methods to improve the optimal solution. The hybrid methods have been implemented for solving the ELD problem comprising of genetic algorithm-pattern search-sequential quadratic programming (GA-PS-SQP) [36], EP-SQP, PSO-SQP [37], hybrid differential evolution with biogeography-based optimization (DE/BBO) [38], GA-DE [39], and GA-SQP [40]. By utilizing the advantages of each original one, these hybrid methods have good ability for searching for the better optimal solution with faster computational time. However, the combination of original methods may cause the hybrid method become more complicated with more control parameters and it may lead to difficulty for a proper selection of these parameters.In this paper, a one rank cuckoo search algorithm (ORCSA) is first proposed for solving the ELD problem considering nonconvex and piecewise quadratic fuel cost functions of thermal units in the objective function of the problem with complicated constraints such as prohibited operating zones (POZ), spinning reserve and power losses. The ORCSA method was first proposed by Ahmed et al. in 2013 [41] by performing two modifications on the original cuckoo search algorithm (CSA) which was originally developed by Yang and Deb [42] is inspired from the reproduction strategy of cuckoo species in the nature. The first modification is to merge new solution generated from both Lévy flights and replacement a fraction of egg together and then evaluate and rank the solutions at once only. The second modification is a bound by best solution mechanism used for handling the inequality constraints to improve convergence rate and performance. The ORCSA method has shown more superior to the conventional CSA in terms of performance and convergence speed for the standard benchmark functions and a real-world problem of algorithmic trading systems optimization in the financial markets [41]. The proposed ORCSA method has been tested on different systems with different characteristics of thermal units and constraints. The results obtained by ORCSA have been compared to those from other methods available in the literature.The organization of the remaining paper as follows. Section 2 addresses the problem formulation, Section 3 presents the implementation of ORCSA for the ELD problem, Section 4 provides the numerical results, and finally the conclusion is enclosed.The objective of the ELD problem is to minimize the total cost of thermal units as follows:(1)MinF=∑i=1NFi(Pi)In the classical ED problem, the fuel cost of each generating unit is expressed as a quadratic function of its power output. As the generating units use only one fuel option or multiple fuel options to generate electricity and the valve point effects considered, the fuel cost function is given as [4,27]:(2)Fi(Pi)=ai+biPi+ciPi2+ei×sin(fi×(Pi,min−Pi))where(3)Fi(Pi)=ai1+bi1Pi1+ci1Pi2+ei1×sin(fi1×(Pi1,min−Pi)),for fuel1,Pi,min≤Pi≤Pi1,maxai2+bi2Pi2+ci2Pi2+ei2×sin(fi2×(Pi2,min−Pi)),for fuel2,Pi2,min≤Pi≤Pi2,max,j=1,…,mi⋮aij+bijPi+cijPi2+eij×sin(fij×(Pij,min−Pi)),for fuelj,Pij,min≤Pi≤Pij,maxsubject to•Power balance constraint: The total power generated from a set of available units must satisfy the total load demand and system power losses:(4)∑i=1NPi−PD−PL=0where power loss is calculated using Kron's formula:(5)PL=∑i=1N∑j=1NPiBijPj+∑i=1NB0iPi+B00•Generator capacity limits: The real power output of thermal units should be in their range between the minimum limit and maximum limits:(6)Pi,min≤Pi≤Pi,max•Prohibited operating zones constraint: For generating units with POZ, their entire feasible operating zones are decomposed in many feasible sub-regions and their feasible operating points should be in one of the sub-regions as follows:(7)Pi∈Pi,min≤Pi≤Pi1lPik−1u≤Pi≤Pikl;k=2,…,ni;∀i∈ΩPiniu≤Pi≤Pi,maxwhere niis the number of prohibited operating zones of unit i.•Spinning reserve constraint: To assure that the power system can operate safely, there must be the amount of power reserved to supply to the load demand in case that one large thermal unit stops working suddenly. The spinning reserve power is defined as:(8)∑i=1NSi≥SRwhere the operating margin of each generating unit Siis determined by:(9)Si=minPi,max−Pi,Si,max;∀i∉Ω(10)Si=0;∀i∈Ωwhere Ω is the set of units with POZ.•Ramp rate limits: The operating range of each generator must satisfy its ramp rate limits during each optimal interval. Therefore, the power output of each unit is limited by the ramp rate limits as below.(11)Pi≤Pi0+URi,if the generation increases(12)Pi≥Pi0−DRi,if the generation decreaseswherePi0is the power output of unit i in the previous subinterval; DRiand URiare the down-ramp and up ramp limits of unit i, respectively.The new generation limits obtained by combing (6), (11) and (12) are as follows.(13)POi,min≤Pi≤POi,maxwhere(14)POi,min=max(Pi,min,Pi0−DRi)(15)POi,max=min(Pi,max,Pi0+URi)The new meta-heuristic CSA developed in 2009 [42] is inspired from the obligate brood parasitism of some cuckoo species by laying their eggs in the nests of other host birds of other species for solving optimization problems. The CSA method has shown better results than PSO and GA for testing on several standard optimization benchmark functions [42]. The overall CSA method is summarized in the three main principal rules as follows [43].1.A cuckoo bird lays an egg and chooses a nest among the predetermined number of available host nests to dump its egg.The best nests with high quality of egg (better solution) will be carried over to the next generation.The number of available host nests is fixed, and the egg laid by a cuckoo can be discovered by the host bird with a probability pa∈[0,1]. For the fraction of eggs, the host bird can either throw them away, or abandon them and build a new nest.Although the CSA method has outperformed the PSO and conventional GA, improved GA, EP, PSO and DE in terms of success rate, number of required objective function evaluations, quality solution and execution time for benchmarked functions [42,44], the CSA method mainly searches for an optimal solution based entirely on random walks which cannot guarantee a fast convergence. Therefore, Walton et al. [45] and Ahmed et al. [41] have proposed two different modifications on the original CSA method to enhance its search ability for optimal solution with fast computational time. The modifications from Ahmed et al. differ from those from Walton et al. In this paper, the two modifications proposed by Ahmed et al. in 2013 are applied on the original CSA for solving the ELD problem. The two modifications are described in detail as follows.(a) The first modification: As described in the CSA method, there are two phases of the new egg generation including the exploration phase corresponding to generation of new eggs via Lévy Flights and the exploitation phase corresponding to the generation of new eggs via the replacement of a fraction of eggs. The new eggs obtained by exploration phase are evaluated before being replaced in the exploitation phase and the eggs in the second generation are evaluated and ranked. Instead, the proposed ORCSA generates new solutions using Lévy flights, replaces a fraction of them, and finally evaluates and ranks their fitness at once. This modification allows ignoring the step of fitness evaluation by merging new eggs from the exploration phase and the exploitation phase together before evaluating their fitness function. Therefore, there is only Ndnumber of nests evaluated instead of 2×Ndevaluations as in the original CSA method.There is one parameter introduced in the proposed method to decide whether the computational process merges the exploration phase and the exploitation phase together or nor, called one rank ratio ror. The selection of this ratio is rather easy and simple. It is initially set to 1 to allow merging all new eggs from the exploration phase and the exploitation phase together. This ratio is still fixed at 1 until a better nest cannot be found at a current iteration. For this case, the ratio is reduced as the following rule.(16)rorIter+1=rorIter−0.5/Dwhere Iter is the current iteration and D is the number of objective function dimensions.(b) The second modification: In optimization problems, an optimal solution must be a feasible one which has to satisfy not only all equality constraints but also all inequality constraints. In this paper, the second modification focuses on the technique for properly handling inequality constraints. Normally, as a solution violates its upper or lower limits, the easy way is to assign it to the upper limit in case of the upper limit violated or to lower limit in case of the lower limit violated. However, a bound by best solution mechanism is first introduced in ORCSA to deal with the violation of the limits. An invalid dimension of a nest is either replaced with a corresponding valid one from a randomly selected nest or randomly reinitialized in range of upper and lower limits. Between the two options, the one is chosen based on a bound by best ratio rbbbdetermined as follows:(17)rbbb=1−1/DSimilar to many other meta-heuristic search methods applied for solving optimization problems, the slack variable technique is also used in this paper for handling equality constraints, i.e. power balance constraint. The slack variable technique is a way to guarantee that the equality constraint is always satisfied where a slack variable is calculated based on the other variables from the equality constraint. In this paper, the first generating unit is chosen as the slack variable so that the sum of power output from the slack unit and the rest of ones equals to the load demand plus power losses in transmission lines. Therefore, suppose the power output of the N−1 generating units from 2 to N is known, the power output of the slack unit 1 is calculated based on (4) as follows:(18)P1=PD+PL−∑i=2NPiThe power loss equation in (5) is rewritten with respect to an unknown variable of by P1as:(19)PL=B11P12+2∑i=2NB1iPi+B01P1+∑i=2N∑j=2NPiBijPj+∑i=2NB0iPi+B00Substituting PLin (19) into (18), a quadratic equation is obtained:(20)A×P12+B×P1+C=0where the coefficients A, B and C are determined by:(21)A=B11(22)B=2∑i=2NB1iPi+B01−1(23)C=∑i=2N∑j=2NPiBijPj+∑i=2NB0iPi+B00+PD−∑i=2NPiThe power output of the slack unit with positive value is chosen between the two roots obtained by solving second order Eq. (20) as below:(24)P1=−B±B2−4×A×C2A,whereB2−4×A×C≥0As a result, the equality constraint (4) is easily maintained due to the slack unit.As mentioned above, there are upper and lower power generations corresponding to each prohibited operating zone of thermal units. If the obtained power output of each unit violates one of its prohibited zones, this power output needs to be redefined so that the limit must be satisfied. For handling the violation, the middle point of each prohibited zone is firstly determined as follows:(25)Pikm=Pikl+Piku2Therefore, there are two sub-prohibited operating zones divided from the middle point including left and right prohibited zones. The new value of violated generating unit is re-determined as below:(26)Pinew=PiklifPi≤PikmPikuifPi>PikmA solution generated via the exploration phase and the exploitation phase may violate the maximum or minimum limits and it needs to be redefined to satisfy these limits. The bound by best solution mechanism described in Section 3.2 is used for handling the violation of the upper and lower limits summarized in detail as below [41].For a in nest Xdin the Nphost nests, Xd=[Pi,d] and Xdmin=[Pi,min] and Xdmax=[Pi,max] for i=2,…,N if the ramp rate limits are neglected or Xdmin=[POi,min] and Xdmax=[POi,max] for i=2,…,N if the ramp rate limits are considered.If Pi,dfrom nest Xdviolates its limits, a random number ɛ is initialized and the invalid Pi,dis then adjusted based on the two following cases:•Case 1: Pi,dis replaced with Pi,rfrom nest Xr(Xris a randomly chosen nest satisfying upper and lower limits) if the random number ɛ is equal to or higher than rbbb.Case 2: Pi,dis initialized randomly within their upper and lower limits if random number ɛ is less than rbbb.The proposed ORCSA method is implemented for solving the ELD problem described as follows.For implementation of the proposed ORCSA method to the problem, there are Nphost nests in the population where each nest represented by Xd(d=1,…,Np) containing thermal units 2−N1 those are Psi,d(i=2,…,N1). The thermal unit generations satisfying Psi,min≤Psi,m,d≤Psi,max are randomly initialized as follows.(27)Pi,d=Pi,min+rand1*(Pi,max−Pi,min);i=2,…,Nwhere rand1 is uniformly distributed random numbers in [0,1].Each nest corresponding to a solution needs to be evaluated to improve obtained solution after each iteration. Therefore, the evaluation is performed based on fitness function defined as below.(28)FTd=∑i=1NFi(Xdi)+Ks×P1,d−P1lim2+Kr×max0,SR−∑i=1NSdi2where Ksand Krare penalty factors for the slack unit and spinning reserve constraint, respectively; P1,dis the power output of the slack thermal unit 1 calculated from Section 3.3 corresponding to nest d in the population; and Sdiis the spinning reserve of unit i corresponding to nest d in the population calculated from (9) and (10).The limit for the slack thermal unit 1 in (28) has not been predetermined but used to penalize the invalid nest for handling equality constraints. The limit is obtained by:(29)P1lim=P1,maxifP1,d>P1,maxP1,minifP1,d<P1,minP1,dotherwiseif ramp rate limits are neglectedor(30)P1lim=PO1,maxifP1,d>PO1,maxPO1,minifP1,d<PO1,minP1,dotherwiseif ramp rate limits are consideredwhere P1,max and P1,min are the maximum and minimum power outputs of slack thermal unit 1, respectively.As mentioned in the three main principles of the conventional CSA method, there are two phases of generating new solution including Lévy flights and the replacement of a fraction of eggs. In this subsection, the generation of new solution based on Lévy Flights using Mantegna algorithm [46] is described. Each new nest Xdis created as follows:(31)Xdnew=Xbestd+α×rand2×ΔXdnewwhere α>0 is the updated step size; rand2 is a normally distributed stochastic number; and the increased valueΔXdnewis determined by:(32)ΔXdnew=ν×σx(β)σy(β)×Xbestd−Gbest(33)ν=randxrandy1/βwhere randxand randyare two normally distributed stochastic variables with standard deviation σx(β) and σy(β) given by:(34)σx(β)=Γ(1+β)×sinπβ2Γ1+β2×β×2(β−1)/21/β(35)σy(β)=1where β is the distribution factor (0.3≤β≤1.99) and Γ(.) is the gamma distribution function.In this subsection, the generation of a new solution is performed to improve quality of obtained solution from the Lévy flights step. In the cuckoo bird behavior, there is a possibility that an alien egg can be identified by the host bird and the egg can be thrown away out of the nest or both it and the nest are forsaken by the host bird. Like the Lévy flights, the discovery action of alien eggs with the probability of pacan also generate a new solution for an optimization problem. The new solution is created by:(36)Xddis=Xbestd+K×ΔXddiswhere K is the updated coefficient obtained based on the probability of discovering an alien egg in its nest:(37)K=1ifrand3<Pa0otherwiseand the increased valueΔXddisis determined by:(38)ΔXddis=rand4×randp1(Xbestd)−randp2(Xbestd)where rand3and rand4are the distributed random numbers in [0,1] and randp1(Xbestd) and randp2(Xbestd) are the random perturbation for positions of the nests in Xbestd.In the proposed ORCSA method, the stopping criterion for the algorithm is based on the maximum number of iterations. The algorithm is terminated as the maximum number of iterations reached.In the proposed ORCSA method, there are five control parameters including the three main ones from the original CSA consisting of the number of nests NP, the probability of a fraction of egg abandoned paand the maximum number of iterations Itermax, and two others from the two modifications on the original CSA consisting of one rank ratio rorand bound by best ratio rbbb. Among these parameters, the selection of rorand rbbbis the simplest task because they are determined using (16) and (17). While the one rank ratio rorhas an impact on merging or not merging the exploration phase and the exploitation phase and the bound by best ratio influences the handling of upper and lower limits, the number of nests and maximum number of iterations have a direct impact on the optimal solution and execution time. For small-scale systems with simple constraints, the number of nests and the maximum number of iterations can be set to small values. On the contrary, for large-scale systems with complex constraints, the number of nests and the maximum number of iterations can be set to higher values. However, the most important parameter of the proposed method is the probability pawhich has a great effect on the final solution. This parameter should be tuned for each system since it is a number in the range [0,1] and there are no criteria for a proper selection of this parameter. Therefore, the effect of paon the final solution by the ORCSA method for each test system will be analyzed with the value of pavarying from 0.1 to 0.9 with a step size of 0.1 to obtain the most suitable value for each system.The overall procedure of the proposed ORCSA for solving the ELD problem is given in Fig. 1and described as follows.Step 1: Select control parameters including the number of nests Np, the maximum number of iterations Itermax and probability pa. Initialize a population of host nests as in Section 3.6.1.Step 2: Check for POZ violations and repair by using Section 3.4. Calculate the slack unit using Section 3.3.Step 3: Evaluate the fitness function to choose Xbest and Gbest based on the value of their fitness function. Set the iteration counter Iter=1 and one rank ratio ror=1.Step 4: Generate new solutions for abandoned eggs via Lévy flights as in Section 3.6.2.Step 5: Initialize a random number and compare to the one rank ratio ror. If the random number is higher than ror, go to Step 9.Step 6: Discover alien eggs and randomize to generate new solution as in Section 3.6.3.Step 7: Perform bound by best solution mechanism to define new solution as in Section 3.5 and check for POZ violations and repair.Step 8: Calculate slack unit 1 and the fitness function (28), then rank and keep the current best nest. Go to Step 14.Step 9: Perform bound by best solution mechanism to determine a new solution, and check for POZ violations and repair.Step 10: Calculate slack unit 1 and the fitness function (28), then rank and keep the current best nest.Step 11: Discover alien eggs and randomize to generate a new solution.Step 12: Perform the bound by best solution mechanism to determine a new solution and check for POZ violations and repair.Step 13: Calculate slack unit 1, obtain fitness function (28), then rank and keep the current best nest.Step 14: Get the best nest Gbest for the current iteration.Step 15: If the best nest Gbest at the current iteration is not better than that of the previous iteration, obtain the new value of the one rank ratio using (16). Otherwise, retain the old value.Step 16: If the current iteration Iter<Itermax, Iter=Iter+1 and return to Step 4. Otherwise, stop the procedure.The proposed ORCSA has been tested on different systems including 13-unit system with nonconvex fuel cost function, 20-unit system with quadratic cost function and transmission losses, 40-unit system with nonconvex cost function neglecting transmission losses, systems up to 160 units considering valve point loading effects and multiple fuel options, and systems up to 90 units considering prohibited operating zones and spinning reserve. The proposed algorithm is coded in Matlab platform and run 50 independent trials for each case on a 2GHz PC with 2GB of RAM.The load demands of the test system [3,30] are 1800MW and 2520MW. The proposed parameters of ORCSA including the number of nests and the maximum number of iterations are respectively set to 10 and 20,000 for the both load demands and the probability pawill be tuned in the range from 0.1 to 0.9 with a step of 0.1. The obtained results by ORCSA for the system including minimum cost, average cost, maximum cost, standard deviation cost and execution time for the load demands are shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. As observed from the tables, the best solution for the 1800MW load demand is obtained at pa=0.7 and for the 2520MW load demand at pa=0.5–0.9. In addition, cuckoo search algorithm (CSA) is also tested on the system with two load cases. The control parameters of the CSA consisting of number of nests, maximum number of iterations and probability are set to the same values with those of the proposed ORCSA.The result comparison between the ORCSA and other methods such as improved fast EP (IFEP) [3], quantum-inspired PSO (QPSO) [15], GSA [17], FA [18], SA [19], OIWO [22], MABCA [23], improved GA with multiplier Lagrange (IGA-MU) [27], DE [30], GA-PS-QSP [36], PSO-SQP [37], GA-SQP [40] and CSA is shown in Tables 3 and 4. Obviously, the proposed method obtains high quality solution and the shortest execution time among the compared methods. The cost convergence characteristic of the proposed method and CSA for the two load demands depicted in Figs. 2 and 3indicates that the ORCSA can obtain better optimal solution than CSA at each iteration. The optimal solution by the ORCSA method for the two load demands is given in Appendix.The power load demand of the system [2] is 2500MW. Similar to 13-unit system case, the number of nests and the maximum number of iterations of the proposed ORCSA are fixed at 10 and 500, respectively whereas the probability pachanges with a step of 0.1 in range from 0.1 to 0.9. The detailed result summarized in Table 4 has shown that the ORCSA for the system is less sensitive to the selection of the probability pa. Furthermore, the very small standard deviation has indicated that the proposed ORCSA is very robust for solving this system. Similarly, the system is also employed to implement the CSA and the control parameters of the CSA are also fixed at these values of the proposed ORCSA.In addition, Table 5shows the result comparison from the proposed method and other methods such as Lambda-iteration method [2], Hopfield model [2], BBO [25] and CSA. As observed from the table, the proposed ORCSA and CSA have the same total cost and execution time and the proposed ORCSA obtains approximate minimum total cost with slightly longer execution time than Lambda-iteration method, Hopfield model and BBO. The comparison of the fitness convergence characteristic of ORCSA and CSA in Fig. 4reveals that the ORCSA can find out higher quality solution than CSA at each iteration. The optimal solution obtained by the ORCSA for the system is given in Appendix.In order to demonstrate the efficiency and scalability of the proposed method, a larger system with 40 units [3] and valve point loading effects is considered. The load demand of the system is 10,500MW neglecting power losses in transmission lines. The control parameters of the proposed method are respectively fixed at 10 for the number of nests and 8000 for maximum number of iterations whereas the probability pawill be tuned in the range 0.1–0.9. The numerical result for this system is given in Table 6and the best minimum cost obtained at pa=0.5–0.6 is $121,412.5355/h. The comparison of total cost and execution time from the ORCSA and those from others including IFEP [3], MPSO [14], QPSO (quantum-inspired PSO) [15], CSA [16], FA [18], OIWO [22], MABCA [23], BBO [25], GA-PS-SQP [36], EP-SQP [37], PSO-SQP [37], DE/BBO (combination of differential evolution and BBO) [38] is given in Table 7. It has been revealed that the ORCSA method is more effective and robust than other methods for obtaining better minimum total cost and average total cost with shorter computational time. The optimal solution for this system by ORCSA is given in Appendix.The test systems from [27] consist of 10, 20, 40, 80 and 160 units with multiple fuel options and valve point loading effects on thermal units. Power losses on transmission lines are neglected. The large-scale systems are created by duplicating the original 10-unit system and 2700MW load is proportionally adjusted to the system size. For implementation of the ORCSA method on the systems, the numbers of nests are set to 12 for 10-unit, 20-unit and 40-unit systems and 15 for 80-unit and 160-unit systems.In addition, the maximum numbers of iterations are fixed at 1000, 2000, 3000, 5500 and 8000 for the systems. The best solution for the systems is obtained at the probability pa=0.2 for 10-unit and 20-unit systems, pa=0.5 for 40-unit and 80-unit systems and pa=0.1 for 160-unit system. Table 8reports the result comparison of maximum cost, average cost, standard deviation and execution time from the proposed ORCSA and original CSA [16]. It is obviously that the proposed ORCSA can obtain better cost than CSA for most cases except the average and maximum costs for the 40-unit system. Moreover, the execution time from ORCSA is shorter than that from CSA. Note that the CSA is run on a 2.1GHz PC with 2GB of RAM.The effectiveness and robustness of the ORCSA method are also verified via the comparison of the average cost and execution time with CSA [16], conventional genetic algorithm with multiplier Lagrange (CGA_MU) and improved genetic algorithm with multiplier Lagrange (IGA_MU) [27] as given in Table 9. As observed from the table, the proposed ORCSA method is better than these methods in terms of fuel cost and computational time. Note the computational times for both CGA_MU and IGA_MU methods were from a PIII-700 PC. Based on the result comparison, the proposed method is very efficient for solving ELD problem with multiple fuel and valve point loading effects on thermal units.Several systems with prohibited operating zones constraints and spinning reserve constraint are considered consisting of 15, 30, 60 and 90 units [26]. For performing on the ORCSA method, the maximum number of iterations is respectively set to 500, 2000, 2500 and 3000 for the systems and the number of nests is fixed at 12 for all systems. In addition, the best value of pais obtained at 0.8 for 30-unit system and 0.9 for the remaining systems. The detailed result comparison between the proposed method and CSA [16] is reported in Table 10. Based on the result, the proposed method can obtain better minimum total cost with slightly longer execution time than CSA. Moreover, the average total cost and computational time from the ORCSA method are also compared to those from CSA [16], conventional GA (CGA) and improved GA with multiplier updating method (IGA_MUM) [26] as in Table 11. The comparison has indicated that the proposed method is more effective and robust than CSA, CGA and IGA_MUM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the ORCSA method has been successfully implemented for solving ELD problems with valve loading effects, multiple fuel options and prohibited zones. The proposed ORCSA method is a new meta-heuristic developed by performing two modifications on the original CSA method. The first modification is merging the new solutions generated via Lévy flights and replacement a fraction of egg together and then evaluating and ranking the eggs at once. The second one concentrates on the technique for handling the inequality constraints. The modifications have enhanced the search capability of the proposed method for complex problems. The effectiveness and robustness of the proposed ORCSA method have been verified on several test systems. The result comparison between the proposed method and other methods has indicated that the proposed method can obtain better total cost faster with computational time than many other methods. Therefore, the proposed ORCSA method can be a very efficient and robust method for solving complex ELD problems.Tables A1–A3.