@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy FMEA application to improve decision-making process in an emergency department

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fuzzy logic approach is preferable to fix the drawbacks for reprioritization of the Risk Priority Number (RPN).Fuzzy logic could reduce the drawback of occurred Traditional FMEA in evaluation and prioritization of failures.The application of using Fuzzy FMEA in the emergency department can be adopted suitably. All of members were able to assess dependently without any bias from the team members.Fuzzy FMEA can be applied for the first time to improve decision making process in an emergency department of a public hospital.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA),Fuzzy FMEA,Emergency department,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hospitals are one of the important service industries of health care for patients. The emergency department is the heart of every hospital, because the errors or failures occurring in it will significantly affect the safety of patients and the goodwill of the hospital. Therefore, emergency departments should be monitored carefully. This study proposed the application of Fuzzy failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) for prioritization and assessment of failures that likely occur in the working process of an emergency department. All individuals were assessed independently without the interference of team members. In addition, this method could reduce the limitations of traditional FMEA. The prioritization of risks could also help the emergency department to choose corrective actions wisely. In conclusion, the Fuzzy FMEA method was found to be suitably adopted in the emergency department. Finally, this method helped to increase the level of confidence on hospitals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hospitals are one of the important service industries of health care for patients. Furthermore, the emergency health-care department is the heart of every hospital, intending to offer service at any time. Hospitals lacking a sufficient urgent service at the outpatient department cannot handle patients requiring quick treatment. Moreover, physicians must have sufficient relevant experience and should be able to treat patients without delay. It is also important for the hospitals to have the required organs or organisms, place, and modern medical equipment [1]. The supervisors in emergency departments should have knowledge on the failures that may likely occur in the working process, as they may have an adverse impact on the health of the patients. These failures should be immediately addressed. Implementing the FMEA technique in the analysis of working process is one way of preventing these failures.FMEA technique can be used to eliminate failures occurring in the emergency department of hospitals. Safety of patients is of utmost importance in the assessment of problems. The following three factors affect the consideration of assessment: occurrence (O), severity (S), and detection (D). The priority number of risks indicated their level related to the occurrence of a problem, which did not appropriate or conform to consideration. Because of the acceptance of criteria of the frequency of occurrence, characteristics of severity, and capability of detection of problem between production industries and health-care industries, the Fuzzy FMEA technique has gained popularity [2]. In the assessment section, this method calculated the risk priority number (RPN) to remove the defects. The Fuzzy FMEA method has been used widely in construction industry [3], agriculture and food domain [4], oil and gas industry [5], aerospace industry [6], nuclear [7] and steel industry [8], and so on. In hospitals, this method is used to prevent infant abduction [9], in medical device [10,11], general anesthesia process [12,13], outpatient registration process for elderly patients [14], and purchasing process [15]. However, it was never found to be used in the working process of an emergency department.Therefore, in this study, we proposed the application of the Fuzzy FMEA method, aiming to develop the prioritization and assessment of failures that likely occur in the working process of an emergency department following the methodology of FMEA. The remaining of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review of FMEA. An algorithm of Fuzzy logic is proposed in Section 3. Section 4 presents the results of the application of Fuzzy FMEA in an emergency department and actual data collection. Finally, Section 5 presents the summary and recommendations of research.FMEA can find all failures in the system, design, process, or service. The risk factors depend on the occurrence, severity, and detection of failures [11]. This method had been widely used for risk management. FMEA is a very useful and effective tool capable of determining the root cause of failures, selecting the ways to detect them, and preventing or mitigating their consequences, with the aim of managing sources of the failures. In addition, it allows the assessment of potential failures to choose the corrective actions that can reduce their severity and occurrence. Consequently, FMEA increases the quality of service rendered and safety of patients. Moreover, the results of FMEA application and limitations of high-risk failures can be identified eventually. Thus, by using the FMEA method, an organization can prevent potential failures in a process as well as choose appropriate corrective actions to reduce the impact of the failures [16].Many industries have succeeded in developing systems and facilities by using FMEA. Recently, health-care industry has focused on the use of FMEA as a tool for process improvement. The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations requires the use of FMEA by all hospitals to improve their processes. In addition, the American Hospital Association, the National Patient Safety Foundation, and Veterans Administration support its use [17]. The health-care industry is delicate to human resources and the effects of failures occurring in it would affect the whole organization [18]. Patient safety is the most important factor in health care, and hence failures occurring in clinical laboratories would lead to serious consequences. Clear guidelines must be established for all laboratories to identify, evaluate, and verify the incident. The FMEA method is capable of detecting problems and high-risk processes before the occurrence of failure. Prediction of possible failures can help propose corrective actions to prevent or reduce its adverse effects [19].Criteria used in most hospitals are devoid of an empirical standard. Several studies have found that these criteria focus on patient safety. Therefore, the level of acceptance of errors was more important in health-care industry than the manufacturing industry, because the severity of failure has adverse effects on patients and not on products or machine. The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations requires the use FMEA by all hospitals for process improvement [20]. FMEA analysis aims at reducing the adverse effects of errors in prescribing and administering drugs in pediatrics by identifying their modes and severity on patient safety. The major focus of hospitals is patient safety, and hence the level of acceptance of potential failures was lesser than that of other industries.The process of FMEA could be carried out by the following five steps [21]:(1)Selecting the process.Assembling of the multidisciplinary team.Collecting and organizing information for the process under study.Conducting failure mode analysis.•Identifying failure modes in each step.Identifying the potential effect of each failure mode.Ranking of severity, occurrence, and detection in each failure mode.Specifying the high risk.The risk was assessed with respect to the following three factors: severity (S), probability of failure, that is, occurrence (O), and the likelihood of controls to detect (D). RPN represents the overall risk of each failure, which can be calculated as(1)RPN=S⋅O⋅DTaking corrective actions and measuring improvement and outcomes.However, implementation of FMEA in the aforementioned studies has limitations in the assessment of RPN. Traditional FMEA operation estimates that RPN was divided into five levels, and scores of 1–10 were assigned to measure the probability of occurrence, severity, and nondetection [22,15]. RPN evaluation in a previous study found that the scores of 1–10 were assessed from the difference of the members and industries. Consequently, the assessment tends to be less accurate [7]. Limitations of the evaluation criteria and RPN evaluation by traditional FMEA operation are as follows [15,23–26,12]:-The importance of criteria giving different weights.The relative importance of O, S, and D was not considered, but they are equally important. This should not be followed when there was a consideration of FMEA implementation.Different scores of O, S, and D may result in the same value of RPN, but the impact of those risks that were hidden may be different. This may lead to a waste of resources and time, or, in some cases, some high-risk events could not be observed.Mathematical formula is very important in risk assessment for calculating RPN. Variations in ranking may lead to entirely different effects on the RPN, which in turn depends on the values of other factors.In general, the aforementioned three factors were difficult to be evaluated precisely. Most of the information in FMEA was often uncertain or imprecise, and could be expressed in a language that is likely important or of very high level.In the previous research, FMEA was used as a combination method with other quality tools to eliminate the potential risk and build confidence in the system. Moreover, the result of assessment by FMEA implementation was shown in terms of RPN. It was also shown that the correct evaluation of RPN was an indication of problem severity, which can be used to take corrective actions to reduce or eliminate the risk that might have occurred. When FMEA method used in the study was implemented, the calculated RPN showed some drawbacks. Consequently, several studies proposed FMEA implementation to enhance process efficiency as well as to overcome the aforementioned drawbacks suitably in real work [7].A new technique was proposed in Ref. [27], which used severity, occurrence, and detection in failure assessment. These parameters represented the members of a fuzzy set for combining the results of rule based on evaluating the min–max inference and then defuzzification of risk assessment of failure from prioritizing failures for corrective actions in a failure mode, effects and criticality analysis (FMECA) based on fuzzy logic. A method was proposed in Ref. [28] for reduction of the rules to reduce the complexity associated with the fuzzy logic-based FMEA methodology by eliminating some of the rules that are not necessary to be converted to output in the semiconductor-manufacturing process. Wang et al. [25] showed that two different failure modes could not be distinguished from any other mode. Different experts might have different levels of knowledge and judgment when the verdict was inconsistent. In addition, it was not possible to include or eliminate the rule and reduce rules incompletely if it was not reduced from a complete “if-then” rule base. Hence, deserving reduction rules was not prioritized for failure modes to overcome the limitations of RPN by using the fuzzy if-then rules. In order to overcome the limitations of RPN and the fuzzy if-then rules, a fuzzy weighted geometric mean (FWGM) methodology was proposed to prioritize and assess the risks in implementing FMEA. The development of fuzzy logic approach for FMEA did not require expert knowledge. Prior experience and engineering methodology help evaluate the numbers to measure the level of these risks, assessment of which leads to impropriety and inconsistency between priority numbers. A fuzzy-based FMEA application to improve the purchasing process of a public hospital was proposed in Ref. [15]. This approach could solve problems effectively and identify the potential failure modes and effects explicitly. In addition, it could also build confidence in the process.A most popular fuzzy rule-based method to approve traditional FMEA was proposed in Ref. [2], which has the following specific advantages over the traditional methods of FMEA [23,24,27]:-It allows the analyst to use linguistic terms in criticality assessment for assessing the risks associated with failure directly.Ambiguity, qualitative data, or information, including quantitative data, could be used in the assessment and management consistently, but not explicitly.The structure of the combination of parameters, severity (S), occurrence (O), and detection (D), was more flexible.The fuzzy logic system is based on the fact that some problems did not require the correct or accurate value, and could solve the problem depending on prior experience or knowledge of experts. It is based the theory of probability in the transfer of crisp input to fuzzy input, to be processed by referencing the condition of fuzzy rule base created by experts. The problem could be solved by fuzzy rule base processing, where the fuzzy output reverts to crisp output. Fuzzy logic was a tool for making decision under conditions of uncertainty in the data by allowing for flexibility. The principle of fuzzy logic was similar to the complex thought patterns of human. The fuzzy logic had more special characteristics than the Boolean logic, that is, an extension of the partially true concept that consists of values between completely true and completely false; but the Boolean logic has only true and false values [21].Algorithm of Fuzzy logic: The algorithm of the fuzzy logic has the following steps:(1)Define the linguistic variables and terms (initialization)Construct the membership functions (initialization)Construct the rule base (initialization)Convert crisp input data into fuzzy values using the membership functions (fuzzification)Evaluate the rules in the rule base (inference)Combine the results of each rule (inference)Convert the output data into nonfuzzy values (defuzzification).Initially, crisp input data are converted into fuzzy values using the linguistic variables and membership functions in a process called fuzzification. Then, the rules in the fuzzy logic system are considered as the core of inference processing. An inference depending on a set of rules is to evaluate the rules and combine the decisions result of the system. Finally, a defuzzification step converts the fuzzy output to crisp output that corresponded to the system [15]. The corresponding model is depicted in Fig. 1.The overall data of the analysis of linguistic variables were used to explain the severity, occurrence, and detection of failure. These data were the input of fuzzification to determine the degree of membership in each input. These fuzzy inputs were evaluated by using rule base and fuzzy logic operations to identify the risk of failure modes and the involved degree of membership in the risk category. After defuzzification, the fuzzy output was converted to crisp output to prioritize the failure mode [15].Fuzzification converted crisp inputs to determine the degree of membership by the membership function, which was considered a good solution when the input was defined to linguistic conditions (Fig. 2) [24].The rule base was created to control the output variable in the fuzzy logic system by if-then rule with provision and summing. In order to obtain the results, the evaluation of each rule was combined in a process called fuzzy inference [15]. This process allowed the calculation of the rules as the input. The most commonly used technique for evaluation was the “min–max” inference. Therefore, the true value of the rule was set as the minimum value. If the output of fuzzy set was more than one rule, the subset was defined as the maximum real value; and the Mamdani (max–min) method was also widely used in the inference [15,23,24,29,30].After evaluating a rule, the overall result would be a fuzzy value. This value would be defuzzified to convert the fuzzy output to crisp output. A function was constructed by the membership function of the output variable. A popular method used in this process was center of gravity (COG) [15] method:(2)COG=∫abμA(X)xdx∫abμA(X)dxThe results of the defuzzification process are rated based on the conclusions of the fuzzy values [24–26,30]. This was used to indicate the risk of failure to take corrective action according to priorities. A method was proposed in Ref. [15] for choosing the failure to take corrective action if the fuzzy RPN (FRPN) of a failure mode was greater than or equal to the average number of FRPN.The proposed Fuzzy FMEA model has the following steps (Fig. 3):Step 1: Study the process of the emergency department.This step is aimed to determine the implementation process and design the form that is used to collect data for the analysis. Implementation data of this study were collected via observation and questionnaires filled by doctors, nurses, and authorities related to the emergency department. The working process of an emergency department consists of four steps: obtaining medical records, patient screening, analyzing in treatment room, and forwarding center (coordinating patient center) (Fig. 4).Step 2: Determine all potential failure modes, effects, and current control of each failure mode in the emergency department.Study the processes involved in the emergency department to determine the implementation process and design the form used for data collection. Then, determine all potential failure modes, effects, and current control of each failure mode.Step 3: Evaluate the S, O, and D ratings of each failure mode by FMEA users.According to Wang et al. [25], the development of fuzzy logic approach for FMEA did not require expert knowledge. Furthermore, it was found that the number of people involved in the process did not limit the assessment. Related studies found that three to six people with sufficient knowledge and understanding of the process facilitated the suitability and ease of operation [11,31–34].After identifying all problems occurring in the emergency department, the nature of the problem in each process is evaluated by a nurse and an expert team consisting of five people: one supervisor, two deputy heads, and two operating nurses, who evaluated the operation into the following three forms:•First form: FMEA team members of each individual assessing priority for each failure without the criteria, factors, and score for considering the assessment.First, the individual will assess prioritization of failures from the rank (issued that it is important to be resolved first) until the last one. The advantages of this assessment are anyone can be evaluated independently according to one's own opinion and the priority of the failures can be summarized by counting the data with duplicated assessment. The evaluated priority of most data duplicates, that is, the highest priority failure, should be corrective actions. The results of data have been evaluated without the priority of the failure, because the assessment cannot count the frequency of duplicated data.Therefore, an assessment of the first form is inappropriate to be applied in the emergency room, because, furthermore, it will be difficult to summarize from counting the frequency of duplicated data. Nonunique data cannot be concluded. The assessments do not contain criteria or guidelines for decision-making process, and hence may contain errors and inaccuracies.Second form: Five members help to brainstorm and assess the ratings by traditional FMEA.This can be performed by considering occurrence (O), severity (S), and detection (D) of all problems in the process. The score is thus obtained by the assessment, according to Eq. (1).Third form: Five members with individual evaluated ratings score by Fuzzy method.These scores were obtained based on the feeling, experience, and knowledge of the members. The data form of the problem with criteria and description consists of three factors, namely occurrence (O), severity (S), and detection (D), similarly to the traditional FMEA method (second form). The total score, contributed by each individual, is calculated according to geometric mean (GM) method.When the GM method is used to find the values and prioritize problems of the fuzzy method, the problems have an FRPN higher than or equal to average FRPN, which must be improved and solved. Of the 21 problems found after evaluation and sequential importance, 10 must be resolved immediately. The problems (Nos. 2, 20, 21) with FRPN>average FRPN (4.68) must be resolved with utmost priority; in these problems, FRPN=7 (Table 1).Table 2compares the assessment results between the traditional FMEA and fuzzy method. The traditional FMEA ranking failure numbers of 20, 19, 21, 16, and 17 and the fuzzy ranking failure numbers 2, 20, 21, 12, 13, 9, and 16 are important at top five during calculation of the RPN and priorities of the two methods. Both methods show similar results of failure prioritization. Corrective actions are required for failures numbers 16, 20, and 21, as they are included in both methods. Then, the assessment and RPN calculation are in part of both methods (a brainstorm of traditional FMEA and each individual of fuzzy method). It was found that the assessment and traditional calculation of RPN resulted in a value ranging from 1 to 1000, which is different from the received value. The value of RPN obtained from brainstorming shows the problem which does not affect the process until too much corrective actions are performed, because brainstorming has advantages derived from knowledge and prior experience in decision making. However, the limitations are evaluated in the Results section to assess individual difficulty; furthermore, they cannot be evaluated in fact. The persons with higher position possessing authority have an idea conflict in decision making with those of lower position or minority, which is different from reality. The comparison of received and numeric FRPNs results in continuous values of data with score >1–10, which is easy for consideration by the user who can identify the setting of rules in control for a suitable operation. The evaluation format of Fuzzy FMEA with individual scores is unique to everybody. This indicates that it can show the idea and assessment truly without prejudice of considering the score of the team.Step 4: Calculate the RPN with algorithm of fuzzy.First, a function was constructed for the implementation of fuzzy as shown in Fig. 5. The first step is to define a scale of score in each factor to generate membership function for input variables. The second step is to generate the membership function for the output variable. The last step involves defining the rules to control output.•Define the scale of severity (S), occurrence (O), and detection (D) of criteria used for evaluation of fuzzy. These criteria and the reduction of score [20,22,31,35,29] must be approved by the head of the emergency department before implementation. It is evident from Table 3that scores of 1–10 in each factor were divided into five levels to generate membership function of S, O, and D factors as shown in Fig. 6. The definitions of scores are: 1=almost none, 2–3=low, 4–6=medium, 7–8=high, and 9–10=very high. this procedure is applied in fuzzification to convert input variables of S, O, and D to fuzzy inputs.Generate membership function for risk output. In Fig. 7, the defined output to create manner function member resembles the input, but in the output section, the importance of risks of problem was divided into ten levels as 1=none, 2=very low, 3=low, 4=high low, 5=low medium, 6=medium, 7=high medium, 8=low high, 9=high, and 10=very high. These must be according to the rule of defining, because the rules were used for inferring fuzzy inference to control the receiving output value. This procedure is implemented in defuzzification process to convert fuzzy outputs to FRPN (risk of each failure).The rules defined by users having knowledge and understanding in the system or an expert (emergency department head). The number of rules can be determined as “Membership function No. of Severity·Membership function No. of Occurrence ·Membership function No. of no Detection=Rules No. of Fuzzy.” Therefore, when important levels of these three factors with all the rules are compared, we obtain 5·5·5=125 rules, for example:Rule# 1: ifOccurrence=Almost noneandSeverity=Almost noneandno Detection=Almost nonethenRisk=None.Rule# 2: ifOccurrence=Almost noneandSeverity=Almost noneandno Detection=LowthenRisk=None (Fig. 8).In this study, 125 rules (Appendix A; Fig. 9) were used, which defined the rule for controlling output value by creating the rule using MATLAB program, which used the conjunction “and” to link each factor to output value for controlling the value of FRPN that received any important level of risk as shown in Fig. 8. This procedure is implemented in inference process to evaluate the rules and combine the results.Step 5: Ranking FRPN.The results of defuzzification would be rated based on the conclusions of fuzzy [25,30,26]. This was used for indicating the risk of failure to take corrective action according to priorities. A method was proposed in Ref. [15] to choose the failure to take corrective actions if FRPN of a failure mode ≥the average number of FRPN. Therefore, this step involves ranking of FRPN to choose the failures to take corrective actions. In case study, score values of problems≥average of FRPN (≥4.68). Of the total 10 problems, six are ranked first. Because of changing and enlarging the screening point area for being convenient in movement and supporting patients in the process of screening, relative problems exist and confused patients remain to contact for treatment. Transferring patients from ICU to patient room makes supervision of the crisis patients inadequate and inappropriate, because of the unavailability of beds and sufficient respirators or proper tools. Furthermore, there are two problems in operating solution. The confused patient will be separated as waiting for treatment, because labels are not tagged at the patient's bed all times. Another drawback associated with this process is the unclear division of area (yellow and red areas). In the third rank, the problem of no tagging labels is indicated for screening of the type of severity of the patients’ symptom (e.g., patients with coma and urgent symptom, who were sent to treatment room quickly). For the important problem in fourth rank, patient symptom history will be waited for treatment and then overlapped with the table, because of the absence of sufficient channels for screening and keeping. The important problem in the fifth rank is the missing of required data, because of manual error in saving the document. Finally, the important problem in the sixth rank is the noninquiry of patients for their preliminary symptoms or measuring vital signs before doctor visit. This is because the nurses do not follow the operation on working steps, leading to occurrence of problems and difficulty in investigating low-level problems. Moreover, complaints related to waiting for treatment (from relatives and patients), due to the non-coordination of patients and relatives in the working system (emergency departments have screening and accordant treatment symptoms without any queues), are associated with severe problems in low level.Step 6: Corrective actions in areas of emergency department with high RPN.Finally, this step helps solve problems of increasing occurrence of failure as shown in Table 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Regarding the evaluation of all three forms, the first form provides each individual in the FMEA team to assess his/her own opinions by using the priorities for each failure without the criteria, factors, and score in the assessment. In the second form, team members of FMEA brainstorm to evaluate and then use the traditional FMEA method to calculate the RPN. In the third form, each individual in the FMEA team can assess his/her own opinions and then use the fuzzy method to calculate the RPN.As the result, this study found that the advantages of this assessment could be independently evaluated according to different opinions; and the priority of failures could be summarized by counting the data with duplicated assessment. On the contrary, each individual of the FMEA team assesses the priorities of all 21 failures without the criteria, factors, and score used for considering the assessment. The data have been evaluated without prioritizing the failure, because the assessment cannot count the frequency of duplicated data. Therefore, the assessment of the first form is inappropriate for implementation in the emergency room. Nonunique data cannot be concluded. The assessments do not contain criteria or guidelines for decision-making process, and hence may contain errors and inaccuracies.For the second form, the assessment based on traditional FMEA method has remarks from the RPN calculation method. When all three factors are calculated by multiplication according to the traditional FMEA method, the scores in each factor are different, thereby resulting in different values of RPN. The scores have a wide range, and are incoherent, which require them and some failures to be overlooked without nonupdation. It is evident that there are only two failures with RPN>100, and an overview of the rating on the rest of failures is necessary. This indicates that the risk of failure is very small, and hence corrective actions are not required. The main drawback of a brainstorming session to evaluate the rating is that the members cannot express their opinion, as it may be against the team or those with higher positions. As a result, the bias in the assessment cannot be assessed according to the actual circumstances.The comparison of received and numeric FRPNs results in continuous values of data with score >1–10, which is easy for consideration by the user who can identify the setting of rules in control for a suitable operation. The evaluation format of Fuzzy FMEA with individual scores is unique to everybody. This indicates that it can show idea and assessment truly without prejudice of considering the score of the team. A total of 21 problems were found when it is operated according to the Fuzzy FMEA methodology. After priority assessment, it was also found that there are 10 problems that must have been resolved with high priority, because FRPN>average FRPN (4.68), that is, the problems (Nos. 20, 21, and 2) with FRPN≈7.The results of this study show that the Fuzzy FMEA method can detect failures in an emergency department, whose effect can be evaluated by comparing the priority ranks of the problem before and after implementation of the method. During assessment, each individual in the team can show his/her own ideas independently without prejudice of paradoxical assessment with high position. In addition, when risks occur, failures are resolved. The results of operation can help build confidence in the process of emergency department as well.Future research needs to use the assessment format of Fuzzy FMEA applied in other studies. Two sections must be considered further. The first section with subject of criteria used for assessment and rule for operation of a new Fuzzy. For consistent appropriateness with the environment, it has to determine the rule created by experts. The second section with operated priority to select problems for resolving and taking corrective actions should be assessed again to check whether the FRPNs of each failure can be reduced or not, when they are already resolved. A software program can be used to improve the format, understanding, and convenience of the Fuzzy FMEA assessment.See Table Afor details.