@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Face recognition using transform domain feature extraction and PSO-based feature selection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
DDFFE and ThBPSO based face recognition irrespective of variations in pose, color and illumination.Significantly reduced number of features using DDFFE and ThBPSO.Quadruple ellipse mask used to isolate and extract important features from spectrum.Significantly improved recognition rate even with the simple Euclidean classifier.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Face recognition,Feature selection,Binary Particle Swarm Optimization,Discrete Wavelet Transform,Discrete Fourier Transform,Discrete Cosine Transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents two new techniques, viz., DWT Dual-subband Frequency-domain Feature Extraction (DDFFE) and Threshold-Based Binary Particle Swarm Optimization (ThBPSO) feature selection, to improve the performance of a face recognition system. DDFFE uses a unique combination of DWT, DFT, and DCT, and is used for efficient extraction of pose, translation and illumination invariant features. The DWT stage selectively utilizes the approximation coefficients along with the horizontal detail coefficients of the 2-dimensional DWT of a face image, whilst retaining the spatial correlation of pixels. The translation variance problem of the DWT is compensated in the following DFT stage, which also exploits the frequency characteristics of the image. Then, all the low frequency components present at the center of the DFT spectrum are extracted by drawing a quadruple ellipse mask around the spectrum center. Finally, DCT is used to lay the ground for BPSO based feature selection. The second proposed technique, ThBPSO, is a novel feature selection algorithm, based on the recurrence of selected features, and is used to search the feature space to obtain a feature subset for recognition. Experimental results obtained by applying the proposed algorithm on seven benchmark databases, namely, Cambridge ORL, UMIST, Extended Yale B, CMUPIE, Color FERET, FEI, and HP, show that the proposed system outperforms other FR systems. A significant increase in the recognition rate and a substantial reduction in the number of features required for recognition are observed. The experimental results indicate that the minimum feature reduction obtained is 98.2% for all seven databases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Face recognition (FR) is a biometric technique that is widely used in various areas and places such as security, forensic medicine and anti-terrorist cells. It involves determining if the image of the face of any given person matches any of the face images stored in a database [1–3]. This problem is hard to solve automatically due to the changes that various factors, such as facial expression, lighting [4], and different poses [5] can cause on the image.Most research on face recognition falls into two main categories: feature-based and holistic [1]. Holistic or global approaches to face recognition, involve encoding the entire facial image and treating the resulting facial “code” as a point in a high-dimensional space. Thus, they assume that all faces are constrained to particular positions, orientations, and scales. A feature on the other hand represents a distinctive or characteristic measurement, transform, structural component extracted from a segment of a pattern. whereas feature-based approach to face recognition basically rely on the detection and characterization of individual facial features and their geometrical relationships. Such features generally include the eyes, nose, and mouth.Features are used to represent patterns with the goal of minimizing the loss of important information [6]. Feature extraction aims at extracting only the most significant features from the feature set to satisfy an objective with the least possible features selected.For FR methodology to work successfully, the features used by the classifier are significant [7]. A good feature extractor for a face recognition system is built to extract discriminant features that are not sensitive to environmental variations such as variations in pose, scale, illumination, and facial expressions. Many holistic feature extraction methods use combinations and variants of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [8], Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Neural Networks, and so on. PCA-based face recognition can be simple and efficient, but it is susceptible to translation-variance, pose, and lighting conditions [9]. LDA-based FR systems are well-known for feature extraction, and dimensionality reduction. They out perform PCA-based ones conventionally, and solve the illumination problem [10]. However, a major problem with LDA is that it suffers from the Small Sample Size (SSS) problem, where singularities arise owing to the larger number of training samples compared to the dimension of the feature space. There are also other methods like Back Propagation Networks (BPN), global linear regression (GLR), local linear regression (GLR), and hybrid global linear regression (HGLR), which were developed in recent years. All of them have major shortcomings, They are all computationally expensive and require large storage [11]. Thus, the underlying motivation behind the proposed extraction method is to curtail these shortcomings to an extent.Traditionally, an additional step prevalent in modern FR systems is Feature Selection, which is the process of optimizing the extracted feature set, to reduce dimensionality and computation time. In the extracted feature set, not all the features are required or even play a part in recognition. Selecting the most relevant variables is usually essential for building a robust system, particularly if the variables are redundant.There are several feature selection techniques and some methods emphasize more on one aspect than another. This is the point of distinction between the existent techniques. One of the simplest techniques works by describing filters that select features by ranking them against the correlation coefficients of other features. A serious limitation of variable ranking is that it may lead to the selection of a redundant subset. Another limitation is that the subset of useful variables may exclude many redundant, but relevant features. Another method known as the wrapper model engages a learning algorithm to measure classification accuracy but it is usually more expensive computationally [12].All these limitations can be overcome by employing evolutionary computation (EC) algorithms that assess subsets of variables according to their usefulness [13]. The main motivation for using ECs to solve multi-objective optimization problems is due to its capability for searching simultaneously with a set of possible solutions to find the optimal solution. Computational methods can be used to optimize feature selection process by iteratively trying to improve the feature subset with regard to a given measure of quality. Two popular evolutionary algorithms like Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [14] and Genetic Algorithm (GA) [15], have been used widely in face recognition. GA uses the Genetic Programming (GP) paradigm which provides a way to do program induction by searching the space of possible computer programs for an individual computer program that is highly fit in solving or approximately solving the problem at hand. Unfortunately, GA suffers from computational issues. PSO is similar to the GA in the sense that they are both population-based search approaches. They both depend on information sharing among their population members to enhance their search processes using a combination of deterministic and probabilistic rules. Although PSO and the GA on average yield the same effectiveness (solution quality), PSO is more computationally efficient (uses less number of function evaluations) than the GA [16]. PSO is very effective for optimization over search-spaces that are partially irregular, noisy and change frequently over time; it's meta-heuristic nature and the relative ease with which it can be extended to discrete space makes it an ideal choice.For our proposed feature selection method, we thus draw inspiration from EC algorithms to extract a minimal set of ideal features which are pose, translation and illumination invariant, whilst being computationally efficient.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel approach to a flexible face recognition system is proposed, which uses the combination of DWT, DFT, and DCT for feature extraction and a ThBPSO based feature selection. DWT and DFT have played a key role in efficient feature extraction which is the main contributor for the high recognition rates being obtained. DCT not only helps DFT in enhancing the recognition rate, but also aids ThBPSO in achieving a significant reduction in the number of selected features. The feature selector ThBPSO reduced the feature set to the least number of optimum features for maximum recognition performance. We can also conclude that the conventional BPSO is a special case of ThBPSO with a threshold of 10. A threshold of 13 gives the best recognition performance for any dataset, and also maintains the least number of features, i.e., 35% of the extracted features. A successful attempt has been made to equally handle all image variations (pose, scale, occlusion, illumination, facial expressions, and background). The proposed method exhibits extremely good performance under frontal poses with variations in facial expressions and facial details (ORL and Color FERET fafb). The experimental results show that the proposed algorithm has performed well under the extreme illumination variation of subset five of Extended Yale B, with peak RR reaching 100%, and an average RR of 99.61% (training to testing ratio of 3:16). The algorithm has successfully handled pose variations (Color FERET, FEI, HP, UMIST), and illumination variance in color images (CMUPIE), giving a peak RR of 91%, and an average RR of 86.81% for Color FERET ((8:12), considering all 13 poses), and peak RR of 100%, and an average RR of 99.14% for CMUPIE (5:16). The ORL database gave an average RR of 96.82% (4:6). The proposed method costs an average testing time of 112.3ms per image for Color FERET database (8:12). This may still be a limitation of the proposed method for real time applications.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2014.05.007.The following are the supplementary data to this article: