@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The new normal: Market cooperation in the mobile payments ecosystem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Address competition and collaboration in the payment ecosystem.Develop the Mobile Payment Market Collusion (MPMC) framework.Integrating theories of market collusion with the literatures on business and technology ecosystems.Validating the framework by a case study of technology-based market collusion in mobile payment ecosystem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Case study,iZettle,Market cooperation,Mobile payment,Payment ecosystem,Payment markets,PayPal,SMS payment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The introduction of mobile payments is one of many innovations that are changing the payment market. This change involves new payment service providers entering this lucrative market, and meanwhile, the existing stakeholders are trying to defend their oligopolistic positions. The mobile payment market cooperation (MPMC) framework in this article shows how the digitalization of payments, as a technology innovation, affects the competition and collaboration among traditional and new stakeholders in the payment ecosystem at three levels of analysis. We do this by integrating theories of market cooperation with the literatures on business and technology ecosystems. The MPMC framework depicts technology-based market cooperation strategies in the context of recent battles in the mobile payments ecosystem. In these battles, the competitors can use technology either in defensive build-and-defend strategies to protect market position, or in offensive battering-ram strategies for ecosystem entry or position improvement. Successful strategies can lead to: (1) Ricardian rents, based on operational efficiency advantages traceable to the firm’s position relative to suppliers and monopoly power; and (2) Bainian rents, resulting from the extent the firm is able to resist price competition in the market. We validate the framework that we propose through three case studies of technology-based market cooperation in the mobile payments ecosystem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Payments have become a hot spot for digital innovation (McKinsey 2014b). Mobile phone manufactures, telecom operators, payment service providers, software companies, and technology start-ups all are entering the payment market (Gartner 2014, McKinsey 2014b). It is not only the well-known Internet giants, such as Google, Facebook, and Apple, and the early payment entrepreneurs such as Square, PayPal and iZettle anymore. There now are more there are more 12,000 start-ups moving into the payment services market (McKinsey 2014b). This is reshaping the industry and banks have been trying to fight off the competitors by using their existing market positions and IT infrastructures. For instance, Dansk Bank in Denmark responded to changes in the market by launching a mobile peer-to-peer payment app called “Mobile Pay.” After only eighteen months, the payment app was adopted by about 40% of the Danish population.One of the factors explaining the pace of innovation is that payment fees, even though the fees are declining per transaction, still are among the most important sources of revenues for banks. According to McKinsey (2014a), the global annual revenues from payments will reach by 2018 US$2.3 trillion and account for 43% of all banking services revenues. Another factor is the ongoing digitization of banking and payments. In particular, the mobile phone now plays a central role in this transformation and it has been suggested that “banks should have a ‘mobile first’ philosophy, in which products and processes are completely redesigned for mobile, after which they are translated to Internet and branches” (McKinsey 2014a).Due to digital convergence with mobile technologies, payments have become one of society’s most innovative and dynamic sectors, with fierce technology-based competition for market position (Ondrus and Lyytinen 2011). Banks all over the world are talking about the technology-led competition as the “new normal” or the “new standard,” indicating that the industry has started to display competitive dynamics that are typical of high-tech industries rather that traditional financial industries (cf. Lee et al. 2010). For example, digital payments are information goods with near to zero marginal cost and frequently strong direct network effects (Bakos and Brynjolfsson 1999, Ferguson 2009). Most payments compete in two-sided markets where different costumer groups – payers and payees – are matched through some means of digital intermediation (Evans et al. 2006, Rochet and Tirole 2003, Shapiro and Varian 2013). Thus, the dynamics of payment markets are similar to mobile industries and characterized by tension between competition and collaboration among stakeholders (Ghazawneh and Henfridsson 2012, Selander et al. 2010). While some of the stakeholders are direct competitors, they are also mutually dependent on the success of the industry as a whole and thus are forced into collaboration with other entities.However, the payment market also displays characteristics that set it apart from other digital industries. The payment market is characterized by a strong regulatory framework and oligopoly (Ferguson 2009). Because of their high societal impact, regulatory agencies typically have a strong interest to influence how stakeholders assume positions within the market. In addition, payment markets have a long history of collaboration among the stakeholders, where change frequently is achieved by consensus and joint efforts rather than an innovation arms race. There are limitations in the conceptual understanding of how these distinct characteristics of payment markets influence how firms compete in them. Thus, contributing to an increased understanding of the effects of digitalization of payments, and also to digital ecosystem dynamics in general, we seek to explain how the digitization of payments, as a technology innovation, affects competition and collaboration among traditional and new stakeholders of the payments ecosystem.We do this by developing the mobile payment market cooperation (MPMC) framework, which is based on an integration of market cooperation theory1In his review of theories of profit, Makadok (2011) refers to this group of theories as market collusion theory. The term collusion has a very strong emphasis of the competitive dimension of market positioning, which we consider not matching the more collaborative sentiment of the ecosystem perspective and the empirical context in this study. The Danish payment market is characterized by a long history of collaboration between governmental agencies and financial institutions. Therefore, throughout this article, we refer to the set of theories that relate to firm’s market positioning as market cooperation theory. Here cooperation is a term that denotes firm collaboration and competition in markets to achieve co-opetitive and beneficial outcomes.1(Makadok 2003, 2011) and ecosystems theory from the business technology domain (Adomavicius et al. 2007, Basole and Karla 2011, Moore 1996, Selander et al. 2013).Market cooperation theory is based on the view that some markets and market positions restrains price rivalry, thereby allowing firms to profit at the expense of their customers. The profit generating mechanism of market position is particularly relevant in the typical two-sided market (Rochet and Tirole 2003, Stabell and Fjeldstad 1998), where the platform owner controls the cluster of stakeholders and captures a large share of the profit, high network effects that frequently lead to tippy markets, and scale advantage through high fixed and near zero marginal costs (Gawer and Henderson 2007, Shapiro and Varian 2013).We use the business ecosystem as the unit of analysis, since previous research has concluded that mobile technological developments cannot be viewed in isolation. Thus, one has to consider the system and infrastructure they are part of (Adomavicius et al. 2007). In similar line of research, Basole and Karla (2011) propose that the organization of mobile industries, such as mobile payments, is more appropriately conceived as an ecosystem. One example is the direct credit transfer (bank account to bank account) from a mobile phone. It involves mobile phones, mobile phone operators, mobile bank applications developed by third party software providers, internal banking systems, and interbank processing provided by central banks.Drawing upon three embedded case studies from the Danish payment ecosystem, we illustrate how different market cooperation strategies are used in the ecosystem and how turbulence is a recurring pattern in the evolution of socio-technical ecosystems (see e.g. Henningsson and Henriksen 2011). We show that established competitors apply the defensive strategy of build-and-defend and new competitors use the offensive strategy of a battering-ram.The reminder of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we develop the MPMC framework by integrating market cooperation strategies and ecosystem theories. Then, in Section 3, we outline our case study approach, including data collection and analysis. Following this, in Section 4, we present our three illustrative case studies from the Danish payments market. This is followed by a discussion of the proposed framework’s validity in Section 5. Finally, we discuss implications for theory, practice, and future research in Section 6.We develop the MPMC framework in three steps. First, we discuss how technology can be used in market cooperation strategies. We identify two generic strategies. One is a defensive strategy that we label the build-and-defend strategy. Established competitors use it to fight off new entrants. The other is an offensive strategy that we label the battering-ram strategy. New competitors that are aiming to enter the market use this strategy. Second, we introduce the concept of the digital ecosystem. The digital ecosystem view, building on the idea of a business ecosystem, emphasizes the relationship between technology and strategy, which otherwise cannot be fully understood by approaching each as an isolated unit. Third, we synthesize the market cooperation strategies and ecosystems literature into an integrated explanatory framework for technology-based market cooperation strategies that is applicable to the mobile payment ecosystem.To understand how any technology, including payment technology, creates value for an organization, the technology has to be linked to the organization’s value-creation mechanisms. Makadok (2003, 2011) offers a useful categorization of the major theories in strategic management. He organized them by their causal profit mechanisms. They are the means through which money moves from a customer to a vendor in exchange for goods or services, generating net profit in the meantime. This categorization views the numerous theories of strategic management through four value mechanisms: collusion, governance, competence, and flexibility.Theories for market cooperation strategy, addressing how firms collaborate and compete to assume positions in a market space, relate to the profit mechanism. Fundamental for these theories is the observation that a firm’s choice of and position in an industry, it turns out, are important factors for performance. For a firm to change its market position, it must have the ability to cooperate with other stakeholders in a way that enables it to exert power over its suppliers and customers. Below, we will define the objectives and mechanisms of market cooperation strategies. Then, we will discuss how technology can be used in defensive and offensive strategies.Market cooperation theories suggest that “market power is necessary for an industry’s participants to be able to recover fixed investments and create long-term returns on equity that exceed that of firms in other industries” (Drnevich and Croson 2013). From this perspective, market concentration and barriers to entry that limit the competition on price and leads to increased average industry profit (Makadok 2011).Common for this category of theories is an explicit or implicit view on management as market positioning, tailoring firm strategy to create or exploit unique industry characteristics. Establishing and defending an attractive position in the marketplace enables a firm to either gain pricing power towards consumers or gain bargaining power towards suppliers. Following the analysis of Makadok (2003, 2011) and Drnevich and Croson (2013), the economic profit mechanisms for the firm in this perspective include both operational efficiency advantages, so called Ricardian rents (Ricardo 1817). These are traceable to market power and position relative to suppliers and monopoly-related rents (Bain 1956). This enables such firms to resist price competition from competitors.Drawing on Drnevich and Croson (2013), we identify two principle uses of technology for market cooperation strategies: (1) the build-and-defend strategy, and (2) the battering-ram strategy. We analyze the first strategy in terms of strategic options for existing stakeholders in an industry. We discuss the latter strategy as an option for existing firms in the market and new entrants that want to change their market position. Table 1summarizes the two strategies and their options for technology-based market cooperation strategy in mobile ecosystems.The build-and-defend strategy is based on the logic that access to technology can act as defense for a particular market position or a barrier for market entry. In the establishment of barriers of entry, the existing stakeholders in an industry have a typical interest in collaborative strategies to manage technology in a way that hinders new competitors to enter. Fewer competitors in an industry generally leads to decreased price competition and, in the end, increased average profit for the existing participants (Drnevich and Croson 2013). From the viewpoint of an individual business unit, the most profitable position is when the technology somehow can grant the business unit a monopoly position that allows one-sided decisions on pricing. There are two ways technology can contribute towards such positions in the industry: by level of capital investment, and by technology access.First, Drnevich and Croson (2013) put forward that large-scale capital investments in technology can serve as barriers to market entry, because of their large initial capital requirements and uncertain prospects for their recovery. This will be true if competing in an industry requires substantial initial investment in technology resources and ongoing investment to maintain complementary capabilities.Some parts of the payment industry are characterized by very high initial technology investment costs. For example, the banks and payment card providers need to build the large interbank transfer systems and card clearing systems that are the basis for payments. These investments signal commitment on the part of the incumbent to defend its market (Drnevich and Croson 2013). The incentive for incumbent commitment is to discourage potential rivals to enter into the market, even though it would be technologically and financially possible for them to replicate the incumbent’s investments.Second, for the tech payment industry, not only the size of the investment capital required, but also access to technology can act as a barrier. Some technology is proprietary, such as interbank transfer systems, which are unique to an individual firm or to a small cluster of businesses. Establishment of de facto standards and technical patents are well-established strategies to protect a firm’s market position in the digital marketplace (Shapiro and Varian 2013).Within the payment industry, it is also possible to set up alliances or temporary collaboration agreements that hinders new competitors to enter the industry by limiting the technology access of other potential collaborators. An example is the Payment Card Institute, which governs the use of the chip that is embedded in payment cards. So for the overall success of the ecosystem, it might be in the interest of all in the marketplace to block the entry of new competitors by refusing to give them access to essential technology.While technologies can be employed to hinder new entrants, technology can also be used as a battering-ram to gain a foothold in a market or to break an especially profitable position of a rival. History is replete with examples of how new competitors have drawn on disruptive technological innovations to penetrate or bypass existing ecosystems (Christensen and Overdorf 2000). For instance, early strategic ITs provided many new entrants important advantages that enabled them to out-compete incumbents with new PC-based IT solutions. For many low-cost airlines, for example, the utilization of the Internet for ticket sales enabled their customers to both bypass an existing, potentially impeding ecosystem of incumbent airlines and travel agencies. This also enabled the new entrants to lower the total operating cost of issuing and handling ticketing. This slowly yielded a competitive edge for the new entrants over the incumbents.For the new entrants in an industry, a decision to use technology as a battering-ram for market entry is essentially a decision related to the level of technological compatibility that exists in the market (Shapiro and Varian 1998). The first option is to attempt entry with a technology that is compatible with existing technologies, and seeking to establish collaborative relationships with others who control the technology. Related to this is to compete with other firms that provide similar products or services. This includes an iPhone app that competes with any other iPhone app that provides similar functionality, or an Android-based smartphone that competes with other Android phones. Both have to come up with technological innovations that make the offers desirable compared to other existing offers. This strategy is in the category of payments offered by some vendors of payment card readers that seek to establish collaborative relationships with stakeholders who potentially control technologies and competitive relationships with ecosystem stakeholders who are providing similar products or services.The second option is to enter through technology strategies involving incompatible, or close to incompatible technologies that are based on new technology regimes (Shane 2001). In payments, Bitcoin has opened up a new type of competitive regime. Mobile technologies, meanwhile, are competing effectively competing with fixed-line telecom ecosystems, but such regimes do not automatically lead to complete incompatibility: total compatibility and total incompatibility are simplifications of what we observe in most economies. However, with the introduction of mobile technologies, new business ecosystems also have emerged that would not have been possible before. And firms in the existing fixed-line telecom ecosystem have only partly managed to figure out the transition to the new technology regime.The term ecosystem originally comes from biology (Tansley 1935). Moore (1996, p.26) defined a business ecosystem as:“an economic community supported by a foundation of interacting organizations and individuals – the organisms of the business world. The economic community produces goods and services of value to customers, who are themselves members of the ecosystem. The member organisms also include suppliers, lead producers, competitors, and other stakeholders. Over time, they coevolve their capabilities and roles, and tend to align themselves with the directions set by one or more central companies.”The ecosystem concept has been introduced to a number of scientific domains, including business (Selander et al. 2013), technology (Messerschmitt and Szyperski 2005), information (Moore 1996), and payments (May et al. 2008).More generally, an ecosystem is defined as a co-opetitive environment in which symbiotic relationships are formed to create mutual value for its stakeholders (Basole 2009, Selander et al. 2010, Selander et al. 2013). In the literature, four features of ecosystems stand out. First, an ecosystem is characterized by simultaneous competition and cooperation, so called co-opetition (Brandenburger and Nalebuff 2011, Walley 2007). Micro-level analysis depicts some stakeholders as direct competitors, while macro-level analysis depicts the same stakeholders as mutually dependent on the success of the ecosystem as a whole. In some setting there may be some degree of collaboration with other stakeholders in the ecosystem, resulting in strategic networks.Second, a key success factor for a prosperous ecosystem is the relationship among the stakeholders in the ecosystem. For the individual stakeholders, this is partly a matter of managing resource dependencies. Stakeholders in the ecosystem that control important resources can exercise power over other stakeholders and can capture a larger part of the ecosystem’s total revenues. However, if the stakeholders that control key resources hold the “keystone advantage” are exercising too much pressure relative to the other stakeholders, it might be fatal to the ecosystem as a whole, and as a consequence, may damage the business of the keystone stakeholders as well (Iansiti and Levien 2004).Third, ecosystems have observable differences. For example, within a business ecosystem, certain stakeholders can have closer relations than other stakeholders. One can even talk about ecosystems of ecosystems. As an analytical construct, this leads to a problem of stakeholder inclusion: which level of analysis to use and where to draw the borders for an ecosystem? The problem of inclusion is not unique to ecosystems, but is a classical problem in social theory that has been discussed extensively in prior literature (March and Simon 1958). Weick (1969) argues that this is partly due to the fact that it is activities, not people, who are organized. Any individual is only partly included in the organization. Consequently, individuals can be both part of an organization and its environment. Similarly, an organization can be a stakeholder in many ecosystems. The problem is accentuated in the analysis of an ecosystem, where most of the organizations are involved in more than one set of related coordinated activities.Pfeffer and Salancik (2003) also discuss organized activities. They argue that the problem of where an organization begins and ends disappears when it is approached as a set of coordinated activities. A similar reasoning can be applied to ecosystems, but then from the perspective of co-opetitive relationships. However, from this position the issue arises of how to handle the within-ecosystems clusters of stakeholders that are more tightly connected. Within ecosystems, competitors might form partnerships, alliances, networks and other formal and informal cluster formation that as a group have co-opetitive relations to other clusters. An example is when two rival standards attract groups of proponents and adaptors. To capture this level of co-opetitive interactions, a meso-level of analysis is required. The meso-level is able to depict situations where more than one, but not all competitors in an ecosystem form business clusters and have co-opetitive relations with other business clusters.The fourth typical characteristic of ecosystems is that they are not stable, but are constantly evolving. Continuous adaptations in the relationships between ecosystem stakeholders across the micro, meso and macro-levels make ecosystems dynamic. The systemic properties of an ecosystem means that changes in one of the ecosystems entities will trigger responses and changes in other entities. As a consequence, “ecosystems are essentially defined by the active shaping of relationships between their members” (Selander et al. 2010, p. 2). Given the co-opetitive nature of the relationships among ecosystem stakeholders, the changes respond to the need to capture business value in a way that nurtures the value appropriation capabilities of other stakeholders in the ecosystem.Previous research has observed that ecosystems transform rapidly along with technological innovations that alter conditions for the business landscape (Evans et al. 2006, Yoo et al. 2008, Zammuto et al. 2007). New technology generations are fundamentally reshaping the traditional logic, as business processes become intertwined with surrounding technology ecosystems (Basole 2009). This is also true in the payment ecosystems.We conceptualize a payment ecosystem as one that exists in a fusion relation (Sawy 2003) to technologies, in which the technologies form part of a technology ecosystem. Adomavicius et al. (2007, p. 201) define a technology ecosystem as a “system of interrelated technologies that influence each other’s evolution and development.” The definition is based on the view of evolving components of complex technologies as being mutually interdependent (Henderson and Clark 1990, Iansiti and Khanna 1995). Consequently, from the consumer side, the selection of a specific technology is associated with a decision to join a particular business network that operates in a specific technological regime with interoperable technologies (Shane 2001).Markets based on products or services where compatibility is a key factor are characterized by system-based competition (Katz and Shapiro 1994). In these markets, compatible products complement each other and create higher value as a system, such as ATMs and payment cards, and payment terminals and credit cards. An example outside the payment domain includes nuts and bolts, which together provide fastening services. Also, in the mobile handset and telecommunication network domain, smartphones and apps are examples of highly complementary products.Two products are defined to be complementary products when changes in the activity levels of one of the products (e.g., sales, functionality, and ease of use) affect the marginal returns to changes in the activity levels of the other product as well (Milgrom and Roberts 1990). Complementary products mutually depend on each other and reinforce each other’s performance outcomes. Customers prefer to purchase complementary technologies as a system of complements rather than as stand-alone products because technologies must interoperate (Lee et al. 2010). The value of the system is greater than the sum of the values of the individual products (Tanriverdi and Lee 2008).For the payment ecosystem stakeholders, the connected relationship between business and strategy means that the collaborative and competitive strategies of the individual business units and business clusters in ecosystem are inseparable from the strategic adoption of technology. The inseparability of business and technology evolution, as a result, can be attributed to the systemic properties of technologies on micro, meso, and macro-levels of the ecosystem.A payment ecosystem, then, is an ecosystem in which business and technology strategies are inseparable. As a result, technology can be used in defensive and offensive market strategies at different levels in the ecosystem, including the micro, meso and macro-levels.The MPMC framework integrates the possible use of technology to enact market strategies with the three levels of ecosystem analysis. (See Fig. 1.)At the core of the MPMC framework is the idea of technical compatibility, which permits technological innovations to be built into technical systems. In a market with mobile technologies, technical compatibility makes it possible for firms to execute their strategies in the market. Competition and collaboration exist at all three levels, and so do classes of compatible and incompatible technologies. Consequently, technology-based market cooperation strategy in mobile payment ecosystems can be understood as a three-level battle between defensive and offensive technology-based strategies:•On the micro-level, individual business units compete with market cooperation strategies based on proprietary technologies, for instance, the traditional card terminals that you find at most cashiers versus the mobile dongle card readers.On the meso-level, formal and informal strategic networks and alliances are formed as a result of stakeholders joining forces in clusters to compete with other clusters of stakeholders using market cooperation strategies based on shared technologies, for instance, the entrance of mobile operators in the payment sector providing SMS payments.On the macro-level, the ecosystem of interdependent stakeholders will compete with other ecosystems through market cooperation strategies based on technology regimes. For instance, stakeholders such as Bitcoin may threaten the entire industry.Stakeholders in the payment ecosystem contribute to its technologies through innovation and adoption either in competitive or collaborative mode with other stakeholders. In the collaborative mode, stakeholders in the micro, meso or macro-levels will jointly innovate or adopt component, application or support technologies that will benefit the stakeholders in the collaboration. Conversely, in the competitive mode, stakeholders on the micro-level will innovate or adopt component, application, or support technologies that will benefit the specific stakeholder. Meso-level adoption is a situation involving a combination of the competition and collaboration modes.In the MPMC framework, macro-level ecosystem technological and business evolution is the result of the ecosystem stakeholders’ decisions to adopt compatible or incompatible technology strategies. Strategy at the ecosystem level can be decided upon by one single business organization in an ecosystem that is heavily dominated by one single stakeholder. However, as illustrated by our case studies below, thus far the evolution of the payment ecosystem has been a more federated, distributed or emergent decision.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
