@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
TITS-FM: Transductive incremental Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed transductive inference model for Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy models.We introduce a novel model for transductive similarity.Transductive similarity improves the accuracy of TS fuzzy models for classification.Developed transductive similarity model is not limited only to TS fuzzy models.Developed model improves the precision of real world recognition tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
TS-fuzzy models,Transductive similarity,Graph transduction,Incremental learning,Online learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we present a novel model originating from Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy models. It is based on a concept of transductive similarity, where unlike a simple inductive similarity, it considers also local neighborhood of a given element. Transductive property of a local space is used in an inference process, what allows the technique to be used also in incremental settings. Since incremental model construction brings new challenges, we are unable to use the offline transductive approach as some of the previous works did. The key idea of our model is to adjust activation properties of each rule, based on cross-rule similarities. Our method is capable of using the transductive property for any metric. Besides the final model, we also present several improvements to the transductive similarity technique itself, where we alternate the similarity metric in several ways to better exploit the influence of local neighborhood in the final metric. At the end, we demonstrate a superior performance of our technique over the state-of-the-art techniques build on TS fuzzy models on several machine learning datasets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Similarity is a key concept for a majority of machine learning and patter recognition techniques, which represents the elements as multidimensional vectors. The similarity used in these techniques is frequently quite simple such as the L1 or L2 similarity. This is the most straight forward notion of a similarity, which can be translated from the human knowledge into the machine knowledge. But this kind of similarity might not necessarily be the best way to evaluate the correspondence between two items. It might not be the way, how people understand correspondence between objects. We can see that human notation of similarity is not always in the correspondence with simple metrics used in machine learning and pattern recognition algorithms. Even simple rules such as the triangular inequality can be too limiting for humans and algorithms which do not enforce this inequality can achieve better results than those, which require it [15]. Therefore we seek for a more complex notion of similarity, which can be used.Specifically we rely on the concept of transductive similarity measure. The transductive inference itself was introduced as a concept by [24] and was used in combination with the SVM classifier in [28,17]. In our work we understand the concept of the transductive similarity as a similarity induced by the transductive property of the space. More specifically, we say that the similarity measure s between two elements xiand xjis learned through the graph-based transductive learning algorithm. This is in accordance to the notion of the transductive similarity used in [11], who experimentally proved that transductive similarity can improve the accuracy of classification tasks. In case of the transductive similarity applied to individual elements, our intuition is to learn the similarity induced by the shape manifold represented by the feature space elements. The question that we try to answer is, whatever the fuzzy rules also create a manifold in a space and whatever we can learn a better fuzzy membership function based on the transductive property of the space.Besides the similarity, second important aspect is the notion of belonging to a particular group or a class. In absolute world, this notion represents conditional relationship ifx=Ctheny=V based on binary logic. This notion builds on an assumption that the relationship “belongs to” is absolute. However this is not the way how we understand this relationship in the real life. Given an object, which is “somehow” round and “somehow” red can be considered by different degrees of confidence as either an apple, a red ball or an orange, depending on the value of its properties. This notion is exactly what is expressed in the fuzzy logic and the conditional relationship is ratherifx=ˆCtheny=ˆVwhere the operator=ˆtells the amount of correspondence of the variable x to C and the variable y to V. Thus, rather than a binary condition, a fuzzy rule represents variables having a continuous amount of values.Given these two concepts, we should state a question, if the transductive similarity can help us to improve the performance of a fuzzy-based models. Our hypothesis is that for models based on fuzzy rules we can develop a cross-rule relationships, that can further be used in the transductive similarity to adjust activations (values of x) and results (values of y) of used fuzzy rules. Especially we build on the notion that the relationshipx=ˆCexpresses a degree of x being C, thus it can be understood as a similarity measure, where value of 1 expresses an absolute similarity and value 0 expresses an absolute dissimilarity.In this paper we present novel techniques for using the transductive similarity for the inference in TS-fuzzy models. Since the simple transductive similarity model [11] did not prove to be effective for each of the tasks evaluated during our experiments, we propose a new model of the transductive similarity. This model does not need to be necessarily used in the context of TS-fuzzy models. The contributions of this paper are as following:•The transductive inference model for incremental TS-fuzzy models3 novel models for the transductive similarity, which can be combined and yield 7 possible variantsApplications of proposed models to tasks of gesture, sketch and object recognitionWe evaluate the proposed techniques on 5 standardized datasets used for classification tasks. Further we present qualitative results for applications in 3 domains based on different classification models. To further advocate the proposed similarity models, we use them in a setting independent of fuzzy-based classification.Our paper is organized as following: Section2 summarizes previous works on models for transductive similarity, fuzzy models and their combinations, Section3 introduces the transductive similarity, the baseline fuzzy model and describes our method for the incorporation of the transductive inference for incremental fuzzy models, Section4 describes the proposed improvement to existing transductive similarity models, Section5 presents experimental results, an evaluation protocol and applications of our method, Section6 includes final conclusion and discussion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work we presented a new inference model for incremental TS-fuzzy models which is based on a transductive similarity. The models brings a concept of transductivity into an inference for an incremental TS-fuzzy models. Unlike previous approaches which use the transductive inference for fuzzy models, our technique does not require access to the whole dataset in advance and can build the transductive model incrementally, one example at a time, starting from scratch. We show, that this inference model improves the accuracy of TS-fuzzy models in an incremental setup.Along the inference model, we also proposed new models to improve the transductive similarity itself, which can be decomposed into three parts, and these can be used separately, based on the requirements for the inference process (computational cost, precision, number of free parameters). The novel transductive similarity models specifically consider applications of a higher order of the neighborhood for a particular example, a trade-off between original and transducted similarity and a weighting of the transducted similarity according to a likeness to the original query example. Each of these improvements is suitable for different kind of dataset and it can be considered as an extra hyper-parameter, which specifies model to be used. Generally, the RATS and HOTS models work for any dataset, as for TFTS it is mostly useful in cases, where the transductive similarity can cause a confusion of the classifier, given the original similarity.Our experimental results clearly show the increased performance of classifiers based on our model. On all 4 datasets and 3 applications we achieved significantly better results than the baseline techniques. Also we have shown the generalization of the proposed new similarity models on classifiers other than fuzzy models by using other classifiers based on a pairwise distances of elements.