@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving comparison shopping agents’ competence through selective price disclosure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new approach for increasing the attractiveness of comparison shopping agents.The approach, selective price-disclosure, affects the buyer’s decision-making.Two methods for selective price-disclosure for fully-rational agents are given.The effectiveness and efficiency of the methods are demonstrated using real data.A third method is experimentally shown to be highly effective with people.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-commerce,Comparison shopping agents,Information disclosure,Belief adjustment,Experimentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The plethora of comparison shopping agents (CSAs) in today’s markets enables buyers to query more than a single CSA when shopping, and an inter-CSAs competition naturally arises. We suggest a new approach, termed “selective price disclosure”, which improves the attractiveness of a CSA by removing some of the prices in the outputted list. The underlying idea behind this approach is to affect the buyer’s beliefs regarding the chance of obtaining more attractive prices. The paper presents two methods, which are suitable for fully-rational buyers, for deciding which prices among those known to the CSA should be disclosed. The effectiveness and efficiency of the methods are evaluated using real data collected from five CSAs. The methods are also evaluated with human subjects, showing that selective price disclosure can be highly effective in this case as well; however, the disclosed subset of prices should be extracted in a different (simplistic) manner.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Comparison shopping is the practice of comparing the prices of items from different sources in order to find the best deal. Yet comparison-shopping is time consuming and requires resourcefulness. In today’s online world, comparison shopping can be substantially facilitated through the use of commercial comparison shopping agents (CSAs) such as PriceGrabber.com, bizrate.com and Shopper.com. These web-based intelligent software applications allow consumers to compare many online stores’ prices, saving their time and money (Pathak 2010). According to Consumer Futures’ report from 2014 (Downer et al. 2013),56%of the costumers in the UK declared that they have used a CSA in the last 2years. The 17th annual release of ShoppingBots and Online Shopping Resources (shoppingbots.info) lists more than 350 different CSAs that are currently available online. This rich set of comparison-shopping offerings available over the Internet as well as the fact that each CSA covers only a small portion of the sellers offering a given product, allow prospective buyers to query more than a single CSA for comparison shopping. This way they are more likely to find a good price prior to making a purchase. This poses a great challenge to CSAs, as most of them do not charge consumers for accessing their web sites, and therefore the bulk of their profits is obtained, potentially alongside sponsored links or sponsored ads, via commercial relationships with the sellers they list (most commonly in the form of a fixed payment paid every time a consumer is referred to the seller’s website from the CSA) (Moraga-Gonzalez and Wildenbeest 2012). Therefore, if a CSA could influence buyers to avoid querying additional CSAs, it would certainly improve its expected revenue. In the CSA-buyer setting, the buyer’s decision of whether or not to resume exploration is based primarily on the best price obtained thus far, her expectations regarding the prices that are likely to be obtained through further CSA-querying, and the intrinsic cost of querying additional CSAs (e.g., cost of time). Influencing the best price presented to the buyer can be achieved by increasing the number of sellers whose prices are being retrieved in response to the buyer’s query. Yet, this requires consuming more resources and the expected marginal improvement in the best price decreases as a function of the set size.In this paper we take a different approach to influence the buyers’ decision whether or not to query additional CSAs, in a way that discourages further querying. The idea is that by disclosing only a subset of all the prices collected by the CSA, one can influence the buyer’s expectations regarding the prices she is likely to encounter if she queries additional CSAs. The underlying assumption is that the buyer is a priori unfamiliar with the market price distribution of the specific product she wants to buy, and her expectations are updated each time she obtains an additional set of prices from a queried CSA (Bikhchandani and Sharma 1996). An intelligent price disclosure strategy can thus decrease the buyer’s confidence in obtaining a better price from the next CSA queried and, as a result, discourage her from any additional querying. We emphasize that this new approach does not conflict with, but rather complements, the idea of increasing the number of sellers whose prices are checked in order to increase the chance of finding a more appealing (lower) price. The paper focuses primarily on situations where the buyer queried a single CSA and needs to decide whether to query more. This is because, as argued later on, this is the common setting, and overall the ability to influence the buyer’s beliefs concerning the market price distribution decreases as a function of the number of prices gathered by the buyer, i.e., the number of CSAs already queried.The contributions of the paper are threefold. To begin with, we are the first to introduce the idea of selective price disclosure in order to influence buyers to avoid querying additional CSAs. We formally analyze the incentive of buyers to query additional CSAs and CSAs’ benefit in selectively disclosing the prices with which they are acquainted whenever queried. Choosing the best subset of prices to disclose from the original set of prices is computationally intractable, therefore our second contribution is in presenting two price disclosure methods that CSAs can use. These methods are aimed to improve the probability that a buyer will terminate her price-search process and buy the product through the CSA applying the selective price disclosure. Both methods disclose the minimum price known to the CSA, thus the benefit from the partial price disclosure does not conflict with increasing the number of prices the CSA initially obtains to potentially find a more appealing (lower) price. The effectiveness of the methods when the buyer is fully rational is evaluated using real data collected from five comparison shopping agents for four products. The evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of the resulting subsets of prices achieved with these methods and the tradeoff between their performance and the time they are allowed to execute. Finally, we evaluate the methods using human subjects, to possibly discover that the best solution for fully-rational buyers is less effective with people. This is partially explained by our experimental findings, whereby people’s tendency to terminate their search increases as a function of the number of prices they obtain from the CSA, even if the minimum price remains the same. For the latter population we suggest a simple price disclosing method that has been shown to be highly effective in deterring people from querying additional CSAs.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we review related work regarding CSAs, dynamic pricing and selective information disclosure. We formally present the model in Section 3. In Section 4, we analyze the CSA and buyer’s strategies, and the effect of selective price disclosing on the buyer’s decision to query additional CSAs. Later, in Sections 5–7, we discuss and evaluate the selective price disclosing methods for fully rational agents and provide experimental results exemplifying the applicability of the proposed methods with people. Finally, we conclude with a discussions and directions for future research in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The significant increase in searchers’ search termination probability reported in the three preceding sections gives strong evidence for the usefulness of our selective price disclosure approach, both with fully-rational agents and people, in improving a CSA’s expected revenue. As discussed in the introduction, selective price disclosure does not conflict with the general practice of increasing the number of sellers that the CSA queries, as a means for improving the CSA’s competitiveness, depending on the available resources. Therefore, the suggested mode of operation is to have the CSA obtain the prices of as many sellers as possible, benefiting from the potential decrease in the expected minimum price found, and then disclose a subset of prices using the methods presented in this paper, depending on whether the searcher is a fully rational agent or a person.We stress that the methods presented in the paper for selecting the subset of prices to be disclosed do not make any assumption about the way the searcher constructs her set of beliefs and learns the distribution of prices. Indeed, the evaluation with both KDE and parametric distributions revealed similar qualitative results. The methods are characterized by a polynomial computational complexity and are demonstrated to be effective using real data.The results reported in Section 6, dealing with people, make several important contributions. First, they provide a simple method for selective price disclosure that substantially improves CSA’s performance with people and requires minimal computation. Second, we empirically show that for the typical range of the number of prices that CSAs present nowadays, presenting more prices is generally more beneficial. This latter result strengthens the significance of the price disclosure idea, as it suggests that the improvement achieved in people’s tendency to terminate their search is much greater than the inherent resulting discouragement they experience due to the decrease in the number of listings they receive from the CSA. Overall, the differences between the effectiveness of the different price disclosure methods when applied to human and fully rational agents are not surprising. Prior research in other domains has provided much evidence for the benefit in being able to distinguish between these two populations in mechanism design (Wurman et al. 1998, Cassell and Bickmore 2003). The results reported in Section 7, on the performance of our methods of selective price disclosure when the CSA is not the first to be queried, align with the ones reported in Sections 5 and 6. We thus conclude that Interval method is recommended when facing fully-rational searchers, and the Minimal method is recommended when facing human subjects, even if the CSA is not the first to be queried.In a more general context, the selective disclosure approach can be useful for any situation where a user who searches for the best option needs to estimate the distribution over the possible options. For example, consider a searcher looking for a used car. After visiting each dealer, the searcher needs to decide whether to stop the search and buy the best car so far or to continue her exploration by visiting another dealer. Since exploration is costly, the searcher needs to consider the probability distribution over the cars in the market in her decision-making process, and the searcher estimates this distribution given the options already observed. In this case, our approach can be used by the dealer to affect the searchers’ beliefs regarding the distribution of opportunities, hence increasing the probability that the searcher will buy from the current dealer. Another example would be a searcher looking for a partner on an online dating website. After examining her options, the searcher needs to decide whether to stop the search and invite one of the candidates out on a date or continue her exploration by visiting another dating website. Again, the searcher will base her decision-making on the probability distribution over the possible options, and the website is able to use our approach to affect the searchers’ outlook.There are many directions for future research evolving from the results presented in this paper. Such directions include more detailed investigation of the source of differences in the decision to resume exploration between agents and people (and also possibly bounded rational agents that were developed by people). Another interesting direction would be the integration of complementary considerations into the selection of the subset of prices to be disclosed, e.g., additional preferences the searcher may have (other than the price). Finally, we see a great interest in models in which all CSAs act strategically and employ information disclosure techniques. The equilibrium analysis of such settings will definitely benefit from the methodologies, analysis and results presented throughout this paper.