@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiresolution local binary pattern variants based texture feature extraction techniques for efficient classification of microscopic images of hardwood species

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A multiresolution local binary pattern (MRLBP) variants based texture feature extraction techniques for hardwood species categorization into 75 classes.Feature dimension reduction using principal component analysis.Investigation of the effectiveness of MRLBP variants texture features for hardwood species classification using LDA, linear SVM and RBF kernel SVM classifiers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Discrete wavelet transform,Local binary pattern,Completed local binary pattern,Linear SVM,Linear discriminant analysis,RBF kernel SVM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, multiresolution local binary pattern (MRLBP) variants based texture feature extraction techniques have been proposed to categorize hardwood species into its various classes. Initially, discrete wavelet transform (DWT) has been used to decompose each image up to 7 levels using Daubechies wavelet (db2) as decomposition filter. Subsequently, six texture feature extraction techniques (local binary pattern and its variants) are employed to obtain substantial features of these images at different levels. Three classifiers, namely, linear discriminant analysis (LDA), linear and radial basis function (RBF) kernel support vector machine (SVM), have been used to classify the images of hardwood species. Thereafter, classification results obtained from conventional and MRLBP variants based texture feature extraction techniques with different classifiers have been compared. For 10-fold cross validation approach, texture features acquired using discrete wavelet transform based uniform completed local binary pattern (DWTCLBPu2) feature extraction technique has produced best classification accuracy of 97.40±1.06% with linear SVM classifier. This classification accuracy has been achieved at the 3rd level of image decomposition using full feature (1416) dataset. Further, reduction in dimension of texture features (325 features) by principal component analysis (PCA) has been done and the best classification accuracy of 97.87±0.82% for DWTCLBPu2 at the 3rd level of image decomposition has been obtained using LDA classifier. The DWTCLBPu2 texture features have also established superiority among the MRLBP techniques with reduced dimension features for randomly divided database into fix training and testing ratios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wood is considered to be one of the nature's supreme souvenirs for mankind. Wood has drawn attention of art historians, archeologists, forensic and paleontologists, and all living things on this earth for centuries [1]. Wood is by and large classified into hardwood (HW) and softwood (SW) species. Softwood trees (Gymnosperms) have scale-like foliage and are not deciduous. It has a simple cellular structure and 90% to 95% of the cells are longitudinal tracheids. Because of a limited number of cell types, it turns out to be difficult task to discriminate softwood species from one another [2]. On the other hand, hardwood species originate from Angiosperm trees. Unlike their counterparts, hardwood species have a complex cellular structure and are easy to distinguish among the similar species. Vessels, fibers, parenchyma's and rays are the four major elements useful in the identification of hardwood species. Vessels, also known as pores (in cross-section view) are the missing elements in softwood species. Correct identification of wood species is crucial for many reasons, especially to strengthen the endeavor to fight against the illegal logging and smuggling of precious woods, and protection of threatened plant and tree species at risk. It would also help custom officials to properly assess the wood species and then implement tariffs accordingly [1]. Like humans, unique cellular structure of the wood species (which vary among the intra-species) acts as a blueprint for its identification [2].Traditionally, the hardwood identification is being carried out by a small number of skilled officers using macroscopic image textures, weight, aroma and the color of the wood specimen [1]. Microstructures of hardwood cross-section samples are used for the identification of wood species, wherein the features of unknown samples of hardwood species are compared with the features of available samples [3].The major challenge in wood identification is the non-availability of infrastructure (xylarium, microslides and literature for comparing the microstructure of unknown wood sample with the known) and the scarcity of highly skilled manpower with proven experience in the said field. Further, imparting training to human officers to attain an expertise in identification of wood is a time-consuming process. Nowadays, occupation as a wood certification officer is neither easy nor lucrative and likelihood of unfairness and oversight cannot be denied. Moreover, identification of large quantity of wood samples is not only time consuming, but also erroneous and impractical to implement in real world applications. There is no systematic classification procedure for wood identification and, thus, a specie has to be identified based on the combination of its microstructure features. In tropical countries there is huge hardwood diversity. India alone has over 1200 hardwood species and, therefore, memorizing the microstructure of all the species is next to impossible. Thus, to effectively address the above said issues researchers are looking into the possibility of coming up with computer assisted forest species/hardwood species identification system.The limitations of the traditional techniques have opened the new way for wood identification which is machine vision based. This has been the first motivation for this task. The core goal of machine vision based identification system in the context of wood identification is to achieve quantifiable, repeatable and reliable pattern recognition results [4]. The machine vision based forest/hardwood species identification techniques were introduced by several researchers [5–18]. These techniques have shown ability in performing the task with reasonable accuracy based on the statistical information (texture features) extracted from the images of various wood species [5–18]. The summary of the forest species classification based on the texture features of macroscopic, microscopic and stereogram images are listed in Table 1. From the summary given in Table 1, it is seen that texture features in combination with classifiers have produced reasonably better classification accuracy for forest/hardwood species.The microscopic images of wood provide sufficient information for accurate classification of variety of woods in contrast to macroscopic images that reveal only limited amount of information [19]. Taking into account the results and discussion provided by various authors in the available literature [5–18] on classification of wood images, it is understood that the recognition accuracy, can be improved by employing a suitable texture feature descriptor for acquiring significant texture information of an image. This has been the second motivating point for the present work. As the coarse resolution to fine resolution approach is effectively used for pattern recognition approaches [20], the wavelet transform has been used for feature extraction [21]. The intrinsic multiresolution ability of DWT makes it an exceptional tool for feature extraction and analysis of an image. In the above perspective, in the present work, a multiresolution local binary pattern (MRLBP) variants based texture feature extraction techniques for microscopic images of hardwood species has been proposed. This technique puts together multiresolution capability of DWT, and variants of LBP. Further, three supervised classifiers are employed to investigate the effectiveness of the texture feature extraction techniques on microscopic images of hardwood species.The contents of the present research paper are structured as follows: Section 2 discusses in detail the proposed methodology for classification of hardwood species using MRLBP variants based texture features. The comprehensive review of DWT, LBP variants and three classifiers is presented in Section 3. Section 4 brings out a critical discussion on experimental result and the performance evaluation of the proposed texture feature extraction techniques. The work is concluded in Section 5.The procedure for the classification of microscopic images of hardwood species is shown in Fig. 1. The four major steps involved to accomplish hardwood species classification task are preprocessing, texture feature extraction, feature dimension reduction and classifier. The microscopic images are added with color information to enhance certain anatomical features of hardwood species. Thus, the preprocessing step is involved to obtain grayscale image from color (RGB) image, which results in significant reduction of computational time during texture feature extraction.In the second step (texture feature extraction), these grayscale images are first decomposed by DWT to seven different levels/scales (L1–L7) incorporating Daubechies wavelet (db2) as decomposition filter. The transformation is carried out to obtain significant features of the image at unique resolution that are unnoticeable at any other resolution. The decomposition process divides grayscale image into four identical quarter-size subimages, viz., approximation (LL1), horizontal (LH1), vertical (HL1) and diagonal (HH1) components at the 1st level of image decomposition. Subsequently, the LL1 component is decomposed into four equal quarter-size subimages (LL2, LH2, HL2 and HH2) at the 2nd level of image decomposition. This procedure of subdividing the approximation component is repeated till defined level of image decomposition is reached. Thereafter, texture features are extracted from each of the subimages at different levels/scales (L1–L7) of image decomposition. To extract significant features of the image, six texture descriptors namely local binary pattern (LBP), uniform LBP (LBPu2), rotation invariant LBP (LBPri), rotation invariant uniform LBP (LBPriu2), histogram Fourier features LBP (LBP-HF) and uniform completed LBP (CLBPu2) are used. Thus, on the basis of combination of DWT with different variants of LBP following MRLBP variants based texture feature extraction techniques are proposed here and they are listed in Table 2.The requirement for the significant texture features is based on the following facts: it is known that the microscopic images of hardwood species contain four key elements namely, vessels, rays, parenchyma and fibers. These elements are of numerous sizes and shapes. As the visual perception evaluates images on various levels of resolution at the same time, the multiresolution analysis capability of DWT is helpful in detecting features at a unique resolution which is undetectable at any other resolution. Thus, the features obtained by combining DWT and LBP variants at several level of image decomposition extracts distinctive features. Further, combining these features together at several levels of image decomposition improves discrimination capability of classifier for hardwood species. Furthermore, these texture feature vectors containing various range of values are normalized in the range of 0–1, thus rendering it in the form useful as an input to the classifier. The feature vector is normalized using Eq. (1),(1)FNorm=F−min(F)max(F)−min(F)where FNorm: normalized feature vector data, F: original feature vector data.These texture descriptors produces large complex features, and among them several features may not be significant for discrimination of the hardwood species. Thus, in order to reduce the feature dimensions, principal component analysis (PCA) is employed in the third step. In the final step, three machine learning algorithms have been used to classify the given hardwood species into 75 different classes using these texture features. Further, the effectiveness of the MRLBP variants based texture feature extraction techniques has been observed on the basis of the classification accuracy obtained through the classifiers. The supervised learning algorithms chosen in this work are LDA, linear SVM and RBF kernel SVM. These classifiers have been chosen based on their general performance characteristics in areas such as face recognition, forest species identification. Consequently, the best combination of texture descriptor and classifier is identified on the basis of the best classification accuracy. A detailed discussion about these classifiers is presented in Section 3.4.The theoretical concept for the above mentioned steps is briefly described as below.A mathematical tool employed in the hierarchical decomposition of a signal/image is known as discrete wavelet transform (DWT). Ever since its introduction, due to its multiresolution capability, DWT [20–22] has been efficiently explored in a wide range of applications like image analysis, denoising, segmentation, compression, biomedical imaging, and texture feature extraction, etc. The DWT has gained popularity in image processing applications for efficiently providing spatial-frequency information [23]. The significant elements of 2D-DWT includes four critical elements, one scaling function φ(x, y), and three wavelet functions (ψH(x, y), ψV(x, y) and ψD(x, y)), which are product of two one dimensional (1D) functions. The ψH, ψVand ψDwavelets are useful in the measurement of gray level variations in the horizontal, vertical and diagonal directions, respectively. The scaled φ and translated ψ basis functions are defined as follows [24]:(2)φj,r,c(x,y)=2j/2φ(2jx−r,2jy−c)(3)ψj,r,ci(x,y)=2j/2ψiφ(2jx−r,2jy−c),i={H,V,D}The DWT expression to an image f(x, y) of size M×N is given by [24]:(4)Wφ(j0,r,c)=1MN∑x=0M−1∑y=0N−1f(x,y)φj0,r,c(x,y)(5)Wψi(j,r,c)=1MN∑x=0M−1∑y=0N−1f(x,y)ψj,r,ci(x,y)i={H,V,D}In above equation j0 is an arbitrary starting scale. The Wφ(j0, r, c) coefficients furnish approximation of image f(x, y) at j0 scale andWψi(j,r,c)coefficients provide diagonal, vertical and horizontal details at scale j≥j0.A compactly supported orthogonal wavelet having pre-assigned degree of smoothness was designed by Ingrid Daubechies [25]. It has been used in several image processing applications [26]. Daubechies wavelet family is characterized by time invariance, produces real number coefficients, asymmetric and has a sharp filter transition band that is useful in minimizing the edge effects between the frequency bands. The fractal like self-symmetry property facilitates fast wavelet transform in computation, also for a given support it offers the highest number of vanishing moments [25]. The DWTCLBPu2 (CLBP_Sign+CLBP_Magnitude) texture images at 3rd level of image decomposition for grayscale image of aurantium species is shown in Fig. 2. It is observed that each level of subimages of CLBP_Sign and CLBP_Magnitude has significant information which is combined together to get the discriminative texture features.Ever since LBP's introduction by Ojala et al. [27,28], it has been used as a dominant texture descriptor technique for image analysis due to its discriminative information representation capacity. Some of the areas where LBP has shown its potentials are face recognition, object identification, demographic classification, etc. This technique is considered to be an easy, yet computationally efficient [28].A circular neighborhood of variable size was proposed in [29] to overcome the inadequacy of original LBP operator of 3×3 neighborhood size that cannot capture the dominant texture features in large-scale structures. The LBP label for a center pixel coordinate (x, y) of an image is given by [29]:(6)LBPP,R(x,y)=∑p=0p−1s(gp−gc)2pwhere the gray value of the pixel of interest (central pixel) and P neighborhood of center pixel is represented by gcand gp, respectively. Also,s(z)=0,z<01,z≥0symbolizes thresholding function. In LBPP,Roperator, P stands for number of sampling points on circular neighborhood, while R is the spatial resolution of the neighborhood. Bilinear interpolation is applied to pixel values if the sampling points are not part of integer coordinates.The LBP patterns are said to be uniform patterns, if at most 2 bit wise transition (1 to 0 or 0 to 1) is reported in the circular binary pattern of LBP [29]. The LBPu2 histogram comprises separate bin for uniform patterns and only single bin is assigned to all the non-uniform patterns. For a given pattern of P bits, P(P−1)+3 output bins are produced. The reduction in non-uniform patterns is due to the fact that in natural images LBP patterns are mostly uniform. Further, uniform patterns of texture images account for about 90% of the entire pattern with (8, 1) neighborhood and close to 70% for (16, 2) neighborhood [30].The rotation of an image results into diverse LBP codes. To address the issue of the image rotation effect, LBPri has been proposed in [29,31,32]. Thus, to make all the versions of binary codes the same, LBP codes are rotated back to reference pixel position to nullify consequence of translation of a pixel location. TheLBPP,Rriis generated by circularly rotating the basic LBP code and considering the pattern which has a minimum value as given by [29,31,32]:(7)LBPP,Rri=mini{ROR(LBPP,R,i)}where i=0, 1, 2, …, P−1. The circular bit-by-bit right shift operation is performed on x (a P-bit number) for i times by the function ROR(x, i). TheLBPP,Rridescriptor produces overall 36-bin histograms for each image due to 36 diverse, 8 bit rotation invariant codes [31,32].To overcome the disadvantages associated withLBPP,Rri(poor performance because of crude quantization of angular space at 45°)LBPP,Rriu2was proposed [32]. If a pattern has uniformity value U≤2, it is known as “uniform” pattern defined as follows [32]:(8)U(x)=∑p=0p−1Fb(x⊕ROR(x,1),p)where b stands for binary numbers. Given a binary number x, the circularly consecutive binary bits b are obtained by [32]:(9)Fb(x,i)=ROR(x,i)⋅(2b−1)The bitwise logical operators XOR and AND are denoted by ‘·’ (dot) and ‘⊕’ operator, respectively and for a given bit sequence, i signifies the index of least significant bit (LSB). The rotation of uniform codes toward their minimum value generates (P+1) patterns. Merely counting number of one's in the “uniform” patterns, binary number generatesLBPP,Rriu2pattern code. The other patterns are marked “miscellaneous” and grouped into a single value as given by [32]:(10)LBPP,Rriu2=∑p=0p−1s(gs−gc),U(GP)≤2P+1,otherwiseA rotation invariant LBP-HF that retains most discriminative characteristics, is obtained by taking the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) ofLBPP,Ru2[33,34]. The LBP-HF is constructed globally for the entire image compared to other histogram based invariant texture descriptor methods which have normalization of rotation in the local region. The LBP-HF's are invariant to cyclic shifts along the rows of input histogram, and are said to be invariant to the rotary motion of an input image f(x, y) [33]. The DFT is used to construct the features as given by [33,34]:(11)H(n,u)=∑r=0P−1hI(UP(n,r))e−i2πur/Pwhere H(n, u) corresponds to DFT of the nth row of LBPu2 histogram hI(UP(n, r)).Guo et al. [35] have proposed completed local binary pattern (CLBP) to enhance the significant texture feature extraction capability of local binary pattern (LBP). In CLBP, two components namely local difference and center gray level are obtained from the grayscale image. The sign (S) and magnitude (M) components of local difference is produced by employing local difference sign-magnitude transform (LDSMT) as given by [35]:(12)dp=gp−gc=sp*mp,andSp=sign(dp)mp=|dp|where mpandSp=1,dp≥0−1,dp<0are magnitude and sign of dp, respectively. The CLBP_Sign (CLBP_S) and CLBP_Magnitude (CLBP_M) operator characterizes the complimentary components of image's local structure. Also, the CLBP_Center (CLBP_C) operator is produced by converting center pixel into binary code employing global thresholding [34]. The CLBP is better texture feature descriptor than LBP [36]. In this paper CLBP_S, and CLBP_M operator are concatenated to shape the CLBP histogram.The gray scale image of aurantium species has been processed with LBP and its variants and is depicted in Fig. 3. The comparison of the processed images reveals that CLBPu2 (CLBPu2_S and CLBPu2_M) image has more information compared to other LBP variants as it combines the CLBP_S and CLBP_M information together which is evident from Fig. 3(g) and (h).With the high-dimensional features, computational requirement of classifier increases and the classification accuracy may not be improved due to high-dimension features. Therefore, a feature dimension reduction technique [37,38] is required to transform data from high-dimensional space to low-dimensional space. The endeavor of feature dimensionality reduction is to retain the best subset of features of the full feature dataset [39,40]. The principal component analysis (PCA) is one such widely used linear transformation technique [41]. The PCA reduces data dimensions by computing a few orthogonal linear combination of the original dataset features with maximal variance. The PCA involves calculating the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of the original feature matrix. The eigenvectors characterized by largest eigenvalue is known as first principal component (PC). The second PC is orthogonal to first PC with second largest variance, and so on. The first several PC's have most of the variance, which is sufficient to represent the original data without losing much of the information.The efficiency of the proposed texture feature extraction techniques for hardwood species classification are evaluated by three supervised classifiers, namely, linear discriminant analysis and two variants of SVM, viz., linear and RBF kernel. The classifiers are briefly explained in the following subsections.The LDA is a simple, powerful and mathematically robust classifier, which often constructs models with accuracy equivalent to other methods [42]. The need of low computational complexity and immunity to overfit, facilitated LDA classifier to be widely used in applications such as brain computer interface (BCI), face and object recognition [42,43], image retrieval [44], bioinformatics and tropical wood species identification [11]. The LDA was originally proposed as Fisher's discriminant analysis [45] for binary class problem. It works on the concept of projecting data in high-dimensional feature space to low-dimensional features space. The LDA searches for a linear combination of variables (features) that is best to discriminate among the given classes. The LDA has been extended for multiclass problem using (p−1) discriminant function for p classes and is known as multiple discriminate analysis [42,43].The SVM, an efficient and robust supervised classifier, given away excellent generalization performance and has been fruitfully applied to several pattern recognition problems in signal and image processing [46–51]. It was initially proposed as binary classifier [52]. Let (xi, yi) for i=1, 2, 3, …, l, represents a particular set of instance-label pairs, xi∈Rn, yi∈{+1, −1}, then the SVM binary classifier predicts a label y, in yifor a given testing instance x. The optimization problem for binary classification is defined as follows [53]:(13)minw12wTw+C∑i=1lξ(W;xi,yi)subjecttoconstraint,yi(wT×xi+b)−1≥0,∀iwhereξ(w;xi,yi)is a loss function and C (nonnegative) is a penalty parameter (cost factor). The binary class SVM is extended for multiclass classification using approaches such as, “one against one”, “one against all”, and “directed acyclic graph” [54]. Further, a multiclass SVM classifier proposed by Crammer and Singer [55] involves solving single optimization problem only. The linear SVM and RBF kernel SVM (nonlinear) are briefly described here:These days, linear classifier is method of choice as it works directly on the given input data space. The linear SVM classifier is ideal for a dataset having massive features, and is sparse in nature. It is considered to be efficient and enjoy faster training and testing procedure [56,57]. The multi class SVM proposed by Crammer and Singer [55] has been used in linear SVM classifier, here. The decision function for p class is expressed by [53]:(14)f(x)=argmaxp=1,2,…,p(wpTxi)When the training set is inseparable in the original space, the original input data xiare mapped into a high dimensional space Φ(xi), in which mapped data are linearly separable. The expression for decision rule is given as [58,59]:(15)f(x)=sgn∑i=1lαi,yik(xi,xj)+b,where k(xi, xj) is a kernel function and αisignify the Lagrange multipliers (for dual optimization problems) which describes the optimal separating hyperplane. The radial basis function is one of the most popular kernel function and is given by [58]:(16)K(xi,xj)=e(−γ||xi−xj||2),γ>0where γ is the kernel parameter.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the MRLBP texture feature extraction techniques have been proposed to enhance the classification accuracy of microscopic images of hardwood species. Instead of using conventional feature extraction techniques wherein texture features were extracted from single resolution grayscale image, in the proposed techniques, DWT has been employed to decompose the image up to 7 different levels, followed by texture feature extraction with LBP variants. The resultant DWT subimages coefficients obtained using proposed methodology are distinct at each level and contain valuable information. Extracting texture features by variants of LBP from several (L1–L7) resolutions subimages have increased the number of significant features. Combining the texture features of several levels (L1–L7) generate significant feature vector useful in discrimination among the hardwood species. Further, three classifiers namely, LDA, linear SVM and RBF kernel SVM have been used for assessing the performance of the proposed texture features obtained at 7 different levels of image decomposition by DWT. An open source database of 1500 microscopic images of 75 different hardwood species have been used in this study to evaluate the performance of the proposed texture features.Critical analysis of the results obtained with 10-fold cross validation approach revealed that among all the proposed techniques, DWTCLBPu2 generates most discriminative texture features. The best classification accuracy of 97.40±1.06% is obtained for DWTCLBPu2 texture features at the 3rd level of image decomposition (1416 features) using linear SVM classifier. Further, reduction in feature dimensions is obtained using PCA and it is observed that the DWTCLBPu2 texture features have achieved superlative classification accuracy of 97.87±0.82% at the 3rd level of image decomposition (325 features) with LDA classifier. The accuracy thus, achieved by MRLBP based texture features are better than the conventional texture features for hardwood species. It is important to note that the higher level of image decomposition by DWT produce low resolution images that do not carry qualitative visual information. Therefore, most of the MRLBP techniques have shown decrement in classification accuracy beyond the 3rd level of image decomposition.In addition, the classification accuracy obtained using randomly divided database into fix training and testing ratio of hardwood species by DWTCLBPu2 texture features have also established the superiority of MRLBP techniques. Hence, it can be concluded that the texture features extracted by the MRLBP variants based texture feature extraction techniques for hardwood species are of excellent quality, as is evident from the classification accuracy obtained by all the three classifiers. Although, in this work only Daubechies wavelet (db2) has been applied for image decomposition with DWT, there is a scope to implement other wavelet decomposition filters to decompose the images, to analyze their effect on the significance of texture features so generated and observe their effect on classification accuracy.