@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intelligent feature extraction and classification of anuran vocalizations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel segmentation method is developed to tackle the noise problem which has often been ignored in the literature.This work adopts the clustering analysis to reduce the complexity of classification and increase the recognition rate.This work provides the public a friendly education gateway for recognizing the frog species in Taiwan.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data mining,Clustering analysis,Neural networks,Feature selection,Segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An intelligent identification system for mixed anuran vocalizations is developed in this work to provide the public to easily consult online. The raw mixed anuran vocalization samples are first filtered by noise removal, high frequency compensation, and discrete wavelet transform techniques in order. An adaptive end-point detection segmentation algorithm is proposed to effectively separate the individual syllables from the noise. Six features, including spectral centroid, signal bandwidth, spectral roll-off, threshold-crossing rate, spectral flatness, and average energy, are extracted and served as the input parameters of the classifier. Meanwhile, a decision tree is constructed based on several parameters obtained during sample collection in order to narrow the scope of identification targets. Then fast learning neural-networks are employed to classify the anuran species based on feature set chosen by wrapper feature selection method. A series of experiments were conducted to measure the outcome performance of the proposed work. Experimental results exhibit that the recognition rate of the proposed identification system can achieve up to 93.4%. The effectiveness of the proposed identification system for anuran vocalizations is thus verified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pattern recognition forms a fundamental solution to different problems in real world applications [1]. The function of pattern recognition is to categorize an unknown pattern into a distinct class based on a suitable similarity measure. Thus similar patterns are assigned to the same classes while dissimilar patterns are classified into different classes.In speech recognition, a source model is assumed and the signal is expected to obey the laws of a specific spoken language with vocabulary and grammar. Anuran vocalization is a representative instance of a category of natural sounds where a vocabulary and other structural elements are expected. In comparison with the human speech recognition problem, animal sounds are usually simpler to recognize. Speech recognition often proceeds in a quiet and similar environment, while anuran's sounds are usually recorded in a much noisier environment, under which we must recognize simpler vocalizations.In this work, an automatic identification system for mixed anuran vocalizations is proposed to recognize the anuran species based on the recorded audio signals that were sampled from recordings of anuran sounds in an outdoor environment. The sampled signals were first converted into frequency signals. Then syllable segmentation and feature selection methods are employed to separate the original anuran calls into syllables and to derive the input feature sets for the classifiers. Experimental results reveal that the proposed identification system is effective in identifying mixed anuran calls.There are several major contributions in this research. Firstly, to the best of our knowledge, this work is the first research that addresses the problem on identification of mixed anuran vocalizations in the literature. Secondly, surrounding noise has always been ignored in researches about animal sound recognition system such as those of literature [5] and is now considered in the present research. A novel segmentation method is developed in order to tackle the noise problem. The maximum amplitude of vibration is selected to successfully segment the syllables. Thirdly, instead of human voice samples, the collection of anuran vocalization samples is difficult stemmed from several factors, such as the presence of noise, anuran seasonal habitual behavior and nighttime calls. This work adopts the clustering analysis before the classification stage to reduce the complexity of classification and effectively increase the recognition rate. The last but not the least, the algorithm proposed in this work is not only specifically designed for detecting the sounds of frog species in Taiwan, but also provides the public a friendly education gateway for recognizing the frog species in Taiwan.The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe related work in audio recognition. The architecture of the intelligent identification system for anuran vocalizations is presented in Section 3. Experimental results and analysis are given in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An automatic identification system for mixed anuran vocalizations is proposed in this work to effectively recognize the anuran vocalizations in the outdoor environment. The public can upload unidentified anuran vocalizations recordings to this anuran vocalization identification website to request for the discrimination of the frog species based on the uploaded mixed anuran vocalization samples. A series of experiments were performed to verify the effectiveness of the proposed work. Experimental results reveal that the recognition rate of fast learning neural-networks classifier can reach up to 93.4% in average. Accordingly, this system is beneficial for the public to easily recognize anuran species via online consultation.Since the recorded anuran vocalizations in rural field are usually chorus audio sample with unbalanced volume, tone and rhythm, the quality of the collected samples is usually poor. In addition, surrounding noise in the outdoor environment further increases the difficulty in collecting samples of anuran vocalizations. In the future work, we intend to use multiple microphones or adopt some automatic recording method at fixed locations to collect abundant samples with good quality for the use of training of classifiers and thus higher accuracy rate of recognizing the mixture of anuran vocalizations can be achieved. Besides, we will try to revise the de-noise filter function used in the signal processing module to deal with different kinds of conditions via analyzing the abnormal samples. Notably, the sound samples used in this work were collected from every place in Taiwan for one year. The difficulty was that some species only emerged in the specific season, humidity, and time. Even some only occurred in the mountains and swamp, and these factors would increase the difficulties to collect the anuran sound samples. We plan to put in more manpower and resources to record more samples in different season, time, and environment to overcome the above-mentioned problems. Thus, our proposed recognition system can be more accurate and robust.