@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards effective online review systems in the Chinese context: A cross-cultural empirical study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Consumers’ reviewing behavior is affected by culture differences across countries.Chinese are less engaged, less negative and value negation more in review systems.Review volume, emotional tendency and spotlight review positively affect book sales.Length and Reviewer rank negatively affect sales. Helpful votes have no impact.Effective review systems in China need care about review format and voting system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online review system,Electronic commerce,National culture difference,Cross-cultural study,Empirical analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Online reviews, as one kind of quality indicator of products or service, are becoming increasingly important in influencing purchase decisions of prospective consumers on electronic commerce websites. With the fast growth of the Chinese e-commerce industry, it is thus indispensable to design effective online review systems for e-commerce websites in the Chinese context, by taking into account cultural factors. In this paper, we conduct two empirical studies on online reviews. Firstly, we study how culture differences across countries (i.e., China and the USA) impact the way in which consumers provide online reviews. Secondly, we investigate the impact of online reviews on product sales in the Chinese context, and show that directly copying the ideas of successful online review systems in the USA will deteriorate the effectiveness of the systems in China. Finally, we propose several suggestions for the development of effective online review systems in the Chinese context based on the results of our two empirical studies and the findings in previous studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, more and more people in China choose to shop in online stores rather than in traditional ones. According to the report by China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC) (2012), the number of online shoppers in China has reached 194million by the end of 2011. The proportion of online shoppers in total Internet users increased from 35.2% to 37.8% in the same period with a steady growth every year. These numbers demonstrate that the Chinese e-commerce industry has shown great potential through its fast development.With the advent of web 2.0, users have been particularly productive in providing opinions (i.e., online reviews) of virtually every product ranging from televisions, cars, hotels, restaurants, books and movies to mobile apps (Dellarocas 2003). These online reviews, compared with those provided by merchandisers themselves, convey more consumer-oriented product information about purchase and usage experiences (Lee et al. 2008), On the other hand, it has long been recognized that these reviews are of great use to prospective users of these products (Lee et al. 2008), leading to substantial efforts being devoted to harnessing them. Resnick and Zeckhauser (2002) point out that consumers’ online reviews have a direct impact on transactions. Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006) demonstrate that online reviews have a significant influence on book sales on Amazon US (www.amazon.com, the largest e-commerce website in the United States). Online merchandisers also have begun to embed consumers’ online reviews in product advertisements in the form of complement to product introduction (Lee et al. 2011).Due to the significance of online reviews, it is critical to design an effective online review system, where all the activities (i.e., review contribution and review harness) happen. In this paper, we aim to shed some light on how to develop effective online review systems in the Chinese context. It has been recently recognized that the effectiveness of online review systems in a country is also influenced by its national culture (Koh et al. 2010). However, many e-commerce websites in China tend to directly copy ideas from those world’s leading ones in another country (e.g., the United States) without considering the culture differences. It has been proven that the ignorance of culture differences will cause the failure of those systems (Bricks 2006)). Thus, it is important for e-commerce sites in China to consider culture differences seriously when adopting others’ experience. Hence, the first thing we need to do is to investigate how culture across countries (China and the United States specifically) could impact the online review systems, and confirm that directly coping ideas of online review systems from the US context will not work well in the Chinese context, through exploring the culture differences between the US and China in terms of the behavior of providing reviews. Based on the confirmation, we then need to make clear how exactly online reviews theoretically impact consumers’ purchasing behaviors, especially in the Chinese context. Without knowing of this correlation, it is impossible to establish an effective online review system that could positively influence consumers’ products choosing process, strengthen trust among consumers and boost product sales. We intend to especially investigate the correlation between online reviews and product sales in order to build a more effective review system. In the end, our findings, together with the comparative analysis of our findings with those of other studies in the US context (differences are explained by the results in our cultural study), can further provide significant implications for the development of effective online review systems in the Chinese context.We conduct two empirical study in this paper. Our first study aims to investigate the effects of national culture on consumers’ review providing behavior by exploring the review systems on Amazon US and Amazon China (www.amazon.cn) respectively. In particular, we investigate the differences across countries on various properties of online reviews, and seek to theoretically explain these differences in the framework of dimensions of national culture proposed by Hofstede et al. (Hofstede 1980, 2001; Hofstede et al. 2010). We find that: (1) the way in which consumers provide online reviews is influenced by culture differences; (2) compared with those consumers in US, consumers in China tend to be less engaged in online review systems, provide less negative reviews, and value negative reviews more. In the second study, we establish a multi-dimensional review-related research framework, and create a panel data econometric model to explore the correlation between online reviews and product sales from the perspectives of number of reviews, quality of reviews, reputation of reviewers and the emotional tendency of reviews based on dataset collected from the Dangdang Books (book.dangdang.com, one of the largest Chinese online bookstores) (Fang et al. 2011). Our results show that: (1) number of reviews, emotional tendency of reviews and spotlight reviews are all positively correlated with product sales, while reviewer rank and length of reviews have negative effect on product sales; (2) the review voting mechanism of Dangdang is not significantly correlated with product sales. Based on the results of the two studies, we further provide several important guiding suggestions towards the development of effective online review systems in the Chinese context. These systems should pay attention to emotional tendency of reviews, reviewer ranking mechanisms, spotlight reviews, review format and review voting mechanisms.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of related works on online consumer reviews as well as those on the influence of national culture on e-commerce and online review systems. In Section 3, we provide a high level introduction of our methodology. We then describe the details of our two empirical studies in Sections 4 and 5 respectively. After that, we provide several suggestions towards effective online review systems in the Chinese context in Section 6. Finally, we conclude our current work and propose future work in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we study the problem of how to develop an effective online review system in the Chinese context by conducting two empirical studies.Firstly, we conduct a cross-cultural study to examine how the national culture difference across countries influences online consumers’ behavior of providing reviews. We propose our hypotheses for different aspects of reviews based on Hofstede’s framework of national culture. The aspects of reviews include number of reviews, emotional tendency of reviews, length of reviews, spotlight reviews, and the number of helpful and helpless votes. Cultural dimensions in the framework consist of power distance, masculinity versus feminity, individualism versus collectivism, uncertainty avoidance and long-term orientation. We test our proposed hypotheses based on the analysis of consumer reviews on books collected from Amazon US and Amazon China respectively. Our results show that: (1) online consumers are influenced by culture difference across countries when providing online reviews, but the effect of power distance with regard to spotlight reviews will become smaller when corresponding books become more popular online; and (2) Chinese consumers are reluctant to engage in the online review systems and “helpfulness” voting mechanism compared with their American counterparts, but they tend to hold more positive attitude towards products or service, provide less extremely negative reviews, and weight more on the negative reviews provided by other online consumers.Secondly, we investigate the impact of online reviews on product sales in the Chinese context. We first propose our hypotheses about the correlations between different aspects of online reviews and product sales based on previous theories and research findings. The constructs related to reviews include number of reviews, reputation of reviewers, emotional tendency of reviews, quality of reviews and timeliness of reviews. To test our hypotheses, we propose a linear panel econometric model and fit the model in our crawled dataset. The dataset is crawled from Dangdang, which is the largest online book store in China. Our results show that: (1) number of reviews, emotional tendency of reviews and spotlight reviews are all positively correlated with product sales, while reviewer rank and length of reviews have negative effect on product sales; and (2) the review voting mechanism of Dangdang is not significantly correlated with product sales.Based on our two empirical studies and the findings in others’ studies, we propose several guiding suggestions for online review systems in the Chinese context. Firstly, online review systems should rank reviewers in a more reasonable manner so that consumers could express their emotional tendency, pay attention to negative reviews, and standardize the format of reviews. In addition, designers should enhance the effectiveness of review voting mechanisms and improve the quality of spotlight reviews so that online consumers can reduce their information search cost and find their needed information quickly. Furthermore, online review systems should encourage consumers to share more real experience on purchase and usage. The truthfulness of reviews should also be taken into account for reviewer rank evaluation, review voting mechanism and spotlight reviewers selection.The contributions of our current work are as follows: (1) we explore the impact of national culture difference across countries (the US and China in this paper) on online consumers’ behavior of providing reviews by analyzing the real data collected from Amazon US and Amazon China. Different from other cross-cultural studies, we choose our two datasets from two websites belonging to the same corporation but running in the US and China respectively. This will partly eliminate biases caused by differences of websites for our cross-culture study; (2) different from previous studies on the exploration of influence of online reviews on product sales, we use the amount of product sales rather than the rank of product sale as dependent variable in our model. Since the rank data is not as suitable as continuous amount data for the linear model, we believe that our model could lead to more reliable results; (3) our model could capture the dynamic impact of online reviews on product sales in the Chinese context, since we use the panel data and model; and (4) we design a comprehensive framework of relationships between online reviews and product sales. We also provide the guiding suggestions for the design of online review systems in the Chinese context.The limitations and future work are discussed as follows: (1) our cross-cultural study only considers the numeric information of aspects of online reviews and ignores the qualitative information hidden in text segments. Consequently, our hypotheses only cover part of the connections between online reviews and dimensions of national culture. For future work, we will employ text mining techniques to discover hidden information in text segments and take into account that information in the model; (2) our cross-culture study only focuses on one particular product – book. In the future, we will investigate effects of properties of different products. Specifically, we could conduct studies for products in different categories, or for products with different levels of popularity; and (3) in our second study, our econometric model does not consider the lagged effect of reviews on sales and the endogenous effect of variables. Besides, the comparison between our results on Dangdang and others’ findings on Amazon US is not robust, since these studies might be conducted in different conditions. In the future work, we will try to eliminate the bias caused by the different conditions by designing a more refined comparative study.