@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An Unequal Multi-hop Balanced Immune Clustering protocol for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An Unequal Multi-hop Balanced Immune Clustering protocol (UMBIC) is proposed.UMBIC solves the hot spot problem and improves the lifetime of networks.UMBIC adjusts the intra-cluster and inter-cluster energy dissipation of clusters.UMBIC utilizes the multi-objective immune algorithm to finds the optimum clusters.Simulation experiments were conducted in MATLAB correctly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hot spot problem,Unequal clustering,Multi-hop routing,Multi-objective immune algorithm,Homogeneous and heterogeneous networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In multi-hop routing, cluster heads near the base station act as relays for far cluster heads and thus will deplete their energy very quickly. Thus, hot spots in the sensor field result. This paper introduces a new clustering algorithm named an Unequal Multi-hop Balanced Immune Clustering protocol (UMBIC) to solve the hot spot problem and improve the lifetime of small and large scale/homogeneous and heterogeneous wireless sensor networks with different densities. UMBIC protocol utilizes the Unequal Clustering Mechanism (UCM) and the Multi-Objective Immune Algorithm (MOIA) to adjust the intra-cluster and inter-cluster energy consumption. The UCM is used to partition the network into clusters of unequal size based on distance with reference to base station and residual energy. While the MOIA constructs an optimum clusters and a routing tree among them based on covering the entire sensor field, ensuring the connectivity among nodes and minimizing the communication cost of all nodes. The UMBIC protocol rotates the role of cluster heads among the nodes only if the residual energy of one of the current cluster heads less than the energy threshold, as a result the time computational and overheads are saved. Simulation results show that, compared with other protocols, the UMBIC protocol can effectively improve the network lifetime, solve the hot spot problem and balance the energy consumption among all nodes in the network. Moreover, it has less overheads and computational complexity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor network (WSN) is an emerging information acquisition technology. It has got a great scientific research development in recent years. Also, it has been used widely in many fields such as military, surveillance, medical aspects (e.g. monitoring patients) and environmental studies (e.g. flood, localization and tracking). A WSN typically consists of many small, low cost, low-power communication devices called sensor nodes. Each sensor node has limited on-board processing, limited storage and radio capabilities. Due to limited and non-rechargeable battery options, the energy resource of the node should be managed wisely. The energy-efficiency is the primary design issue, which greatly affect the WSN lifetime [1–3].In the recent years, researchers developed many clustering protocols [1–5] to improve the lifetime, the bandwidth reusability and the scalability of WSNs. Clustering scheme divides the network into equal clusters, where each cluster consists of a Cluster Head (CH) node and many member nodes. Once the network has been divided into clusters, the communication between nodes can be intra-cluster or inter-cluster. Intra-cluster communication comprises the message exchanges between the member nodes and their respective CH, while inter-cluster communication includes transmission of CHs messages to base station (BS) via a single-hop or a multi-hop routing. In single-hop networks, the dissipated energy of CHs farther away from the BS is higher than that of the closest CHs to the BS due to a long distance. While in multi-hop networks, the closest CHs to the BS undertake data forwarding, which means that the energy consumption of these CHs is higher. This imbalance energy consumption leads to the death of a certain number of nodes prematurely, causing “hot spot” problem [6–12].This paper proposes a new clustering protocol called an Unequal Multi-hop Balanced Immune Clustering protocol (UMBIC) to mitigate the hot spot problem and improve the lifetime of small and large scale/homogeneous and heterogeneous WSNs with different nodes' densities. In UMBIC, BS utilizes the Unequal Clustering Mechanism (UCM) [6,13] and the Multi-Objective Immune Algorithm (MOIA) [14–18] to partition the network into optimum unequal clusters on the basis of ensuring the connectivity among nodes, balancing the consumption energy among nodes and minimizing the communication cost for data and overhead control packets. The MOIA algorithm is one of recently evolutionary algorithms. It has been considered here due to the following features [14,15]: (1) It has the global search performance; (2) It produces the solution sets that are highly competitive in terms of convergence, diversity and distribution; (3) It has elitism, which inherently embedded in the selection mechanism to preserve good solutions and not lose them during generations; (4) It adapts the population to a reasonable size for the specific problem and this reduces the number of objective function calls; and (5) It has much less computational cost.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a literature survey about various clustering protocols. The preliminaries and formulation of the clustering problem are explained in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the details of the proposed UMBIC protocol. The analysis of the UMBIC protocol is explained in Section 5. In Section 6, simulation results and discussion are given. Finally, Section 7 offers some conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
