@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Source and transmission line maintenance outage scheduling in a power system using teaching learning based optimization algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose TLBO algorithm for solving the Integrated Maintenance scheduling problem.The proposed approach for generation and transmission maintenance scheduling is based on hourly basis.Testing and validation is carried out in six bus and IEEE-118 bus systems.Optimal maintenance schedules are obtained with better savings in cost when compared to other existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Teaching learning based optimization,Integrated maintenance scheduling,Generator outage,Security constrained unit commitment,Planning horizon,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to enhance the performance and lifetime of any equipment, maintenance is essential. The major power system components including generators and transmission lines require periodical maintenance and in this regard, the present work details Integrated Maintenance Scheduling (IMS) for the secure operation. The IMS problem has been formulated as a complex optimization problem that affects unit commitment and economic dispatch schedules. Most of the methodologies adopt decomposition approaches for the solution of IMS. In this work, Teaching Learning Based Optimization (TLBO) has been used as a prime optimization tool as it has been proved to be an effective optimization algorithm when applied to various practical optimization problems and its implementation is simple involving less computational effort. The methodology has been tested on standard test systems and it works well while including generator contingency. Numerical results comparison indicates that this method is a promising alternative for solving IMS problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Maintenance Scheduling (MS) plays an important role in extending the life and improving the overall availability of the equipment. In power systems, MS of source and transmission line aims to operate the system to meet power demands at minimal production and maintenance costs while satisfying maintenance and network constraints. Implementation of the effective maintenance policies helps to reduce the frequency of service interruptions and extends equipment lifetime or at least the mean time to the next failure whose repair may be costly. Most of the MS problems considers preventive maintenance schedule of generating units over a planning period in order to minimize the total operational cost while satisfying energy requirements and maintenance constraints. The thermal capacity of transmission lines creates serious overloading problem when certain lines and/or generators are simultaneously removed for maintenance from the system and the resulting maintenance schedule may not be suitable for the system at all times. The inclusion of transmission line maintenance will increase the complexity of the problem. Hence, it is necessary to consider Integrated Maintenance Scheduling (IMS) that combines source (generation) and transmission maintenance scheduling, for the secure and reliable operation of an electric power system.The maintenance scheduling problems have been formulated as a nonlinear optimization problem with several equality and inequality constraints. The solution methods for solving this problem can be categorized into three groups as: mathematical, heuristic search and hybrid methods. The mathematical approaches including integer programming, branch-and bound techniques and dynamic programming have been applied for solving Generator Maintenance Scheduling (GMS) problems and these methods are severely limited by the ‘curse of dimensionality’ and poor in handling the nonlinear objectives and constraints that characterizes the GMS problem [1]. Benders decomposition has been applied to solve GMS problem [2] and it has been extended for the solution of GMS problem including transmission maintenance and network constraints [3]. Benders decomposition based on duality theory has also been reported for the generation and transmission maintenance scheduling with network constraints [4]. In Benders decomposition, the maintenance scheduling problem is decomposed into a master problem and operation sub-problems. The master problem consisting of maintenance scheduling decision variables is solved in the first stage and operation sub-problems are solved in the second stage to minimize the total operating cost subject to operational constraints. Benders cuts based on the solution of the sub-problems are introduced to the master problem for improving the existing solution and this iterative procedure is continued until the optimal or near optimal solution is found.Benders decomposition have been applied to include network constraints in maintenance scheduling problem and the network is modeled as a probabilistic problem in order to include the effect of generator and transmission line outages [5]. Benders decomposition has also been addressed to long term scheduling problem which includes complex network, fuel dispatch problem and emission constraints [6]. A mixed integer programming model has been developed for transmission constrained GMS [7]. Benders decomposition with linearized set of power flow equations has been applied for establishing power systems scheduled generator outages while considering the transmission influence for short-term planning horizon [8].Evolutionary Programming (EP) based technique has been presented to the unified model of the maintenance scheduling problem of power generation and transmission systems [9]. EP is a random search technique; initialization is to produce initial random solution, mutation is used to produce new individuals according to certain criteria and competition is a random tournament selection. It may happen that the new solution be infeasible, which elongates execution time and increases the probability of trapping in local optimal. To remedy these problems, hill-climbing technique is used in conjunction with EP to ensure the feasibility of new individuals. The maintenance scheduling problem has several uncertainties associated with it and fuzzy model has been developed for maintenance scheduling problem that accounts for such uncertainties [10]. The EP based hill climbing technique and fuzzy comparison technique has been used as a tool to find the solution. EP finds the near optimal solution, hill climbing technique is used to maintain the feasibility during the solution process and fuzzy comparison technique is used to compare individuals. The EP search ability in conjunction with the feasibility watch of the hill climbing technique simplifies the solution of the fuzzy IMS problem. This methodology has been extended to solve security constrained maintenance scheduling problems [11].The impact of generator and transmission maintenance strategies have been focused on the system reliability and on the associated costs and a methodology that captures all chronological aspects of the maintenance procedures through Monte Carlo simulation algorithm has been developed [12]. A proper maintenance outage scheduling provides wide range of options for managing short-term security and economics. The short-term operation strategies may yield secure and economic operation for maintenance scheduling over a longer time span. The coordinated maintenance scheduling problem has been formulated that provides coordination between generation and transmission outages, mid-term maintenance outage and hourly security constrained generation scheduling, midterm allocation and short-term utilization of resources, short-term transmission security and optimal maintenance outage scheduling [13]. Mathematically, this problem is a very large-scale, mixed-integer, non-convex optimization problem. Lagrangian relaxation and Benders decomposition techniques have been applied to decompose a large-scale optimization problem into many small-scale sub-problems. The adjusted Lagrangian multipliers and Benders cuts are effective linking constraints and the hourly results for maintenance outages and generation scheduling are obtained based on hourly load curve.Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) has been applied for most of the engineering optimization problems. The discrete PSO has been developed for solving discrete engineering optimization problems such as generator maintenance scheduling. The modified discrete PSO, a combination of discrete PSO and evolutionary strategy enhances searching capability of the algorithm under complex and constrained environment. The incorporation of the mutation operator in the modified discrete PSO algorithm has significantly improved the diversity of the PSO's population and ensured convergence toward satisfactory solutions [14].Ant colony optimization algorithm has been applied to hard combinatorial optimization problems including IMS problem [15]. An optimization model has been proposed for coordinating the midterm maintenance scheduling with the short-term generation scheduling, which has been applied to large-scale, nonlinear, non-convex and mixed-integer problems [16]. This model consists of effective acceleration strategies that enhance the existing solution methodology [13] in various aspects like decomposition and cooperation strategy, computational time, etc. Coordinated preventive maintenance scheduling of generating and transmission companies in restructured power markets have been presented [17]. A stochastic model has been presented for coordinated long-term MS of generation units and transmission lines with short-term Security Constrained Unit Commitment (SCUC) under deregulated environment [18]. A hybrid evolutionary algorithm derived from extremal optimization and genetic algorithm, has been developed and applied to solve GMS problem under reliability criterion [19].An innovative optimization technique, Teaching–Learning Based Optimization (TLBO), inspiring natural phenomena of teaching–learning process in a class room between teacher and students (learners) has been developed by Rao et al. (2011). TLBO is an algorithm-specific, parameter-less algorithm that does not require any algorithm-specific parameters to be tuned [20,21]. This algorithm can find the global optimal solution for nonlinear constrained optimization problems with less computation effort and high consistency. The effectiveness of TLBO algorithm and its modified versions [22–26] have been reported in various fields of engineering such as Civil Engineering [27], Mechanical Engineering [28,29] and Electrical Engineering [30–32]. However, from the literature it is clear that the application of TLBO for IMS problem has not been explored. This motivates the authors to use TLBO to determine optimal maintenance schedules in order to minimize total operation cost over the operational planning horizon with the satisfaction of several equality and inequality constraints. In the present work, IMS is formulated as a highly complex and non-linear optimization problem and TLBO is used as a main optimization tool to determine the optimal maintenance schedules for planned maintenance outages of generating units and transmission lines in a power system.The contributions of this paper are as follows:(i)A unified solution for IMS problem has been obtained by utilizing TLBO as a primary tool which determines the optimal generator and transmission line maintenance schedules. The classical methods have been used to obtain the optimal real power schedules.The generation and transmission line maintenance scheduling methods in the literature were mostly based on weekly or monthly basis. In this paper, IMS problem has been solved on hourly basis which helps to obtain more efficient and suitable midterm strategies for the scheduling and the coordination of generating units and transmission line maintenance outages.Preventive security strategy that enhances IMS has been included in this paper.The proposed approach handles the system and operational constraints effectively. Moreover, it is easy to implement and can be recommended for practical applications.This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the IMS problem is formulated. In Sections 3 and 4, a brief description of TLBO and its application for solving IMS problem are presented. Section 5 analyses the results of the proposed technique to solve the IMS problem. Section 6 outlines the conclusion.NomenclatureNGnumber of unitsnumber of linesnumber of times at each intervalnumber of intervals under studyindex for time periodproduction cost of unit i at time t at interval kmaintenance schedule of unit i in time t at interval k, =0 if unit is on maintenance =1 otherwisemaintenance schedule of transmission line j in time t at interval k, =0 if line is on maintenance =1 otherwisestarting time for maintenance of unit i and line jending time for maintenance of unit i and line jmaintenance durationmaximum number of lines that line j could be on partial maintenanceminimum duration for each partial maintenance of line jminimum time interval between two consecutive partial maintenance of line jflow on transmission line jmaximum allowable flow on transmission line jminimum up and down time of unit ioutput power from generating unit i at time τdemand at time τminimum and maximum output power from unit iThe objective of IMS is to minimize the total operation cost over the operational planning horizon, while satisfying the prevailing constraints such as generator maintenance, transmission maintenance, SCUC and line flow constraints.The objective function to be minimized is the sum of operating cost, generator maintenance and transmission line maintenance costs given by Eq. (1) subject to constraints given by Eqs. (2)–(17),(1)Min∑t=1NT∑k=1NP∑i=1NGCitk*Xitk+∑i=1NGDitk*(1−Xitk)+∑j=1NLD′jtk*(1−Yjtk)The first part of the objective function in Eq. (1) represents operating cost in which Citkrepresents quadratic function in terms of P′iτand Xitk=1 if the unit i is available at time t at interval k or it is equal to 0 if the generating unit is taken for maintenance. The second part of the objective function in Eq. (1) represents generator maintenance cost. Here, Ditkrepresents maintenance cost of unit i at time t at interval k. If the generating unit is under maintenance then the second term is taken into consideration. The third part of the objective function in Eq. (1) stands for transmission line maintenance cost. D′jtkrepresents maintenance cost of transmission line j at time t at interval k. When transmission line maintenance is considered, then third term can be added with the operating cost.For the same unit i, these costs can vary from interval k=1 week to another depending on the available resources, the weather conditions, etc. and time period t represents number of hours in a week. For the chosen problem, k=1 week and t=7*24=168h.The binary variable, uiτis equal to 1 if the maintenance schedule of unit i is started at time τ and is 0 otherwise.viτis equal to 1 if the maintenance schedule of unit i is ended at time τ and is 0 otherwise. The index τ represents the time t at interval k. The generator maintenance constraints are listed as follows:The relationship between Xiτ, uiτandviτis given by,(2)uiτ−viτ=Xi(τ−1)−Xiτ,uiτ+viτ≤1,∀i,∀τThe maintenance cannot be aborted or finished earlier than scheduled. The generating unit should be scheduled for maintenance within the maintenance window:(3)Xiτ=0or1ifei≤τ≤li1otherwise,∀iThe maintenance should be completed within the maintenance duration given by Eqs. (4) and (5).(4)∑τ=eili(1−Xiτ)=MDi,∀i(5)∑τ=eiliuiτ=1,∀iThe binary variable qjτis equal to 1 if the maintenance schedule of transmission line j is started at time τ and is 0 otherwise. rjτis equal to 1 if the maintenance schedule of transmission line j is ended at time τ and is 0 otherwise. The transmission line maintenance constraints are listed as follows:The relationship between Yjτ, qjτand rjτis given by,(6)qjτ−rjτ=Yj(τ−1)−Yjτ,qjτ+rjτ≤1,∀j,∀τThe transmission line should be scheduled for maintenance within the maintenance window:(7)Yjτ=0or1ifej≤τ≤lj1otherwise,∀jThe maintenance should be completed within the maintenance duration given by Eqs. (8) and (9).(8)∑τ=ejlj(1−Yjτ)=MDj,∀j(9)1≤∑τ=ejljqjτ≤MNj,max,∀jConsidering partial maintenance in lines, the maximum number of times that a line can be on maintenance is shown in Eq. (9). The line should be on partial maintenance at least up toMTj,minongiven by Eq. (10). Between two adjacent partial maintenances the minimum time interval should beMTj,minoffgiven in Eqs. (11) and (12).(10)∑h=ττ+MTj,minon−1(1−Yjh)≥qjτ*MTj,minon,τ=ej,…,lj−MTj,minon+1,∀jqjτ=0,τ=lj−MTj,minon+2,…,lj,∀j(11)∑h=ττ+MTj,minoff−1Yjh≥rjτ*MTj,minoff,τ=ej,…,lj−MTj,minoff+1,∀j(12)∑h=τljYjh≥rjτ*(lj−τ+1),τ=lj−MTj,minoff+2,…,lj∀jThe production of each generating unit must lie between its lower and upper limits:(13)Pimin≤P′iτ≤Pimax,∀i,∀τTotal capacity of the units running at any time should not be less than predicted load at any time:(14)∑i=1NGP′iτ*Xiτ=Dτ,∀τMinimum up and down constraints:(15)0≤Tiu≤numberofhoursunitihasbeenonline(16)0≤Tid≤numberofhoursunitihasbeenofflineThe flow on each transmission line at any time should lie below its maximum limit:(17)|Fj|≤FjmaxTLBO is a population based optimization algorithm in which a group of solutions are implemented to reach an optimum solution. The TLBO is based on the influence of a teacher on the output of learners in the class (output is considered in terms of results or grades of students). The teacher is generally considered as the most skilled person whose knowledge is shared with the learners. The quality of teacher is reflected on the outcome of the learners. Consider, two distinct teachers (T1 and T2) taking class in two different classes (C1 and C2). The results of the students are recognized in terms of their grades. Suppose the mean of the grades (M1) obtained by the students in class 1 is found to be higher than the mean of the grades of students in class 2 (M2), it can be stated that T1 is better than T2. Therefore, a good teacher produces better mean for the results of the students. Further, by interacting among themselves the learners can learn. However, in reality a teacher can only move the mean of a class up to some extent depending on the capability of the class. This follows a random process depending on many factors [21]. The TLBO algorithm is modeled based on the transfer of knowledge in the classroom environment where, the learner first gain knowledge from a teacher and then from other learners by means of group discussions, formal communications, etc. The proposed algorithm consists of two phases namely Teacher Phase (TP) and Learner Phase (LP). In the TP, a teacher tries to bring the learners to his or her level in terms of knowledge. The solution nominations are randomly distributed throughout the search space. Thus, among the solutions the best solution is selected. Let, Miand Tibe the mean and the teacher respectively at any iteration i. During the TP, teacher Titries to move mean Mitoward its own level, so new mean is designated as Mnew and based on the difference between the existing and the new mean, the solution is updated as,(18)Difference_meani=r(Mnew−TFMi)where, r is a random number in the range [0,1] and TF is a teaching factor which decides the value of mean to be changed. Value of TF can be either 1 or 2 which is a heuristic step and it is decided randomly as,(19)TF=round[1+rand(0,1){2−1}]Based on the difference mean given by Eq. (18), the existing solution is modified as,(20)xnew,i=xold,i+Difference_meaniIn the LP, the learners mutually interact among themselves and the process of mutual interaction tends to increase the knowledge of the learner. Each learner interacts randomly with other learners and hence knowledge sharing is facilitated. Consider, two different learners xiand xj, such that i≠j, the modification formula representing the learner phase can be expressed as,(21)xnew,i=xold,i+r(xi−xj)iff(xi)<f(xj)(22)xnew,i=xold,i+r(xj−xi)iff(xj)<f(xi)xnew is accepted if it gives better function value. The TLBO algorithm is terminated when a predetermined maximum iteration number (maximum number of generations) is reached.The steps involved in the implementation of TLBO algorithm for solving IMS problem are as follows:Step 1: Read the system data and initialize TLBO parameters such as population size (P) and maximum number of generations.Step 2:(i)Initialization: randomly generate population xiaccording to population size and number of design variables (number of generating units/transmission lines) as,(23)population=r*UL,i−LL,i+LL,iwhere, UL,iand LL,icorresponds to the allowed starting and ending period for maintenance scheduling. An initial population of TLBO algorithm for solving IMS problem is presented in Fig. 1(a), each element in the population is a design variable that represents the starting period for maintenance. The design variables corresponds to number of generating units for GMS problem, number of transmission lines for transmission maintenance scheduling problem and number of generating units and transmission lines for IMS problem.Identify the optimal generating units to be committed without violating operational constraints including minimum up/down time constraints.Calculate the optimal real power schedule among the committed units.Perform load flow and reschedule the real power generations if any transmission line is overloaded.Evaluate the fitness function value which includes the objective function and constraint violations.Step 3: Teacher phase:(i)The maintenance schedule having minimum fitness value is found and is mimicked as teacher (xteacher).Compute the mean of the learners (Mi=[m1,m2,…,mnd]) in the class column-wise and identify the best solution (xteacher). Shift Mitoward xteacher which acts as new mean (Mnew).Calculate Difference_mean using Eq. (18) and evaluate xnew using Eq. (20). With the new xnew values proceed from steps 2(ii) to 2(v).Compare fitness values and keep the best.Step 4: Learner phase:(i)Obtain xnew in learners phase using Eqs. (21) and (22). With the new xnew values proceed from step 2(ii) to 2(iv).Compute and compare the fitness function values and retain the best.Step 5: Termination criterion:Stop if the maximum number of generation is reached. Otherwise goto step 3.Fig. 1(b) shows the pseudocode of TLBO algorithm.•In the proposed methodology, the constraints of the MS problem (Eqs. (2)–(12)) are handled using penalty function method. In the penalty function method, each variable penalty term is in proportion to the violation of corresponding constraint such that more violation of the constraint results in the higher penalty value. To accelerate the convergence of the proposed method and avoid obtaining infeasible solutions, variable penalty terms are used. The penalty terms are based on the deviation from the constraints and they are chosen high enough to make constraint violations prohibitive in the final solution.The constraints in SCUC problem i.e., minimum ON/OFF duration constraints, generating capacity limits and load demand constraint mentioned in (Eqs. (13)–(16)) is implemented using preservation method. In the preservation method, solutions are initially placed in the feasible search space and remain within by adapting an update mechanism that generates only feasible solutions. The line flow constraint in Eq. (17) is also handled by penalty function method.The application and performance of TLBO algorithm for solving maintenance scheduling problems have been revealed by implementing on standard 6 bus and IEEE 118 bus test systems. The hourly load profile of both the test systems is shown in Fig. 2. In order to show the effectiveness of the proposed method, various scenarios have been considered in each test system. The proposed method has been coded in Matlab 7.9 environment and executed on a 2.53GHz Pentium IV PC with 3 GB RAM. The parameters chosen to acquire the optimal maintenance schedule are population size=50 and maximum number of generations=50.To show the performance of the proposed method, it is implemented on a standard 6 bus system which comprises of 3 generating units, 7 branches and 3 load sides [16]. The scheduling period is 168h. During the week, generating unit may be scheduled at any day and transmission line may be scheduled between Tuesday and Saturday. Due to crew constraint, all the three generating units cannot be scheduled simultaneously and partial maintenance is not permitted for transmission line. The simulation study includes the following scenarios:Scenario 1: Neglecting generator and transmission maintenances.Scenario 2: Generator maintenance is only considered.Scenario 3: Transmission line maintenance is only considered.Scenario 4: Both generator and transmission line maintenance are considered.Scenario 5: Contingency of generating unit 2 with Scenario 4: (a) for duration of 24h; (b) for duration of 48h.Scenario 1: In the first scenario, maintenance of generating units and transmission lines are neglected, SCUC is performed. The optimal generating units satisfy the power balance and other operational constraints for each interval are identified. The real power dispatch schedule among the online generating units is calculated and by using this schedule load flow is carried out. Among three generating units, Generator 1 (G1) is the most economical unit that is treated as a must run unit, Generator 2 (G2) is the most expensive unit and Generator 3 (G3) is treated as a peaking unit. The generating unit (s) 1 or 1 and 3 are able to meet the power demand in each interval and generator 2 is not committed because of its high generation cost. The generating unit 3 is committed during the peak interval of every day. The optimal dispatch schedule of G1 and G3 for the entire scheduling period is presented in Fig. 3. This schedule satisfies the system and operational constraints with the minimum operating cost of $513,733.05.Scenario 2: This scenario discusses the GMS problem that aims to obtain the optimal generator maintenance schedule with the objective of minimization of total fuel cost. The maintenance starting period of generating units are taken as design variables. The generating units 1, 2 and 3 are de-committed for maintenance on Sunday during 145–168thh, Monday during 1–24thh and Saturday during 121–144thh respectively. Except during the maintenance hours, G1 is committed throughout the scheduling period. Though G2 is the most expensive unit, it is committed when G1 is under maintenance in order to satisfy the power demand and G3 is the peaking unit that is committed when G1 is under maintenance in addition to peak hours of each day. This reflects a slight increase in the total operating cost.The simulation study is extended by considering the generator's maintenance for any 24h within the scheduling horizon instead of starting hour of a particular day. Based on this consideration, only G3 is allowed for maintenance during 118–141thh but no additional saving in the primal cost is achieved. The real power schedule for this study is presented in Fig. 4. The primal cost obtained for both cases is $567,526.87 which includes total operating and maintenance cost and the percentage of increase in the operating cost is 8.71.Scenario 3: To show the effect of transmission line maintenance on the dispatch of generators, maintenance of transmission line L1 which is connected between buses 1 and 2 is carried out. The L1 requires 24h maintenance and it should be maintained between Tuesday and Saturday. From the load curve, it is obvious that Saturday is preferable for maintenance of L1 as it has light load in the allowed maintenance window. The transmission line maintenance necessitates rescheduling in generation in order to avoid overloading in transmission lines and this increases the total operating cost. During the maintenance of L1, the generating units are committed appropriately to satisfy the system and operational constraints. Here, the transmission line maintenance is carried out for any 24h within 25–144thh. The proposed methodology provides the optimal maintenance interval during 119–142. Similar to Scenario 1, the most economic unit G1 is committed entirely, G2 is not committed as it is most expensive and G3 is committed during 138–140thh in addition to peak hours. The obtained primal cost is $564,306.81 which includes the total operating cost of $514,386.81 and maintenance cost of $49,920. Due to the maintenance of L1, the generation is rescheduled; hence the operating cost is increased from $513,733.05 to $514,386.81 and the percentage of increase is 0.13. Fig. 5shows the real power generations of G1 and G3 after transmission maintenance scheduling.Scenario 4: The previous two scenarios detail the impacts of maintenance of generating units and transmission lines in real power scheduling and in which maintenances have been carried out separately. In this scenario, co-ordinated maintenance scheduling of generating units and transmission lines have been carried out. Combining the optimal maintenance schedules of generators and transmission lines as obtained in Scenarios 2 and 3, G1 is committed in the entire scheduling horizon except the maintenance period during 145–168h, G2 is committed when G1 is under maintenance and it is under maintenance during 1–24h, G3 is under maintenance during 118–141 and is committed during peak hours, 138–140thh and when G1 is under maintenance and L1 is removed from service due to maintenance during 119–142. The primal cost obtained is $620,684 which includes the total operating cost of $561,740 and maintenance cost of $58,944. This results in increase in operating cost by 9.34%.The maintenance starting periods of generating units and transmission lines can be taken as design variables instead of combining the solutions of Scenarios 2 and 3. By comparing with combined maintenance schedule, L1 is maintained during 73–96 and the operating cost is reduced to $558,900. As a result, 8.79% increase in the operating cost with respect to Scenario 1 is obtained. The generators’ dispatch is presented in Fig. 6.Scenario 5: To further show the effectiveness of the proposed approach, generator outage is considered along with co-ordinated maintenance scheduling. Outage of one generating unit will affect the scheduling of remaining units and this in turn affects the operating cost. In this test system, G2 is expensive unit which is committed usually during 145–168h when G1 is under maintenance. Consider, outage of G2 on Sunday during 145–168thh, G1 and G3 are maintained during hours 118–141 and 145–168 respectively and L1 is under maintenance during 119–142thh. A new generating unit commitment schedules and generation dispatches are obtained and secure operation is also ensured. The real power dispatches of generating units are presented in Fig. 7. The generator outage produces an impact on the total operating cost and the operating cost of $560,568.15 which is higher than the Scenario 4 is obtained.Further, in order to show the ability of the proposed method in handling contingencies, the outage period of G2 is increased from 24h to 48h and it is in outage during 121–168thh (48h). This leads to new preventive maintenance and dispatch schedules. The maintenance of G1 has been shifted to 1–24thh to satisfy power demand, because G1 cannot be allowed for maintenance during 121–141sth in which G2 is in outage. Similarly, G2 is scheduled for maintenance during hours 25–48 instead of 1–24thh and G3 is maintained during 145–168thh. Due to the longer duration of contingency, the operating cost is increased to $571,810. The real power outputs of generating units are presented in Fig. 8.The objective of preventive security is to prepare the system when it is still in normal operation in order to make it able to face future (uncertain) events in a satisfactory way. Hence, contingency analysis has been carried out on standard test systems. Its effect has resulted in shifting of maintenance schedules which in turn results in rescheduling of generating units consequently enhances the operational security.To show the computational efficiency of the proposed method, it is implemented on IEEE 118 bus system. This test system is large scale, comprising of 54 generating units, 186 transmission lines and 91 loads. The test data for the 118-bus system is taken from motor.ece.iit.edu/data/coop. The scheduling period is 168h and the annual peak load is 6000MW. Among 54 generating units and 186 transmission lines, Generator 10 (G10), Generator 20 (G20), Generator 34 (G34) and transmission line connected between buses 38 and 37 (L51) require maintenance. Due to crew limitation, one generating unit is allowed for maintenance at any hour. The partial maintenance of L51 is allowed at the maximum of 2. Each partial maintenance outage should last at least 8h, and at least 8-h rest is required between two continuous partial maintenance outages. The following three scenarios illustrate the performance of the proposed approach.Scenario 6: Co-ordinated maintenance scheduling.Scenario 7: Contingency during hours 121–144: (a) G10; (b) G20.Scenario 6: This scenario details the impact of combined generator and transmission line maintenance in large-scale system operations. Among three generating units considered for maintenance, G10 and G20 are base load units that are committed during the entire 168h except during their maintenance periods and G34 is treated as a peaking unit. The optimal operation can be achieved if G10, G20 and G34 are allowed for maintenance during hours 121–144, 145–168 and 1–24 respectively and L51 during 1–8th and 17–26thh. L51 has been under partial maintenance, it is taken out for maintenance during first 8h (1st–8thh) and is again scheduled for maintenance during 17–26thh. Between two partial maintenances, L51 is under service for 8h (9th–16thh). The generating units G10, G20 and G34 have been scheduled for maintenance when the 24-h demand is lower in the whole week. The remaining generating units are scheduled according to their capacities to satisfy the load demands and the generating units G1–G3, G6–G9, G12–G19, G22, G23, G26, G30–G33, G35, G37, G38, G41, G42, G46–G52, G54 are not committed at all. The optimal real power generations of the generating units G10, G20 and G34 are presented in Fig. 9. The final schedule satisfies maintenance, SCUC and line flow constraints. The obtained primal cost is $9,335,700 which includes operational and maintenance costs of $9,183,300 and $152,400 respectively. The operating cost obtained using the proposed approach is found to be lesser as compared to [13] in which the operating cost is $10,137,660.83.It is further observed that for a one-month planning horizon, the maintenance outage of G10, G20, G34 and L51 are scheduled during hours 650–673, 145–168, 449–472 and 121–138 respectively. The total operating cost is found to be $37,605,000 which is comparatively lesser than [13] in which the operating cost is $40,044,300. The computational time required for the proposed methodology to carry out equipment maintenance outage with SCUC for a one-month planning horizon is about three hours which is lesser than [13] that requires four hours to complete the process.Scenario 7: To validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach to deal with contingencies in large-scale system, it is assumed that the base load unit G10 is in outage during 121–144h. This alters the maintenance schedule of G10 and G20 to 145–168 and 121–144, respectively and results in rescheduling of remaining generating units to meet the demand. As a result, the operation cost increases from $9,183,300 to $9,187,500. The real power dispatches of G10, G20 and G34 are presented in Fig. 10(a). The resulting schedule satisfies the system and operational constraints.The impact on the optimal cost due to outage of G20 during hours 121–144 is investigated. Though the preventive maintenance schedules obtained for generators and transmission line are same as in Scenario 6 the outage of G20 during 121–144 causes rescheduling among the generators in order to meet the system and operational requirements. The generation reschedule increases the operational cost to $9,201,500. The optimal real power outputs of G10, G20 and G34 are presented in Fig. 10(b).The numerical results including maintenance schedule, operating, maintenance and primal costs obtained in various scenarios for both test systems are presented in Tables 1 and 2. From the results seen in Table 3, it is seen that the proposed method provides the lowest primal cost schedule, emphasizing its superior solution quality. The proposed method provides better solution for large scale system that indicates its ability to reach global optimal solution. This method uses TLBO to obtain the optimal maintenance schedule that decides the solution quality. Randomness is inherent property of TLBO; hence initial population is obtained using random numbers. Change in population size, affects the performance of the TLBO algorithm. The optimum population size is found to be related to the problem dimension and complexity. Simulations are carried out 50 times for each test systems for different population sizes ranging from 10 to 50. A population size of 50 resulted in achieving global solutions more consistently for both test systems. When the population size is set above 50, the savings in optimal cost is minimal and the computational time gets increased. After a number of careful experimentation, the optimum values of population size and maximum number of iterations have finally been settled to 50. Fig. 11shows that the proposed method is having smooth convergence characteristics for both test systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
