@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel criterion for nonlinear time-delay systems using LMI fuzzy Lyapunov method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We merge Lyapunov criteria with LMI to evaluate the stability of the system.The H infinity control performance is achieved by the controller design of PDC.Converting the stability problem into system parameter matrices.EBA is employed to find the feasible solutions insuring the system is stable.The stability is used to construct the fitness function of EBA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy Lyapunov method,Delay-independent,T–S fuzzy systems,Evolved Bat Algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study presents a kind of fuzzy robustness design for nonlinear time-delay systems based on the fuzzy Lyapunov method, which is defined in terms of fuzzy blending quadratic Lyapunov functions. The basic idea of the proposed approach is to construct a fuzzy controller for nonlinear dynamic systems with disturbances in which the delay-independent robust stability criterion is derived in terms of the fuzzy Lyapunov method. Based on the robustness design and parallel distributed compensation (PDC) scheme, the problems of modeling errors between nonlinear dynamic systems and Takagi–Sugeno (T–S) fuzzy models are solved. Furthermore, the presented delay-independent condition is transformed into linear matrix inequalities (LMIs) so that the fuzzy state feedback gain and common solutions are numerically feasible with swarm intelligence algorithms. The proposed method is illustrated on a nonlinear inverted pendulum system and the simulation results show that the robustness controller cannot only stabilize the nonlinear inverted pendulum system, but has the robustness against external disturbance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The nonlinear time-delay system is relatively much more complex than the linear time-invariant (LTI) system. Thus, to decompose and analyze a nonlinear time-delay system with conventional mathematical models is always time consuming and difficult. However, the decomposition and analysis procedures can be massively simplified through describing the temporary states of the nonlinear time-delay system by fuzzy models. Every temporary state of the nonlinear time-delay system corresponds to one fuzzy rule. Hence, the whole nonlinear time-delay system can be approximately approached by collecting all fuzzy rules, together.Moreover, the linear matrix inequality (LMI) theory is a useful analytical tool for analyzing the behavior of a control system. Many problems arising in system and control theory can be reduced to a few standard convex or quasiconvex optimization problems involving the LMI. The key to guarantee the stability of the system as a whole is finding a common symmetrically positive definite matrix for all subsystems with the control forces generated by the fuzzy models.A simplified LMI condition is derived in this paper. In order to overcome to influence of modeling error between nonlinear systems and fuzzy models, the robustness design is considered. In our proposed approach, the Takagi–Sugeno (T–S) fuzzy model is employed to decompose a nonlinear time-delay system, and the LMI conditions are derived via Lyapunov theory to check the stability of the composed T–S fuzzy systems and nonlinear systems. To derive a relaxed stability condition, this work extends the fuzzy Lyapunov approaches on stability analysis of nonlinear time-delay systems by applying the LMI theory and T–S fuzzy representation. A novel robustness delay-independent LMI-based stability criterion is proposed to overcome the modeling errors between nonlinear time-delay systems and fuzzy models. Based on these criteria given in this work, a parallel distributed compensation (PDC) control design with H∞ disturbance attenuation performance is presented to stabilize the nonlinear time-delay systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This investigation addresses the stability problem of time-delay T–S fuzzy systems subjected to disturbances. A novel delay-independent stability criterion in terms of fuzzy Lyapunov's method is merged with LMI theory to ensure the asymptotic stability of the time-delay T–S fuzzy systems. Furthermore, the H∞ control performance is achieved by the controller design of PDC. The stability criteria derived from LMI conditions through the Lyapunov function approach reform the stability analysis problem into an inequality equation; and the problem is thus converted into finding a common symmetric positive definite matrix and the control force matrix. The stability criteria are then used to construct the fitness function for employing the EBA in order to find the feasible solutions which insure that the fuzzy control system is stable in the large. An inverted pendulum is taken as an example of the nonlinear system in our experiment. An even more strict condition is given in our design, which ensures uniformity of the system control force to be equal. EBA is employed in the experiment. There are 500 iterations and 30 runs to provide the data for statistical analysis. The experimental results indicate that the EBA with our proposed fitness function presents a 91.46% success rate in average for finding the feasible solutions under the additional constraint criterion on the system control force.