@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-scenario passive filter planning in factory distribution system by using Markov model and probabilistic Sugeno fuzzy reasoning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The time-varying and non-stationary problem is transformed to be a multi-scenario.The optimization computation which is free of probabilities can be simplified.Both probability and duration are considered in the probabilistic Sugeno fuzzy reasoning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Harmonics,Markov model,Passive filter,Probability,Fuzzy reasoning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Power quality may degrade owing to increasing harmonics from nonlinear loads in a power system. Harmonics are time-varying and non-stationary power quality problems in the power system. This article addresses that the passive filter planning considers multiple scenarios, including different load levels and harmonic currents in a factory distribution system. Based on the above factors and use of the Markov model, this work attempts to gain multiple scenarios, each with its own probability and duration. A novel method based on probabilistic Sugeno fuzzy reasoning is also developed by using individual optimal solutions of all scenarios. Moreover, the final optimal solution is obtained using the center-of-gravity approach. The proposed method is validated using simulation results of a 2-busbar factory distribution system and an 18-busbar factory distribution system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Harmonic problems arising from the converter-based facilities and nonlinear loads are increasingly severe in a factory distribution system. Recently, harmonic problems are also concerned in the transmission and distribution levels due to the use of HVDC (or light HVDC) and FACTS (flexible AC transmission system) devices. Parallel/series resonances may lead to facility overvoltage or overcurrent in the power system. Voltage distortions may incur facility malfunctions. To ensure a constant power quality, the designed filter should consider the characteristics of time-varying and non-stationary harmonics as well as varying linear loads. Consequently, designing a passive/active filter to mitigate harmonics within an acceptable range is a challenging task.The active filter is able to reduce the impact of harmonics on the voltage distortion in the power system adaptively according to time-varying and non-stationary harmonics and varying linear loads [1,2]. However, the passive filters are still widely used in most industrial factories because of their low cost. The single-tuned passive filter, whose capacitor size and tuned resonance frequency need to be determined, is a widely used passive filter to mitigate harmonics in the power system. Notably, the passive filters are likely ineffective, owing to the time-varying and non-stationary nature of the linear load and nonlinear harmonic injection current. Passive filter planning has received considerable attention, as summarized in the following. A previous study implemented simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA) to gain the number of capacitor banks and tuned resonance frequency of the single-tuned passive filter by approximating the gradient of the objective functions [3]. By analyzing probabilistic constraints, another work considered the time-varying factors for harmonics and loads with Gaussian distribution [4]. A related work considered uncertainty by using fuzzy models with membership functions for harmonics, loads and short-circuit capacity [5]. Another investigation considered nonlinear arc furnace loads with different probabilities to attain the expected investment [6]. Moreover, a cumulant-based model considering uncertainty was adopted, in which the harmonic voltage with a cumulative probability of 95% was used as a representative value [7].Despite their contributions, the above works have the following limitations:(a)Most works investigated the worst case (i.e. the smallest linear loads and largest harmonic currents). The worst case may cause a high cost and over-compensation [3];Harmonics may be other probability distributions or irregular patterns. Confidence-level treatment cannot be used for other distribution [4] (e.g. Weibull distribution);Membership functions tend to produce an optimistic solution because of minimization of investment cost [5];Probabilistic model and convolution calculation were not utilized for attaining the optimal solution [6]; andComputing all cumulative probabilities of harmonic voltages for different harmonic orders at different busbars is rather time consuming when using population-based evolutionary algorithms [7].The Markov model, on the other hand, defines all operation states in a set of time-series data. The Markov model can yield the probability and duration of each state (scenario). In the past, a building energy consumption model was proposed based on stochastic Markov models [8]; the energy consumption model was employed to forecast possible energy saving gains from building retrofitting projects. Using the same model, another work presented a multi-state Markov model for a coal power generating unit [9]; this work proposed an approach for the estimation of transition intensities between the various generating capacity levels of the unit based on field observation. Recently, a method for solar radiation modeling was proposed using hidden Markov models which are unique in the sense that it not only considered transitions of values in a time sequence but also considered a dependent sequence of events and constructed the transient dependencies between these two entities [10]. The Markov model was also applied to determine the size of energy storage for isolated systems considering stochastic solar radiation due to their random behavior [11]; the obtained results were compared with those from a deterministic method; it was shown that the stochastic model presented more reliable values.Fuzzy modeling, known as a linguistic approach based on fuzzy logic [12,13], is able to model an uncertain system. Takagi–Sugeno–Kang (TSK or called simply Sugeno) fuzzy modeling [14,15] was developed to generate fuzzy rules consisting of fuzzy antecedent (condition) parts and mathematical function in the consequent (action) part. The antecedents divide the input space into a set of fuzzy regions, while consequents describe behavior of system in those regions. In the past, Ren et al. presented an experimental study for turning process in machining by using Sugeno fuzzy rules to integrate multi-sensor and tool wear information [16]. Kumbasar et al. presented a method to establish the inverse of the Sugeno fuzzy model using simple manipulations of the condition and action parts of the fuzzy rules [17]. This method was used to embed a nonlinear internal model control structure to provide an effective and robust control performance. Garcoa et al. presented a fault-diagnostic system method using fuzzy identification based on the Sugeno fuzzy rules [18]. This method was validated in case it was hard to obtain a good mathematical model for this studied system but knowledge on how the system works was available. Ferreira and Serra partitioned an uncertain dynamic system into several linear sub-models, in terms of transfer function, and organized into the Sugeno fuzzy structure [19]. A new definition of fuzzy frequency response was given. Tong et al. used the Sugeno fuzzy model with parametric uncertainties to represent a nonlinear system [20]. Based on this fuzzy model, fuzzy robust state feedback output tracking controller and fuzzy robust observer-based output tracking controller were proposed. Wu employed the Sugeno fuzzy model to represent a discrete-time nonlinear system, which deals with the robust H2 fuzzy observer-based control problem, with parametric uncertainties [21]. Juang and Jang implemented the Sugeno fuzzy model using a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) chip [22]. These works show that the Sugeno fuzzy reasoning is useful to achieve a solution in uncertain environment.To eliminate the aforementioned shortcomings, this article presents a new method for determining the capacitor sizes and tuned frequencies of the single tuned passive filters considering time-varying and non-stationary conditions in a factory distribution system. The studied problem was transformed to be many scenarios with different probabilities and durations using the Markov model. After obtaining individual optimal solutions, a novel method based on probabilistic Sugeno fuzzy reasoning is proposed to integrate all optimal solutions. The condition parts of Sugeno fuzzy rules include the durations modeled as membership functions while the action parts consist of capacitor sizes and tuned resonance frequencies modeled as singletons. Each Sugeno fuzzy rule is applied by a probability given by adding probabilities from relevant scenarios. Thus, the time-varying and non-stationary problem can be solved easily without embedding probability density functions in the optimization process.The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Markov model used for the non-stationary harmonics and loads. Section 3 then introduces the problem formulation for a single scenario. Next, Section 4 presents the proposed method based on the probabilistic fuzzy reasoning. Additionally, Section 5 summarizes the simulation results for a 2-busbar system and an 18-busbar system. Conclusions are finally drawn.“Scenario analysis” (or scenario planning) is a process of analyzing possible future events by considering alternative possible scenarios. The scenario analysis, which is a projection method, does not try to show one exact picture of the future. Instead, the scenario analysis presents consciously some alternative future scenarios. Thus, a set of possible future scenarios is studied. In short, some scenarios are investigated in a scenario analysis to show possible future outcomes [23]. The concept of scenario analysis can be applied to study the passive filter planning problem.The passive filter planning considering time-varying and non-stationary harmonics and loads in a factory distribution system can be transformed into many scenarios using the Markov model. The Markov model correlates a state probability with its corresponding state duration in the stochastic process. The harmonic current sources and busbar loads in a studied period (i.e. one week to one year) are modeled using the Markov process herein. Fig. 1illustrates a single harmonic current source with three states. Failure rate (λ) refers to a transition rate from one state (e.g. state 1) to another state (e.g. state 2) while repair rate (μ) is the other transition rate from state 2 to state 1.Let Pbm, m=1, 2, …, M, denote the probabilities for M states. Then,(1)∑m=1MPbm=1(2)[T][Pb1...PbM]t=0The upper (lower) triangle matrix of the M×M squared matrix [T] consists of the repair (failure) rates among states. The diagonal term of [T] equals the negative sum of all off-diagonal terms in the same column. The absolute value of diagonal term for a state m in Eq. (2) is termed the rate of departure for state m. Three essential parameters in the Markov process are discussed as follows:(i)Inverse of rate of departure for state m equals the duration for state m.The probabilities for the M states can be attained by solving Eqs. (1) and (2); andPeriod for state m=(probability for state m)×(duration for state m).Above discussion reveals that probability and duration are two important independent parameters because the period relies on the probability and duration. Applications of the Markov model become obvious by aggregating “Markov states” as a “scenario” given its probability and duration in a power system. Specifically, multiple scenarios exist in a power system owing to many harmonic current sources and linear loads. For example, assume that two harmonic current sources are considered here, with each one having three states. These two harmonic current sources have nine possible scenarios. The aggregate rate of departure for a new scenario equals the sum of the corresponding rates of departure for any two states in two harmonic current sources. The product of the corresponding probabilities from any two states in various two harmonic current sources yields the aggregate probability for a new scenario.Traditional methods employ expected values (sum of all products of individual quantities and corresponding probabilities) as the final result in a problem with multiple scenarios. Based on a novel concept, this work incorporates the probabilities with the corresponding durations of multiple scenarios. This novel concept is achieved by using probabilistic Sugeno fuzzy reasoning [24].After each scenario is defined by the Markov model, which has its own probability and duration, a scenario can be expressed as the following optimization formulation.(3)Minfx,ys.t.(4)px,y=0(5)gx,y=0where the vector of x includes the harmonic voltages (dependent variables) of various harmonic orders (h∈H where H is the set of concerned harmonic orders) at all busbars (n∈N where N is the set of busbars). The vector of y includes the tuned resonance frequency (thi) and the number (nhi) of capacitors in the single-tuned passive filter for all harmonic orders (h∈H at all candidate busbars (i∈CB) where CB is the set of candidate busbars). More specifically, the single-tuned passive filter is an LC in series device that has a tuned resonance frequency close to the studied harmonic order. The harmonic admittance of the filter can be expressed with the net fundamental frequency reactive power (which is a function of nhi) and thifor harmonic h at busbar i[5].The objective f(x,y) in Eq. (3) is the investment cost of passive filters, which is the cost of capacitors and inductors in the single tuned filters (all concerned harmonic orders, h∈H) at all candidate busbars (i∈CB). The equality constraint in Eq. (4) consists of harmonic power flow equations for all harmonic orders (h∈H). The inequality constraints in Eq. (5) comprise operation limits. In particular, the harmonic voltages at busbars and harmonic injection current at PCC should be subjected to the limits specified in the IEEE Std 519-1992 or EN50160. The inequality constraints also encompass limits of the power factor at PCC of a factory distribution system and the range of thi. Some formulas are given in Appendix A and detailed information is given in Ref. [3].The problem expressed by Eqs. (3)–(5) is a constrained mixed integer optimization problem involving real-number variables (i.e. tuned resonance frequency, thi) and integer variables (i.e. number of capacitor banks, nhi). Conventional integer programming (IP) and evolutionary programming take an extraordinarily long CPU time in yielding a near-optimal solution. This article employs the authors’ previous method [3] to solve this constrained mixed integer programming problem efficiently. That method is based on Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation (SPSA). SPSA is an easily implemented and highly efficient gradient approximation that relies on two values of the objective function. Detailed descriptions of SPSA are given in Appendix B.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work presents a novel method involving integration of both probabilities and durations of scenarios to deal with single-tuned passive filter planning. The non-stationary and time-varying harmonic problem is transformed into a multi-state and multi-scenario problem using the Markov process. Durations of the scenarios are modeled by the membership functions in the “condition part” of probabilistic Sugeno fuzzy rules. The desired optimal tuned resonance frequencies and number of capacitors in the single-tuned passive filters are calculated using the center of gravity.Results obtained by conventional methods considering mean values and expected values may be close to that obtained by the proposed method if diversities of probabilities and durations are not obvious, as shown in the 2-busbar system. However, the proposed method may gain a solution which differs markedly from the mean values and expected values. This work also demonstrates that the expected values are identical to those obtained by the proposed method if membership values always equal unity. Compared with the traditional cumulant-based and chance-constrained optimization methods, the merits of the proposed methods can be summarized as follows: (1) the optimization computation, which does not involve probabilities, can be simplified; (2) both probability and duration, which was ignored in the traditional methods, are considered in the probabilistic Sugeno fuzzy reasoning.