@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Research on the interactive effects of online scores

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework is established from the point of interactive effects to explain the inconsistent results about online scores.The effect of overall score is negatively affected by the difference between weighted score and overall score itself.It is also positively affected by the difference between overall scores of one product and those of alternative products.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online reviews,Word of mouth,Interactive effect,E-commerce,Score,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the popularity of online shopping, more and more consumers are making their decisions according to online reviews. However, studies on the effects of online scores produce different results, even for the same products. This study analyzes the impact of online scores from the perspective of the interaction between the different forms of online scores to provide a reasonable explanation of the inconsistency of the research results in this regard. The results of this study demonstrate that the effect of the overall score is negatively affected by the difference between the weighted score and the overall score itself. Moreover, it is also positively influenced by the difference between the overall score of one product and those of its substitutes. While considering the difference between the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score, its influence on the effect of the overall score is insignificant. This research theoretically validates the interactive effects of online scores and provides the basis for an online-score-based operation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The development of the Internet has provided an opportunity for the rapid expansion of e-commerce, making online shopping one of the major forms of consumption. This also prompts consumer focus on online reviews. According to a survey by DoubleClick.com, more than 50% of consumers use a search engine to find review information provided by the previous consumers before their purchases (Row 2006). These data have risen to 83.4% based on the latest report of the China Internet Network Information Center in August 2013. A report from IResearch in June 2011 also indicates that 81.8% of the audiences obtain information about movies via the Internet. All of these examples indicate that online reviews are playing an important role in eliminating consumer uncertainty and helping with decision making for purchases (Clemons et al. 2006).Many studies on online reviews have been performed in recent years. The majority of studies on the effects of online reviews on sales focus on the review volume and scores. However, such studies have provided different conclusions. This phenomenon is particularly prominent in the research regarding online scores. Certain scholars note that online scores have a positive impact on product sales (Clemons et al. 2006; Dellarocas et al. 2007; Lu and Feng 2009; Ye et al. 2009; Rui et al. 2013), while other studies indicate the irrelevant relationship between them (Liu 2006; Karniouchina 2011). Many scholars have taken online movies and other experiential products as the subject of their research and drawn different conclusions. Dellarocas et al. (2007) reveal the positive effect of the average value of online scores on the box office. Duan et al. (2008) find no significant correlation between the daily box office and the average rating of reviews. Regarding the above differences in the results, certain scholars note that the impact of online scores on the sales of products is moderated by certain factors, such as review related factors (including the volume of reviews, etc.) (Khare et al. 2011; Gopinath et al. 2013), reviewer related factors (Forman et al. 2008; Hu et al. 2008), product related factors (Park and Lee 2009; Lee et al. 2011; Yang et al. 2012), and consumer related factors (Park and Kim 2008). However, no systematic analyses of such inconsistencies have been made to date, and the interpretation of the existing research is not sufficient.Currently, the numerous review websites provide not only the overall score (or average score) but also other multi-dimensional scores (Li and Hitt 2010). Taking an online movie as an example, the scores concerning a specific movie include the overall score, the sub-dimensional score (such as the score of impression and storyline), the score of other similar movies, and so on. The review websites may also provide the information about the score distribution, i.e., the score levels and corresponding proportions (see Fig. 1). All of these scores provide general information to help consumers to make their final decisions. A higher overall score indicates a greater possibility on the part of the consumers to decide to purchase the product. A low sub-dimensional score may lead to a denial of consumption. This indicates the interaction and mutual dependence of the overall score and other types of scores, which jointly affect the final consumption decision.On such a basis, this study tests the abovementioned phenomenon through empirical analysis to reveal the interaction between the different forms of scores and to provide a reasonable explanation for the inconsistent conclusion concerning the effects of the online reviews. This study focuses on the following questions:1.How does the overall score interact with the other types of scores?How can such an interaction influence the effect of the overall score on decision making?The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant theories and establishes the hypotheses. Then, the sources of the data and variables are described in Section 3. Next, the main findings are presented and discussed in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes the significance and limitations of the research.In statistics, the interactive effect indicates the interdependence and mutual influence of two or more independent variables that jointly affect the dependent variables. If the combined effects are larger than the sum of the single factors, a synergistic effect exits between them, which is the so-called positive interactive effect; otherwise, the antagonistic effect or the negative interactive effect exists (Wen et al. 2005; Aiken and West 1991).Most studies on the interactive effect include the product item in the regression equation for analysis. Generally, the product item in the linear regression model reflects whether there is an additive interactive effect (Aiken and West 1991; Jaccard et al. 1990).In this research, the interactive effect between the variables refers to the mutual influence between the overall score and other scores, which jointly affect consumer decision making. This research uses the regression equation for analysis and introduces the product item as the interactive effect of the variables.Information Accessibility-Diagnosticity Theory (Feldman and Lynch 1988) is about information utility. Information diagnosticity refers to the extent to which a piece of information is different from others. If the information can help consumers classify goods to a unique cognitive category, it is considered to be diagnostic (Bone 1995). Information accessibility is affected by its relative comparability. Generally, more attention is paid to the more complex, abnormal or extreme information that is searched more conveniently, thus the higher accessibility and diagnosticity of such information (Bettman et al. 1998). At the same time, the theory also indicates that the individual’s perceived diagnosticity of the information determines the usefulness of the information. When more diagnostic information emerges, the original information will be used less to make decisions. (Herr et al. 1991).The Consistency Theory (Osgood and Tannenbaum 1955) is used to explore and predict the changes in peoples’ original attitude to maintain their internal consistency when they receive new information. According to the theory, due to the different evaluation criteria, different people will have a similar or different attitude towards the same things or people. If one person’s attitude is similar to another’s, both of them do not need to change their attitude; otherwise, they change their attitude, driven by an internal force to achieve psychological consistency and harmony if they disagree with each other. This theory is validated by many scholars from different perspectives. Wilson and Hodges (1992) note that the WOMs are filtered by receivers according to their consistency with previous evaluation criteria. The information, obtained via diverse channels, will intensify consumers’ attitude if it is consistent with the previous attitude toward a certain product or service; otherwise, the consumer may change their attitude according to the WOMs. Jain and Maheswaran (2000) find that highly inconsistent information can be sufficiently convincing to change the initial attitude.In this research, a greater difference between the other types of scores and the overall score indicates the higher scrutiny and higher information accessibility and diagnosticity of the other scores. The more replaceable or comparable a product, the more attention will be paid to its scores, and the higher the information accessibility and diagnosticity, the more convincing the information is. Based on the Consistency Theory, as consumers may have different attitudes according to different scores, they may moderate their attitude based on the more convincing score information. This indicates that consumers will adjust their overall score-based attitude when other scores have higher information diagnosticity and accessibility. In this process, the attitude based on the overall score information and that based on the other scores influence each other, namely, the overall score interacts with the other scores. The following hypotheses are proposed accordingly.When making consumption decisions, consumers will consider the overall score, as well as other forms of scores, and judge by comparing the different types of scores of the products and services. According to the Consistency Theory, when the differences between the other forms of scores and the overall score exist, the former will precipitate the adjustment of consumer attitudes derived from the latter. The extent and direction of the adjustment depend on the strength of the differences between the two categories of scores. Combining the Information Accessibility-Diagnosticity Theory, we can infer that the significant difference between the other forms of scores and the overall score will decrease the information diagnosticity of the latter, which in turn impacts the effect of the overall score.Considering the score levels and corresponding proportions (as illustrated in Fig. 1), the median of each level is used to calculate a weighted score to evaluate the impact of the score distribution. According to the Information Accessibility-Diagnosticity Theory, the diagnosticity of the weighted score is determined by the difference between the weighted score and the overall score. When the difference is large, the respective attitudes about the two scores differ greatly; therefore, the weighted score is deemed more diagnostic. In this case, the consumer will adjust his or her overall-score-based attitude according to the weighted score. In contrast, consumers will adjust their attitude to adapt to the overall score in the case of a minor difference between the weighted score and the overall score and weak diagnosticity of the weighted score (Wilson and Hodges 1992). Based on this, the following hypothesis is proposed:H1The difference between the weighted score and the overall score negatively interacts with the overall score.In this research, the overall score and sub-dimensional scores are provided by the users. In other words, regarding a specific movie, a user may give an overall score, and the user may also provide the sub-dimensional scores based on his feelings about the story, the cinematography or the music of the movie. For example, a user may have a general impression of a movie and give an overall score of 5. However, he perhaps likes the music or theme song of the movie and gives a score of 8 in this dimension. From this aspect, the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score are made independently. The sub-dimensional scores represent the feelings of users regarding the different aspects of the movies, and they can provide more elaborate information and are valuable for audience decision making.According to the Information Accessibility-Diagnosticity Theory, the difference between the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score determines the information diagnosticity of the former. When this difference is large, the attitudes based on the two types of scores differ significantly, and the sub-dimensional scores are more diagnostic for customers (Feldman and Lynch 1988). In this case, the consumer will adjust the overall-score-based attitude to the sub-dimensional scores (Wilson and Hodges 1992; Jain and Maheswaran 2000). On the contrary, in the case of a minor difference between the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score and a low diagnosticity of the sub-dimensional scores, the consumer will adjust the sub-dimensional-score-based attitude to the overall score. Therefore, the following hypothesis is proposed:H2The difference between the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score negatively interacts with the overall score.There are interactive effects among different products, which affect consumer decision-making (Aaker and Joachimsthaler 2000; Shocker et al. 2004; Libai et al. 2005; Seetharaman et al. 2005; Binken and Stremersch 2009). In the related research, many scholars note that the sales of a specific product correlate with the sales of its substitutes or complementary goods (Shocker et al. 2004; Seetharaman et al. 2005). This research focuses on the mutual effects between products from the perspective of substitutes. As Elberse and Eliashberg (2003) regard products with the same rating and of the same type as the rivalry of a specific product, this study analyzes the competition between the substitutes of the product in the same kind, and measures the replaceability of the product by the score difference. The smaller the score difference, the more replaceable the product is. According to the Consistency Theory, the consumer pays equal attention to the scores of the product and its alternatives that appear in the same period, and his/her attitude is determined jointly by the score of the product and its alternatives. In the case of a minor score difference between the product and its alternatives, the consumer will pay more attention to the alternatives and the attitude toward the product will weaken based on the score of the product; otherwise, in the case of a significant score difference, the consumer pays less attention to the alternatives, and the attitude based on the score of the product itself is slightly affected. To conclude, in the case of a minor score difference between the product and its alternatives, the score of the product itself plays little role in the consumption decision-making; otherwise, it plays a large role. The score difference positively interacts with the score of the product itself. The following hypothesis is proposed:H3The difference between the scores of the product and its substitutes positively interacts with the score of the product itself.The research framework is presented in Fig. 2.In this study, we choose online movies as the research object for the following considerations. First, the different findings regarding the effects of online scores are mainly concentrated on movies, and this lays a certain foundation for us to reveal the reasons of the distinction. Second, as a movie is a type of experiential product, consumers will rely more on online scores. Finally, compared with other products, the review information in the online communities about movies is more comprehensive and reliable.The data are collected from Mtime (http://www.mtime.com), which has a professional database containing all of the movies released since 2001 and their related information. As a professional movie website, Mtime provides a platform for reviewers to express their views and post objective evaluations to other users. The website provides not only the overall scores but also other forms of scores, such as the sub-dimensional scores. For a specific movie, users can provide the overall score or sub-dimensional scores respectively. This indicates that the overall score is not calculated from the sub-dimensional scores directly.We collected every movie released from September 2011 to April 2012 in China and excluded those with no reviews and no scores. The final data set includes 210 movies. For each movie, we collected the following information: the movie title, the number of people who want to watch it, the overall score, the category of the movie, the distribution of the proportion of each score level (score distribution), etc. The relative example is presented in Table 1.This research focuses on online movies as its subject and explores the interactive effects of online scores on consumer decision-making. Samples in this research are the movies released in China during a certain period of time, but the box office of certain movies is very low and the data in this regard are incomplete. Therefore, the research uses the number of people who want to watch as a replacement for the box office in the analysis.According to the theories concerning consumer decision-making, consumption intention and behaviors are correlated. The study by Armstrong et al. (2000) on the four durables also validates that the purchase intention can effectively predict the future purchase behaviors, and Klemz and Boshoff (2001) further note that the purchase intention directly correlates with the purchase behavior and indicates whether the consumer will further purchase.To further explore the relationship between the intention and the decision making related to watching movies, this research conducts an empirical analysis on the audience intention and the box office of 54 movies on the basis of data collected from Mtime (http://www.mtime.com). Movies studied in this research have a box office ranging from RMB 0.2 million to RMB 975 million and cover different types whether they are popular or not; therefore, the samples are representative. The research fits its model by using the number of people who want to watch the movie as the independent variable and the box office as the dependent variable. The model fitting demonstrates a significant linear relationship between the independent and dependent variables, and the goodness of fit is as high as 0.83. The model is as follows:Movieboxoffice=-1544.664+4.502∗numberofpeoplewanttowatchIn addition, to remove the non-linear relationship among the variables and referring to the previous studies (Ye et al. 2009; Duan et al. 2008), the log value of the number of people who want to watch the movie is used as the dependent variable in the research.In this study, the independent variables consist of the overall score, the difference between the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score, the difference between the weighted score and the overall score, and the difference between the overall scores of one product and those of its substitutes.As we are interested in the interactive effects between other forms of scores and the overall score, the following equation is developed, with the logarithm transformation of the number of people who want to watch the movie as the dependent variable. In addition, the model incorporates the interactive effects of the independent variables.Log(WantWatchNumi)=Scorei+WeightedScoreDifi+SubdimScoreDifi+SubstiScoreDifi+Scorei∗WeightedScoreDifi+Scorei∗SubdimScoreDifi+Scorei∗SubstiScoreDifiScoreidenotes the overall score of movie i. WeightedScoreDifiis the absolute difference between the weighted score and the overall score. SubdimScoreDifiis the average of the absolute difference between each sub-dimensional score and the overall score. And SubstiScoreDifiis defined as the average of the absolute difference between the overall score of movie i and those of the alternative movies. Here, substitutes in this research are chosen by considering the type of movies and the time of release (Elberse and Eliashberg 2003). As every movie has at least one tag on the website, its substitutes in this research have at least one of the same tag. Substitutes are selected from similar movies released in the same week to avoid the deviation of the conclusion caused by the different life cycle of movies.Variables are quantified as follows.(3 - 1)WeightedScoreDif=∑i(|medianofleveli-overallscore|×proportionofleveli)totalnumberoflevels(i=1,2,3,4,as the code of each level)(3 - 2)SubdimScoreDif=∑i|scoreofdimensioni-overallscore|totalnumberofdimensions(i=1,2,3,…,as the code of each dimension)(3-3)SubstiScoreDif=∑i|overallscoreofsubstitutei-overallscore|totalnumberofsubstitutes(i=1,2,3,…,as the code of each substitute)Variable symbols are described in Table 2.Table 3presents the statistical results for the variables. The table reveals that the numbers of people who want to watch the movie (WantWatchNumi) vary greatly because people want to watch different movies, with a standard deviation of 2278.90 and an overall average value as high as 1,316.21, indicating that the study sample covers both popular and unpopular movies.Table 4presents the variable analysis and reveals the correlation to different degrees between the independent and dependent variables. Among them, the overall score (Scorei) is positively correlated with the dependent variable. The difference between the weighted score and the overall score (WeightedScoreDifi) and the difference between the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score (SubdimScoreDifi) are negatively correlated with the dependent variable. However, the difference between the score of a movie and that of the alternative movies (SubstiScoreDifi) demonstrates no significant correlation with the dependent variable.As the independent and dependent variables in this research are continuous variables, the research employs a hierarchical regression to test the interaction between the variables. The analysis results via SPSS 17.0 are listed in Table 5. Model 1 and Model 2 are the test models for the main effects, and Model 3 is the test model with the interactive effects introduced. As indicated by R2, compared with Model 1 and Model 2, the independent variables in Model 3 better interpret the dependent variable. That is to say, the model with the interactive effects introduced is more interpretive. To ensure the credibility of the regression equation results, we conduct a multi-collinearity test and find that the variance inflation factors (VIF) of each independent variable are less than 3.5, indicating that there is no significant multi-collinearity among the independent variables.From the result of Model 3 in Table 5, the Scoreiand the WeightedScoreDifihave a significant negative interactive effect (with the significance level being 0.036), which supports H1 and indicates the difference between the weighted score and the overall score may change consumer decision-making.However, the interactive effect between the SubdimScoreDifiand Scoreiis not significant (P=0.095>0.05), thus denying H2. This may be due to the large inherent differences of the sub-dimensional scores when the sub-dimensional scores differ greatly from the overall score, which reduces the information diagnosticity of the sub-dimensional score and finally leads to the minor interactive effects between the sub-dimensional scores and the overall score. In addition, the results also indicate that the Scoreihas a significant positive interaction with the SubstiScoreDifi(with the significance level being 0.008), which supports H3. This indicates that similar products affect the influence of the score of the product on consumer decision making.In addition, according to Table 5, the overall score in Model 1 has a significant positive impact on the movie’s box office (with the significance level being 0.01), while in Model 2, the significance of the impact is only 0.1. However, Model 3 reveals minor main effects of the overall score but significant interactive effects with the other scores. This indicates the effect of the overall score actually exists, but the significance and direction of the effect depend on the impact of other scores.To explore how different scores affect the effect of the overall score, this research tests the interaction of the WeightedScoreDifiand the SubstiScoreDifi. The result is displayed in Table 6. The full-variable model introduces all of the variables, the sub-variable model 1 is the interaction model for the weighted score, and the sub-variable model 2 is for the alternative movie scores. The full-variable model supports H1 and H3. It is only in the sub-variable model 1 that the overall score has no significant effect on the box office, indicating that the insignificant effect of the overall score in Table 5 may be caused by the weighted score. This may be because in the different levels of the WeightedScoreDifi, the Scoreihas the opposite effects on log(WantWatchNumi), so that the effect of the overall score is masked in the averaging process.To further reveal the direction of the overall score’s effect on the box office when different levels of the WeightedScoreDifiare considered, this study uses the mean value of the WeightedScoreDifi(0.86) as the threshold to sort the figure into the high and low level and conduct the model fitting of the overall score, the WeightedScoreDifi, and the dependent variables. Table 7displays the test results for the different levels of the WeightedScoreDifi, indicating that when the WeightedScoreDifiis high, the effect of the overall score on the box office is significantly positive; and when it is low, the effect of the overall score on the box office is significantly negative. Thus, the insignificant effect of the overall score in sub-variable model 1 (in Table 6) is attributed to the offset by the impact of the WeightedScoreDifiat different levels. Then, why is the effect of the overall score significantly negative when the WeightedScoreDifiis low? The Prospect Theory indicates that people have an irrational tendency to be less willing to gamble with profits than with losses. In the case of a low WeightedScoreDifi, that is, the relative consistency of the two types of scores, if the overall score is high, the score information is positive to consumers. According to the Prospect Theory, people are more concerned about certain things when facing gains. Thus, consumers are risk averse when facing a higher overall score, which leads to a lower box office and vice versa.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
