@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A cloud computing platform for ERP applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A CloudERP platform was proposed.Customers can select web services and customize an ERP system.The proposed process builds on the GA and incorporates with the rough set theory.A prototype was built on the Google App Engine to verify the proposed process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web services composition,ERP,Cloud computing,Genetic algorithms,Rough set theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cloud computing enables many applications of Web services and rekindles the interest of providing ERP services via the Internet. It has the potentials to reshape the way IT services are consumed. Recent research indicates that ERP delivered thru SaaS will outperform the traditional IT offers. However, distributing a service compared to distributing a product is more complicated because of the immateriality, the integration and the one-shot-principle referring to services. This paper defines a CloudERP platform on which enterprise customers can select web services and customize a unique ERP system to meet their specific needs. The CloudERP aims to provide enterprise users with the flexibility of renting an entire ERP service through multiple vendors. This paper also addresses the challenge of composing web services and proposes a web-based solution for automating the ERP service customization process. The proposed service composition method builds on the genetic algorithm concept and incorporates with knowledge of web services extracted from the web service platform with the rough set theory. A system prototype was built on the Google App Engine platform to verify the proposed composition process. Based on experimental results from running the prototype, the composition method works effectively and has great potential for supporting a fully functional CloudERP platform.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditional business applications such as computer aided design (CAD), product data management (PDM), Computer aided manufacturing (CAM), enterprise resources planning (ERP) and manufacturing execution systems (MES) all rely on a central server and procedural software. These systems are not autonomous or flexible enough to support a dynamic business environment [34]. With the advance of Internet technology and globalization, these enterprise applications, especially ERP systems have been web-enabled, providing access to information and communications via the Internet as a part of global business strategy [16]. Along with the emerging demand for mobility and on-demand services, the development of web-based ERP systems becomes an urgent research and development issue [64].The subscription to web services for ERP applications has two essential advantages: ease of integration and reduction in costs through the hosted application model [57]. Wu et al. [67] presented a framework for measuring the scalability of service based applications in a Cloud Computing environment and propose an assignment strategy to improve the scalability of composite Web services in terms of services productivity. Recent research indicates that ERP delivered thru SaaS will outperform the traditional IT offers as a consequence of the current economic crisis and will helps the economies to recover [21]. Although ERP is lagging behind other applications in terms of SaaS based applications there seems to be a general consensus that ERP in SaaS is gaining momentum. To grab this momentum, the four big players in the ERP systems market SAP, Oracle, Sage and Microsoft are positioning their ERP offers in SaaS model [24]. However, distributing a service compared to distributing a product is more complicated because of the immateriality, the integration and the one-shot-principle referring to services [23]. Also, the process of analyzing and selecting services in the Web services composition process is more complex than the one of analyzing and selecting parts for a product design [37]. It is further complicated by the customer's request in terms of the scope of application. One specific need is the development of efficient composition methods which evaluate and optimally integrate these possibly heterogeneous services on the Web, especially in the ERP application domain, in response to an enterprise customer's request.Therefore, this paper proposes a CloudERP platform on which enterprise customers can select web services and customize a unique ERP system to meet their specific needs. The CloudERP aims to provide enterprise users with the flexibility of renting an entire ERP service through multiple vendors. This paper also addresses the challenge of composing web services and proposes a web-based solution for automating the ERP service customization process. This study proposes a method that makes use of the genetic algorithm (GA) concept and the rough set theory to solve the Web services composition problem. The genetic algorithm incorporates with rough set theory to solve the web services composition problem has been discussed and applied [5,36,37]. However, these all focus on how to use rough set theory to extract rules and ignore the feature of the application domain. The novelty of the proposed method lies in the application domain (Cloud ERP).This remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the concepts of Web-based ERP and Web services composition. In Section 3, a novel ERP platform called CloudERP is proposed. In Section 4, the proposed composition method for Web ERP services is presented. In Section 5, a system prototype is presented along with experimental data analysis and then followed by Section 6 which provides concluding remarks and summary of future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
