@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An unsupervised learning method with a clustering approach for tumor identification and tissue segmentation in magnetic resonance brain images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel SOM based FKM algorithm for tissue segmentation and tumor identification in magnetic resonance brain images (T1-w, T2-w, FLAIR and MPR sequences) is proposed through this work.Exact demarcation between tumor and edema region is characterized.Validation of the segmented results by an experienced radiologist.Cross comparison with FCM, SOM, FKM and other hybrid clustering algorithms using ten standard comparison parameters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
SOM (self-organizing map),FKM (fuzzy K-means algorithm),MR brain tumor identification,Tissue segmentation,Peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR),Jaccard Index,Dice Overlap Index (DOI),Sensitivity,Specificity,Mean square error (MSE),Computational time,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Malignant and benign types of tumor infiltrated in human brain are diagnosed with the help of an MRI scanner. With the slice images obtained using an MRI scanner, certain image processing techniques are utilized to have a clear anatomy of brain tissues. One such image processing technique is hybrid self-organizing map (SOM) with fuzzy K means (FKM) algorithm, which offers successful identification of tumor and good segmentation of tissue regions present inside the tissues of brain. The proposed algorithm is efficient in terms of Jaccard Index, Dice Overlap Index (DOI), sensitivity, specificity, peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR), mean square error (MSE), computational time and memory requirement. The algorithm proposed through this paper has better data handling capacities and it also performs efficient processing upon the input magnetic resonance (MR) brain images. Automatic detection of tumor region in MR (magnetic resonance) brain images has a high impact in helping the radio surgeons assess the size of the tumor present inside the tissues of brain and it also supports in identifying the exact topographical location of tumor region. The proposed hybrid SOM-FKM algorithm assists the radio surgeon by providing an automated tissue segmentation and tumor identification, thus enhancing radio therapeutic procedures. The efficiency of the proposed technique is verified using the clinical images obtained from four patients, along with the images taken from Harvard Brain Repository.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An image is composed of several groups of pixels or voxels. Segmentation is an image processing technique, in which different regions of an image are segregated based upon the pixel intensities available within the image. Boundary and edge-based segmentation are the two types of segmentation procedure, of which, boundary based segmentation is used extensively [61].Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) helps in obtaining a structural three dimensional image of the internal parts of human body. It, based on the principle of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), provides a better augmentation in analyzing heart, lungs, pelvis, abdomen and soft tissues in brain. The principle of NMR is as follows. Our human body is made of 80% hydrogen atoms. Hydrogen atom has a strong positive nucleus comprising proton particle. This proton has its own spin velocity, spin direction and axis of rotation. The parallel alignment of the hydrogen nuclei is set by a super conducting magnet cooled with helium liquid. The hydrogen nuclei, at this state, are subjected toward a radio frequency radiation. It disturbs the analogous alignment of the hydrogen nuclei. As the nuclei absorb some quantity of radio frequency signal, they shift from lower energy level state to higher energy level state. As soon as the radio frequency radiation is stopped the nuclei get back to their original position with some emission of relative energy. This emitted energy, from the shifting of nuclei from excited state of energy to ground state, is recorded and processed by using a signal processor. This procedure gives out a spatial image of the internal structure of human body. The same procedure is used repeatedly to obtain 3D MR brain images. In an MRI scanner two dimensional Fourier transform is done upon the obtained image structures. On these obtained MRI images, segmentation is done by using SOM based FKM for unique tumor identification and tissue segmentation.Cancer cells play a major role in tumor formation inside the human body. A survey made by Times of India has identified that nearly 3 million people living in India suffer from cancer, out of which 1 million people are registered with new forms of cancer. The effects created by tumor are extremely pervasive, leading to the formation of lesions and tumor within the human body. The most complicated organ of our human body is the brain. Cancer cells affecting the tissues of brain stimulate tumor formation. Though manual segmentation of brain tissues and identification of tumor region is available, an automated algorithm capable of both tumor identification and tissue segmentation processes is proposed through this paper.Conventional analysis of MR brain images preferred by a medical expert is quite a complicated and time consuming task. The accuracy of diagnosis entirely relies upon the experience possessed by the expert. Manual procedures involving tumor identification and tissue segmentation are prone to error and inaccuracy, where noises or interferences produced by the magnetic field and radio frequency signals occupy a predominant position. So, it is inevitable to have an automatic segmentation technique to offer considerable results.Some of the MR (magnetic resonance) brain image sequences are classified as T1, T2, FLAIR (fluid attenuated inversion recovery) and MRS (magnetic resonance spectroscopy) images. T1 weighted images depict white matter as white in color (inner tissue region) and grey matter (outer tissue region) as grey in color, whereas, it is white color for gray matter and gray color for white matter in case of T2 weighted images. FLAIR images support the radiologist in viewing the tissues of the brain in a better perspective by suppressing the fluid content (water and cerebrospinal fluid) in brain. T1, T2 and FLAIR image sequences are segmented by the proposed SOM-FKM algorithm.Nandha Gopal [1] referred an automatic detection of brain tumor, capable of producing an accuracy of 95.16% in segmenting MR (magnetic resonance) brain images, that requires further improvement.Vishnuvarthanan and Rajasekeran [2] suggested an automated tumor extraction and tissue segmentation using basic fuzzy inference system. It has shortcomings in terms of computational time, PSNR and MSE.Guerrout et al. [3] used Markov random field theory for medical image segmentation. The algorithm performs medical image segmentation on a cluster of PCs using Markov random field theory. Segmentation process is done only upon T1 and contrast enhanced T1 weighted images.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
