@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive neuro-fuzzy prediction of grasping object weight for passively compliant gripper

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of universal gripper able to pick up unfamiliar objects.Adaptive neuro fuzzy prediction of grasping objects weight.Grasping objects weight in relation to embedded sensor stress.Adaptive neuro-fuzzy estimation of grasping objects weight.Correlation between grasping objects weight and embedded sensor stress.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Passively adaptive gripper,Compliant mechanism,Adaptive neuro fuzzy prediction,Underactuated gripper,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The development of universal grippers able to pick up unfamiliar objects of widely varying shapes and surfaces is a very challenging task. Passively compliant underactuated mechanisms are one way to obtain the gripper which could accommodate to any irregular and sensitive grasping objects. The purpose of the underactuation is to use the power of one actuator to drive the open and close motion of the gripper. The fully compliant mechanism has multiple degrees of freedom and can be considered as an underactuated mechanism. This paper presents a new design of the adaptive underactuated compliant gripper with distributed compliance. The optimal topology of the gripper structure was obtained by iterative finite element method (FEM) optimization procedure. The main points of this paper are in explanation of a new sensing capability of the gripper for grasping and lifting up the gripping objects. Since the sensor stress depends on weight of the grasping object it is appropriate to establish a prediction model for estimation of the grasping object weight in relation to sensor stress. A soft computing based prediction model was developed. In this study an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) was used as soft computing methodology to conduct prediction of the grasping objects weight. The training and checking data for the ANFIS network were obtained by FEM simulations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Significant efforts have been made to find gripper designs simple enough to be easily built and controlled, in order to obtain practical systems. To overcome the limited success of the early designs due to the cost of the control architecture a special emphasis has been placed on the reduction of the number of degrees of freedom, thereby decreasing the number of actuators. The strategy for reducing the number of actuators while keeping the hand capability to adapt its shape to the grasped object is referred to as underactuation. Papers [1–6] show that underactuation allows reproducing most of the grasping behaviors of the human hand, without augmenting the mechanical and control complexity.A mechanism is said to be underactuated when it has fewer actuators than degrees of freedom. In order to achieve this goal, passive elastic elements are used. The transmission mechanism used to achieve such a property must be adaptive, i.e. when one or more fingers are blocked, the remaining finger(s) should continue to move. When all the fingers are blocked, the force should be well-distributed among the fingers and it should be possible to apply large grasping forces while maintaining a stable grasp.Due to the multiple degrees of freedom of a single compliant joint, any compliant mechanism [7–13] can be considered as an underactuated mechanism. Finger compliance allows the gripper to passively conform to a wide range of objects while minimizing contact forces. Passive compliance offers additional benefits, particularly in impacts, where control loop delays may lead to poor control of contact forces. Compliance can also lower implementation costs by reducing the sensing and actuation required for the gripper.The primary task of this study is to design one compliant underactuated gripper: for any shape of the gripping object, with passive compliance, with one active input and multi-output gripping surface, as a fully compliant mechanism with distributed compliance and with one embedded sensor. The optimal topology structure of the adaptive gripper is obtained by iterative FEM optimization procedure. The main advantages of compliant mechanisms are that they can be built using fewer parts, require fewer assembly processes and need no lubrication. Special care must be taken, however, in designing compliant mechanisms in order to obtain sufficient mobility and safety against failure due to fatigue.In article [20] we used adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) methodology to create controller for input displacement control of the gripper according the grasping object shape. Afterwards in article [31] we performed kinetostatic analysis of the gripper mechanism. The main goal of this investigation will be to establish a neural network based prediction model of the grasping objects weight. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are flexible modeling soft computing tools with capabilities of learning the mathematical mapping between input and output variables of nonlinear systems. One of the most powerful types of neural network system is ANFIS [14]. ANFIS shows very good learning and prediction capabilities, which makes it an efficient tool to deal with encountered uncertainties in any system. ANFIS, as a hybrid intelligent system that enhances the ability to automatically learn and adapt, was used by researchers in various engineering systems [15–21]. So far, there are many studies of the application of ANFIS for prediction and real-time identification of many different systems [22–24]. In [25] the effectiveness of predicting non-uniformity of the wafer surface with ANFIS was investigated under conditions of the three process parameters. A developed finite element method was used to obtain the training data and testing data about non-uniformity on wafer surface. A neuro-fuzzy model was utilized to predict the hardness and porosity of shape memory alloy in [26]; the ANFIS model predicted the variations of the porosity content and hardness of the synthesized shape memory alloy. Article [27] presented an improved ANFIS with self-feedback for the applications of time-series prediction. An ANFIS model is applied to predict the flow stress in hot deformation process of Ti6000 alloy in [28]. In [29] optimum cure time of the rubber compounds are predicted using ANFIS model. Various principles of the neural network approach for predicting certain properties of polymer composite materials are discussed in [30].Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) is the main core of ANFIS [32–38]. FIS is based on expertise expressed in terms of ‘IF–THEN’ rules and can thus be employed to predict the behavior of many uncertain systems. FIS advantage is that it does not require knowledge of the underlying physical process as a precondition for its application. Thus ANFIS integrates the fuzzy inference system with a back-propagation learning algorithm of neural network. ANFIS model will be established in this study to predict the grasping object weight in relation to embedded sensors stress. The experimental training and checking data for the ANFIS network are obtained from experimental analysis. The ANFIS prediction will be compared to the experimental results.To investigate the behavior of the fully compliant underactuated adaptive gripper, many FEM simulations of the different gripper designs were performed for every design parameter changing. Fig. 1(a) shows the initial gripper topology and all parameters which were altered. The initial gripper topology was obtained according to current gripper models from references [2–6]. The FEM simulations were made to determine and verify the design of two target functions for the gripper, concave and convex shapes. According to these, the gripper should accommodate to these two main shapes. Besides, the accommodation of the gripper to many other shapes of a grasping object was verified. Only the fully compliant mechanism could establish the adaptable behavior of the gripper. Table 1presents all optimization parameters with their ranges, initial values, optimal values and the changing increments. Some parameters were unchangeable, while some parameters depended on other parameter. After the verification, many FEM simulations for the cylindrical object with the radius r=25mm were performed. The final structure topology of the gripper is shown in Fig. 1(b). The entire FEM analysis was performed in ABAQUS software with following parameters and characteristics:•grasping object as explicit discrete rigid element,finite element type for grasping object R3D4: a 4-node 3-D bilinear rigid quadrilateral, 1mm size,gripper material: ABS plastic (mass density 1250g/mm3, Young's modulus: 2.3GPa, Poisson's ratio: 0.37),solid and homogeneous section for the gripper,gripper as explicit 3D stress element,finite element type for the gripper C3D8R: an 8-node linear brick, reduced integration, hourglass control, 1mm size.According to the FEM simulations, it was proven that the gripper could accommodate to the different shapes and sizes of the grasping objects. Fig. 2shows the verification of the gripper behavior for seven different shapes and sizes of the grasping objects.After the optimization process, some small parts (holes, edge rounding, fixing part, etc.) were added according to manufacturing requirements. Fig. 3shows the main gripper features. These are:•the whole gripper structure represents one passive elastic structure (Fig. 3(a));for one active input, the gripper has multi-output contact points (Fig. 3(b));one active input actuator (Fig. 3(b));one sensor embedded in the gripper structure (Fig. 3(a));The gripper part which is fixed during gripping and holding of a grasped object is shown as well. The gripper accommodation to the cylindrical object with the radius r=25mm can be noticed in Fig. 3(b).The relationship between the input displacement and the total area in contact for the both finger is shown in Fig. 4. It is interesting to note that the area in contact decreased after approximately 25mm of input displacement. The result indicates that there was a separation between the gripper surfaces and the grasping object at approximately half of the input displacement since there is drastic decrease of the total area in contact. The graphs were obtained in ABAQUS software for FEM simulations.The next analysis was the estimation of the gripper behavior for the object grasping and lifting up. During the analysis, the object weight was changed to determine which the maximum object weight value is. Emphasis was in determination of embedded sensor stress changing while the grasping object weight increases. The gripper was made of a silicone rubber as a monolithic structure and the conductive silicone rubber was used for the embedded sensors. Conductive silicone rubber is an electro active material whose electrical resistance changes with deformation. These properties make this material suitable to develop force or deformation sensors. Fig. 5shows a case when the sensor electrical resistance changed with and without grasping objectFig. 6presents the all steps during grasping the object and for the later incremental increasing weight of the object. According to these results it is not easy to determine which the maximum grasping object weight is. It can be seen that the maximum weight of the grasping object for stable grasping and lifting the object was 0.6kg. However, experimental investigation with real gripper was showed that maximum object weight value was smaller for stable grasping and lifting the object.As already noted, the main emphasis was determination of the embedded sensor stress changing during the grasping and lifting up the prescribed object. Fig. 7shows the embedded sensor stress changing for these two steps in relation of gripper input displacement. Dotted black line labels the middle sensor stress limit for the stable grasping and lifting up of the object.Fig. 8shows the embedded sensor stress for incremental increasing grasping object weight. At stable grasping and lifting the middle sensor stress was 0.088N/mm2.ANFIS can be used for classification, approximation of highly nonlinear functions, on-line identification in discrete control system and to predict a chaotic time series and can serve as a basis for constructing a set of fuzzy ‘if-then’ rules with appropriate membership function to generate the stipulated input-output pairs. The membership functions are tuned to the input-output data. ANFIS is about taking an FIS system and tuning it with a back propagation algorithm based on the collection of input-output data. The basic structure of a FIS consists of three conceptual components: a rules-base, which contains a selection of fuzzy rules; a database, which defines the membership functions (MFs) used in the fuzzy rules; and a reasoning mechanism, which performs the inference procedure upon the rules and the given facts to derive a reasonable output or conclusion. These intelligent systems combine knowledge, technique and methodologies from various sources. They possess human-like expertise within a specific domain–adapt themselves and learn to do better in changing environments. In ANFIS, neural networks recognize patterns, and help adaptation to environments. ANFIS is tuned with a back propagation algorithm based on the collection of input-output data.Here the training data is obtained by FEM simulations. 90 FEM simulations were performed for this purpose. Each simulation lasted 1h. It was simulated grasping object weights from 10 up to 900g. One half of the data are used for training while the other half is used for checking and validation of the model. With a proper training scheme and fine filtered data-sets, ANFIS is capable of predicting grasping forces values quite accurately since it learns from training data. This measurement-free architecture also makes it immediately available for operation once they are trained.There are two membership functions (A and B) on each input since this structure has fast training procedure. In this study bell-shaped membership functions were choses with maximum equal to 1 and minimum equal to 0. This type of functions has best characteristics for fuzzing the inputs. Fuzzy logic toolbox in MATLAB was used for the entire process of training and evaluation of fuzzy inference system. Table 2shows the main ANFIS details used in this study. Fig. 9shows an ANFIS structure for one input (embedded sensor stress).In this work, the first-order Sugeno model with one input and fuzzy IF-THEN rules of Takagi and Sugeno's type is used:(1)ifxisAthenf1=p1x+r1(2)ifxisBthenf2=p2x+r2The first layer consists of input variables membership functions (MFs). This layer just supplies the input (embedded sensor stress) values to the next layer. In the first layer every node is an adaptive node with a node function O=μAB(x) and where μAB(x) and are MFs. In this study, bell-shaped MFs (3) with maximum equal to 1 and minimum equal to 0 is chosen(3)f(x;a,b,c)=11+((x−c)/a)2bwhere the bell-shaped function depends on three parameters a, b and c. The parameter b is usually positive. The parameter c located the center of the curve as it is shown in Fig. 10.The second layer (membership layer) checks for the weights of each MFs. It receives the input values from the 1st layer and acts as MFs to represent the fuzzy sets of the respective input variables. Every node in the second layer is non-adaptive and this layer multiplies the incoming signals and sends the product out. Each node output represents the firing strenght of a rule.The third layer is called the rule layer. Each node (each neuron) in this layer performs the pre-condition matching of the fuzzy rules, i.e. they compute the activation level of each rule, the number of layers being equal to the number of fuzzy rules. Each node of these layers calculates the weights which are normalized. The third layer is also non-adaptive and every node calculates the ratio of the rule's firing strenght to the sum of all rules’ firing strenghts like(4)wi*=wiw1+w2,i=1,2The outputs of this layer are called normalized firing strengths.The fourth layer is called the defuzzification layer and it provides the output values resulting from the inference of rules. Every node in the fourth layer is an adaptive node with node function(5)Oi4=wi**f=wi*(pix+ri)where {pi,r} is the parameter set and in this layer is referred to as consequent parameters.The fifth layer is called the output layer which sums up all the inputs coming from the fourth layer and transforms the fuzzy classification results into a crisp (binary). The single node in the fifth layer is not adaptive and this node computes the overall output as the summation of all incoming signals(6)Oi4=∑iwi**f=∑iwi*f∑iwiThe hybrid learning algorithms were applied to identify the parameters in the ANFIS architectures. In the forward pass of the hybrid learning algorithm, functional signals go forward until Layer 4 and the consequent parameters are indentified by the least squares estimate. In the backward pass, the error rates propagate backwards and the premise parameters are updated by the gradient descent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
