@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A genetic fuzzy system based optimized zone based energy efficient routing protocol for mobile sensor networks (OZEEP)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Genetic fuzzy system based optimized clustering over existing routing protocol ZEEP.Cluster head selection criterions are energy, distance, node density and mobility.Fuzzy module is used to nominate cluster head candidates in the first phase.Genetic algorithm further optimizes the selection from the nominated candidates.Achieved balanced clustering for enhanced network lifetime and minimum packet loss.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sensor,Mobility,Clustering,Genetic algorithm,Fuzzy logic,Fuzzy inference engine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Wireless sensor networks have become increasingly popular because of their ability to cater to multifaceted applications without much human intervention. However, because of their distributed deployment, these networks face certain challenges, namely, network coverage, continuous connectivity and bandwidth utilization. All of these correlated issues impact the network performance because they define the energy consumption model of the network and have therefore become a crucial subject of study. Well-managed energy usage of nodes can lead to an extended network lifetime. One way to achieve this is through clustering. Clustering of nodes minimizes the amount of data transmission, routing delay and redundant data in the network, thereby conserving network energy. In addition to these advantages, clustering also makes the network scalable for real world applications. However, clustering algorithms require careful planning and design so that balanced and uniformly distributed clusters are created in a way that the network lifetime is enhanced. In this work, we extend our previous algorithm, titled the zone-based energy efficient routing protocol for mobile sensor networks (ZEEP). The algorithm we propose optimizes the clustering and cluster head selection of ZEEP by using a genetic fuzzy system. The two-step clustering process of our algorithm uses a fuzzy inference system in the first step to select optimal nodes that can be a cluster head based on parameters such as energy, distance, density and mobility. In the second step, we use a genetic algorithm to make a final choice of cluster heads from the nominated candidates proposed by the fuzzy system so that the optimal solution generated is a uniformly distributed balanced set of clusters that aim at an enhanced network lifetime. We also study the impact and dominance of mobility with regard to the variables. However, before we arrived at a GFS-based solution, we also studied fuzzy-based clustering using different membership functions, and we present our understanding on the same. Simulations were carried out in MATLAB and ns2. The results obtained are compared with ZEEP.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Demand for ‘Ambient Intelligent’ devices has become very popular in our daily lives. Such devices are capable of sensing and controlling environmental or physical parameters such as temperature, humidity, pressure, and movement and allow remote human interactions with applications where direct intervention of humans is difficult or is impossible. Networking such embedded systems, called sensors, create a new and versatile network known as wireless sensor networks. Due to the low cost, easy integration and mass-scale production of MEMS technology, wireless sensor networks have garnered great deal of interest in a variety of applications such as the design of intelligent buildings, disaster relief, military, facility management, medicine and health care, and machine surveillance. However, such varied applications require very careful planning, design and implementation of such sensor networks so that they achieve complete coverage and connectivity for accurate detection or monitoring of events. After the sensor network deployment covering the physical space under observation, each node in a sensor network goes through multiple phases of operation. Every node starts by sensing a particular event, listening for the communication channel to be free to perform transmission of the sensed data, routing and sleeping. Fig. 1shows these phases of operation.The activities that are primarily responsible for energy consumption in the sensor networks are sensing events and data routing. Energy consumption by nodes varies during the sensing of events depending on whether the application requires continuous or periodic sensing of events. Accordingly, diverse studies have been performed in the literature that focus on the sleeping and sensing patterns of the nodes in the data link layer, in particular the Medium Access Control or MAC layer.In the data routing phase, all of the sensors that are active transmit their sensed information to the sink or the base station. It is observed that in direct communication, nodes that are located close to the sink or the base station spend less energy during transmission than the nodes that are placed at greater distances from the base station or the sink node. This unequal energy consumption leads to a multi-hop routing choice and, therefore, a many-to-one traffic pattern in the network. Fig. 2shows a diagrammatic representation of the data packet arriving from multiple sources.An energy analysis of routing data using direct transmission reveals that as the strength of the signal reduces by square of the distance (di) therefore, the nodes located far away from the base station (BS) have to expend more energy in transmitting their data to the sink. The amount of energy used in direct transmission can be modeled as ɛampK (3d1+d2)2, where ɛamp is energy used by amplifier and K is constant. It is also evident that the nodes farthest from the BS die out quickly giving rise to network partitions and low network lifetime. However, in multi-hop communication, the data is carried to the sink via multiple hops through closely located nodes or neighbor nodes. The amount of energy used for data transmission in multi-hop communication is given byεampK(d12+d22)and is much is less due to smaller transmission distances involved when compared to direct transmission (Figs. 3 and 4show the energy analysis).The biggest challenge associated with these nodes is that they are extremely energy constrained and have variable channel capacity and limited bandwidth availability to perform data routing. Such networks also have redundant information and, because of best path routing, have cluttered loads on a single or a few paths compared to other available routes, giving rise to an increased unbalanced load and data losses in the network.In such a highly resource-constrained scenario, delivering real time data and maintaining real time communication along with quality of service are very stimulating research topics, in particular when such networks exist in harsh environments with heterogeneous nodes trying to address mobility, dynamic network topology, node failures and communication failures. It is, therefore, very important for such networks to be self-configurable in nature and operate in an adhoc manner. Fig. 2 shows the collaborative processing performed by sensor nodes.It has been observed that in reality, real world problems and applications require a network with variable size. In such networks, the number of nodes deployed grows generously, leading to an increased network size. Therefore, scalability demands a network architecture that can meet the reduced energy consumption requirement in addition to being fault tolerant, allowing load balancing, and performing efficient data routing. Clustering or grouping of sensors is a well-known two-tier architecture that has proved [1] to be a good solution for reducing network energy consumption as well as meeting the scalability requirements. Clustering of nodes allows efficient data aggregation and selection of optimal paths toward the sink. They help reduce generation of duplicate packets in the network and further save the network from message overheads for route creation every time a node has to send data. Clustering, which is a hierarchical model of data transmission, restricts participation of the nodes in dissipation of information and allows multi-hop data routing only between the cluster heads (CH). Hence, with a reduced number of nodes performing data transmission, the overall energy consumption of the network is reduced significantly, which results in an extended network lifetime. Figs. 5 and 6represent this idea.As we can see an important component of clustering is a cluster head (CH) which performs many activities like organize the medium access within the cluster, participate in routing decisions. Cluster heads are also natural places for data aggregation and data compression and hence it is evident that the cluster head of each cluster expends more energy than any other node in the network. It is often desirable that all nodes in the network have the same power level at any point of time. Hence it becomes extremely necessary to rotate the job of CH among the other nodes so that they can share the role of CH for balanced energy dissipation in the network. This means that to rotate the role of CH we cannot run the clustering algorithm only once but will need to execute it repeatedly. The new CH which is selected at each repetition will have better values for energy along with other network criteria that have been defined for the CH selection in the clustering algorithm. The node which was a CH in the previous round will not participate in the CH selection as it will have lower remaining energy at the end of the previous round when compared to other nodes who were non-CH in those rounds. This concept of selecting a new CH based on the changing network parameters like node's remaining energy, density around the node, node's distance to base station and node's mobility with an aim to have complete network coverage and evenly distributed network's energy dissipation is called dynamic clustering. In this method once clustering is completed (clusters are formed and respective cluster heads are selected) no CH is changed until data transmission in the steady state phase is over. Only when re-clustering is initiated, a new CH is selected again based on the current network dynamics. In addition, it is important that when clustering is performed, all sensor nodes should belong to at least one cluster so that network partition does not happen. However, another major concern that originates while designing clustering algorithm is that the number of overlaps between nodes and clusters should be kept to a minimum value. It becomes extremely necessary to devise efficient clustering algorithms that do not only rotate the role of cluster heads in the network efficiently but also choose optimal routing paths so that the overall energy consumption of the network is reduced considerably to improve the network lifetime.In the literature, many algorithms have been proposed to address these issues in the best possible way. Over the years, optimization of classical routing protocols has been done with the aim of extending network lifetime. However, WSN challenges require an intelligent and flexible technique to process the ambiguity and uncertainty related to node behavior and data in the complex network environment. This has prompted many researchers to study and embed various soft computing techniques in their design of optimal algorithms.Soft computing is the blend of methodologies that were designed to sculpt and facilitate answers to real world problems, which are not modeled or are too difficult to model mathematically. These problems are typically associated with fuzzy, complex, and dynamical systems with uncertain parameters. The uncertainty associated with the network state information is unavoidable in terms of both fuzziness and randomness. The main techniques in soft computing are Bayesian statistics, evolutionary computing or genetic algorithms, artificial neural networks, fuzzy logic, particle swarm optimization, simulated annealing, and ant colony optimization. Each technique can be used separately, but a powerful advantage of soft computing is the complementary nature of the techniques. Used together, they can produce solutions to problems that are too complex or inherently noisy to address with conventional mathematical methods. These features have made soft computing usage spread to various applications in communications, aerospace systems, electric power systems, industrial and manufacturing automation, robotics, and transportation [16].In this work, a genetic fuzzy (GFS)-based method to optimize the clustering and routing model of the zone-based energy efficient routing protocol for mobile sensor networks (ZEEP) [9] is proposed. ZEEP is a two tier routing protocol designed explicitly for wireless sensor networks. In this work, we optimize the cluster head selection mechanism of ZEEP by utilizing the benefits of the fuzzy logic system and genetic algorithm. Fuzzy logic or the fuzzy inference engine is used to help nodes decide the caliber to be elected as a CH based on parameters such as energy, distance between nodes, node density and mobility levels. We further use the evolutionary search algorithm, the genetic algorithm, on the output of the fuzzy inference system and select the best nodes as cluster heads so that the energy consumption of the network is as minimal as possible. A detailed study and understanding of WSNs made us converge on the following input variables for the fuzzy module embedded in the nodes. We briefly describe our learning process to help orient readers to understand the work described in this paper.Concerns associated with mobile networks and those of stationary networks differ significantly. For stationary networks, parameters such as distance between nodes and sinks do not vary once the network is deployed, and parameters such as energy, node density and transmission energy vary in a predictable manner, depending on the application. Hence, clusters, once formed, are not disturbed until re-clustering is performed.The scenario for mobile networks is quite different. Because of mobility and, consequently, the different speeds of nodes, the distance between nodes varies continuously. The node density is also variable here as the number of nodes surrounding the mobile node changes due to the node's movement. Consequently, the variation in the transmission energy of the nodes also becomes significant. All of these factors impact the energy consumption of the nodes and ultimately lead to unpredictable network behavior. Thus, a good cluster configuration is disrupted more often, leading to data losses or packet drops and also intensified energy consumption by the network because of the reconfiguration of the zones and paths in addition to managing route configuration overheads. This requires re-clustering of nodes as early as possible so that the values of clustering parameters do not change significantly and also data losses do not happen. Therefore, mobility is a vital decisive factor selected in our proposed clustering based routing algorithm OZEEP.In both cases of stationary and mobile networks, it is important that the selection of CHs is appropriately done so that CHs are optimally distributed in the network; in other words, no two CHs should be very far apart or very close to each other, they should not overlap and all nodes should belong to at least one cluster. This requirement is important for reducing the energy consumption of the deployed network.OZEEP aims at creating such stable clusters, which cannot be modeled by any classic mathematical methods. OZEEP can start with an initial set of cluster configurations and can also run on network with randomly deployed nodes. Our proposed algorithm takes into account both stationary as well as mobile nodes. Each node in OZEEP has a fuzzy module embedded in it that helps the node to judge the caliber to be chosen as a CH depending on its remaining energy levels, node density, distance and mobility factor. The number of candidates thus selected by the fuzzy inference system is a reduced number or a subset of the total number of nodes deployed. This information is then sent to a SINK or a base station, which uses the genetic algorithm to make a final selection of nodes that can actually be the CH. An optimal number of nodes to be a CH are important to ensure an even distribution of CHs in the network for load balancing and fault tolerance.In the proposed work, we have tried to use a genetic fuzzy system to select nodes as cluster heads and also decide on the optimal number of cluster heads for the network to achieve optimal load distribution, fault tolerance, efficient data gathering and dissemination. The outputs of the fuzzy system and genetic algorithm obtained from MATLAB tool boxes were fed into ns2, and our optimized algorithm OZEEP was compared with ZEEP on packet loss and energy consumption parameters. However, before we arrived at a GFS-based solution, we also studied fuzzy module in detail and performed clustering using the fuzzy system alone. We performed experiments using different membership functions and observed their behavior with respect to energy, distance, density and mobility of the node. We realized that the choice and shape of membership function selected are important to achieve optimal output, and therefore, we selected a triangular membership function as opposed to a generalized bell-shaped curve or trapezoidal membership function.Nevertheless, the foundation of the whole study is targeted to recognize the relationship of a node's mobility with system variables such as distance, energy and node density to correctly understand the impact of mobility on the network behavior and the system performance.The work is presented as follows: Section 2 describes the related works to call attention to the motivation for proposing our new protocol OZEEP. Section 3 gives the system and energy model, and Sections 4-6contain the details of OZEEP operation. Section 7 presents the simulation environment, and in Section 8, we present the results and discussions. In Sections 9 and 10, we give our conclusions and future work, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we have used a GFS system to perform clustering over our existing routing algorithm, ZEEP. The parameters selected as criterion for CH selection are energy, distance, node density and mobility of a node. We can say that mobility is the main criterion that dominates the behavior of all of the other parameters. Mobility of a node defines the variation in the constraints such as distance and energy, and consequently, these correlated issues affect the node density. However, by using a two-phase CH selection with a fuzzy system identifying the optimal candidates and GA further selecting the best among them, we are able to achieve a balanced clustering such that the network lifetime is increased. Since, OZEEP is an optimized network which is used for data routing, therefore, the need for retransmissions of data and route setups in case of path breaks are completely missing. Thus, the total energy consumption of the network while routing of packets is also greatly reduced as can be seen from the experimental results. Our proposed optimized algorithm OZEEP is observed to perform better over ZEEP. Also, the proposed algorithm is implementable on real sensor nodes as the main computing, that is, running of genetic algorithm, which requires multiple iterations to converge to a desirable result is done by the base station or SINK node, assumed to be a processor with unlimited power and energy.The future endeavor is to extend OZEEP by introducing caching in the network. We plan to study the data access delay of OZEEP and design caching in a way to reduce the latency. The aim will be to further reduce network-wide transmissions leading to an increased network lifetime.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.