@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improved Complex-valued Radial Basis Function (ICRBF) neural networks on multiple crack identification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A two-stage ICRBF neural network is developed for multiple crack identification.Conventional CRBF neural network is used in the first stage of ICRBF.Reduced search space moving technique is used in the second stage of ICRBF.Crack location and depth are identified using frequency domain vibration signals.ICRBF is more efficient followed by IRBF, CRBF, RBF and MLP neural networks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Improved Complex-valued Radial Basis Function neural networks,Multiple crack identification,Frequency domain,Damage identification,Function approximation,Finite element analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a new class of neural networks in complex space called Complex-valued Radial Basis Function (CRBF) neural networks and also an improved version of CRBF called Improved Complex-valued Radial Basis Function (ICRBF) neural networks. They are used for multiple crack identification in a cantilever beam in the frequency domain. The novelty of the paper is that, these complex-valued neural networks are first applied on inverse problems (damage identification) which come under the category of function approximation. The conventional CRBF network was used in the first stage of ICRBF network and in the second stage a reduced search space moving technique was employed for accurate crack identification. The effectiveness of proposed ICRBF neural network was studied first on a single crack identification problem and then applied to a more challenging problem of multiple crack identification in a cantilever beam with zero noise as well as 5% noise polluted signals. The results proved that, the proposed ICRBF and real-valued Improved RBF (IRBF) neural networks have identified the single and multiple cracks with less than 1% absolute mean percentage error as compared to conventional CRBF and RBF neural networks, mainly because of their second stage reduced search space moving technique. It appears that IRBF neural network is a good compromise considering all factors like accuracy, simplicity and computational effort.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Structural members having a crack or local defect can cause catastrophic structural failure of built-in structures. Identifying cracks in a structure (also termed as structural health monitoring or structural damage identification) is an important research topic in the present scenario, because of its impact on life safety and economic issues. A crack in a structural member induces changes in its local flexibility thereby affects the dynamic response (natural frequencies, mode shapes and non-linear response due to external excitation) of that structure. Monitoring the dynamic response of the structure is an effective aid to model the location and quantification of the crack in structures, which are called vibration based damage identification methods. The vibration based damage identification methods are promoted in their use over non vibration damage identification methods (viz. visual, acoustic or ultrasonic, magnetic field methods) mainly because of simplicity, accuracy per unit processing time and economy. Dimarogonas [1] presented a review on crack damage identification in beams and turbine rotors along with the cracked structural vibration theories. Doebling et al. [2] summarized the vibration based damage identification methods to detect, locate and characterize a crack damage in structural and mechanical systems by examining changes in measured vibration response. Plenty of research has been published on modeling and detection of cracks in beam like structures using numerous Finite Element Analysis (FEA) models as single crack identification [3–6] and multiple crack identification [7], but still there is a lag in the development of a rigorous cracked beam vibration theory as well as an efficient method [1,7] to detect the multiple cracks with good accuracy and reduced computational effort.The vibration based structural damage identification methods are classified under various classifications [8] as parametric and non-parametric methods based on methodology, frequency and time domain methods based on analysis with signal information, deterministic and stochastic methods based on mathematical theory and classical and non-classical methods based on the ease of application. Classical methods are those derived from the sound mathematical theories, whereas, the non-classical methods are developed based on some heuristic concepts (e.g. evolutionary principles). Most of the classical methods perform point-to-point search strategy, which cause the possibility of convergence into local optimal solution rather to a global optimal solution and mostly depend on computer power for the extensive and hopefully robust search. The classical methods used in the literature for crack identification as inverse problem are Auto-Regressive-Moving-Average (ARMA) method [3] using displacement of time domain vibration response, Newton–Raphson method [7,9] using frequency domain vibration modal data, strain energy equilibrium method [10] using measured vibration frequencies and mode shapes, Modified Fourier Series (MFS) method [11] to tackle the arbitrary number of transverse open cracks in Timoshenko beam, Frequency Response Function (FRF) variation method [12] using first three modes of vibration obtained from experiments, and statistical structural damage identification method [13] using modal frequencies based on Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) method in Monte Carlo Simulation. All of the above studies are lacking in identification of small cracks (crack depth ratio less than 0.1) and majority of them are applied only for single crack identification.Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and evolutionary algorithms are examples of non-classical methods. ANNs are efficient computational models developed based on human intelligence to manage and process information; and these have good data interpolation, pattern recognition and classification, function approximation capabilities and are robust to noisy data [14,15]. The literature shows that, Back Propagation Neural (BPN) network was successfully applied on the structural damage [16–22] and crack damage identification [23–27] cases compared to the other class of ANNs. The BPN network has excellent pattern recognition, interpolation and generalization abilities because of its supervised learning and simple architecture. However, the limitations of BPN network are that, it requires more computational training time and difficulty in optimizing the network's structural and functional parameters.Other non-classical methods such as Genetic Algorithm (GA) [28], Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [29–31], Nelder–Mead (NM) simplex algorithm [29] and Fuzzy Logic (FL) methods [27] are also applied on the crack identification problem in the literature. GA is based on the evolutionary principle, PSO is based on the behavior of swarms, NM is a non-derivative search method for multidimensional unconstrained minimization, and FL is based on linguistic reasoning. These methods identify the structural damage by minimizing the objective (or) fitness (or) cost function which is usually the mean squared error between measured responses and the numerically simulated responses (from FEA) of the damaged structure. The limitations of these non-classical optimization methods compared to ANNs are they require significantly more computational effort, sensitive to noisy data and less accurate in parameter identification. For example, Baghmisheh et al. [29] identified the single crack location and depth with average percentage errors of (0.06%, 0%) by PS-NM method in comparison with (0.09%, 0%) by GA-NM (0.46%, 0.54%) by PSO and (0.39%, 1.66%) by BPN network. The reported values are from numerical simulation results, but in experiments the error exceeded more than 8% for all the methods. Varghese and Shankar [30] identified the crack location and depth of two cracks with errors of (4.04%, 5.92%) for crack location and (2.98%, 0.92%) for crack depth using PSO method based on combined acceleration and power flow matching approach with 5% addition of Gaussian noise. Parhi and Choudhury [27] identified the single crack location and depth with 2.96% and 4% error respectively using FL. And the computational effort of BPN, GA, PSO, NM and FL methods has not been mentioned in the reported studies. ANNs can predict the damage without any priori information, but it requires significant amount of training data and the evolutionary algorithms (GA, PSO and FL) work efficiently for damage detection but require extensive computational effort [32]. Very few studies have been conducted to improve the training efficiency and accuracy of ANNs by training with different algorithms in stages (hybridizing) [33] and using effective input–output patterns [34]. Selection of efficient training patterns sampled from different statistical sampling theories such as Central Composite Designs (CCD) and LHS [19] methods, construction of appropriate input–output patterns from measured data viz. FRFs, natural frequencies and curvature mode shapes in frequency domain [19,34], and displacement, velocity and acceleration responses in time domain [35], the location of sensors (accelerometers) to measure the structural dynamic response and training with noisy measurements (data perturbation) [33,36] are also some of the interesting aspects to train the ANNs efficiently.In recent years a special class of ANNs, the Radial Basis Function (RBF) neural network introduced by Broomhead and Lowe in 1988 [37] has received considerable attention because of its generalization ability and faster learning. The RBF neural network learns the input–output mapping by covering the input space with bias functions that transform a vector from the input space to the output space. Conceptually, the RBF neural network is an abstraction of the observation that biologic neurons exhibit a receptive field of activation such that the output is large when the input is closer to center of the field and small when the input moves away from the center. The commonly used RBF is Gaussian function and the RBF neural network is computationally efficient than BPN network [38]. The learning algorithms for RBF neural network are least square and orthogonal least square [39] methods. In the literature on structural damage identification, RBF neural network was used for identifying the damage size and depth of aluminum plates [40], predicting the rotational frequency of helicopter rotor [41], structural health monitoring [42], predicting the creep in comparison with multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [38], online damage detection [43], and a combination of RBF with GA and Fuzzy logic for studying the performance of RBF on detection of size and location of delamination of composites [44]. However, their use for identification of structural damage and crack damage is very limited. For example, a comparative study for crack identification using MLP and RBF neural networks in frequency domain was investigated by Suresh et al. [24] and stated that the RBF network performance was found superior over MLP network in terms of computational time. The application of hybrid RBF neural network combined with GA and FL on identification of composite beam delamination was reported by Zheng et al. [44] and the identified errors were 4.7% and 4.3% respectively for the size and location of the delamination. A two-stage Improved Radial Basis Function (IRBF) neural network methodology with conventional RBF in the first stage and a reduced search space moving technique in the second stage was investigated on structural damage identification [45], joint damage identification [46] and single crack identification [47]. The proposed IRBF has identified the damage with good accuracy (less than 1% error for all structural damage, joint damage, crack location and depth identification) and less computational effort compared to conventional RBF neural network and existing hybrid CPN-BPN network [33]. However, its application on multiple crack identification has not yet been reported.Recent trends shows that, Complex-valued Radial Basis Function (CRBF) neural network, which is an extension of RBF neural network in the complex domain is better in terms of computational effort than the real valued RBF neural networks [48] particularly in the area of classification problems such as signal processing and image recognition. The critical factor that decides the efficiency of a complex-valued classifier is the selection of a proper transformation of real valued input features to the complex values for classification. Very few studies were carried out on ANNs in complex domain using Complex Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and an extension of back propagation algorithm to complex form [49]. Most of the studies using complex-valued ANNs are reported in the area of classification [48,50–54] and on reconstruction of in-cylinder pressure pulse using engine structural vibrations [55]. However, there is not much literature available on CRBF neural network for structural damage identification applications, which are regression or function approximation problems.Thus, in the present study, a novel Improved Complex-valued RBF (ICRBF) neural network with reduced search space moving technique in its second stage is proposed for multiple crack damage identification. It is similar to IRBF neural network [46] except that the CRBF neural network is used instead of RBF neural network. The crack location and depth identification of ICRBF neural network is evaluated in comparison with IRBF neural network using two numerical examples, viz. a single cracked cantilever beam [24] and a multiple cracked cantilever beam [7] in frequency domain. The effect of noise addition to the input patterns is also studied for crack location and depth identification using IRBF and ICRBF neural networks to simulate the experimental errors.Cracks in the structural elements of a machine lead to local flexibility changes in the stiffness of the elements, thereby affect the static, dynamic and stability behavior. Monitoring the dynamic behavior of the structure is an effective aid to identify the location and quantification of crack in the structures. The structural element in the present study is considered as Euler–Bernoulli beam element having length ‘Le’ with an open crack of depth ‘a’ at a distance ‘Lc’ from the left end. A cracked beam finite element model based on elasto-plastic fracture mechanics and finite element method developed by Krawczuk et al. [4] and Viola et al. [5,6] is considered in the present study to model the crack damage. The element has two nodes with two degrees of freedom (transverse displacement, w and rotation, ϕ) at each node as shown in Fig. 1. The cracked beam is divided into two parts with a rotational mass less spring of length zero having a torsional rigidity (D) that dependent on the crack geometry and beam cross-section. It is given as follows [5,47]:(1)D=EH3β6f(ζ)where E is Young's modulus, H is height, B is breadth of rectangular beam cross-section and β=B/H.The function f(ζ) depends on the dimensional crack ratio ζ=a/H and it can be represented as:(2)f(ζ)=ζ2(12−19.5ζ+70.1ζ2−97.6ζ3+142ζ4−138ζ5+128ζ6−132ζ7+379ζ8−417ζ9+131ζ10+313ζ12−357ζ13+102ζ14),0≤ζ<0.5and(3)f(ζ)=1.32(1-ζ)2−1.78,0.5≤ζ≤1The element stiffness matrix k of the cracked beam element is given as follows [47]:(4)k=EIK11K12K13K14K22K23K24K33K34SYMK44where K11, K12, K13, K14, K22, K23, K24, K33, K34 and K44 are derived cracked beam stiffness matrix elements and are given in Machavaram and Shankar [47].The element mass matrix m of the cracked beam element is considered as same as that of non-cracked beam element and is given as follows [47]:(5)m=ρALe42015622Le54−13Le4Le213Le−3Le2156−22LeSYM4Le2where ρ is mass density of the material and A=BH is area of the beam element with rectangular cross section.The cracked cantilever beam with length ‘L’, breadth ‘B’ and height ‘H’ as shown in Fig. 2with multiple cracks is considered for formulation of the multiple crack identification in the present study. It has n number of elements with constant element length (Le) and each element has a crack at arbitrary location (Ln) from fixed end and with variable depth (an). Each element is modeled as a cracked beam element and their respective element stiffness matrix k and mass matrix m are derived using FEA method as given in Eqs. (4) and (5) and are assembled into global stiffness matrix K and mass matrix M to calculate frequencies and mode shapes of the structure as frequency response. The natural frequencies and mode shapes of the structure are obtained by solving the eigen value equation as given below:(6)KΦ=MΦΛwhere Λ is the diagonal matrix containing the eigen values (λ), i.e. square of the natural frequencies (ω2) and Φ is the modal matrix containing the eigen vectors (ϕ) or mode shapes.The frequency domain method is a common method of damage identification in the structural systems [34]. The major advantage of frequency based identification is that the modal information can be expressed in terms of mode shapes, resonant frequencies and modal damping ratios. Moreover, the modal information of a few modes of finite element is adequate to compare the modal measurements. Previous works [34,45] have shown that Fractional Frequency Change ratios (FFCs) and Damage Signature Indices (DSIs) are more effective in the identification of structural damage in frequency domain.The Fractional Frequency Change (FFC) ratio for the ith mode caused by damage defined as [47]:(7)FFCi=fui−fdifuiwhere fuiand fdiare the frequencies of the ith mode of the structure in undamaged and damaged states respectively; and f=ω/(2π) is the natural frequency in hertz (Hz).The Damage Signature Index (DSI) is defined as the ratio of change in the modal vector to the change in the modal eigen value. The DSI value for the ith mode is expressed as [47]:(8)DSIi=ϕui−ϕdifui2−fdi2where ϕuiand ϕdiare the modal vector values of the ith mode in undamaged and damaged states respectively. They can be complete or incomplete vectors. When only a few modal vector values at K locations are obtained, the vector DSIicomprises K entries.In the proposed method, both FFCs and DSIs are used as input patterns and the crack location and depth (Lcand a) are used as output patterns to train the proposed neural network. The input vector of multiple crack damage case in frequency domain for the present neural network strategy is:(9)Input={FFC1,FFC2,FFC3,…,FFCM,DSI1,DSI2,DSI3,…,DSIK}where M is the number of damage natural frequencies considered and K is the number of locations considered for obtaining the modal values.The output vector of a multiple crack damage case in frequency domain for the present neural network strategy is:(10)Output={L1,a1,L2,a2,…,Ln,an}where Liis the ith arbitrary crack location from the fixed end of the cantilever beam and aiis the respective crack depth and n is the total number of members in the structure.In practical situations, while measuring the dynamic behavior of the system, there is always a possibility of error in the measurements due to factors like improper connections, environmental factors, measurement techniques, etc. Therefore noise has been added to natural frequencies and mode shapes to simulate the experimental errors in the identification process. Noise with zero mean and standard deviation of 0.05 or 5% Root Mean Squared (RMS) level is added to the effective input patterns.In the present study, the Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) technique is employed to search the effective input and output patterns to train the proposed neural network for multiple crack identification. Initially, the two dimensionless parameters γi=Li/L and ζi=ai/H respectively the ratio of location of crack (Li) from fixed end to the beam structure span (L) and the ratio of crack depth (ai) to the beam height (H) of the ith arbitrary crack are sampled using LHS technique for different levels of crack locations and depths respectively as output patterns (Eq. (10)) for all the n multiple cracks. These output patterns are used to simulate the input patterns (Eq. (9)) in frequency domain using FEA model of the cantilever beam structure.Complex-valued Radial Basis Function (CRBF) neural networks were initially proposed by Chen et al. [50] for nonlinear signal processing involving complex signals, later on it is applied to many classification problems with real-valued input features [48,51–55]. In the present study, the existing CRBF neural network is modified to handle real-valued function approximation problems considering their capability with better computational power and their orthogonal decision boundaries capable of performing classification tasks more efficiently than real-valued networks. The CRBF is a logic extension of the existing real-valued RBF neural network. It has an input layer, a single hidden layer and an output layer as shown in Fig. 3similar to RBF neural network. Any complex quantity can be represented by its real and imaginary parts as,(11)xC=xR+ixIwhere, xCis complex quantity, xRis real value and xIis imaginary value mapped in the complex plane; andi=−1.The input layer has ‘I’ input neurons which are equal to input features of the input vector x. The input features in the input layer are transformed complex values from the real-valued input features. The real-valued input features initially coded in the range of [0,1] and are transformed into complex space by phase encoding [0,π] using a unique transformation function ‘exp(iπx)’ also called as node activation function. In real-valued neural networks, the node activation function is usually continuous, bounded and non constant function. The real sigmoid function is a typical example, but in complex-valued neural networks, any regular analytic function cannot be bounded unless it reduces to a constant, this is known as the Liouville's theorem [50]. More details on unique node activation (transformation) functions can be found in the study reported by Savitha et al. [48,54].The transformation of real-valued input features to complex-valued input features using phase encoding in complex space is done by the following equations:(12)xiC=exp(iπxic)wherexicis coded real-valued input feature in the range of [0,1] and is given by,(13)xic=xi−xi(min)xi(max)−xi(min)where xi(min) and xi(max) are minimum and maximum values of the ith input feature xi.The hidden layer has ‘J’ hidden neurons; each hidden node (neuron) has a real radially symmetric response around the node center. The centers of hidden nodes are some complex vectors in the input space and the nonlinearity of hidden node is a real function. The response of each hidden node is calculated as,(14)ϕjC=exp−1σj2xiC−cjCHxiC−cjCThe width σjis a real positive scalar known as width of the Gaussian function,xiCis ith complex-valued input vector andcjCis a complex-valued centroid of the jth Gaussian CRBF. The operator(•)H=((•)T)*is called Hermitian operation and is conjugate transpose of the matrix, (•)Tdenotes vector or matrix transpose and (•)* represents complex conjugate.Each hidden node width σjfor both in the real and complex-valued cases is either different for the each unit or same for the each unit. A constant value for all the RBF units result simpler training.The output layer has ‘K’ output neurons and the output of each output neuron is calculated as linear sum of hidden to output layer weights and the response of the each hidden neuron. The weights in the proposed CRBF neural network are real-valued and the response of the output neurons is also a real-valued output. The response of the output neuron is given as,(15)yk=∑j=1JwkjϕjC+wk0=∑j=1Jwkjexp−1σj2xiC−cjCHxiC−cjC+wk0where wkjis the real-valued weight vector in the output layer for the kth output node and wk0 is a real-valued bias value to that output node.ϕjCis the radial basis function of the jth hidden node as calculated in Eq. (14).The main advantage of RBF neural networks is that linear learning algorithms can be easily applied to RBF training. The same algorithms are extended to CRBF neural networks; those are least square algorithm with fixed centers [56], orthogonal least square algorithm [39], recursive clustering and least square algorithm [37] and dynamic complexity learning algorithm [57].A two-stage ICRBF neural network strategy is developed on MATLAB (R2010b) platform to identify the multiple cracks in a beam structure. It is different from the conventional CRBF neural network as discussed in Section 3, mainly by its two stage crack identification strategy. The proposed ICRBF neural network is similar to IRBF neural network except that the CRBF neural network is used instead of RBF neural network. The IRBF neural network is presented in the earlier studies with applications on structural damage identification [45], joint damage identification [46] and crack identification [47]. The algorithm of the proposed ICRBF neural network strategy is explained in the following steps.As discussed earlier LHS technique is employed to search the effective input and output patterns to train the ICRBF neural network. The algorithm of LHS module “LHSU.function” developed on MATLAB (R2010b) platform [47] as shown in Fig. 4is used to sample the n crack locations and their respective crack depths in a cantilever beam. Initially, the two dimensionless parameters γi=Li/Landζi=ai/H respectively the ratio of location of crack (Li) from fixed end to the beam structure span (L) and the ratio of crack depth (ai) to the beam height (H) of the ith arbitrary cracked element are sampled for different levels of crack location (Li) and crack depth (ai) respectively for the n cracks in the n elements as output patterns. These values are used as input vector x of each element with min[0,0] and max[1,1] to “LHSU.function” module for sampling N training samples.The sampled N output patterns of crack depth and location (Liand ai) for all the n multiple cracked elements are used to derive the element stiffness matrix k and mass matrix m of the cracked beam using FEA method as given in Eqs. (4) and (5) respectively. The algorithm of multiple cracked beam finite element module “CBFEM.function” developed on MATLAB (R2010b) platform is shown in Fig. 5to assemble the global stiffness matrix K and mass matrix M. The other inputs are number of elements (n), nodal connectivity (NOD), natural co-ordinates (NCO) of nodes and boundary/fixed condition (FN) details of the cracked beam structure.Assembled global stiffness matrix K and mass matrix M are used to calculate the natural frequencies and mode shapes of the structure by solving the eigen value equation as given in Eq. (6). The algorithm of cracked beam vibration input–output pattern module “CBVIBIO.function” developed on MATLAB (R2010b) platform is shown in Fig. 6to calculate the input patterns as FFCs and DSIs from vibration response of the cracked beam structure in the frequency domain.The development of the ICRBF neural network multiple crack identification is shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b) respectively for the first stage and second stage of the ICRBF neural network multiple crack identification strategy. The two stages of multiple crack identification are as follows:(a)First stage multiple crack identification strategy: The output patterns([γiζi]i=1n)are sampled using LHS technique and the input patterns (both FFCs and DSIs) are simulated using FEA. The input–output patters are used to train the first stage of ICRBF (i.e. the conventional CRBF) network, which is an exact interpolation type where the number of hidden neurons are equal to the size of training patterns and it trains in single iteration. The spread constant (σ) and pattern size (N) are selected by trial and error method until the identification error becomes negligible in the training process. After the effective training process, the multiple crack identification is performed for a new test damage case. If the identification error (absolute mean percentage error, AMPE) is less than the predefined error tolerance, the memory of the ICRBF network (basis functions,ϕjCand weights, wkj) are saved as primary memory and it is used to identify the multiple crack of the test cases. If the error is more than error tolerance, the crack identification is performed in the second stage using reduced search space moving technique. The detailed algorithm of ICRBF first stage multiple crack identification is presented in Fig. 7(a).Second stage multiple crack identification strategy: If the error is more than the error tolerance, a new set of input–output patterns are simulated using LHS technique and FEA simulation in the reduced search space of ±wR% around the identified damage (crack) in the first stage. Again these patterns are used to retrain the CRBF network and to perform the multiple crack identification for the test case. The process is performed iteratively until the identification error comes less than the predefined error tolerance and at each time the memory (basis functions,ϕjCand weights, wkj) of the network has been refreshed in the second stage. This memory is called secondary memory and it has been saved after minimizing the error between successive iterations (moves). These primary and secondary memories saved by the above methodology are used to identify the multiple cracks in a structure. The detailed algorithm of ICRBF second stage multiple cracks identification is presented in Fig. 7(b). For a new test case to which the output is unknown, initially the crack is identified by primary memory and then by the secondary memory. The identification error is calculated between the primary and secondary stage identifications; if the error is below the tolerance the identification is finalized. Else if the error exceeds the tolerance, again the crack identification is performed by training with the input–output patterns from the reduced search space in the second stage. It will continue until the identification error in successive moves becomes less than the error tolerance.The proposed ICRBF neural network is similar to IRBF neural network except that the CRBF neural network is used instead of RBF neural network, the pseudo-code of the IRBF neural network is given in the study reported in [46]. The first and second stage crack identification is shown graphically on a contour plot of prediction error minimization in Fig. 8for better understanding of the ICRBF/IRBF neural network crack identification strategy. It represents two graphical representations (1) the proposed network first stage identification in the entire design space at left, and (2) the second stage identification based on reduced search space moving technique with ±wR% reduction of the search space from the first stage identification and its movement to the optimal value at right.Percentage reduction in the search space, size of training dataset and spread constant of the second stage CRBF network are selected by trial and error method to train the proposed ICRBF network. The percent reduction in search space will depend (almost equal) on the first stage identification error of the proposed ICRBF method, to make identification error less than the predefined tolerance in the second stage. The first stage identification results in this study were considered as the conventional CRBF network [48,50,51,54] results to compare the performance of the ICRBF neural network.The performance of the developed ICRBF neural network is evaluated by two key performance indicators viz. (i) computational effort and (ii) Absolute Mean Percentage Error (AMPE) for identification.The computational effort is measured in terms of the Central Processing Unit (CPU) time on an Intel Core i3 M350-2.27GHz processor; and the AMPE and maximum error for identification of crack is calculated using the following equation:(16)Errori=Oai−OpiOai×100(17)AMPE=∑i=1NtErroriNt(18)Max.error=max(Errori),i=1,2,...,Ntwhere Oaiis actual crack (location/magnitude), Opiis identified crack (location/magnitude) and Ntis the total number of test cases.In the present study, at first a single cracked cantilever beam example [24] was taken to investigate the applicability of the proposed ICRBF neural network on crack identification. Then it was implemented on a more complex numerical problem of a cantilever beam with three cracks [7]. The performance was compared with conventional neural networks (MLP and RBF), conventional CRBF neural network, conventional RBF neural network and IRBF neural network [47] in terms of accuracy and computational effort in the frequency domain. Each simulation was done with zero noise and with 5% noise addition to the input patterns to simulate the experimental errors.A cantilever beam with single crack is considered for detecting the crack damage in terms of crack location and crack depth. The beam structure used by Kam and Lee [10] and Suresh et al. [24] is taken for the present study with dimensions 300mm length (L), 20mm breadth (B) and 20mm height (H). The material of the cantilever beam is steel with 2.06×1011N/m2 Young's modulus (E) and 7850kg/m3 mass density (ρ). An open crack of specified depth (a) exists at a distance L1 from the fixed left end of the cantilever beam as shown in Fig. 9[47]. The entire beam is divided into five elements with 50mm, 60mm, 60mm, 60mm and 70mm respectively from left end to right end. Each element has two nodes with two degrees of freedom (transverse displacement, w and rotation, ϕ) at each node as shown in Fig. 9[47].The crack may exist at any location in the entire continuous span of the cantilever beam. The dimensionless parameters γ=L1/Landζ=a/H respectively for the crack location and depth are assumed to vary in between 0 and 1 from fixed end to free end and from zero depth to full depth respectively. Natural frequencies and mode shapes of the considered cantilever beam are simulated from eigen value equation using assembled global stiffness matrix K and mass matrix M. The training data for the conventional RBF, conventional CRBF, IRBF and proposed ICRBF neural networks are generated by computing the FFCs and DSIs for different cases of cantilever cracks (single crack) as discussed in Section 2.1. FFCs corresponding to only first five natural frequencies (M=5 values) and the DSIs corresponding to first and second mode shapes (P=10 values/mode×2 modes=20 values) are considered as effective input pattern (total 25 values). The output pattern comprise of crack location and depth (2 values).In order to train the proposed ICRBF neural network in the first stage (i.e. conventional CRBF) as discussed in Section 4, 200 single cracked cantilever beam cases (N1) were selected by LHS method having two parameters γ and ζ vary between 0 and 1 for the location and depth respectively, and a spread constant (σ1) of 100 was used for the network. The error tolerance (Etol1) for the next stage identification was kept as 3%. Study was also conducted for inputs contaminated with noise; noise with zero mean and a standard deviation of 0.05 or 5% RMS level has been taken. The training data in the present study is continuous, i.e. the network is trained in such a way that it could identify the crack at any given location in the entire continuous span of the beam and the depth also given as continuous. The performance in terms of accuracy and computational effort of the ICRBF network for crack identification was evaluated by using the test cases reported by Kam and Lee [10] and Suresh et al. [24]. Kam and Lee [10] used the Newton–Raphson method for crack identification and Suresh et al. [24] used the MLP and RBF neural network techniques for crack identification of the same cantilever beam example with different test cases. The ICRBF network has identified the single crack in the cantilever beam structure above the error tolerance (3%) in the first stage (i.e. conventional CRBF network) for all the selected test cases. The identification error has been reduced further by passing the first stage identification results to the second stage of the proposed ICRBF method employed with reduced search space moving technique. In the second stage, 50 cracked cantilever cases (N2) were selected by LHS method from the reduced search space of ±10% (wR) around the first stage crack identification. A spread constant (σ2) of 1.00 was used in the second stage of the ICRBF network. The error tolerance (Etol2) in the second stage ICRBF identification was kept as 1%. These optimal parameters of the ICRBF network were selected based on trial and error method to minimize the crack identification error to a tolerable limit as discussed in Section 4. In the second stage of ICRBF network, the identification error is minimized to less than the predefined error tolerance after a number of moves of the reduced search space, located nearer to the first stage identification and then follows the previous search space located by the second stage identification of the proposed ICRBF network.The similar procedure is followed to train and test the IRBF neural network [47] for single crack identification in frequency domain with the same input–output patterns. In the first stage of IRBF method (i.e. conventional RBF neural network), the training patterns (N1) were 200, spread constant (σ1) was 100 and error tolerance (Etol1) was 3%. The first stage IRBF has identified the single crack with more than 3% in its first stage identification. The identification error has been reduced by performing the identification with second stage IRBF network with 50 training patterns (N2), 1.00 as spread constant (σ2), 1% error tolerance (Etol2) and ±10% (wR) reduced search space.The identification results of single crack damage for all the test cases using IRBF neural network and the proposed ICRBF neural network with zero noise and with 5% noise addition are given in Tables 1–4. Table 1 shows the identified values of single crack location and depth using IRBF method with zero input noise for the same test cases as reported by Suresh et al. [24]. Table 2 shows the identification performance for those test cases with 5% input noise using IRBF method. Table 3 shows identified values of single crack location and depth using ICRBF method with zero input noise for the same test cases as reported by Suresh et al. [24]. Table 4 shows the identification performance for those test cases with 5% input noise using ICRBF method.The results in Tables 1–4 are discussed in detail here. The AMPE of the 12 test damage cases with zero noise addition to the input patterns was 10.82% for the crack location and 6.59% for the crack depth of the single crack identification using conventional MLP method; whereas it was 3.38% for the crack location and 4.62% for the crack depth using conventional RBF method as reported by Suresh et al. [24]. For the same zero noise addition, the AMPE of the twelve test damage cases respectively for crack location and crack depth are 6.26% and 12.61% by the conventional RBF (first stage of IRBF), 0.08% and 0.11% by the IRBF, 5.51% and 8.09% by the conventional CRBF (first stage of ICRBF) and 0.01% and 0.13% by the ICRBF network.With 5% noise addition to the input patterns, the AMPE of the 12 test damage cases respectively for crack location and crack depth are 10.73% and 15.87% by the conventional RBF (first stage of IRBF), 0.13% and 0.18% by the IRBF, 7.94% and 6.21% by the conventional CRBF (first stage of ICRBF) and 0.02% and 0.01% by the ICRBF network. It can be observed from the results that the performance of the ICRBF for single crack identification is better in terms of accuracy (AMPE) followed by IRBF, CRBF, RBF and MLP even with the addition of noise to the input patterns.The AMPE and maximum percentage error of the single crack identification are shown respectively in Figs. 10 and 11using different neural network crack identification strategies including the noise effect.The AMPE and maximum percentage error as shown respectively in Figs. 10 and 11 of single crack identification are more for conventional RBF (i.e. first stage IRBF) than conventional CRBF (i.e. first stage ICRBF). The accuracy in terms of AMPE and maximum percentage error has been improved by the CRBF neural network as compared to the RBF neural network. However, the performance of IRBF and ICRBF neural networks (with less than 1% AMPE) is comparable to each other and more efficient than the conventional CRBF and RBF neural network mainly because of the second stage reduced search space moving technique. Addition of noise to the input patterns has influenced the accuracy of the CRBF and RBF neural networks significantly, but the effect is insignificant for the ICRBF and IRBF neural networks.The computational effort taken by the IRBF neural network is 8.42s with zero noise and 9.44s with 5% noise, whereas it is 5.50s with zero noise and 5.24s with 5% noise by the ICRBF neural network for single crack identification computed with Intel Core i3 M350-2.27GHz processor. The computational effort shown here is for the 12 test damage cases including the training effort and it is more for IRBF neural network compared to ICRBF neural network. In the second stage, both ICRBF and IRBF have taken only about one move to identify the single crack with good accuracy for both zero noise and 5% noise addition to the input patterns. The influence of noise effect is also insignificant for both IRBF and ICRBF neural networks. Therefore, the proposed ICRBF neural network is an effective crack identification strategy as compared to IRBF, CRBF, conventional RBF and MLP neural networks in the order in terms of good accuracy for single crack identification of cantilever beam. The performance of the proposed ICRBF neural network in comparison with other neural network is also studied next with a more typical problem of triple (multiple) crack identification.A cantilever beam with triple crack as investigated by Lee [7] is considered for identifying the multiple crack location and depth using the proposed ICRBF neural network. The beam structure has 0.50m length (L), 0.02m breadth (B) and 0.02m height (H); and the material of the cantilever beam is steel with 2.10×1011N/m2 Young's modulus (E) and 7860kg/m3 mass density (ρ). There are three equal finite elements with open cracks at a normalized location from the fixed end (γi=Li/L) and with a normalized depth (ζi=ai/H) respectively for each ith cracked element as shown in Fig. 12. Similar to the single crack problem, the elasto-plastic fracture mechanics and finite element method [47] is used in the present study for multiple crack identification.The first six natural frequencies of the triple cracked cantilever beam for different crack locations and respective crack depths are shown in Table 5. The values differ very slightly from the values reported by Lee [7], because the new fracture mechanics and finite element approach [47] given by Krawczuk et al. [4] and Viola et al. [5,6] is considered in the present study. The crack location influence on modal frequency reduction is less significant for triple cracks in a cantilever beam as given in Table 5 for all the six modal frequencies with different crack locations and constant crack depths. It can also be observed that, cracks nearer to the fixed end causes the more reduction in the former natural frequencies and the cracks away from the fixed end causes the more reduction in latter natural frequencies. Both modal frequencies and mode shapes are used as effective inputs for training the conventional RBF, conventional CRBF, IRBF and proposed ICRBF neural networks for triple crack identification as similar to the single crack identification problem.The training data for the conventional RBF, conventional CRBF, IRBF and proposed ICRBF neural networks are generated by computing the FFCs and DSIs for different cases of cantilever cracks (triple cracks) as discussed in Section 2.1. FFCs corresponding to only first five natural frequencies (M=5 values) and the DSIs corresponding to first and second mode shapes (P=6 values/mode×2 modes=12 values) are considered as effective input patterns (total 17 values). The output pattern comprise of three crack locations and their corresponding depths (6 values).In order to train the proposed ICRBF neural network in the first stage (i.e. conventional CRBF) as discussed in Section 4, 1000 triple cracked cantilever beam cases (N1) were taken by LHS method having six parameters [γ1ζ1γ2ζ2γ3ζ3] vary between 0 and 1 for the location and the depth of three cracks respectively, and a spread constant (σ1) of 100 was used for the network. The error tolerance (Etol1) for the next stage identification was kept as 3%. Study was also conducted for inputs contaminated with noise; noise with zero mean and a standard deviation of 0.05 or 5% RMS level has been taken. The training data in the present study is continuous similar to single crack training data. The performance in terms of accuracy and computational effort of the ICRBF network for triple crack identification was evaluated by using the three more test cases along with the two test cases reported by Lee [7]. Lee [7] used Newton–Raphson method for multiple crack identification of cantilever beam with triple cracks. The ICRBF network has identified the triple crack in the cantilever beam structure above the error tolerance (3%) in the first stage (i.e. conventional CRBF network) for all the selected test cases. The identification error has been reduced further by passing the first stage identification results to the second stage of the proposed ICRBF method employed with reduced search space moving technique. In the second stage, 500 triple cracked cantilever cases (N2) were selected by LHS method from the reduced search space of ±10% (wR) around the first stage triple crack identification. A spread constant (σ2) of 100 was used in the second stage of the ICRBF network. The error tolerance (Etol2) in the second stage ICRBF identification was kept as 1%. These optimal parameters of the ICRBF network were selected based on trial and error method to minimize the crack identification error to a tolerable limit as discussed earlier.The similar procedure is followed to train and test the IRBF neural network for triple crack identification in frequency domain with the same input–output patterns. In the first stage of IRBF method (i.e. conventional RBF neural network), the training patterns (N1) were 500, spread constant (σ1) was 10 and error tolerance (Etol1) was 3%. The first stage IRBF has identified the triple crack with more than 3% in its first stage identification. The identification error has been reduced by performing the identification with second stage IRBF method with 100 training patterns (N2), 1.00 as spread constant (σ2), 1% error tolerance (Etol2) and ±10% (wR) reduced search space.The identification results of triple crack damage for all the test cases using IRBF neural network and the proposed ICRBF neural network with zero noise and with 5% noise addition are given in Tables 6–9. Table 6 shows the identified values of triple crack location and depth using IRBF network with zero input noise for the test cases. Table 7 shows the identification performance for those test cases with 5% input noise using IRBF network. Table 8 shows the identified values of triple crack location and depth using ICRBF network with zero input noise for the same test cases. Table 9 shows the identification performance for those test cases with 5% input noise using ICRBF network.The results in Tables 6–9 are discussed in detail here. The AMPE of the two test damage cases with zero noise addition to the input patterns was 1.78% for the crack location and 1.88% for the crack depth of the triple crack identification using Newton–Raphson method after 20 iterations as reported in Lee [7]. For the same zero noise addition, the AMPE of the five test damage cases respectively for crack location and crack depth are 6.28% and 27.70% by the conventional RBF (first stage of IRBF), 0.40% and 0.27% by the IRBF, 4.92% and 10.98% by the conventional CRBF (first stage of ICRBF) and 0.24% and 0.17% by the ICRBF network.With 5% noise addition to the input patterns, the AMPE of the five test damage cases respectively for crack location and crack depth are 4.61% and 19.90% by the conventional RBF (first stage of IRBF), 0.47% and 0.30% by the IRBF, 6.31% and 9.01% by the conventional CRBF (first stage of ICRBF) and 0.22% and 0.15% by the ICRBF network. It can be observed from the results that the performance of the ICRBF for multiple (triple) crack identification is better in terms of accuracy (AMPE) followed by IRBF, CRBF and RBF similar to single crack identification results, even with the addition of noise to the input patterns. The Newton–Raphson method [7] which is an optimization technique was found to be superior in terms of accuracy as compared to both RBF and CRBF neural networks (which are mapping techniques); however Newton–Raphson method is inferior in comparison to both IRBF and ICRBF neural networks.The AMPE and maximum percentage error of the triple crack identification are shown respectively in Figs. 13 and 14using different neural network crack identification strategies including the noise effect.The AMPE and maximum percentage error as shown respectively in Figs. 13 and 14 of triple (multiple) crack identification are more for conventional RBF (i.e. first stage IRBF) than conventional CRBF (i.e. first stage ICRBF) similar to the single crack identification problem. The accuracy of crack identification (both single crack and multiple cracks) has been improved by the CRBF neural network as compared to the RBF neural network. Addition of noise to the input patterns has insignificant effect on ICRBF, IRBF, CRBF and RBF neural networks.The computational effort taken by the IRBF neural network is 9.14s with zero noise and 7.12s with 5% noise, whereas it is 28.17s with zero noise and 24.48s with 5% noise by the ICRBF neural network for triple crack identification computed with Intel Core i3 M350-2.27GHz processor. The computational effort shown here is for the five test damage cases including the training effort and it is more for ICRBF neural network compared to IRBF neural network on multiple crack identification strategy. Because, in the first stage, ICRBF has taken more number of training patterns to train in the complex-domain compared to the IRBF neural network which is in the real-domain. In the second stage, IRBF has taken about three moves to identify the triple crack with good accuracy whereas, ICRBF has taken only one move even after adding the noise; but the computational effort is more for Complex-valued RBF neural networks as compared to the real-valued RBF neural networks.The performance of IRBF and ICRBF neural networks is more efficient than the conventional CRBF and RBF neural network mainly because of the second stage reduced search space moving technique even for the multiple crack identification. However, the complex-valued neural networks demand more training patterns to train for good accuracy and thereby more computational effort in comparison to real-valued neural networks. The insignificant effect in the accuracy of both CRBF and RBF is observed in the triple crack identification, but it is not the case in single crack identification. The noise effect is insignificant for both the RBF and CRBF neural networks and their improved versions, because of the generalization ability of RBF neural networks in comparison with other multilayer neural (MLP and BPN) networks. The training data size also influences the robustness of the RBF/CRBF networks; larger the data size better will be the robustness to noisy measurement, but it consumes more computational effort for training. Hence, a compromise is required for accuracy and computational effort and this is proven with single and multiple crack identification in the present investigation.The AMPE obtained by ICRBF and IRBF was less than 1% for both the cases of with zero noise and 5% noise addition to the input patterns, which is much less than the AMPE obtained by CRBF and RBF neural networks. Therefore, the proposed ICRBF neural network is an effective multiple crack identification strategy as compared to IRBF, CRBF, conventional RBF and MLP neural networks in the order in terms of good accuracy. However considering the more modest computational effort of IRBF neural network, it is a better option than ICRBF neural network with good accuracy, less computational effort and simplicity in architecture.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The numerical simulation of the multiple crack identification of a cantilever beam with zero noise and with 5% Gaussian random noise addition to the input patterns was evaluated with ICRBF neural network in comparison with IRBF, CRBF and RBF neural networks in frequency domain. LHS technique was used to sample the different levels of crack depth and their location as output patterns in the designed search space; and FFCs and DSIs as input patterns were simulated numerically from finite element analysis (FEA) to train the neural networks. The real-valued input features in real space were converted into complex-valued input features in complex space using a non-linear complex-valued activation function to train the proposed ICRBF neural network. The trend observed in both examples is that, in terms of accuracy ICRBF is best followed by IRBF, CRBF, RBF and MLP neural networks respectively. The main conclusions of the present study are as follows.•The accuracy in terms of AMPE and maximum percentage error of Complex-valued Radial Basis Function (CRBF) neural networks was significantly better as compared to real-valued Radial Basis Function (RBF) neural networks for the inverse problems under the category of function approximation.In the second stage, IRBF has taken about three moves to identify the triple cracks with good accuracy, whereas ICRBF has taken only one move even after adding the noise. But the computational effort is more for Complex-valued RBF neural networks as compared to real-valued RBF neural networks, because complex-valued neural networks demand more training patterns to train for good accuracy.The IRBF and ICRBF neural networks’ performance (less than 1% AMPE) was comparable to each other and more efficient than the conventional RBF and CRBF neural networks mainly because of the contribution of the second stage reduced search space moving technique of IRBF and ICRBF.After comparing the results of accuracy and computational effort using various neural networks for multiple crack identification, it is seen that IRBF appears to give the best value in terms of compromise between computational effort and accuracy.