@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genetic programming for smart phone personalisation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Context-aware smartphone personalisation with GP is proposed for adapting autonomously to user preferences.We propose collaborative GP personalisation through the island model over multiple phones.We demonstrated the framework empirically on two case study applications for solving multi-objective problems.Results show collaborative personalisation speeds up convergence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Genetic Programming,Island Model,Personalization,Smart phone,Online evolutionary,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Personalisation in smart phones requires adaptability to dynamic context based on user mobility, application usage and sensor inputs. Current personalisation approaches, which rely on static logic that is developed a priori, do not provide sufficient adaptability to dynamic and unexpected context. This paper proposes genetic programming (GP), which can evolve program logic in realtime, as an online learning method to deal with the highly dynamic context in smart phone personalisation. We introduce the concept of collaborative smart phone personalisation through the GP Island Model, in order to exploit shared context among co-located phone users and reduce convergence time. We implement these concepts on real smartphones to demonstrate the capability of personalisation through GP and to explore the benefits of the Island Model. Our empirical evaluations on two example applications confirm that the Island Model can reduce convergence time by up to two-thirds over standalone GP personalisation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Smartphones have experienced exponential growth in recent years. These phones embed a growing diversity of sensors, such as gyroscopes, accelerometers, Global Positioning Systems (GPS), and cameras, with broad applicability in areas such as urban sensing or environmental monitoring. Coupled with phone users’ high mobility and diverse profiles [2], this sensory richness has fuelled complex applications with composite logic, including features such as location-based and usage-based services. The increased application complexity involves significant challenges in personalising smart phone applications so that they can adapt to new or unexpected context.Smartphone personalisation either occurs centrally at a server or locally at the phone. Centralised approaches track user activity to customise content delivery or application behaviour. They can easily misrepresent user preferences due to spurious activity, and they involve privacy concerns as users need to share their data with the content providers. Most standalone smartphone algorithms, aiming at either data-centric [5] or user-centric personalisation [3], are based on static or rule-based approaches. However, personalisation increasingly depends on contextual information and user inputs [4], which are both subject to dynamic changes arising from mobility and user preferences. The problem of personalisation of smart phones is therefore multidimensional and requires an approach that can not only adapt parameters in response to changes in user preferences and context, but also adapt the program logic to optimise for unpredictable changes in context.Online learning is well-suited for smart phone personalisation. In order to provide maximum versatility to support the creativity and unpredictability of smart phone users, we need an online learning approach that allows for the adaptation of program logic, and not just parameters within fixed program logic. Additionally, smart phone users are often co-located with several other users that share their context, providing opportunities for collaborative personalisation based on this shared context. The most suitable online learning strategy should provide the syntactic richness to evolve logic on a single smartphone, and to support the sharing of functional logical blocks among co-located phones according to the building block hypothesis [34].Most online learning methods, such as reinforcement learning [6] and neural networks [7], are concerned with parameter optimisation only. While these methods could be run within an evolutionary framework, any sharing of genetic sequences across phones would not necessarily map to functional logic blocks, which could slow down convergence. Genetic Programming (GP), on the other hand, is amenable to this scenario, as it evolves both logic and parameters simultaneously, providing it with the syntactic richness and flexibility that is comparable to offline human software development. Because GP evolves functional logic blocks, sharing logic across multiple phones is both more meaningful and more conducive to quicker convergence.This paper proposes GP for smart phone personalisation. We first show empirically that GP can support smart phone personalisation through our software framework called the Android Genetic Programming Framework (AGP). In order to expedite convergence towards high performing applications, we propose collaborative personalisation of smartphones through the GP Island Model to exploit shared context between co-located phones. The main research question we aim to answer is: “To what extent does collaborative smartphone personalisation improve convergence time?”. To address this question, we extend AGP to support the island model and run extensive experiments with 2 Android phones for a comparative evaluation of the benefits of sharing logic among smartphones against stand-alone personalisation, exploring 6 scenarios with different migration rates and intensities. Our results show that the Island Model consistently outperforms the standalone GP for online personaliation, and somewhat surprisingly, that injecting random programs into the subpopulations can be beneficial for the more complex application of energy-efficient localisation.The contributions of this paper are:•Introduction, motivation, and demonstration of genetic programming for smart phone personalisationProposal of collaborative smart phone personalisation through the GP Island Model for faster convergence and exploitation of shared contextEmpirical evaluation of both standalone and collaborative personalisation through two case study applications, which confirm the benefits of collaborative personalisationThe remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses related work in the literature. Section 3 defines the problem for smart phone personalisation, motivates genetic programming to address this problem, and proposes collaborative GP for faster personalisation. Section 4 briefly introduces the AGP framework and our extension to support the Island Model. Section 5 demonstrates online personalisation through GP, while Section 6 evaluates the benefits of collaborative personalisation through the Island Model. Section 7 discusses the results and concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
