@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On robustness of speech based biometric systems against voice conversion attack

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Evaluation of robustness of SID and SV systems against VC spoofing attack.The vulnerability in decreasing order of VC techniques is GMM, WFW and WFW−.In SV systems, GMM-SVM is more resilient than GMM-UBM for VC impostor attacks.All systems are more robust to cross-gender than intra-gender converted voices.An approach of relating the VC score with SV performance is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Speaker identification,Speaker verification,Voice conversion,GMM,WFW,SVM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Voice conversion (VC) approach, which morphs the voice of a source speaker to be perceived as spoken by a specified target speaker, can be intentionally used to deceive the speaker identification (SID) and speaker verification (SV) systems that use speech biometric. Voice conversion spoofing attacks to imitate a particular speaker pose potential threat to these kinds of systems. In this paper, we first present an experimental study to evaluate the robustness of such systems against voice conversion disguise. We use Gaussian mixture model (GMM) based SID systems, GMM with universal background model (GMM-UBM) based SV systems and GMM supervector with support vector machine (GMM-SVM) based SV systems for this. Voice conversion is conducted by using three different techniques: GMM based VC technique, weighted frequency warping (WFW) based conversion method and its variation, where energy correction is disabled (WFW−). Evaluation is done by using intra-gender and cross-gender voice conversions between fifty male and fifty female speakers taken from TIMIT database. The result is indicated by degradation in the percentage of correct identification (POC) score in SID systems and degradation in equal error rate (EER) in all SV systems. Experimental results show that the GMM-SVM SV systems are more resilient against voice conversion spoofing attacks than GMM-UBM SV systems and all SID and SV systems are most vulnerable towards GMM based conversion than WFW and WFW− based conversion. From the results, it can also be said that, in general terms, all SID and SV systems are slightly more robust to voices converted through cross-gender conversion than intra-gender conversion. This work extended the study to find out the relationship between VC objective score and SV system performance in CMU ARCTIC database, which is a parallel corpus. The results of this experiment show an approach on quantifying objective score of voice conversion that can be related to the ability to spoof an SV system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Speaker recognition is the process of recognizing the speakers from their spoken utterances, which carry information about their identities. According to the application, it can be divided into two different tasks: identification and verification. The objective of speaker identification is to determine the identity of the speaker who produced the input speech signal [1,2]. The objective of speaker verification is to accept or reject an identity claim from a speech sample [3,4]. Speaker recognition has a wide range of applications including the services like telephone-based banking [3], forensics to investigate a suspect [5] and voice mail [6].Automatic voice conversion is the methodology to convert one speaker's (source speaker) voice so that it creates the perception as if spoken by another speaker (target speaker). The objective of a voice conversion system is to learn a mapping function through training that converts source speaker's utterance into target speaker's utterance by transforming the speaker timbre as well as prosody without changing the linguistic message in the utterance [7]. It can be deliberately used as a spoofing attack to fool the state-of-the-art speaker recognition systems.Although SID and SV technologies have substantially advanced now-a-days, at the same time, voice conversion methodology also developed significantly to produce converted voices with good conversion quality. This makes SID and SV systems prone to fraud attacks carried out by voice conversion. With the help of voice conversion technology, one can even conceal identity and cheat others. Therefore, in our daily life also VC can create several challenging issues. Hence, now-a-days there is a major demand to evaluate the robustness of speech based biometric systems and find out a way to successfully distinguish transformed speech from natural speech.Multiple number of studies have been done to test the robustness of speaker recognition systems against impostor attacks. Spoofing attack due to playback and cut-paste has been examined [8]. Performance of current state-of-the-art SV systems against different types of spoofing and tampering attacks has also been evaluated [9]. Speech synthesis can also be used to attack SV systems using high quality target speaker's synthetic speech [10]. Speaker adapted speech synthesis technique is applied to fool the SV systems [11–13]. These studies suggest that high quality synthetic speech increases false acceptance rate (FAR) of SV systems significantly. Human voice mimicking has also been used as voice disguise [14]. A new approach based on artificial tone-like signals is also used to deceive the SV systems [15].Speaker recognition systems are also prone to attacks from impostors using voice converted speech to target a specific speaker. Several studies investigated the effect of transformed speech on SID system performance [16–18]. In these studies mainly GMM based SID system and GMM based VC were used. These studies point out that GMM based VC can fool a GMM based SID system and correct identification decreases as the amount of conversion training data increases. Vulnerability of several SV systems against different VC (transfer function based VC, GMM based VC and unit selection based VC) spoofing attacks has also been evaluated in [19–22]. These studies show significant increase of FAR of such systems. Therefore, security of speaker recognition systems against voice conversion impostor attack is of prime concern. Different countermeasures (exploitation of phase based feature [23,24], usage of high level dynamic feature and voice quality assessment [25], calculation of pairwise distance difference between input data and target speaker data in training [26], local binary pattern (LBPs) analysis of some feature vectors [27]) to prevent the voice conversion spoofing attack has also been proposed.From the existing literature, it is found that VC spoofing attack on speech based biometric systems have not been evaluated in detail. Therefore, considering the practical importance of the detailed analysis of VC attack on speech based biometric systems, in this paper, we shall check the robustness of the current state-of-the-art speaker recognition systems. We shall also try to find a relation between VC objective score and SV system performance that can help to mitigate the spoofing attack. In this paper, the performance of GMM-based SID systems [2], GMM-UBM based SV systems [28] and GMM-SVM based SV systems [29] against different voice conversion spoofing attacks on the TIMIT database [30] are examined and compared for all possible conversion directions. We will use three different voice conversion techniques: standard GMM based VC method [31,32], WFW based VC method [33] and WFW− based VC method [33]. In GMM based voice conversion, mixture of Gaussian components is used to model the probability densities of joint source and target speaker's feature vectors. Then a continuous probabilistic frame-wise mapping is applied to the source feature vectors. It can capture the overall spectral characteristics and can produce the average representation of the target spectrum. As a result, GMM based VC can generate converted speech with good similarity to target speech, but with degraded quality. On the other hand, WFW is the combination of frequency warping and an energy correction filter, both constructed from a GMM. Frequency warping based spectral conversion can preserve the spectral details well, but it cannot completely modify the shape of the spectrum. WFW based spectral conversion takes the advantage of both the methods: GMM based conversion and frequency warping based conversion. Thus, WFW based VC should generate well balanced converted speech with respect to similarity and quality. Finally, the simpler version of WFW, where energy correction is not applied is the basic frequency warping based transformation method. Therefore, it is expected that WFW− will give good quality converted sound with lesser conversion of speaker characteristics. Current speaker recognition systems do not consider the naturalness of the speech; rather consider the similarity between the target and converted voices. Hence, we can expect that GMM based VC attack will pose more challenge to speaker recognition systems than other conversion methods. We also perform an experiment to establish a relationship between voice conversion objective scores and SV system performance on CMU ARCTIC database. As it is a parallel corpus, it helps to determine the objective scores of the converted voices which are used to attack the SV systems. The result shows that it is possible to establish an approach, which relates objective score with SV system performance.Over the past few years VC approaches and speech based biometric systems have matured to a great extent. Therefore, the aim of our work is to check whether the current VC spoofing attacks really pose serious threat to such systems, and if so, find out an alternate way to resolve that.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the framework of a typical voice conversion system and the theoretical aspects of the different voice conversion techniques that are used in this study. Section 3 provides the fundamentals of used speaker identification and speaker verification systems. Section 4 is devoted to database description. In Section 5, we discuss about the various performance metrics. In Section 6, experimental results and a comparison among the speaker recognition systems and voice conversion techniques is provided. Section 7 presents a relationship between voice conversion objective scores and the SV system performance. The conclusion of this work is summarized in Section 8.This section provides the general framework of the voice conversion systems used in this study and also introduces three VC techniques used in this work.The general framework of the voice conversion system is shown in Fig. 1. The entire process can be divided into two modules: the training module and the testing module. During training process, the conversion function that maps the voice characteristics of the source speaker to the target speaker is learnt from the stored recorded utterances of both speakers in the database. In the testing process, the learnt mapping function is used to transform the input source speaker's speech. Voice conversion is the outcome of several operations that will be described in the following subsections.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a set of experiments have been proposed and evaluated in order to analyze the robustness of speaker identification and verification systems against voice conversion spoofing attacks and also to investigate a link between voice conversion objective score and speaker verification system performance. Three popular VC operations were carried out to simulate the attack. This kind of attack was applied on GMM based SID system and two state-of-the-art SV systems: GMM-UBM and GMM-SVM. Experimental evaluation of the SR system's performance was performed on TIMIT database. In the GMM based SID experiments, many of the converted voices were identified as their corresponding target speakers for mainly GMM based VC. However, they also failed to deceive SID systems mainly for WFW and WFW− based VC, because in these two types of VC, source voice was identified in many of the cases. More importantly, for intra-gender VC source and target voice identification is higher than cross-gender VC. Erroneous conversion rate is significantly higher for cross-gender conversion. Results of GMM-UBM SV experiments indicate a sharp rise in EER and MinDCF values for all three conversions. Thus, these VC techniques are able to break down the resistance of the SV systems, which is a serious potential threat to SV as well as voice based biometric authentication systems. GMM-SVM based SV experiments suggest that this system can also be cheated by the three used VC spoofing attacks. However, this system is more robust to the attacks than GMM-UBM SV system. SV system's performance against all voice conversion directions indicates that intra-gender conversion is slightly more vulnerable towards the system than cross-gender conversion.Due to the intense interest in speech synthesis research, it is becoming increasingly possible to generate high quality converted speech that can breach an SR system. The work presents a relationship between VC score and SV, SID performance for voice converted speech. This in turn shows the likely vulnerability of SV, SID systems against VC spoofing attack and effort needed to design a system that can avoid such attack.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2015.01.036.The following are the supplementary data to this article: