@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A group decision making framework based on fuzzy VIKOR approach for machine tool selection with linguistic information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two algorithms for VIKOR method based on the fuzzy linguistic approach are developed.A general MCGDM framework for a machine tool selection problem is presented.The proposed framework is verified by an example.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Group decision making,Computer numeric control machine tool,Triangular fuzzy number,Decision support model,VIKOR,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Computer numerical control (CNC) machines are used for repetitive, difficult and unsafe manufacturing tasks that require a high degree of accuracy. However, when selecting an appropriate CNC machine, multiple criteria need to be considered by multiple decision makers. In this study, a multi-criteria group decision making (MCGDM) technique based on the fuzzy VIKOR method is developed to solve a CNC machine tool selection problem. Linguistic variables represented by triangular fuzzy numbers are used to reflect decision maker preferences for the criteria importance weights and the performance ratings. After the individual preferences are aggregated or after the separation values are computed, they are then defuzzified. In this paper, two algorithms based on a fuzzy linguistic approach are developed. Based on these two algorithms and the VIKOR method, a general MCGDM framework is proposed. A CNC machine tool selection example illustrates the application of the proposed approach. A comparative study of the two algorithms using the above case study information highlighted the need to combine the ranking results, as both algorithms have distinct characteristics.Manufacturing industries today face multiple challenges such as globalization and rapidly changing market requirements because of modern lifestyle trends [18]. Therefore, during the early stages of operation, initial machinery and equipment capital investment decisions are critical to future profitability. Computer numerical control (CNC) machines are considered highly efficient cost effective system centered equipment for repetitious, difficult or dangerous manufacturing tasks. The critical links in CNC machines turn raw materials into finished parts and components for final product assembly. Therefore, the selection of the correct CNC machine tool can decrease production delivery times, improve product flexibility and product quality, and enhance overall productivity [1]. However, selecting the appropriate stand-alone machine tool from the various market alternatives has been a major difficulty for manufacturing companies, as improper machine tool selection could negatively affect the overall manufacturing system performance [6].Machine tool selection is often a difficult task for engineers and managers as there are many qualitative and quantitative attributes that need to be considered in the selection of the appropriate machine tool [39]. Because of diverse conflicting machine tool selection criteria, quantifying the uncertain qualitative attribute information can be extremely complex. For example, a machine tool that is able to manufacture several different parts could result in increased set-up/changeover times [48]. Effective machine tool selection, therefore, needs to compromise over conflicting tangible and intangible factors, and, to deal with these, multiple criteria decision making (MCDM) has been found to be useful. However, human assessment of qualitative attributes is always subjective and therefore imprecise due to the decision-makers vagueness and uncertainty [5]. Because evaluation data such as alternative ratings or criteria weights are usually expressed in linguistic terms, the fuzzy linguistic approach has been found to be a suitable natural approach to handle such problems.Against this background, MCDM methods under a fuzzy environment have received significant research attention. As seen in the literature review (see Section 2), fuzzy AHP has been one of the most utilized techniques for this kind of problem. However, fuzzy AHP have often been used to calculate the criteria weights, so an MCDM method that directly considers the conflicting factors is needed. The VIKOR method, which stands for VIse Kriterijumska Optimizacija i Kompromisno Resenje, was first proposed by Opricovic as an efficient tool to handle conflicting criteria [40–42]. This method ranks alternatives and determines a compromise solution that is the closest to the ideal. Opricovic and Tzeng conducted a detailed comparative analysis of the VIKOR method and other MCDM methods [42,43], and various extensions of the VIKOR method can be found in the literature. Machine tool selection is an MCDM problem, so the VIKOR method is a suitable method for solving MCDM problems with conflicting criteria. To date, however, there have been few studies which have used the VIKOR method for machine tool selection problems.Even though research has shown that using fuzzy logic for machine tool selection can achieve good results, few have considered group decision making (GDM), which can consolidate different individual preferences into a single collective preference. The selection of a CNC machine tool generally involves at a minimum the production department, the finance department and the maintenance department. Therefore, to ensure accurate, effective selection decisions, experts from the internal and external environments need to be involved. However, few studies have discussed GDM applications for CNC machine tool selection. In addition, most fuzzy approaches have required some defuzzification process to obtain crisp results, so a further concern has been at which point the defuzzification process should be conducted when using the fuzzy VIKOR method, an issue which has not yet been fully explored in the literature.Therefore, based on the above motivations, the objective of this study is to present a GDM framework based on a fuzzy VIKOR method to solve a CNC machine tool selection problem. The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows. Related research is reviewed in Section 2. Some preliminaries for the fuzzy set and GDM are introduced in Section 3. In Section 4, two different algorithms are proposed to extend the traditional VIKOR method for a fuzzy GDM case. A general framework for an MCGDM based on the two algorithms is also presented. An application example for a CNC machine tool selection at the Pakistan Machine Tool Factory Private Limited is provided in Section 5 to demonstrate the computational procedure of the proposed approach. In the final section, some conclusions and future research directions are given.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Machine tool evaluation and selection for manufacturing companies is a time-consuming, complex decision-making problem as incorrect selection can have a negative effect on the overall performance of a manufacturing system and eventually lead to quality and productivity losses. From the discussion in this paper, some managerial implications can be derived from the proposed approaches. First, it is flexible, so decision makers are able to express their ratings over the alternatives and the criteria weights in linguistic terms. Fuzzy logic is a natural approach to explicitly handle the decision makers’ judgments. Second, in the application of the fuzzy model, to ensure better informed decisions, it is ideal that the decision information be provided by a group of experts rather than a single decision-maker. GDM allows engineers and managers to assess the potential strengths and weaknesses of a problem and apply their expert knowledge and technological understanding. In addition, VIKOR is an appropriate MCDM method for dealing with machine tool selection problems with multiple conflicting criteria. Further, as identified in [33], managers can select suitable weights (v) to highlight different aspects according to their own priorities. If a manager wants to highlight maximum group utility, thenv=1would be used. In contrast, if the manager is concerned about individual regret, thenv=0would be used.In this study, an integration of fuzzy set theory and a GDM approach was developed to extend the VIKOR method to the selection of suitable machine tool alternatives under a linguistic environment. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows1)Two algorithms, which differed in the defuzzification process, were presented to solve MCGDM problems using the VIKOR method. The first algorithm was simple and carried out the defuzzification process immediately after the fuzzy aggregation. The second algorithm implemented the defuzzification process after the calculation of the fuzzy index values and therefore involved more uncertainty.A general MCGDM framework for machine tool selection based on the two algorithms was presented. As mentioned, this framework allowed for the incorporation of qualitative information expressed in linguistic terms and considered the aggregation of individual preferences.An application example for CNC machine selection at a Pakistani machine tool factory was given to verify the proposed approach. A comparative study demonstrated the distinct characteristics of the two algorithms. It was shown that both algorithms could be used to obtain a better understanding of the solution.Although the proposed fuzzy VIKOR based framework has some advantages when seeking to solve machine tool selection problems, there are still some limitations left for further research. In this paper, the criteria weights were supplied directly by the decision makers using the linguistic variables. This was simple and easy, but the interdependence and feedback relationships between the criteria were not considered. When such relationships are explicitly involved, some further methods such as DEMATEL and ANP may need to be used. Second, the defuzzification and ranking methods have been very important issues in fuzzy VIKOR methods and other fuzzy MCDM approaches. Since various approaches can be applied, the design of a suitable benchmark for a given decision problem has yet to be addressed. In addition, no criterion has been identified for choosing group decision making defuzzification methods. This issue and the benchmark issue of the framework (the overall algorithm) are the two remaining areas to be resolved in the future. Third, the differing knowledge backgrounds, experience and potentially conflicting interests of the group members led to the necessity for a consensus reaching process before the individual preferences aggregation. Therefore, under a GDM setting, a consensus reaching process could be incorporated into the fuzzy VIKOR method to develop a more robust version.