@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybridizing two-stage meta-heuristic optimization model with weighted least squares support vector machine for optimal shape of double-arch dams

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing ACOR–PSO as a two-stage meta-heuristic optimization model to efficiently find the optimal shape of double-arch concrete dams.The improvement of ACOR–PSO in terms of computational efficiency, optimum solution, stability of results and convergence history in comparison with ACOR and PSO.Reducing the computational time of optimization procedure of double-arch dams subject to earthquake loads using weighted least squares support vector machine.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Double-arch concrete dams,Optimal shape,Continuous ant colony optimization,Particle swarm optimization,Weighted least squares support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A two-stage meta-heuristic optimization model is introduced to find the optimal shape of double-arch concrete dams. The main aim is that computational merits of the continuous ant colony optimization (ACOR) and the particle swarm optimization (PSO) be integrated. This proposed method called ACOR–PSO can accelerate the capability of exploitation and convergence of PSO. To achieve this, a preliminary optimization is accomplished using ACOR in the first stage of ACOR–PSO. In the second phase ACOR–PSO, PSO is utilized by using the optimal initial swarm of the first phase results. The weighted least squares support vector machine (WLS-SVM) is considered as the most reliable method for predicting the dynamic responses of dams. To testify the robustness and efficiency of the proposed ACOR–PSO, first, the well-known benchmark functions in literatures are optimized using the proposed ACOR–PSO, and provides comparisons with ACOR and PSO. Then, a real world double-arch dam is presented to demonstrate the effectiveness and practicality of the ACOR–PSO. The numerical results reveal that ACOR–PSO not only converges to better solutions but also provides faster convergence rate in comparison with ACOR and PSO.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Among the engineering structures, dams due to the following properties or features are so important: (1) economical and social utilization; (2) the largeness of structural scale; (3) the intensity of sensitivity to the damages from the possible destruction, etc. In this case, double-arch concrete dams are as one of the important engineering structures in designing and modelling. Hence, a proper shape design of double-arch dams has been considered as an important problem in dam engineering. An appropriate shape design seriously influences on the economy and safety of an arch dam. Also, the shape design depends on factors such as the interaction effects of dam-reservoir-foundation and the earthquake affects. Therefore, optimization techniques can be efficiently utilized to achieve an optimal shape for arch dams. This optimal design can consider the conditions of the economy and safety simultaneously [1].During the last years, various studies related to design optimization of arch dams were reported in Refs. [2–9]. In these studies, the optimum design of arch dams was considered under static and dynamic loads. In these studies, the effect of arch dam-water-foundation rock interaction was neglected, and the conventional mathematical models were utilized for analysis approximation and optimization task. In recent years, the optimal shape design of arch dams considering dam-water-foundation rock interaction subjected to earthquake loading has been developed by few researchers [1,10–14].The meta-heuristic optimization methods in comparison with gradient-based methods have been utilized to obtain global or near-global optimum solutions. Due to accelerating the convergence for exploring and finding promising regions in the search space, these methods are quite suitable for global searches. In the last years, the particle swarm optimization (PSO) has been introduced as one of the most popular meta-heuristic algorithms, and has been significantly developed [15]. Many successful applications of PSO based algorithms in engineering optimization of structures can be found in the literature. The main capability of PSO is the exploration mechanism in the search space. Hence, PSO can solve many optimization problems at lower computational cost than other meta-heuristic algorithms. Although, the premature convergence and the low searching accuracy are known as the shortcomings of PSO. In the case of large scale and complex problems, it can easily trap into local optimum, and therefore the exploitation capability of PSO is decreased. In recent years, many researches have been implemented to improve the exploitation capability of PSO. A comprehensive review of PSO and its variants is presented in Ref. [16]. Furthermore, other versions of PSO have been proposed in [17–20].In this study, the optimal shape of double-arch concrete dams including dam-water-foundation rock interaction is investigated using a two-stage meta-heuristic optimization model. The optimization method is based on a hybrid of the ant colony optimization for continuous domains (ACOR) [21] and PSO, which is called ACOR–PSO. The main aim of the proposed ACOR–PSO is to overcome the limitations of PSO in the optimal shape of double-arch concrete dams. Furthermore, the proposed ACOR–PSO can accelerate the capability of the exploitation and convergence of PSO in the solution space. To achieve this purpose, a preliminary optimization is accomplished using ACOR procedure in the first stage of ACOR–PSO. In the second phase ACOR–PSO, PSO as a local search is utilized to find a more accurate optimum design. In PSO, an optimal swarm is selected based on the hybrid the optimum solution of ACOR and random particles.To demonstrate the high performance and the global search ability of the proposed ACOR–PSO, first, the well-known benchmark functions in literatures are optimized using IGSA-CO. The results of ACOR–PSO are compared with the ACOR and PSO methods. The numerical results demonstrate the efficiency and robustness of the proposed ACOR–PSO. Then, the optimal shape of double-arch concrete dams is found by using ACOR–PSO with weighted least squares support vector machine (WLS-SVM) regression [22]. WLS-SVM is utilized to predict the time history response of double-arch dams in optimization procedure. Furthermore, the optimal solutions obtained by the proposed ACOR–PSO are compared with those of ACOR and PSO methods. The optimal results revealed that the proposed ACOR–PSO can create a robust tool for effectively optimizing double-arch concrete dams.The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the geometrical model of double-arch dam. The finite element model of arch dam-water-foundation rock system is described in Section 3. The optimization problem of double-arch dam is presented in Section 4. Section 5 contains optimization method and the proposed ACOR–PSO. The predicting the structural responses using WLS-SVM regression is introduced in Section 6. The verification of the proposed ACOR–PSO is presented in Section 7. In order to investigate the computational efficiency of the proposed ACOR–PSO for the shape optimization of double-arch dams, Morrow Point arch dam as real world structure is introduced in Section 8. Finally, the main conclusions are given in Section 9.Selecting an appropriate geometrical model is the most important stage of shape optimization of double-arch dams. In order to define the geometrical model of a double-arch dam, the shape of central vertical section is determined in first step. Then, the shape of horizontal section is defied in different levels of height. To achieve this purpose, specifying the curve of upstream and downstream levels is necessary.In this study, to define the upstream curve of dam central section, as shown in Fig. 1, a polynomial of 3rd order is considered as following:(1)y(z)=b(z)=S1−β2(S1+S2)2βh(1−β)−S1z−S1−β2(S1+S2)2βh2(1−β)z3where h, S1 and S2 are the height of dam and the slope at crest and the foundation of dam, respectively. Also, the point where the slope of upstream curve equals to zero is a position z=βh in which 0<β≤1 is constant.By dividing the height of dam into n segment contain n+1 levels, the thickness of the central vertical section dam is expressed as following:(2)tC(z)=∑i=1n+1Li(Z)tCiwhere tciindicates the thickness of the central vertical section at ith level. Also, in the above mentioned equation, Li(z) is the Lagrange interpolation function corresponding to ith level shown as:(3)Li(z)=∏k=1n+1(z−zk)∏i=1n+1(zi−zk),k≠iwhere ziis the z coordinate of ith level in the central vertical section of dam.For the radii of curvature correspond to upstream and downstream levels of dam (ru, rd), as shown in Fig. 2, two functions of nth order with respect to z can be utilized as:(4)ru(z)=∑i=1n+1Li(z)rui(5)rd(z)=∑i=1n+1Li(z)rdiwhere ruiand rdiare the radii values of downstream and upstream of dam at ith level, respectively. In this stage, the shape of a double-arch dam can be defined using the two parabolic surfaces as [23]:(6)yu(x,u)=12ru(z)x2+b(z)(7)yd(x,u)=12rd(z)x2+b(z)+tC(z)In which yuand ydare the levels of upstream and downstream, respectively.In solving the fluid-structure interaction problem using finite element method (FEM), the discretized dynamic equations of the fluid and structure need to be considered simultaneously to obtain the coupled fluid-structure equation.The solid dam is discretized by using finite elements and its equations of seismic motion including the effects of the reservoir and the foundation are expressed as [24]:(8)Msu¨e+Csu˙e+Ksue=−Msu¨g+QpewhereMsis the structural mass matrix,Csis the structural damping matrix,Ksis the structural stiffness matrix,ueis the vector of the nodal displacements relative to the ground,u¨gis the vector of the ground acceleration,Qperepresents the nodal force vector associated with the hydrodynamic pressures produced by the reservoir.The structural damping in the system is usually included by using a Rayleigh type of damping matrix given by [24]:(9)CS=α¯MS+β¯KSwhereα¯andβ¯are constants adjusted to obtain a desirable damping in the system, usually on the basis of given modal damping ratios.For a compressible and inviscid fluid, the hydrodynamic pressure p resulting from the ground motion of the rigid dam (Fig. 2) satisfies the wave equation in the form [25,26]:(10)∇2p=1c2∂2p∂t2where c is the velocity of sound in water and ▿2 is the Laplacian operator in there dimensions.The following boundary conditions are defined by assuming that the effects of surface waves and the viscosity of the fluid are neglected. As shown in Fig. 2, some boundary conditions may be imposed on the fluid domain as follows:(I)At the fluid-solid interface,(11)∂p∂n=−ρwanwhere n is the unit normal vector, anis the normal acceleration on the interface and ρ is the mass density of the fluid.At the bottom of the fluid domain,(12)∂p∂n=−ρan−q¯∂p∂twhereq¯is a damping coefficient which is the fundamental parameter characterizing the effects of the reservoir bottom materials. Relation between damping coefficient and ratio of reflected hydrodynamic pressure wave, α, is [27]:(13)α=1−q¯c1+q¯cAt the far end; A Summerfield-type radiation boundary condition can be implemented, namely:(14)∂p∂n=−p˙cAt the free surface,(15)p=0Eqs. (10)–(14) can be discretized to get the matrix form of the wave equation as [25,26]:(16)Mfp¨e+Cfp˙e+Kfpe+ρwQT(u¨e+u¨g)=0whereMf,CfandKfare the fluid mass, damping and stiffness matrices, respectively, andpeandu¨eare the nodal pressure and relative nodal acceleration vectors, respectively. The termρwQTis also often referred to as coupling matrix.Eqs. (8) and (16) describe the complete finite element discretized equations for the gravity dam-water-foundation-rock interaction problem and can be written in an assembled form as [25,26]:(17)Ms0MfsMfu¨eP¨e+Cs00Cfu˙ep˙e+KsKsf0Kfuepe=−Msu¨g−Mfsu¨gwhereMfs=ρwQTand Ksf=−Q. Eq. (17) expresses a second order linear differential equation having unsymmetrical matrices and may be solved by means of direct integration methods.In the present study, FEM of double-curvature arch dam including the interaction effects of dam-water-foundation rock system is based on the above mentioned theory and assumptions. The arch dam-water-foundation rock system as a three-dimensional linear structure is subjected to earthquake loading. The foundation rock without mass is considered flexibly and the inertia and damping effects of the foundation rock are neglected [25,26]. The foundation rock is extended to three times dam height in upstream, downstream and downward directions. In the analysis phase, first, a static analysis of the arch dam-water-foundation rock system is implemented under a gravity load and a hydrostatic pressure, and then the dynamic analysis of the system is performed using the Newmark time integration method [24]. Therefore, the nodal relative displacement vector of arch dam is used to evaluate the principal stresses at the centre of dam elements via conventional finite-element procedure.The double-arch dam optimization problem subjected to earthquake loading is stated as follows:(18)FindeX={x1,x2,…,xd}Ttominimizef(X)subjectedtogi(X,t)≤0;i=1,2,…,m;t=0,…,TeXL≤X≤XUwhere f, gjand t are the objective function, jth constraint from m inequality constraints and the time, respectively.XLandXUare the lower bound and the upper bound of the design variables,X, respectively. Te is the earthquake duration.A comprehensive overview of the most popular constraint handling approaches used in conjunction with meta-heuristic optimization methods was presented in the literature review by Coello [28]. In the present study, the external penalty function method as one of the most common forms of the penalty function in the structural optimization is employed to transform constrained optimization problem into unconstrained one as follows [29–31]:(19)f˜(X)=f(X)(1+rpPf)wheref˜(X), Pf and rpare the modified function, the penalty function, and an adjusting coefficient, respectively. The penalty function based on the violation of normalized constraints [29] is expressed as the sum of all active constraints violations as follows:(20)Pf=∑t=0Temax∑imax(gi(X,t),0.0)2,0.02This formulation allows solutions with violated constraints, and the objective function is always greater than the non-violated one.The most effective design variables of double-arch dam are its geometrical parameters explained in Section 2. The design variables are expressed as:(21)X={S1S2βtC1tC2⋯tCn+1ru1ru2⋯run+1rd1rd2⋯rdn+1}TIn this study, six different levels in the height of arch dam are considered (n=5). Hence, the vector of the design variables has 22 elements. While the symmetrical shape design of double-arch is considered, the vector of the design variables consists on 21 variables.In the present study, the concrete volume of the arch dam body is considered as the objective function, which can be obtained from integrating the arch dam surfaces as:(22)f(X)=∬Ayd(x,z)−yu(x,z)dxdzwhere ydand yuare the upstream and downstream surfaces of the arch dam, respectively; and A is an area produced by projecting the dam body on xz plane.In this study, the design constraints include behaviour, geometric and stability constraints. The principle stresses in the centre of each element located in the dam body are considered as the behaviour constrain. Theses stresses based on the time history analysis of foundation-reservoir-dam should not exceed the allowable stress. The constraints can be defined as:(23)σCt≤k1fcσTt≤k2ftwhereσCtandσTtare the principle compression and tension stresses in time t, respectively. fcand ftare the uniaxial compressive strength and the uniaxial tension strength for concrete, respectively; k1 and k2 are the incremental coefficients related to the effect of loading's speed/velocity and the dynamicity of loads which are considered as 1.3 and 1.5 in this study, respectively. Therefore, these constraints are defined as:(24)gC,e(X,t)=σCtk1fc−1;t=0,…,T,e=1,2,…,ne(25)gT,e(X,t)=σTtk2ft−1;t=0,…,T,e=1,2,…,newhere ne is the total number of dam elements, and T is earthquake duration.To control the stability of arch dams, the central angle of dam is limited in various levels of height. This constraint is expressed as follows:(26)ϕL≤ϕi≤ϕU⇒gS,iU=ϕiϕU−1gS,iL=1−ϕiϕL,i=1,2,…,n+1where ϕLand ϕUare the central angle of dam for downstream and upstream levels in ith level which is equal to 90° and 130°.The most important geometric constraint is to prevent from intersecting of downstream and upstream faces optimization process as:(27)rdi≤rui⇒gG,i=rdirui−1,i=1,…,n+1where rdiand ruiare the radii of curvature at the down and upstream faces of the dam in ith position in z direction.The slope of curve in the central section of crest and foundation is considered as geometric constraint, which is defined as:(28)S1≤Sall⇒gS1=S1Sall−1(29)S2≤Sall⇒gS2=S2Sall−1where S1 and S2 are the slope of curve in the central section of crest and foundation, respectively.In this study, the thickness of the central vertical section dam in the height of dam as geometric constraint is limited as follows:(30)tL≤tC,i≤tU⇒gt,L=tC,itL−1gt,U=1−tC,itU,i=1,…,n+1where tLand tUare the upper and down value of the thickness of the central vertical section dam.Also, to achieve the acceptable shape of arch dam in various levels, the following constraint is considered geometric constraint:(31)tC,i≤tC,i+1⇒gtC=tC,itC,i+1−1,i=1,…,nTherefore, the penalty function (Pf) in the optimization problem of arch dam is defined as the sum of all active constraint violations that expressed in Eqs. (24)–(31).In the present study, a two-stage meta-heuristic optimization method based on a combination of ACOR and PSO, called ACOR–PSO, is presented for finding the optimal shapes of double-arch dams. In this section ACOR and PSO methods are described at first, and then the proposed ACOR–PSO is introduced.The Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) was introduced for discrete problems. It is inspired by studying the behaviour of real ants searching for their food source. To find the optimum solution of problem with continuous domains, ACOR is based on iterating two steps [21]. In the first step, a number of k artificial ants build solutions for problem using sampling a probability density function (PDF) which is derived from the pheromone information. In the second step, the solutions are utilized to modify the pheromone such that the probability for constructing high quality solutions is increased.In ACOR method, the number of solutions memorized in the archive P is set to M, i.e.Xj={x1j,x2j,…,xdj}T,j=1,…,M.The solutions in P are always ordered according to their modified function values, i.e.,(32)f˜(X1)≤f˜(X2)≤⋯≤f˜(XM)For each variable xi(i=1, …, d), a Gaussian kernel PDF is derived from T as:(33)Gi(x)=∑j=1Mζj1σij2πexp−(x−μij)22σij2,−∞<x<+∞which is used to guide the ants in their search process. The weight ζjis calculated according to:(34)ζj∝1γM2πexp−(j−1)22γ2M2,j=1,…,Mwhere γ is a parameter of the algorithm. When γ is small, the best solutions are strongly preferred, and when it is large, the probability becomes more uniform. The value of the ith variable in the jth solution is chosen as the mean, i.e.μij=xij. The average distance of the other solutions from the jth solution multiplied by a parameter ρ is chosen as the standard deviation:(35)σij=ρM−1∑m=1Mxim−xijThe lower the value of ρ, the higher the convergence speed of the algorithm.At each iteration of ACOR, each artificial ant performs d steps from i=1 to d. At step i, the kth ant builds a partial solution of the optimization problem by sampling the PDF Gi(x). When the d steps are completed, a new solution,Xk={x1k,x2k,…,xdk}, is constructed. All the k solutions are added to the archive T, and the same number of the worst solutions is removed from it.PSO is inspired by the social behaviour of animals such as fish schooling, insects swarming and birds flocking. PSO was introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart [15] in the mid 1990s, to simulate the graceful motion of bird swarms as a part of a socio-cognitive study. This method involves a number of particles that are initialized randomly in the search space of an objective function. These particles are referred to as swarm. Each particle of the swarm represents a potential solution of the optimization problem. The ith particle in tth iteration is associated with a position vector,Xit, and a velocity vector,Vit, that shown as following,(36)Xit={xi1t,xi2t,…,xidt}Vit={vi1t,vi2t,…,vidt}where d is dimension of the solution space.The particle fly through the solution space and its position is updated based on its velocity, the best position particle (pbest) and the global best position (gbest) that swarm has visited since the first iteration as,(37)Vit+1=ωtVit+c1r1(pbestit−Xit)+c2r2(gbestt−Xit)(38)Xit+1=Xit+Vit+1where r1 and r2 are two uniform random sequences generated from interval [0,1]; c1 and c2 are the cognitive and social scaling parameters, respectively and ωtis the inertia weight that controls the influence of the previous velocity.Shi and Eberhart [32] proposed that the cognitive and social scaling parameters c1 and c2 should be selected as c1=c2=2 to allow the product c1r1 or c2r2 to have a mean of 1. The performance of PSO is very sensitive to the inertia weight (ω) parameter which may decrease with the number of iteration as follows [33]:(39)ω=ωmax−ωmax−ωmintmaxtwhere ωmax and ωmin are the maximum and minimum values of ω, respectively; and tmax is the limit numbers of optimization iteration.In optimization problem of large scale structures such as double-arch concrete dams, the structural analysis (function evaluation) is time-consuming procedure. Furthermore, the optimization problem of double-arch concrete dam on shape has many design variables. Due to the aforementioned problems and the slow searching speed of PSO in the last iterations, it can easily trap into local optimum, and therefore the exploitation capability of PSO is decreased. It is expected that this drawback of PSO can be dealt with selecting an initial swarm. Hence, an adequate initial swarm can increase the exploitation capability of PSO, and can effectively accelerate the convergence rate of PSO. To achieve this purposes, a two-stage meta-heuristic optimization method based on a combination of ACOR and PSO, called ACOR–PSO, is proposed in this study. In fact, the hybrid of ACOR and PSO can be known as a memetic algorithm (MA). MAs [34] are extensions of evolutionary algorithms (EA) that apply local search processes in the particles. The local search processes try to improve their fitness by using, for example, hill climbing. A comprehensive review of MAs and theirs variants is presented in [35].In the first stage of ACOR–PSO, ACOR is utilized, and a preliminary optimization is accomplished using ACOR. In the second stage, an optimal initial swarm is produced based on the optimum result of ACOR and a number of particles randomly selected from the search space of the optimization problem. In order to efficiently increase the global search capability of PSO, it is important that the particles of optimal initial swarm must not be too close to one other. To achieve this purpose, randomly selected particles with the largest Euclidean distance from the optimum solution of ACOR are assigned as other particles of the optimal initial swarm in PSO. Finally, PSO as local search with the optimal initial swarm is employed to find the best optimum design. The ACOR–PSO method is executed the following steps:Step 1:Utilize the ACOR algorithm and find the optimum design (XACOR).Replicate NACORparticles to create the initial swarm of PSO.Randomly select other particles of the initial swarm, which denoted asXrnd,j(j=1, 2, …, NPSO−NACOR), with the largest Euclidean distance fromXACOR.Utilize PSO as local search to find a more accurate optimum design using the optimal initial swarm.The algorithm flow of ACOR–PSO strategy is shown in Fig. 3.In order to reduce the computational cost of optimization process subjected to earthquake loading, many methods of predicting equipped with the techniques have been utilized [36–38]. Support vector machine (SVM) proposed by Vapnik [39] as an efficient metamodel has been used for modelling the high non-linear system based on small sample. This metamodel has been applied in many classification and regression problems successfully. SVM based on the structural risk minimization (SRM) rules is superior to artificial neural networks (ANNs), which have been developed the traditional empirical risk minimization (ERM) inductive principle [22]. Also, the problems as over learning, dimension disaster and local minimum are eliminated in SVM. Weighted least squares support vector machine (WLS-SVM) regression was introduced by Suykens et al. [22] to decrease the training computational effort of SVM in the large-scale problem. According to the practice, WLS-SVM is more robust and precise than that of SVM and least squares version of SVM (LSSVM). In this study, the WLS-SVM is utilized to predict the time history response of double-arch dams. Hence, WLS-SVM can significantly reduce the computing effort of optimization procedure.WLS-SVM regression is presented as the optimization problem in primal weight space as follows [22]:(40)minJ(w,e)=12w2+12γ∑i=1nv¯iei2subject to the following equality constraints:(41)yi=wTφ(xi)+b+ei,i=1,2,…,nwith{xi,yi}i=1na training data set, input dataxi∈Rnand output data yi∈R. φ(·):Rn→Rdis a function which maps the input space into a higher dimensional space. The vectorw∈Rdrepresents weight vector in primal weight space. The symbols ei∈R and b∈R represent error variable and bias term, respectively. By the optimization problem (40) and the training set, the model of WLS-SVM regression is defined as follows:(42)y(x)=wTφ(x)+bIt is impossible to indirectly calculatewfrom (40), because of the structure of the function φ(x) is unknown in general. Therefore, the dual problem (Eq. (40)) is minimized by the Lagrange multiplier method as:(43)L(w,b,e;x)=J(w,e)−∑i=1nαi(wTφ(xi)+b+ei−yi)According to the Karush-Khun-Tucker (KKT) conditions and eliminatingwande, the solution is given by the following set of linear equation:(44)Ω+Vγ1nT1n0αb=y0where(45)Vγ=diag{1/γv¯1,…,1/γv¯n};Ωi,j=φ(xi),φ(xj)Hi,j=1,…,n;y=[y1,…,yn]T;1nT=[1,…,1];α=[α1,…,αn]According to Mercer's condition, a kernel K(., .) is selected, such that:(46)K(x,x¯)=φ(x),φ(x¯)HSo, the resulting WLS-SVM model for the prediction of functions becomes:(47)y(x)=∑i=1nαiK(xi,x)+bWeightv¯kis estimated as follows [40,41]:(48)v¯k=1if|ei/sˆ|≤c1c2−ei/sˆc2−c1ifc1<|ei/sˆ|≤c210−4otherwisewheresˆis a robust estimation of the standard deviation for the error variables (ei=ai/Dii−1); constants c1 and c2 are typically chosen as c1=2.5 and c2=3. HereDii−1denotes the ith primal diagonal element of inverse of matrixD, which is the matrix on the left-hand of the system of the linear Eq. (43). After weightsv¯kare determined, the model (47) is obtained after solving WLS-SVM problem (Eq. (43)).In this study, radial basis function (RBF) is selected as the kernel function of WLS-SVM. The kernel function is defined as follows:(49)K(xi,xj)=exp−xi−xj22σ2where σ is positive real constant, and is usually so-called kernel width.In the proposed meta-heuristic optimization method, the great number of function evaluations is required to achieve the optimal solution. In particular, to achieve the optimal design of an arch dam-water-foundation rock system subjected to earthquake loading, the evaluation of dam requires a dynamic analysis of FEM. Hence, the dynamic analysis of arch dam has high computational effort. Also, the stochastic nature of evolutionary search technique with FE analysis (FEA) makes the convergence of the process slow. Therefore, in this study, the structural dynamic responses of arch dams are predicted using WLS-SVM instead of directly performing it by a time consuming FEA. This method can efficiently accelerate the optimization process and reduce the computational cost. To achieve this purpose, the 10-fold cross-validation (CV) is used to find the optimal values of γ and σ for training WLS-SVM [22]. According to Suykens et al. [22], the WLS-SVM regression based on RBF kernel function for predicting of the modified function is performed using the following procedure in this study:Step 1:Given training data{Xk,f˜k(Xk)}k=1Ntot, set N=Ntot.Given N training data, Find an optimal (γ, σ) combination on the total amount of Ntot training data by 10-fold cross-validation and solving linear system (44), giving the model (47).Sort the values |α|.Remove a small amount of M points (typically 5% of the N points) that have the smallest values in the sorted |α|.Retain N–M points and set N=N–M.Go to 2 and retrain on the reduced training set.In order to demonstrate the effectiveness and performance of the proposed ACOR–PSO, this method is tested using the 12 representative standard benchmark functions. These functions have been extensively utilized to evaluate the performance of optimization algorithms. The functions, dimension, the admissible range of the variable and the optimum are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. All the functions are to be minimized. The first six functions shown in Table 1 are unimodal functions whereas the last six functions given in Table 2 are multimodal optimization problems with a considerable amount of local minima.For the PSO method based on recommendation in Ref. [15] and authors’ experience, a population of 50 individuals is used; the inertia weight (ω), which starts at 0.9 and ends at 0.4, decreases linearly; the maximum iterations is considered to be 500. In the ACOR method, number of ants, archive size and the maximum iterations based on authors’ experience are equal to 50, 50 and 500, respectively. In this study, the optimization task is performed by a core™2 Duo 2GHz CPU and all computing times are evaluated by clock time.The performance of the proposed ACOR–PSO depends on some parameters. The appropriate selection of these parameters can lead to better solutions without a significant increase in the computational cost. In order to find the best value of theses parameters, the effect of ACOR–PSO parameters are investigated. For achieve this purpose, for example, the four functions (f1, f2, f3 and f7) are selected. One of the efficient parameters in the proposed ACOR–PSO is the number of replication of the solution obtained by the ACOR. This parameter is used to produce the initial swarm of PSO. To investigate the effect of this parameter, the parameter RACORis defined as:(50)RACOR=The number of the repilications of the solution obtained by ACORThenumberofparticlesininitialswarmofPSO=NACORNPSOTherefore, the value of this parameter, RACOR, is varied according to RACOR=0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7 and 0.8 while the values of other required parameters, similarly to the value of the parameters in ACOR and PSO are assumed. In order to consider the stochastic nature of the optimization process, ten independent optimization runs based these values of RACORare performed, and the results reported in Table 3. For the value of RACOR, the worst, average, best and standard deviation are calculated from the ten independent runs and shown in Table 3.It is revealed that the best optimal solution is associated with RACOR=0.4. It is noted that when the parameter RACORis increased, in ACOR–PSO the PSO method traps into local optimum. Furthermore, Table 3 indicates that the standard deviation of the results obtained based on RACOR=0.4 in the ten independent runs are smaller than those computed by other RACOR. Therefore, the proposed ACOR–PSO based on RACOR=0.4 has the most stability.The maximum number of iterations of ACOR in the first stage of ACOR–PSO is as another efficient parameter in the performance of ACOR–PSO. To investigate the effect of this parameter, the iterations of the ACOR are varied from 100 to 200 with the steps of 20 while in the second iteration RACOR, the maximum iterations of ACOR–PSO are selected to be 0.4 and 500, respectively. In order to consider the stochastic nature of the optimization process, ten sample runs are implemented.It can be seen from Table 4that the lowest values of the functions are obtained for 180 and 200 iterations. From the recorded simulated results of ACOR–PSO, the worst, mean, average, best and standard deviation for the ten simulated runs are calculated and the results are compared in Table 4. The standard deviation of the results obtained based on 180 and 200 iterations of ACOR is smaller than those computed by other values of the maximum iterations of ACOR. Because in ACOR–PSO the entire space search is encompassed by the optimal swarm, this swarm can increase the global search capability of PSO.Furthermore, in order to show the distinction of the computation cost among the values of the maximum iterations of ACOR, the time spent for every run of the functions is shown in Table 5A.As given in Table 5A, the difference of the time spent for every run between 180 and 200 iterations is significant. Therefore, the shape optimization of double-arch dam is considered based on 180 iterations of ACOR and RACOR=0.4.In this subsection, the performance of the proposed ACOR–PSO based on 180 iterations of ACOR and RACOR=0.4 is checked for solving the benchmark functions given in Tables 1 and 2. Also, in order to demonstrate the computational advantages of the proposed ACOR–PSO, this method is compared with ACOR and PSO. The optimum results of ACOR, PSO and ACOR–PSO are shown in Table 5B.It can be observed that the proposed ACOR–PSO is the best algorithm in comparison with the ACOR and PSO. Hence, the ACOR–PSO method converges to a near optimal solution with reasonable computational effort. Finally, the statistical results in terms of the average, best and standard deviation are calculated for comparison of the ACOR, PSO and ACOR–PSO. Theses values are obtained from the ten simulated runs, and then the results are compared in Table 5B. Numerical results demonstrate that the standard deviation of the results by the proposed ACOR–PSO is smaller than those computed by the ACOR and PSO. Therefore, the proposed ACOR–PSO has the best ability to avoid local minima.For f1, f2, f3 and f7 the convergence histories of the mean best solutions of ACOR, PSO and ACOR–PSO in the ten independent runs are shown in Figs. 4–7. The figures demonstrate that the convergence rate of the proposed ACOR–PSO is better than that of ACOR and PSO.In order to investigate the computational efficiency of the proposed meta-heuristic optimization method for the shape optimization of double-arch dams, Morrow Point arch dam, located 263km southwest of Denver, Colorado, is considered as a real world structure. The dam structure is 143m high with a crest length of 221m and its construction consumed about 273,600m3 concrete. The detailed properties of the arch dam-water system have been provided in Ref. [42].In the present study, twenty one variables are considered for creating the double-arch dam geometry. The lower and upper bounds of design variables required for the optimization process can be determined using some preliminary design methods. These bounds are shown in Table 6A. Also, for finding the optimum shape of the arch dam, the properties of concrete, water and foundation as shown in Table 6Bare considered.The ground motion recorded at Taft Lincoln School Tunnel during Kern country, California, earthquake of July 21, 1952, is selected as the excitation for analyses of Morrow Point arch dam. The ground motion acting transverse to the axis of the dam is defined by the S69E component of the recorded motion. This component of the recorded ground motion is shown in Fig. 8.An idealized FE model of Morrow Point arch dam-water-foundation rock system is simulated using FEM as shown in Fig. 9(a). Also, the FEM of dam body is depicted in Fig. 9(b). The material properties of the dam, water and foundation rock are given. The geometric properties of the dam can be found in Ref. [42].In order to validate FEM with the employed assumptions expressed in Section 3, the first natural frequency of the symmetric mode of the arch dam for nine cases are determined from the frequency response function for the crest displacement. The results are compared with those reported by Hall and Chopra [42] as given in Table 7.It can be observed that a good conformity has been achieved between the results of the present work with those reported in the literature.To generate a database for training and testing WLS-SVM, design variables of the arch dam defined in Table 6A is considered as the input vector of WLS-SVM, and the modified function given by (19) is taken as the output of WLS-SVM. Design of computer experiments [43] is employed for generating a set of combinations of the intervening design variables. This set is spread in the entire intervening variables by design of computer experiments. In this study, Latin Hypercube Design (LHD) proposed for computer experiments by McKay et al. [44] is used for generating 250 double-arch dam samples. Then, the principle compression and tension stresses of all double-arch dam samples are determined using FEA. It should be noted that a full dynamic analysis for each double-arch dam sample takes about 45min. Therefore, for training and testing WLS-SVM, the samples are selected on a random basis and from which 200 and 50 samples are employed to train and test the performance generality of WLS-SVM, respectively.In this study, a mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) is used to evaluate the performance of the WLS-SVM metamodel as follows:(51)MAPE=1nt∑i=1nt100×yi−y¯iyiwhere y andy¯are actual value and predicted value, respectively; and ntis the number of testing samples. Furthermore, relative root-mean-squared error (RRMSE) and the absolute fraction of variance (R2) are used to compare predicted and testing values for computing the model validation. The RRMSE and R2 are defined by using the following equations:(52)RRMSE=nt∑i=1nt(yi−y¯i)2(nt−1)∑i=1ntyi2(53)R2=1−∑i=1nt(yi−y¯i)2∑i=1nty¯i2The smaller RRMSE and MAPE and the larger R2 are indicative of better performance generality. The optimal values of γ and σ, and the statistical values and for predicting the effective responses of dam samples found from testing modes are obtained and the results are listed in Table 8.All of the statistical values in the table demonstrate that all the WLS-SVM regression achieve a good performance generality in predicting the responses of arch dam samples. Fig. 10shows the agreement between true responses and those predicted with WLS-SVM.In order to consider the stochastic nature of the optimization process, ten independent optimization runs are performed for ACOR, PSO and the proposed ACOR–PSO methods, and the four best solutions are reported. The optimum designs of the double-arch dam for using ACOR, PSO and the proposed ACOR–PSO based on WLS-SVM as approximate analysis are given in Tables 9–11.As revealed from the results of Tables 9–11, the proposed ACOR–PSO performs better solution compared with ACOR and PSO in the same number of iterations. The optimal dams are also analyzed by an accurate FEA and the value of maximum violated constraint for all design samples is determined and shown in Tables 9–11. For the optimal designs of ACOR–PSO, the percentage values of maximum violated constraints provided in Table 11 is less than 4.3%. Therefore, the results demonstrate the superiority of ACOR–PSO over ACOR and PSO taken as a criterion of comparison.Furthermore, the worst, average, best and standard deviation are calculated from the ten independent runs and shown in Table 12.As can be seen in Table 12, the standard deviation of the results is calculated by ACOR–PSO in the ten independent runs are smaller than those of ACOR and PSO, which indicate the more stability of the proposed ACOR–PSO.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A two-stage meta-heuristic optimization method is introduced to find the optimal shapes of double-arch concrete dams including dam-water-foundation rock interaction subjected to earthquake loading. The proposed meta-heuristic optimization method is based on a hybrid of ant colony optimization for continuous domains (ACOR) and particle swarm optimization (PSO), which is called ACOR–PSO. The main idea of the proposed ACOR–PSO is to combine the advantages of ACOR and PSO methods, and improve the global search ability of PSO. Hence, an adequate initial swarm of PSO can increase the exploitation capability of PSO, and can effectively accelerate the convergence rate of PSO. To achieve this purpose, randomly selected particles with the largest Euclidean distance from the optimum solution of ACOR are assigned as other particles of the optimal initial swarm in PSO. The main purpose of this is that the randomly particles are far away from the optimum solution of ACOR, and be able to search over again in the solution space. Consequently, in PSO the search capability of the global solution is increased. Also, the results show that the convergence rate of ACOR–PSO is higher than that of ACOR and PSO.In this study, the weighted least squares support vector machine (WLS-SVM) as regression model is utilized to approximate the dynamic analysis of arch dam instead of directly performing it by a time consuming finite element analysis (FEA). In order to assess the merits of ACOR–PSO and WLS-SVM, a real-world double-arch dam is optimized. Numerical results show that the proper optimal design can be achieved for the arch dam. The optimum designs obtained by the proposed ACOR–PSO are also compared with those produced by ACOR and PSO. ACOR–PSO shows the improvement in terms of computational efficiency, optimum solution and stability of results in the optimization process.