@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid approach based on fuzzy DEMATEL and FMCDM to predict success of knowledge management adoption in supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study proposes a prediction framework based on the fuzzy decision-making trail and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) and fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making (FMCDM) for KM adoption in SC.The proposed approach is helpful to predict the success of KM adoption in SC without actually adopted KM in SC.It also enables organizations to decide whether to initiate knowledge management, restrain adoption or undertake remedial improvements to increase the possibility of successful KM adoption in SC.This proposed approach demonstrated with empirical case study of a hydraulic valve manufacturing organization in India.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knowledge management,Supply chain,Fuzzy DEMATEL,FMCDM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Knowledge management (KM) adoption in the supply chain (SC) needs high investment as well as few changes in culture of entire SC. This study proposes a prediction framework based on the fuzzy decision-making trail and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) and fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making (FMCDM) for KM adoption in SC. This study first identifying the evaluation criteria of KM adoption in SC from literature review and expert opinion. Further, it uses fuzzy DEMATEL to evaluate weighting of each evaluation criteria's, after that FMCDM method uses to obtain possible rating of success of KM adoption in SC. The proposed approach is helpful to predict the success of KM adoption in SC without actually adopted KM in SC. It also enables organizations to decide whether to initiate KM, restrain adoption or undertake remedial improvements to increase the possibility of successful KM adoption in SC. This prominent advantage can be considered as one of the contribution of this paper. This proposed approach demonstrated with empirical case of a hydraulic valve manufacturing organization in India.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the globalization of business, organizations are keen for improving their competitiveness in order to sustain in the worldwide highly dynamic marketplace. The traditional approaches are no longer significant because the resource based economy has moved to the knowledge based. Knowledge is one of the most decisive factors capable of offering competitive advantages for supply chain (SC) partners [1–4]. Knowledge adds value to an organization through its contribution to products, processes and people, while knowledge management (KM) transforms information, data and intellectual assets into enduring value by identifying useful knowledge for management actions [5]. Knowledge and it's management have become critical for an organization. KM is a major enabler of SC, and is a critical element in information intensive and multi-cultured enterprise environments [6]. Many organizations have adopted KM by using their resources effectively and achieve competitive advantage. Simultaneously few organizations failure has also occurred [7]. KM adoption in SC is time consuming and it takes time to show its full impact on the organization. It is really hard to decide whether to adopt in KM in SC or not.Hence, the aim of this study is to predict the success possibility of KM adoption in SC. It can help the organizations to effective decision-making on KM adoption in SC. A Number of factors affect the success of KM adoption in SC indicates that the prediction issue is a multi-criteria decision-making problem. Human judgement in decision-making is often unclear and hard to estimate by exact numerical values. Hence fuzzy logic is necessary for handling problems characterized by vagueness and imprecision. This study proposes a prediction framework based on the fuzzy decision-making trial and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) and fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making (FMCDM). It helps organizations in analyzing their ability by considering critical factors in the success of KM adoption in SC, and predicted success/failure rates are then provided to enable organizations to determine whether to initiate KM, inhibit adoption or undertake remedial actions to enhance the possibility of successful KM. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discuses the KM adoption in SC. Next Section 3 discusses fuzzy logic and fuzzy DEMATEL. Section 4 then describes an analytical framework based on the fuzzy DEMATEL and FMCDM for measuring the possibility of successful KM in SC. In Section 5, an empirical case of KM adoption in SC in India is presented. Finally, discussion and conclusion are presented in Sections 6 and 7.Knowledge is an essential theoretical construct for understanding organizations, and the relationship between a firm's knowledge capital and its capabilities is now widely accepted [8]. Knowledge transparency brings new objectives of providing more detailed product information to the consumer and gathering more detailed knowledge about the individual consumer [9]. The SCs can be considered as a cradle of knowledge because they involve multiple autonomous players with varying cultures, managerial backgrounds and SC practices. The agility, adaptability, and alignment are characteristics of knowledge flows and knowledge sharing process among SC partners [10]. Knowledge development capacity and intellectual capital efforts are a good complement for other SC strategies [11]. Knowledge exchange within SC adds value to the SC and it improves efficiency [12,13]. Despite the recognized attitude of the firm to build external networks of collaboration, the natural network of relationships existing in the SC itself is the best network in which knowledge sharing and creation takes place. [14]. Knowledge capture and knowledge sharing, showing that these initiatives improve the integration of SC and the production performance [15].SC and KM represent two main streams of research that have significantly developed over the past several years and many related issues such as measuring success of KM adoption in the SC are still not addressed by consultants, practitioners or acadecians.Fuzzy logic was initiated in 1965 by Lotfi A. Zadeh, professor of computer science at the University of California in Berkeley. In the real world, many decisions involve imprecision since goals, constraints, and possible actions are not known precisely [16]. When making decisions in a fuzzy environment, the result of decision-making is highly affected by subjective judgments that are vague and imprecise. The sources of imprecision include namely unquantifiable information, incomplete information, non-obtainable information, and partial ignorance. Fuzzy set theory was first introduced as a mathematical way to represent and handle vagueness in decision-making [16]. In fuzzy logic, each number between 0 and 1 indicates a partial truth, whereas crisp sets correspond to binary logic: 0 or 1.Fuzzy logic can manage fuzzy and rigorous judgement in mathematics [17,18]. The necessary definitions of fuzzy logic in this study are specified as follows [18].(i)Fuzzy set normalizes matters without a specific range, the fuzzy setA˜in universe X must satisfy functionuA˜in X, whereuA˜is called the membership function ofA˜, that is, x∈X. The existing valueuA˜(x)∈[0,1], whereuA˜(x)refers to the degree of x attributed toA˜.It is a convex fuzzy set if the fuzzy setA˜in universe X satisfies:uA˜(λx1+(1−λ)x2)≥min(uA˜(x1),uA˜(x2))∀x∈[x1,x2], where λ∈[0, 1].It is a normal fuzzy set if fuzzy setA˜satisfies condition maxuA˜(x)=1.It is a fuzzy number when fuzzy setA˜in universe X satisfies convex and normal and the following conditions:(a)there is a x0∈X; provided thatuA˜(x0)=1uA˜(x)is piecewise continuousGiven real number α; α∈[0, 1], setAα={x∈X|uA˜(x)≥α}is called α – cut of fuzzy set, where Aαis a normal set.It is a triangular fuzzy number (TFN) if the membership functionuA˜(x)of fuzzy setA˜=(l,m,r)in universe X is defined as follows, where l, m, r are real numbers and l≤m≤ruN˜(x)=0,x<l,x−lm−l,l≤x≤m,r−xr−m,m≤x≤r,0,x>r,DEMATEL was first introduced at Battelle Memorial Institute of Geneva Research Centre. The aim of DEMATEL is to convert the relation between criterions, causal dimensions from a complex system to an understandable structural model of that system [19]. The decision-making in selecting appropriate management systems to create sustainable competitive advantages is a very important topic, which can be formulated as a MCDM problem [20]. Applying the DEMATEL illustrates the interrelations among criteria, finds the central criteria to represent the effectiveness of factors or aspects and avoids the “over fitting” for evaluation. Thus, non-additive methods, fuzzy measure and fuzzy integral are used to calculate the dependent criteria weights and the satisfaction value of each factor or aspect for fitting with the patterns of human perception [20]. The DEMATEL method is a good technique for evaluating problems and making decisions [21,22]. However, it is generally understood that human perceptions on decision factors are usually judged subjectively. In many practical cases, the human preference model is uncertain and might be reluctant or unable to assign exact numerical values to describe the preferences [23]. The matrices or digraph portrays a contextual relation between the elements of the system, in which a numeral represents the strength of influence. Hence, the fuzzy DEMATEL method can convert the relationship between the causes and effects of criteria into an intelligible structural model of the system [19,24,25]. The fuzzy DEMATEL method has been successfully applied in many fields [25]. In recent years, the fuzzy DEMATEL method has become very popular, because it is especially pragmatic to visualize the structure of complicated causal relationships with digraphs.The proposed hybrid fuzzy DEMATEL and FMCDM framework to predict the success of KM adoption in SC has following three phases (see Fig. 1). Its procedure is as follows.The fuzzy DEMATEL is used to determine importance weight of evaluation criteria's of KM adoption in SC, is desribed as follows.Step 1: Defining expert panel and evaluation criteria for KM adoption in SCIn this step a large number of literature reviews is required to search and collect relevant information. Besides, it is necessary to form a panel of experts, which provides group knowledge for related issues. The possible factors affecting KM adoption in SC are figured out based on the information collected and expert opinion. These factors are finalized as evaluation criteria's for predicting the success of KM adoption in SC.Step 2: Fuzzy pair wise comparison matrix:A pair-wise comparison matrix of the evaluation criteria, which have been identified in step (1), should be presented to the members of the expert group. Then, the experts are asked to make sets of pair-wise comparisons to assign a degree of influence to each cell of matrix. A fuzzy scale with five different degrees of influence is used in this study. The degree of influence is one of five linguistic terms {no influence, very low influence, low influence, high influence, very high influence}. Each linguistic term has its own corresponding positive TFN. The applied fuzzy scale including its linguistic terms and their corresponding positive triangular numbers is shown in Table 1.A TFN can be denoted by a triplet (l, m, r) where l≤m≤r. Suppose zkij=(lij, mij, rij) where 1≤k≤K, to be the fuzzy assessment that the kth expert gives about the degree to which factor i have impact on factor jStep 3: Fuzzy initial direct relation matrixThe fuzzy initial direct-relation matrix is the average matrix of k pair-wise comparison matrixes, which are corrsponding to the number of k experts.Since the form of fuzzy numbers is not suitable for matrix operations, defuzzication algorithm is needed for further aggregation. Defuzzication is a method converting fuzzy numbers into a crisp number which is called the best non-fuzzy performance value (BNP). This paper employs CFCS (converting fuzzy data into crisp scores) for defuzzication.The fuzzy aggression procedure can be implemented as follows based on CFCS method.i.Standardization of the fuzzy numbers(1)xlijk=lijk−min1≤k≤KlijkΔminmax(2)xmijk=mijk−min1≤k≤KlijkΔminmax(3)xrijk=rijk−min1≤k≤KlijkΔminmaxwhereΔminmax=maxrijk−minijkCalculate the left and right normalized value(4)xlsijk=xmijk1+xmijk−xlijk(5)xrsijk=xrijk1+xrijk−xmijkCompute the total normalized value(6)xijk=xlsijk(1−xlsijk)+xrsijkxrsijk1+xrsijk−xlsijkCompute crisp value(7)BNPijk=minlijk+xijkΔminmaxIntegrating crisp value(8)aij=1K∑k1≤k≤KBNPijkThus, obtain the initial direct-relation matrix A=[aij], where A is a n×n non-negative matrix, aijindicates the direct impact of factor i on factor j; and when i=j, the diagonal elements aij=0.Step 4: Normalized direct relation matrixCalculate the normalized direct-relation matrix D=[dij], which can be obtained through Eq. (9). All elements in matrix D are complying with 0≤dij≤1, and all principal diagonal elements are equal to 0.(9)D=1max1≤i≤n∑j=1naijAStep 5: Total relation matrixCalculate the total-relation matrix T using the Eq. (10) in which I is an n×n identity matrix. The element tijindicates the indirect effects that factor i have on factor j, so the matrix T can reflect the total relationship between each pair of system factors.(10)T=D(I−D)−1Step 6: Prominence and influence of each criterionTo make the outcome more visible, we compute riand cjthrough Eqs. (11) and (12), respectively. The sum of row i, which is denoted as ri, represents all direct and indirect influence given by factor i to all other factors, and so rican be called the degree of influential impact. Similarly, the sum of column j, which is denoted as cjcan be called as the degree of influenced impact, since cjsummarizes both direct and indirect impact received by factor j from all other factors.(11)ri=∑1≤j≤ntij(12)Cj=∑1≤i≤ntijwhen i=j, ri+cishows all effects given and received by factor i. That is, ri+ciindicates both factor i's impact on the whole system and other system factors’ impact on factor i. The indicator ri+cican represent the degree of importance that factor i plays in the entire system. The priority weight of each influential factor can then be obtained by Eq. (13).(13)w˜=∑j=1nri+ci∑i=1n∑j=1nri+ciThe FMCDM procedure for deriving the possible ratings of success of KM adoption in SC, which is described below:Step 1: Identify fuzzy possible rating of successful KM adoption in SCThe experts (Ei, i=1, 2, …, m) are asked to express their subjective judgments regarding the possible rating of successful KM adoption in SC with respect to each influential factor (Cj, j=1, 2, …, n) by employing linguistic variables as listed in Table 1. The decision matrixY˜is defined as(14)Y˜=E1E2E3E4C1C2C3⋮Cny11y12y13…y1my21y22y23…y2my31y32y33…y3m⋮⋮⋮…⋮yn1yn2yn3…ynmwhere m and n are the numbers of experts and influential factors, respectively,y˜=(Lyji,Myji,Uyji)indicates the fuzzy possible rating of successful KM in SC assessed by ith experts with respect to the jth influential factor.Step 2: Aggregating fuzzy possible rating of successful KM adoption in SCTo obtain the aggregated fuzzy possible rating of success this study applied average score method to consolidate the fuzzy judgement values of m experts, given by(15)q˜j=1m∑i=1my˜jiwhereq˜j=(Lqj,Mqj,Uqji)indicates the synthesized fuzzy possible rating of successful KM in SC regarding the jth influential factor.Step 3: Defuzzification of possible rating of successful KM adoption in SCDefuzzify the TFNs into best nonfuzzy performance (BNP) values. The BNP value (BNPQj) for the fuzzy numberq˜jcan be calculated by the following equation, which is(16)(BNPQj)=(Uqj−Lqj)+(Mqj−Lqj)3+Lqjwhere Qjindicates the crisp possible rating of successful KM in SC with respect to jth influential factor.A predicted value (Psuccess) can be obtained by multiplying the importance weights of influential factors by the possible rating of successful KM adoption in SC.(17)Psuccess=∑j=1nRjQjwhere Rjdenotes the normalized importance weight of jth influential factor, and Qjrepresents the possible rating of successful KM regarding the jth influential factor. As the possibility of success is known, the possibility of failure is simultaneously computed as(18)Pfailure=1−PsuccessTo increase benefit and gain competitive advantage hydraulic valves manufacturing organization located in India interested to adopt KM in their SC. The organization has about 150 employees, 26 suppliers and vendors and about 50 corers turnover. Since KM adoption in SC is time consuming and costly preplanning is required for it. This organization interested to predict their success possibility of KM adoption in SC. The proposed approach is applied as follows.The evaluation criteria's of KM adoption in SC are analyzed by fuzzy DEMATEL method described below.(1)The CMD of the organization under study asks the one of the Senior Manager to help to form expert's panel. Then identified people who will be involved in the project and formed the 15 experts panel which comprising two senior managers, two IT representatives, three KM project representatives, five senior executives of SC members, and three customers to analyze chance of Successful KM adoption in SC. From the literature review 25 possible factors affecting KM adoption in SC are figured out. After discussion with expert panel these factors are finalized as evaluation criteria's for predicting the success of KM adoption in SC for the organization under study (See Table 2).Expert interviews are conducted to collect a pair-wise comparison matrix from the 25 evaluation criteria. By doing so linguistic assessments are obtained. Converting the linguistic assessments in to triangular fuzzy numbers by using Table 1.Then using CFCS (Eqs. (1)–(8)), these linguistic assessments are aggregated to crisp values which represent the degree to which evaluation criteria's have direct impacts on each other. The Fuzzy initial direct- relation matrix is the average matrix of 15 pair-wise comparison matrixes, which are corresponding to the number of 15 experts. Thus the initial direct-relation matrix is obtained (Table 3).Normalize initial direct relation matrix by using Eq. (9).The total-relation matrix is obtained by using the Eq. (10) (see Table 4).Indexes and scores of each factor can be obtained using Eqs. (11) and (12), as shown in Table 5. Based on the above outcomes, the priority weight of each evaluation criteria can then be obtained by Eq. (13).Table 5 thus summarizes the normalized importance weight and rank of each evaluation criteria assessed by 15 experts.The possible rating for successful KM adoption in SC with regard to each evaluation criteria is calculated as follows:(1)The 15 experts are asked to express their views on possibility of successful KM adoption in SC based on each evaluation criteria using linguistic variables.The obtained linguistic variables are converted into corresponding TFNs, and the transformed data are shown in Table 6.This study uses Eq. (15) to synthesize each expert's different expressions towards the possible rating of success with respect to each evaluation criteria, and the aggregated TFNs are derived, which is shown in Table 6.The TFNs are defuzzified into crisp values by using Eq. (16), as shown in Table 6.A predicted value (Psuccess) is obtained by multiplying the importance weights of influential factors by the possible rating of successful KM adoption in SC, which is shown in Table 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
