@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of metaheuristics-based clustering algorithm to item assignment in a synchronized zone order picking system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Apply GA and PSO to assign items to storage zones based on items’ similarities.The co-appearance of two items in the same order is used as the similarity measure.Computational results indicate that PSO algorithm outperforms GA and existing algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cluster analysis,Storage assignment,Warehousing,Particle swarm optimization,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Warehousing management policy is a crucial issue in logistic management. It must be managed effectively and efficiently to reduce the production cost as well as the customer satisfaction. Synchronized zoning system is a warehousing management policy which aims to increase the warehouse utilization and customer satisfaction by reducing the customer waiting time. This policy divides a warehouse into several zones where each zone has its own picker who can work simultaneously. Herein, item assignment plays an important role since it influences the order processing performance. This study proposes an application of metaheuristic algorithms, namely particle swarm optimization (PSO) and genetic algorithm (GA), for item assignment in synchronized zoning system. The original PSO and GA algorithms are modified so that it is suitable for solving item assignment problem. The datasets with different sizes are used for method validation. Results obtained by PSO and GA are then compared with the result of an existing algorithm. The experimental results showed that PSO and GA can perform better than the existing algorithm. These results also show that PSO has better performance than GA, especially for bigger problems. It proves that item assignment policy obtained by PSO and GA has higher utilization rates than the existing algorithm.The index of item, a=1,2,…,qThe index of item, b=1,2,…,q, b>aThe number of zonesThe number of ordersThe similarity between two items, a and bThe number of items

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Logistic plays an important role in the supply chain. It relates to many aspects including information system, inventory, warehousing, customer satisfaction and etc. An efficient logistic management allows productivity improvement as well as cost reduction. Warehousing as one of an important part in logistic has to be managed well since the inefficient warehousing system may require high management cost. Aware of this issue, many companies focus on designing warehousing system which has high productivity and low cost. In the warehouse, order picking is a major operation which may give significant influences to the productivity rate. There are many systems which can be applied to improve the order picking operation such as order batching, routing and storage policies. This paper focuses on item assignment since assigning an item to the right location may optimize labor efficiency, including order picking, put away, and replenishment labor functions.A traditional storage policy focuses on differentiating items based on the order frequency and then assigning the fast-moving items and slow-moving items to two different locations. Practically, a customer order may consist of both fast-moving and slow-moving items. Thus, locating both of them in two different locations causes the order picker has to take far distance in completing the order. As the consequence, the customer waiting time becomes longer. A synchronized zone is one of order picking system that can reduce the customer waiting time [1]. In this system, items which most likely appear in the same order are stored in different zones. Herein, each zone has its own picker. When an order comes, items which are stored in different zones can be taken at the same time. Hence, the customer waiting time can be reduced. Different with other assignment policies which only consider relative distance between storage location and input/output point, the synchronized zoning system considers the similarity between items based on the historical data of the coming orders. The advantage of this policy is in reducing order processing time as well as increasing warehouse utilization. Dividing order picking area into zones makes the order pickers only travel within a small area and more familiar with their zone [2]. It therefore helps the order pickers work faster. Hence, this paper focuses on studying the synchronized zoning system. However, improper design may lead to workload-imbalance [3] and low utilization [4]. Thus, designing zoning system is very crucial in synchronized zoning system.In order to design the synchronized zoning system, Jane and Laih [1] proposed a heuristic method. In general, designing synchronized system can be defined as finding the best combination of each item’s location so that it minimizes the picking time or maximizes the picker efficiency. It also aims to balance the workload of each picker. Therefore, the item assignment becomes an important task in designing synchronized zoning system. This paper aims to solve this problem by proposing two algorithms which can cluster the items as well as determine the storage location of each item. Based on its objectives, this paper views this problem as a NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem. In many previous studies, metaheuristic methods have been proven can solve the NP-hard problems [5–7]. However, since the synchronized zoning system is a new proposed assignment policy, metaheuristic method has not been applied to solve this problem. Therefore, this study proposes an application of metaheuristic method to solve the synchronized zoning system. There are many metaheuristic methods have been introduced such as genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), tabu search (TS), bee colony optimization (BCO), simulated annealing (SA) and etc. However, this study only utilizes GA and PSO to solve the synchronized zoning system. GA is a very well-known optimization method. Its application in discrete combinatorial optimization problem has been well proven [8–12]. Therefore, it is chosen to be applied in this study. On the other hand, PSO was originally proposed for continuous problem [13]. It has been applied in many applications [14–16]. Later, its applications for binary and discrete problem were proposed [17] in many different ways. Since the problem discussed in this study is a discrete problem, applying PSO to solve this problem is feasible. Hence, this paper proposes an improvement of GA and PSO to solve the synchronized zoning system. The proposed algorithms intend to cluster the items and determine the item locations simultaneously. Through a relatively simple algorithm, the warehouse management can apply the proposed algorithms to optimize the warehouse operational cost.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature survey related to current study. Section 3 proposes the developed model, while the evaluation results are discussed in Section 4. Finally, the concluding remarks are made in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Warehousing system plays an important role in logistics management. It must be managed well since it influence significantly the production cost. There are many policies which can be applied in warehouse management. Zoning system is one of the policies which has many advantages. This paper focuses on the synchronized zoning system. The synchronized zoning system divides a warehouse into several zones. Each zone has its own picker where all pickers in different zones are allowed to work at the same time. The synchronized zoning system aims to increase the utilization rate of the warehouse as well as reduce the idle time or customer waiting time so that the customer satisfaction can be improved. In order to achieve these objectives, an appropriate item assignment is required. In order to assign each item to the correct zone, an item clustering should be done. Since synchronized zoning system allows all pickers in different zones to work simultaneously, the item clustering is made based on the appearance of the item in the same zone. Two items which tend to appear in an order are assigned to two different zones. Thus the order can be processed faster.This paper proposes an application of metaheuristic methods, namely PSO and GA, in item clustering for synchronized zoning system. The original PSO and GA algorithms are adjusted so that it can be applied for item assignment problem. In order to evaluate their performances, three different sizes of datasets are used. The results obtained by PSO and GA are compared with an existing algorithm. Tuning parameters used in PSO and GA are determined using experimental design. The computational results show that PSO and GA can overcome the existing algorithm. In general, PSO is better than GA. Only for the smallest dataset, GA has slightly better result than PSO. However GA performance for larger dataset is not as good as its performance in small dataset. These results show that although the original PSO was not made for discrete problem, by a good transformation strategy, it also can be applied or discrete problem. On the other hand, GA might meet difficulty when solving a larger problem where number of total bits is much higher than the number of bits changed in crossover or mutation. In terms of computational time, both PSO and GA need longer computational time than the existing algorithm. However, the computational time spent by PSO and GA is only around three minutes for large dataset or less for smaller dataset. Thus, it is still acceptable. Finally, it can be concluded that both PSO and GA can solve the item assignment for synchronized zoning system. It is shown by the increasing utilization rate. When the utilization rate increased, the picker idle time also decreases. However, the picker workload increases. Further studies should consider the trade-off between utilization rate and picker workload.