@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stigmergic cooperation of nanoparticles for swarm fuzzy control of low-density lipoprotein concentration in the arterial wall

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The concept of swarm fuzzy control by stigmergic cooperation of simple nanoparticles is proposed.The approach is applied to control of LDL concentration in the arterial wall.The universal function approximation property is shown in the aqueous environment of living tissue.Numerical simulations show improved performance in contrast to authors’ earlier work.The new scheme can distinguish between healthy and unhealthy arterial walls to reduce drug side effects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Swarm control,Nanomedicine,Fuzzy control,Atherosclerosis,Nanoparticles,Stigmergy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes the use of stigmergic cooperation between two swarms of Fuzzy Nanoparticles (FNPs) and Auxiliary Nanoparticles (ANPs) for intelligent control of Low-Density Lipoprotein (LDL) concentration in the arterial wall, as a novel non-invasive method for prevention of atherosclerosis. Given any desired fuzzy controller, a swarm of FNPs in the aqueous environment of a living tissue can collectively realize an accurate approximation of this controller, which is called swarm fuzzy controller. In this study, the task of the swarm fuzzy controller is to manipulate the pheromone level of the environment as output according to the sensed value of LDL concentration as input. Pheromone is a chemical substance that is used for stigmergic communication between two swarms of FNPs and ANPs. An ANP consists of a drug reservoir connected to a nanoscale valve which is controllable by pheromone concentration. The level of pheromone in the local environment of an ANP determines how much drug should be released by it. The hardware complexity of the proposed approach is lower than nanorobotics to facilitate its manufacturing. Simulation results on a well-known mathematical model demonstrate that this method can successfully reduce the LDL level to a desired value in the arterial wall of a patient with very high LDL level, while its performance is much better in contrast to the previous work of authors. Also, the mass of the released drug in a healthy wall is 16 times lesser than its corresponding value in an unhealthy wall.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical investigations have shown that an abnormally high accumulation of LDL (low-density lipoprotein) macromolecules, ∼22nm in diameter, within the arterial wall plays a significant role in initiation and development of atherosclerosis (or hardening of the arteries) that is one of the major causes of death in humans [1]. Recent advances in nanomedicine lead to manufacturing of nano-meter-sized agents such as drug-encapsulated nanoparticles (DENPs) that can selectively and locally deliver drugs to a specific organ or tissue which can considerably reduce unwanted side effects and thus increase the variety in choosing the type and dosage of drug. In contrast to the existing methods such as global drug delivery, angioplasty, and open surgery, local drug delivery by nanoscale agents have recently received significant attention as a promising non-invasive approach to prevent and treat atherosclerosis. Some of the previous works in this context have been reviewed by authors in their prior research [2].Authors, in their previous paper [2], proposed the notion of proportional DENP (PDENP) that utilizes a simple piecewise-proportional controller to realize swarm feedback control of LDL concentration within the arterial wall in computer simulation. The hardware complexity of PDENP is much lower than most of the nanorobots in order to be more reasonably realized technologically. But PDENP has a very simple piecewise-proportional controller unit which limits its flexibility and generality. Since the environment of a living tissue is usually uncertain, nonlinear and complex, nanoscale agents need intelligent controller units. But the structure of an intelligent controller unit is usually too complex to be implemented on a single nanoscale agent.A single nano-meter-sized agent has very limited capabilities either due to the inherent and physical limitations of nanoscale world or due to a need for further technological advancements. In other words, the hardware complexity of any realizable nano-meter-sized agent should remain as low as possible to facilitate its manufacturing within the existing bounds of technologies. Fortunately, nanomedicine has access to large swarms of nanoscale agents in even small volumes of the environment. The central question here is: can we exploit a swarm of very simple nanometer-sized agents to realize intelligent controller unit in a distributed manner at nanoscale? As one of the most important methods of intelligent control, this paper aims to focus on fuzzy control [3].There exist some works in the literature that have applied swarm computing to solve nanoscale problems. Hogg [4] proposed a multi-agent paradigm for distributed control of microscopic robots under Brownian motion to solve a specific locating problem in an aqueous environment thorough simulation. Hla et al. [5] considered each nanorobot as a particle and used particle swarm optimization (PSO) for collective movement and obstacle avoidance of a swarm of nanorobots in simulation environment. Chandrasekaran et al. [6] discussed the application of quorum sensing to realize swarm intelligence in a swarm of bio-nanorobots. Brickner [7] considered the populating problem in groups of nanorobots. Solomon [8] proposed a systematic method for the organization and self-assembly of the collectives of evolvable nanorobots and microrobots. Martel et al. [9] discussed a micro-assembly process and considered it on several thousand flagellated bacteria acting as micro-workers. Moreover, they described the problems of communication and cooperation in the swarms of sensotaxis-based bacterial microrobots [10]. Martel [11] also compared the aggregates of synthetic microscale nanorobots with the swarms of computer-controlled flagellated bacterial robots for target therapies through the human vascular network. Hirabayashi et al. [12] discussed the self-assembly of phage-like nanorobots. Al-Hudhud [13] proposed a communication model for a swarm of nanorobots performing a sweeping task to find cholesterol plaques and starts to swarm around the plaque. In [14,15], scientists demonstrated that a system of nanoparticles and engineered proteins can exploit one of the body's own communication pathways to communicate with one another to raise the concentration of systemically administered drugs at the site of a tumor. In comparison with this paper, most of these previous works are problem-specific and do not propose a general technique for realizing intelligent control at nanoscale.As a general method for realization of fuzzy control at nanoscale, this paper aims to propose a swarm fuzzy approach for control of Low-Density Lipoprotein (LDL) concentration in the arterial wall. The proposed idea is based on stigmergic cooperation between two swarms of Fuzzy Nanoparticles (FNPs) and Auxiliary Nanoparticles (ANPs). Given any desired fuzzy controller, a swarm of FNPs in the aqueous environment of a living tissue can collectively realize an accurate approximation of the desired fuzzy controller that is called swarm fuzzy controller. Since fuzzy controller has universal function approximation property [3], the new scheme can be considered as a powerful method for realizing intelligent nonlinear control at nanoscale. In order to facilitate its manufacturing, the hardware complexity of the proposed approach is lower than nanorobotics [16–20], while the performance is maintained by the synergism in the swarm architecture.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, mathematical modeling of the arterial wall including the LDL, FNP, pheromone, ANP, and drug transport is briefly reviewed. The proposed control approach is explained in Section 3. The notion of swarm fuzzy control, the details of the desired fuzzy controller of this study, the structures of FNP and ANP, and the concept of the stigmergic cooperation between two swarms of FNPs and ANPs are explained in this section. Simulation results on a well-known mathematical model of the arterial wall are illustrated in Section 4 for two distinguishing cases of unhealthy and healthy arterial walls and the performance of the proposed approach is compared with PDENP [2]. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.The anatomical structure of arterial wall is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1[1]. The important layers that play critical role in atherosclerosis are endothelium, intima, IEL (internal elastic lamina), and media [1]. Authors in [2] have introduced a general mathematical model as well as a MATLAB Toolbox, entitled ADENP Tool, for modeling and computer simulation of LDL-DENP-Drug transport in the arterial wall based on a well-known mathematical model of the arterial wall [1,21–24]. In this study, we aim to introduce three species including two novel types of nanoparticles including FNP and ANP, and pheromone. In this study, inspired by the natural pheromone in natural swarms like ants [26], pheromone is defined as a chemical substance which is used for stigmergic communication between two swarms of FNPs and ANPs.Depending on the sensors that are employed in a FNP, it can continuously take feedback from the concentrations of some species like LDL in the environment. Given any desired fuzzy controller, assume that the number of fuzzy rules is q. Therefore, q types of FNPs are totally required, where the jth fuzzy rule is implemented on the controller unit of the FNP of type j. A swarm of all types of FNPs collectively realizes an accurate approximation of the desired fuzzy controller, called swarm fuzzy controller, in the aqueous environment. The task of this controller is to manipulate the pheromone level in the environment. An ANP consists of a drug reservoir connected to a nanoscale valve which is controllable by pheromone concentration. The level of pheromone in the local environment of ANP determines how much drug should be released by it. Inspired by [2], the governing equations of LDL, FNP, pheromone, ANP, and drug transport within the arterial wall can be written as:(1)∂cLDLl∂t=−1−σfLDLlVfilt∇cLDLl+DLDLl∇2cLDLl−krLDLlcLDLl−RycLDLl,cdrugl(2)∂cFNPlj∂t=−1−σfFNPlVfilt∇cFNPlj+DFNPl∇2cFNPlj−krFNPlcFNPljforj=1:q(3)∂cphl∂t=−1−σfphlVfilt∇cphl+Dphl∇2cphl−krphlcphl+mph∑j=1qcFNPljuFNPlj(4)∂cANPl∂t=−1−σfANPlVfilt∇cANPl+DANPl∇2cANPl−krANPlcANPl(5)∂cdrugl∂t=−1−σfdruglVfilt∇cdrugl+Ddrugl∇2cdrugl−krdruglcdrugl−RzcLDLl,cdrugl+mdrugcANPluANPlwhere l is the layer number (from endothelium (l=1) to media (l=4)), ▿ the gradient, ▿2 the laplacian, Vfiltthe filtration velocity, and the reaction between LDL and drug is modeled by Ryand Rz. In this study, similar to [2], the drug is defined as a chemical compound which tends to combine with LDL, the chemical reaction between drug and LDL is presumed to be a second order reaction, and the products of this reaction could be excreted from the body through renal excretion.cLDLl,σfLDLl,DLDLl, andkrLDLlare the concentration, filtration reflection coefficient, effective diffusivity and reaction coefficient, respectively, for LDL in the lth layer. The similar notation is used for FNP, pheromone, ANP, and drug.cFNPljis the concentration of FNPs of type j in the lth layer. mphand mdrugare the mass of pheromone and drug molecules, respectively.uFNPljis the pheromone release rate (moleculess−1) by each FNP of type j, anduANPlthe drug release rate (moleculess−1) by each ANP in the lth layer. Fig. 2represents the boundary conditions at the interfaces between wall layers, where the continuity of mass flux and concentration is considered [2].In this paper, similar to [2], FNP and drug molecule are assumed to be spherical particles of 100nm and 4nm in diameter, respectively. Also, the physical/physiological parameters of ANP and pheromone are presumed to be as same as FNP and drug, respectively. The previous experimental studies in the literature demonstrated that the assumed size for FNP and ANP in the present study is applicable [2]. The details of model description and physiological parameters are presented in [2].Fuzzy control [3] has some noteworthy characteristics that can be crucial for intelligent control of living systems. Fuzzy controller could be designed from expert's linguistic information without any need to mathematical model of the system. Due to the property of universal approximation, fuzzy controller is able to control different types of systems such as nonlinear, multivariable and distributed-parameter systems. Also, fuzzy controller is robust against uncertainty. Furthermore, the formulation of a fuzzy controller is much appropriate for collective computing in the nanoscale which is the main focus of this section.In the present study, a fuzzy controller has n inputs (v1, ⋯, vn), one output (u), and q fuzzy if-then rules in the canonical form of “Rule j: if v1 is Aj1 and … and vnis Ajn, then u is Bj,” and utilizes product inference engine, singleton fuzzifier, and centers average defuzzifier, and has the following formulation [3]:(6)u=∑j=1qP¯j∏i=1nμAji(vi)∑j=1q∏i=1nμAji(vi)where n is the number of inputs, q the number of fuzzy rules, vithe ith input,μAjithe membership function (MF) of Aji,P¯jthe center of the MF of Bj, and u the output of fuzzy controller. The MFs are all normal, complete, consistent, and triangular [3]. Without loss of generality, the MFs over each input (Ajifor j=1:q) are defined in the format of Fig. 3, where the lower and upper bounds of the support of each MF are defined at the centers of the previous and next MFs, respectively. Following this format, it is proven that [3]:(7)∑j=1q∏i=1nμAji(vi)=1Consequently, Eq. (6) is simplified to:(8)u=∑j=1qP¯j∏i=1nμAji(vi)=∑j=1quFNPjwhere(9)uFNPj=P¯j∏i=1nμAji(vi)forj=1:qIn nanomedical applications, the fuzzy if-then rules of the fuzzy controller are linguistically defined by medical experts. Assume that the concentration of nanoscale agents in the aqueous environment of a living tissue is cfuzzy. The input signals viare the chemical concentrations of n different species that are sensed by each nanoscale agent, and the output u is the rate of drug or another chemical substance, such as pheromone in this study, which is released by each nanoscale agent in the aqueous environment. But regarding the limitations of the nanoscale world and today's nanotechnology, the fuzzy controller of Eq. (8) is too complex to be implemented on a single nanoscale agent. To address this problem, we propose a novel method to collectively realize an accurate approximation of the fuzzy controller of Eq. (8) in the aqueous environment by a swarm of specific simple nanoscale agents, called Fuzzy Nanoparticles or FNPs.Eq. (8) demonstrates that a fuzzy controller could be considered as a summation of q number of simple termsuFNPj(corresponding to the jth fuzzy rule, for j=1:q) which are structurally same but different in parameters. Manufacturing ofuFNPj(Eq. (9)) on a single nanoscale agent is much simpler than u (Eq. (8)). Hence, we employ a swarm of q types of FNPs, such that the concentration of each type (cFNPj) is set to cfuzzy, anduFNPjis implemented on each FNP of type j.In every small element of the aqueous environment (Fig. 4), the total pheromone release rate (per unit volume) by all q types of FNPs is equal to∑j=1qcFNPjuFNPj, that is the summation of the partial pheromone release rates (per unit volume) by each type of FNPs, wherecFNPjis the concentration of FNP of type j and equals to cfuzzy. Therefore, we have:(10)∑j=1qcFNPjuFNPj=∑j=1qcfuzzyuFNPj=cfuzzy∑j=1quFNPjAccording Eq. (8),∑j=1quFNPj=u. Therefore, the following equation is obtained from Eq. (10):(11)∑j=1qcFNPjuFNPj=cfuzzyuEq. (11) demonstrates that instead of implementing a conventional fuzzy controller on a single nanoscale agent (cfuzzyu), it could be realized by a collaboration between q types of FNPs(∑j=1qcFNPjuFNPj)with much simpler hardware. Fig. 4 illustrates this new control scheme that is called ‘Swarm Fuzzy Control’. Also, Eq. (3) in the previous section exploits this control approach. Due to the tiny size of each FNP and as shown in Fig. 4, every small element of the aqueous environment contains a considerable number of different types of FNPs. In practice, the distribution of different types of FNPs over the space is nearly uniform and thus Eq. (11) is approximately valid over the whole of the space. Fig. 4 schematically displays how a conventional fuzzy controller can be realized at nanoscale by a swarm of simple FNPs based on the notion of swarm fuzzy control.In this section, we aim to design a single-input fuzzy controller, in the form of Section 3.1, to control the LDL level within the arterial wall of patients with very high LDL level, which means that the concentration of LDL in the blood of these patients is more than 200mgdL–1[25]. The fuzzy controller takes feedback from LDL concentration (CLDL) as input, and computes the pheromone release rate (u) as output. It should be noted that the workspace of the fuzzy controller is the interior of arterial wall not blood. Thus, according to [2], to prevent releasing pheromone in lumen, u should be zero for CLDL>160mgdL−1. As a result, the fuzzy controller does not release any pheromone in lumen and the lower positions of endothelium in which CLDLis above 160mgdL−1. Also, to prevent releasing pheromone in healthy arterial walls, u must be low for 25mgdL–1<CLDL<100mgdL–1. As proposed in [2], to exploit the FNPs that are transported to intima, IEL and media in which CLDLis very low (less than 20mgdL–1), u is set to nonzero for small values of CLDL, corresponding to the LDL level in these layers. Generally, using the medical guidelines available in [25], and inspired by the structure of PDENP in [2], we design the fuzzy controller of Fig. 5, as the desired fuzzy controller of this study, which consists of 7 fuzzy if-then rules. The fuzzy rules, input MFs, and control surface of this fuzzy controller are displayed in Fig. 5. In the rest of paper, this fuzzy controller is realized in the aqueous environment by a swarm of seven types of FNPs according to the proposed swarm fuzzy approach in the previous section. Regarding the fuzzy controller of Fig. 5, it is important to note that in general, these fuzzy if-then rules should be designed under the supervision of medical experts. However, in this paper, the fuzzy rule base of Fig. 5a has been designed based on the knowledge that we had acquired from References [2] and [25] as well as our experiments in the simulation environment.Fig. 6shows the structure of a FNP of type j that consists of a nanoscale molecular concentration sensor for taking feedback from LDL concentration(cLDLl)and a controller unit for implementing the formulation ofuFNPljas defined in Eq. (9) (Fig. 4). This controller unit manipulates a controllable molecular pump, connected to a pheromone reservoir, to adjust the pheromone release rate of FNP, i.e.uFNPljas defined in Eq. (3). This pump releases the pheromone molecules in the aqueous environment with a flow rate determined by the controller unit (uFNPlj). According to Fig. 6 and Eqs. (1)–(5), the governing equation of FNP is:(12)uFNPlj=P¯jμAjcLDLlwhereμAjandP¯jare the membership function of the antecedent and the center of the consequent of the jth fuzzy rule (Eq. (9) and Fig. 5), respectively.As mentioned earlier, in this study, FNPs are just employed for releasing pheromone not drug. The important question here is: why are FNPs not used for releasing drug? Due to the risk of toxicity, there is a limitation on the concentration of nanoparticles in blood. In this study, the blood concentration of each type of FNP is the same and it is set to 1/q of the total concentration of all types of FNPs in blood. Hence, if the number of fuzzy rules (q) is large, the blood concentration of each type of FNP becomes low. Since at each time, only few fuzzy rules are fired among all fuzzy rules [3], this causes that the total number of the released molecules by FNPs in the environment of a living tissue becomes very small. But in most of diseases, the release rate of nanoparticles should be large enough. As a result, FNP is not appropriate for releasing drug if the number of fuzzy rules (q) is large.To solve this problem, we propose ANP as a specific DENP which is responsible for releasing drug. In this approach, the swarm of FNPs collectively realizes the desired swarm fuzzy controller in the aqueous environment of living tissue, when the task of this controller is to manipulate the pheromone level of the environment as output according to the sensed value of LDL concentration as input. Pheromone is a chemical substance that is used for stigmergic communication between two swarms of FNPs and ANPs. An ANP consists of a drug reservoir connected to a nanoscale valve which is controllable by pheromone concentration. The level of pheromone in the local environment of ANP determines how much drug should be released by it. By this means, the swarm of FNPs communicates with the swarm of ANPs in a stigmergic manner. Fig. 6 illustrates swarm fuzzy control of LDL concentration in the arterial wall by stigmergic cooperation between two swarms of FNPs and ANPs. As shown in this figure, every small element of the aqueous environment contains considerable number of different nanometer-sized agents including LDL, drug, pheromone, different types of FNPs, and ANP. Using this approach, the total concentration of FNPs in blood can be much lesser than the blood concentration of ANPs. In the present simulation study, we set the total concentration of all types of FNPs in blood to be 0.1 of the blood concentration of ANPs. So, the blood concentration of each type of FNPs is 0.1/q of the blood concentration of ANPs, where q is the number of fuzzy rules.The structure of an ANP is displayed in Fig. 6. The hardware complexity of ANP is simpler than FNP and consists of a controllable nanometer-sized valve that is connected to a drug reservoir. The drug release rate of this valve(uANPl)is linearly dependent to the level of pheromone(cphl)that is sensed from the environment by ANP. According to this figure and Eqs. (1)–(5), the governing equation of ANP is:(13)uANPl=kANPcPlwhere kANPis a positive constant gain, which is the application-dependent design parameter of ANP.Earlier experimental works in the literature, as reviewed in [2], are promising in showing that manufacturing of FNP and ANP may be reasonably possible in near future. In the present study, it is assumed that FNP and ANP have limited lifetime (above few days). Biodegradability is considered as the clearance mechanism of FNP and ANP. After the lifetime of FNP or ANP is finished (even if it is still full of pheromone or drug), it is broken into small biocompatible molecules (similar to the waste products of metabolism) which can be cleared from living tissues through natural clearance mechanism of human body. In this paper, we consider a nanoparticle as a system and our insight to FNP and ANP is abstract and mathematical. Thus, either FNP or ANP introduces an abstract model for nanoparticle, not a specific nanoparticle with certain material and physical–chemical structure. But the materials that are used in FNP and ANP must guarantee biocompatibility especially after biodegradation. FNP and ANP do not contain any propulsion unit, while they exploit natural diffusion/advection for locomotion such as natural macromolecules. Generally, the hardware complexity of the proposed approach is lower than nanorobotics to facilitate its manufacturing.In this section, the proposed swarm fuzzy control approach is used for intelligent control of LDL level in the arterial wall through computer simulation. All simulations have been done in ADENP Tool, a MATLAB toolbox for simulating nano-swarms in nanomedicine, developed in our prior research [2]. More details about this toolbox including the parameters of nanoparticles and drug molecules, values of environmental constants, numerical method for solving PDEs and other cases are available in [2]. The mathematical model of Section 2 (Eqs. (1)–(5)) has been simulated in ADENP Tool on a computer with Core i5-2.27GHz CPU and 3GB RAM. The total execution time for this simulation, including healthy and unhealthy cases, was less than 20min. The physical/physiological parameters of pheromone are considered to be similar to drug, and the parameters of ANP and FNP are assumed to be as same as PDENP in [2]. Here, the proposed nanoparticles (FNPs and ANPs) are administrated to a patient with very high LDL level. Thus, the LDL concentration in lumen,cˆLDL, is presumed to be 200mgdL−1 that is medically known as ‘very high LDL level’ [25]. The desired fuzzy controller is defined in Section 3.2 and Fig. 5, where the number of fuzzy rules (q) is 7. We take the concentration of drug, pheromone, ANP, and each type of FNP in blood (lumen) as 0, 0, 200mgdL–1 and 20/7μgmL–1, respectively. According to [2], these values are applicable. The initial values of drug, pheromone, ANP, and FNP concentrations in the interior of the arterial wall are all set to be zero. The maximum flow rate of the drug and pheromone pumps (umax) in ANP and FNP is set to 1500 moleculess−1[2]. In this simulation, kANP=4.5×109moleculesmm3g−1s−1 (Eq. (13)), andμAjandP¯jare defined in Fig. 5.We consider the effect of FNPs and ANPs on the LDL level of the interior of the arterial wall over 48h (two days) in two distinguishing situations: unhealthy (abnormal) arterial wall where the peak of LDL concentration is 200mgdL–1, and healthy arterial wall where the peak of LDL concentration is 60mgdL–1[25]. Figs. 7–9represent the simulation results for unhealthy arterial wall. Fig. 7 illustrates the changes in LDL, FNP, ANP, pheromone, and drug concentrations over time in each wall layer. In this figure, “min” (dot), “mean” (solid), and “max” (dash) stand for the minimum, average, and maximum value of the related signal over all points of the mentioned wall layer. As shown in this figure and as expected from Eqs. (1)–(5), all types of FNPs have the same pattern. According to Fig. 7a, the proposed approach could desirably control the LDL level in all wall layers in less than 2 days when all LDL concentration signals could reach steady state. In addition to LDL, the concentration signals of other particles could reach steady state in endothelium layer. Due to a delay caused by mass transport from endothelium to next wall layers, reaching the steady state will be happened a little later in those layers. Fig. 8a shows the maximum (dash) and minimum (dot) of the drug release rate by ANPs (left) and the pheromone release rate by FNPs (right) at each time, where umaxis also shown in these plots as a red solid line. These plots depict that the output release rate of FNPs and ANPs are always in the allowed range. In the plots of parts b and c in Fig. 8, the total input concentration of nanoparticles (including FNPs and ANPs) from lumen to arterial wall, and the average concentration of the drug released by ANPs (left) and the pheromone released by FNPs (right) into the arterial wall are shown at each time. It is important to note that the diagram of Fig. 8b is decreasing and converges to a very small steady state value. This result demonstrates the capability of the proposed approach in efficient consumption of nanoparticles that plays a critical role in reducing the side effects and cost of treatment.Fig. 9 represents the final (controlled) profile of LDL concentration in the arterial wall at the end of 48h and compares this profile with the desired (normal) and uncontrolled (without drug) LDL levels. In the present simulation, the desired (normal) LDL level is defined as the equilibrium point of Eq. (1) when the concentration of LDL in lumen is 100mgdL–1, corresponding to normal (optimal) LDL level, and cdrugis zero. The uncontrolled (without drug) LDL level is the initial value of LDL concentration is this simulation and defined as the equilibrium point of Eq. (1) when cdrugis zero, and the concentration of LDL in lumen is 200mgdL–1 for the unhealthy case (Fig. 9), and 60mgdL–1 for the healthy case (Fig. 12). According to Fig. 9, the controlled LDL level is even much better than the desired LDL level at most of the points of the arterial wall except the first middle of endothelium. This is expected and normal [2], and because of the parameters of the controller such that it does not release any drug in the lumen. Since the range of LDL concentration at the lower positions of endothelium is close to lumen, FNPs do not release any drug in this place and thus the LDL level is not significantly reduced. It should be mentioned that the thickness of the first middle of endothelium is smaller than 0.005 of the total thickness of these four layers of the arterial wall.Fig. 9 demonstrates that although the LDL concentration in lumen is very high (200mgdL–1), the proposed swarm fuzzy approach could successfully reduce the LDL level in all layers of the arterial wall with reduction rate (mean ([uncontrolled level−controlled level]/uncontrolled level)×100) of 37.33%, 75.31%, 75.35%, and 73.67% in endothelium, intima, IEL and media, respectively. Comparing these numbers with the results of the previous work of authors [2], 17.9%, 45.7%, 46.9%, and 61.3%, shows that the new method has much better performance in all layers in contrast to PDENP [2].These results show that the proposed technique could reduce the LDL level of the interior of the arterial wall to its desired value and keep it stably at that level until the concentration of FNPs and ANP in blood is maintained at its administered value. It should be noted that FNP and ANP are not designed to reduce the LDL level in blood flow, while it is designed to reduce the LDL level in the interior of the arterial wall to prevent the critical growth of atherosclerotic plaques. Hence, if the consumption of FNP and ANP is stopped by a patient with very high LDL level, since LDL level is still very high in lumen (blood flow), the LDL level will begin to increase in the interior of the arterial wall (because of concentration gradient between lumen and endothelium) [2].Similar to Figs. 7–9, Figs. 10–12show the effect of the proposed approach on a healthy (normal) arterial wall (LDL level of 60mgdL–1) over 2 days. According to Eqs. (1)–(5), the patterns of FNP and ANP (Fig. 8b and c) are the same in both cases of unhealthy and healthy arterial walls. Fig. 12 demonstrates that the proposed method could successfully understand that the arterial wall is healthy and it should not release drug in this tissue. In this case, the LDL reduction rate is trivial and 31.6%, 7.275%, 7.41%, and 7.68% in endothelium, intima, IEL and media, respectively. The area under the drug-time curves of Fig. 8c and Fig. 11c are 0.0327μgmL–1h and 0.0020μgmL–1h, respectively. Comparing these two values shows that the mass of the drug released in unhealthy (abnormal) arterial wall is above 16 times larger than the healthy wall. This confirms the efficiency of the proposed swarm fuzzy approach in distinguishing between unhealthy and healthy tissues which could significantly reduce the unwanted side effects of drug.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As a novel scheme for realization of fuzzy control at nanoscale, this paper proposes a swarm fuzzy control approach based on the notion of stigmergic cooperation between two swarms of Fuzzy Nanoparticles (FNP) and Auxiliary Nanoparticles (ANP). In this study, we employ the proposed technique for intelligent control of LDL concentration in the arterial wall as a novel non-invasive method for prevention of atherosclerosis. FNP and ANP do not contain any propulsion unit and can be naturally transported into the arterial wall such as macromolecules. Generally, the hardware complexity of the proposed approach is much lower in contrast to nanorobotics. Simulation results on a well-known mathematical model of the arterial wall demonstrate that although the LDL concentration in lumen is very high (200mgdL–1), the proposed swarm fuzzy control approach could successfully reduce the LDL level in all layers of an unhealthy arterial wall with reduction rate of 37.33%, 75.31%, 75.35%, and 73.67% in endothelium, intima, IEL and media, respectively. Comparing these numbers with the results of the previous work of authors [2], 17.9%, 45.7%, 46.9%, and 61.3%, shows that the new scheme has much better performance in all layers in contrast to PDENP [2]. Also, the mass of the released drug by the proposed technique in a healthy wall is 16 times lesser than its corresponding value in the unhealthy wall which demonstrates the efficiency of the new method in distinguishing between unhealthy and healthy tissues which could significantly reduce the unwanted side effects of drug. Future research could add actual dynamics of nano-bio concentration sensors, nanometer-sized actuators like mesoporous silica nanoparticles and pH sensitive nanovalves, and nanoscale processing and logic units such as DNA computing, to the proposed FNP and ANP. Moreover, more realistic model of arterial wall can be considered.