@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fast retrieval of hidden data using enhanced hidden Markov model in video steganography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The hidden Markov model is enhanced in the proposed system for fast retrieval of hidden data from video files.Data embedding and retrieval processes are performed using the conditional states and state transition dynamics between the video frames.It enhances the retrieval data rate with minimized computation cost.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Video steganography,Data hiding,Enhanced hidden Markov model,Conditional states,Fast data retrieval,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the digital world, secure data communication has an important role in mass media and Internet technology. With the increase in modern malicious technologies, confidential data are exposed at a greater risk during data communication. For secured communication, recent technologies and the Internet have introduced steganography, a new way to hide data. Steganography is the growing practice of concealing data in multimedia files for secure data transfer. Nowadays, videos are more commonly chosen as cover media than other multimedia files because of the moving sequence of images and audio files. Despite its popularity, video steganography faces a significant challenge, which is a lack of a fast retrieval system of the hidden data. This study proposes a novel video steganography technique in which an enhanced hidden Markov model (EHMM) is employed to improve the speed of retrieving hidden data. EHMM mathematical formulations are used to enhance the speed of embedding and extracting secret data. The data embedding and retrieving operations were performed using the conditional states and the state transition dynamics between the video frames. The proposed EHMM is extensively evaluated using three benchmark functions, and experimental evaluations are conducted to test the speed of data retrieval using differently sized cover-videos. Results indicate that the proposed EHMM yields better results by reducing the data hiding time by 3–50%, improving the data retrieval rate by 22–77% with a minimum computational cost of 20–91%, and improving the security by 4–77% compared with state-of-the-art methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Steganography is the process of hiding the existence of data in a carrier (or a cover-medium) such as text, image, audio, or video. Modifying a cover-medium to embed data into it facilitates secret communication. In digital steganography, the concealment of secret data is performed with a minimal effect on the interpretation of the original medium. Video steganography is an emerging sub-field of digital steganography. Many video steganography techniques have been proposed in recent years.Fig. 1shows the generic form of the video steganography process. The cover-video is the carrier of the secret message. Using a data hiding algorithm, the secret message is embedded in the cover-video, producing a stego-video. The stego-video is transmitted over the Internet. The receiver uses the data retrieval algorithm to extract the hidden message from the stego-video.This study proposes a video steganography method that focuses on the fast retrieval of secretly embedded data. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature on the existing methods. Section 3 presents the proposed video steganography system using enhanced hidden Markov model (EHMM). Section 4 discusses the EHMM algorithm used for data hiding and retrieval. Also described in this section are the experimental studies that illustrate the efficiency of the proposed approach. Section 5 provides the concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An EHMM is presented in this paper to enhance the speed of data retrieval from the stego-frames using the conditional states of the cover-videos. More precisely, EHMMs were applied to AVI videos to improve the speed of data hiding and retrieval. The algorithm presented in this paper is more robust because the secret data and cover-videos are bounded to the use of HMM. The input data were embedded and retrieved using a two-step approach in the proposed system. First, the conditional states of the cover-video frames were identified. Second, the transition among the sequences of conditional states of the video frames was computed. Data embedding and data retrieval were conducted based on a time series. The experimental results illustrate that the proposed technique retrieves hidden data quickly. According to the experimental results of the proposed EHMM, the data can be retrieved faster with lower computational cost. The proposed EHMM employs the conditional states and the state transition dynamics of the enhanced Markov chain. With the use of the enhanced Markov chain in the proposed EHMM, data embedding can be performed at a minimum time. The better use of conditional states of the videos reduces the computational cost incurred by the proposed EHMM, resulting in faster retrieval of hidden data from stego-videos and a good security level.The performance evaluation reveals that the retrieval rates for various video formats lead to different levels of concealment. The results indicate that the amount of time consumed by the proposed method for fast data retrieval is less than that consumed by the state-of-the-art methods. The evaluation reveals that the proposed method focused mainly on data concealment in AVI video files. However, in real-time environments, cover-videos could be on any file format. In addition, the proposed method used images as secret messages for embedding. Thus, the practical implementation of the proposed method could be explored by embedding other digital media files into videos of different file formats. An idea to enhance this research is to explore and establish numerous options for users in effectively selecting cover-media and to identify methods of embedding large amounts of secret data.