@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling the clickstream across multiple online advertising channels using a binary logit with Bayesian mixture of normals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model individual clickstreams across multiple online advertising channels.We find different effects across multiple advertising types on click probabilities.Two consumer types are identified which are differently prone to ad exposures.Paid search advertising positively influences effects of display advertising.We outline managerial implications in the real-time bidding technology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Display advertising,Retargeting,Paid search advertising,Consumer behavior,Baysian mixture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The evaluation of online marketing activities using standalone metrics does not explain the development of consumer behavior over time, although it is of primary importance to allocate and optimize financial resources among multiple advertising channels. We develop a binary logit model with a Bayesian mixture approach to demonstrate consumer clickstreams across multiple online advertising channels. Therefore, a detailed user-level dataset from a large financial service provider is analyzed. We find both differences in the effects of repeated advertisement exposure across multiple types of display advertising as well as positive effects of interaction between display and paid search advertising influencing consumer click probabilities. We identify two consumer types with different levels of susceptibility to online advertising (resistant vs. susceptible consumers) and show that the knowledge of consumers individual click probabilities can support companies in managing display advertising campaigns.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Imagine that we are following a consumer’s Internet browsing routines for one day. On that day, he searches for information and a variety of products via his favorite search engine, Google. Several advertisements are displayed during the search process; although he does not click on the advertisements, he perhaps notices and becomes aware of them. During the same session (i.e., within the same hour), he visits a couple of forums comparing the advantages and disadvantages of a specific product for which he had previously searched. The consumer is exposed to several display advertisements on that forum site, such as banners displaying a product for which he had previously searched. After exploring information on forums and other websites, the consumer clicks on a banner advertisement displaying the product or brand that was presented earlier in an advertisement on Google and purchases that product.On the Internet, this exemplary process of a user from creating awareness to conversion is often referred to as the user-journey. Fig. 1provides an illustration of such a user-journey across multiple types of online advertising.As outlined in our example, individual consumers are often exposed with more than one type of online advertising before these consumers click or purchase. Standalone metrics, such as click-through rates, which is the ratio of clicks to impressions, or conversion rates, defined by the number of purchases in relation to the number of clicks, are not able to realistically assign these clicks and purchases to a specific type of online advertising. These metrics neither explain the development of consumer behavior over time (i.e., a consumer is first exposed to a display advertisement, later searches for the advertised product, and finally purchases it) nor account for the potential effects of the interaction among these multiple types of online advertising. In our modeling approach proposed in this paper, we consider this development and account for interaction effects to explain consumer online behavior.In the last decade, the options for online advertising have become increasingly complex, leading to the necessity of making sophisticated decisions. For example, companies can combine several forms of display advertising on multiple platforms (i.e., information sites, forums, or social network sites) with advertising on search engines, which in turn has numerous different settings (i.e., the specification of the search queries, known as keywords, a company wants to be become displayed for). In this paper, we analyze (1) banner advertisements, to which consumers are nonspecifically exposed (i.e., because these display advertisements are delivered to consumers without accounting for their previous browsing history or considering their previous advertising contacts); (2) retargeted (banner) advertisements, which are delivered to “known” consumers who are identified on the basis of a cookie that is stored on a consumer’s personal computer (i.e., because of the previous browsing history or the previous visits to a company’s website); (3) video advertisements, which are multimedia advertisements that are displayed on YouTube; and, finally, (4) paid search advertisements. In paid search advertising, companies pay web search engines such as Google, Yahoo, or Bing for traffic from the search engine results page to particular websites. Advertisers submit their website information in form of keyword listings and become displayed if a consumer searches for these specific keywords on the search engine. These paid search advertisements are displayed on the top left and right alongside the search engine’s organic, natural results.There have been several attempts to assign the credit of a click or a conversion to multiple types of online advertising in practice (i.e., dividing the credit among all advertising contacts of a consumer or attributing the credit to only the first and last advertising contact (Uniquedigital 2012)). But the question of how different types of online advertising affect individual consumer clicking or purchasing behavior has not yet been comprehensively analyzed. At the same time, new technologies offer companies the potential to “follow” individual users across multiple types of online advertising on a highly detailed, individual consumer level and to record these resulting user-journeys (Kauffman et al. 2012, Lambrecht and Tucker 2011). These clickstream data are collected through cookie tracking by companies’ advertising servers and include user-specific information such as touch points with different advertising channels and the type of interaction (i.e., “view” if a user only sees an online advertisement or “click” if a user clicks on such an advertisement).Our objective is to develop a model that addresses these new types of individual clickstream data with touch points across multiple advertising channels to determine what settings and types of advertising drive consumer clicking behavior. The resulting knowledge is supposed to better support management decisions in allocating financial resources to respective advertising channels as it explains the effect of advertising activities more realistically than standalone metrics or simple heuristics do.This paper is structured as follows: first, we will review previous research related to this work. Second, we will present our model specification which is followed by the introduction of our dataset. After outlining our findings and discussing our results, we conclude this work by highlighting its limitations and providing suggestions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
