@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective optimal power flow using quasi-oppositional teaching learning based optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The optimal power flow problem is formulated as a multi-objective optimization problem.A teaching learning based optimization (TLBO) algorithm is presented for solving the OPF problem.Modifying the TLBO algorithm by applying opposition based learning (OBL) to enhance its search ability.The proposed approaches are implemented on three standard test systems.The effectiveness of the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO approaches are compared with NSGA-II, MOHS, EP, EPM and SFLA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal power flow,Teaching learning based optimization,Quasi-oppositional based learning,Multi-objective optimization,Voltage stability index,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes teaching learning based optimization (TLBO) algorithm to solve multi-objective optimal power flow (MOOPF) problems while satisfying various operational constraints. To improve the convergence speed and quality of solution, quasi-oppositional based learning (QOBL) is incorporated in original TLBO algorithm. The proposed quasi-oppositional teaching learning based optimization (QOTLBO) approach is implemented on IEEE 30-bus system, Indian utility 62-bus system and IEEE 118-bus system to solve four different single objectives, namely fuel cost minimization, system power loss minimization and voltage stability index minimization and emission minimization; three bi-objectives optimization namely minimization of fuel cost and transmission loss; minimization of fuel cost and L-index and minimization of fuel cost and emission and one tri-objective optimization namely fuel cost, minimization of transmission losses and improvement of voltage stability simultaneously. In this article, the results obtained using the QOTLBO algorithm, is comparable with those of TLBO and other algorithms reported in the literature. The numerical results demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed approach to generate true and well-distributed Pareto optimal non-dominated solutions of the multi-objective OPF problem. The simulation results also show that the proposed approach produces better quality of the individual as well as compromising solutions than other algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The main function of electric power system is to deliver electric energy to its loads efficiently and economically. Optimal power flow (OPF) problem has been one of the most important operational function and widely studied subjects in the power system operation and modern energy management system and so it has received much attention to the researchers in the past few decades. The objective of OPF is to minimize selected objective function of a particular power system while maintaining the different equality and inequality constraints. The equality constraints are the load flow equations, while the inequality constraints are the limits of independent and dependant variables. The independent variables are the generator real powers except slack bus power, the generator bus voltages, transformer tap settings and reactive power injection. The dependant variables are slack bus power, load bus voltages, the generator reactive powers and the line flows. Though, the main objective of OPF is to minimize the fuel cost. However, due to the continuous growth in the demand of electricity with unmatched generation and transmission capacity expansion, voltage instability is emerging as a new challenge for power system planning and operation. At the same time, insufficient reactive power sources of power system produce large transmission loss. In such situations, it may be necessary to consider voltage stability margin and transmission loss as part of the objective of the OPF problem. The various algorithms for solving OPF problems can be found in the literature. Carpentier (1962) was the first in formulating a method for the OPF as a non-linear problem. Since then, several techniques have been developed based on classical methods [1–4] such as Newton–Raphson, reduced gradient method, Lagrangian relaxation, interior point methods (IPM) and linear programming. However, these classical optimization methods are failed to handle nonlinear objective functions. The non-linear programming [5] may deal with problems involving nonlinear objective and constraints. However this method also has many drawbacks such as insecure convergence properties, excessive numerical iterations; resulting in huge computations and large execution time and algorithmic complexity. OPF is generally large dimensional nonlinear, non-smooth optimization problem. These properties become more evident and dominant if the effects of the valve-point loading of thermal generators are taken into consideration. Hence, it becomes essential to develop optimization techniques that are efficient to overcome these drawbacks and difficulties.In recent years, many heuristic algorithms, such as genetic algorithms (GA) [6], evolutionary programming [7], simulated annealing (SA) [8], tabu search [9], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [10] hybrid evolutionary programming (HEP) [11], chaotic ant swarm optimization (CASO) [12], bacteria foraging optimization (BFO) [13], differential evolution (DE) [14,15], biogeography based optimization (BBO) [16], harmony search algorithm (HSA) [17], artificial bee colony optimization (ABC) [18], gravitational search algorithm (GSA) [19] and harmony search algorithm (HAS) [20] have been proposed to find near global optimal solution. These may prove to be very effective in solving nonlinear OPF problem. Hinojosa and Araya in their most recent endeavour presented a mixed-integer-binary small-population evolutionary PSO (MIBSPSO) [21] for solving the OPF problem.Various optimization techniques have been proposed by many researchers to deal with the multi-objective OPF problem with various degrees of success. Abido presented the solution of the multi-objective OPF problem by the PSO algorithm [22]. Varadarajan et al. [23] presented a DE approach to compute Pareto-optimal solutions for OPF problem with multiple objectives. The authors discussed an empirical method to obtain a good population size. Enhanced genetic algorithm based technique was proposed by Kumari et al. [24]. Roy et al. [25] proposed BBO algorithm to solve multi-objective OPF problem where fuel cost, transmission loss and voltage deviation are optimized simultaneously. The proposed algorithm was implemented on 9-bus, 26-bus, and IEEE 118-bus systems. In this paper, multi-objective OPF problem is formulated by considering fuel cost minimization, real power loss minimization and the voltage stability improvement as competing objectives. Chen et al. recently proposed a multi-hive bee algorithm (MHBA) [26] for solving multi-objective OPF of IEEE 30-bus system and compared its results with non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II), PSO and ABC to proof superiority over other algorithms. OPF by a fuzzy based hybrid PSO approach was proposed by Liang et al. [27]. The proposed approach obtained best compromising solutions among the different algorithms compared. Multi-objective harmony search algorithm for solving OPF problem was proposed by Sivasubramani et al. [28]. In this paper, fuel cost, L-index and transmission loss were considered as multiple objectives and the results of the proposed method were compared with NSGA-II. Total fuel cost of thermal units, total emission, total real power losses, and voltage deviation obtained were compared with other algorithms. Bhattacharya et al. [29] introduced multi-objective based gravitational search algorithm (GSA) for solving OPF problems and simulation results were compared with mixed integer particle swarm optimization, evolutionary programming, genetic algorithm and BBO. The proposed method produced the most effective experimental results among all the algorithms. A fuzzy based modified artificial bee colony algorithm to solve discrete OPF problem that has both discrete and continuous variables and valve point effects was proposed approach by Khorsandi et al. [30]. Panda and Tripathy applied modified bacteria foraging algorithm (MBFO) [31] to find the optimal generation scheduling of wind and thermal generating units to minimize total system cost and maintain stable voltage profiles of the wind–thermal based power system. Roy et al. [32] presented quasi-oppositional BBO and implemented it on standard 26-bus, IEEE 118-bus and IEEE 300-bus systems for solving multi-objective OPF problem. Pandit et al. proposed improved bacterial foraging algorithm (IBFA) [33] for solving static and dynamic environment economic dispatch problem using the price penalty factor approach.In most of the above mentioned multi-objective OPF papers, the different objectives are converted to a single objective problem by linear combination of different objectives as a weighted sum. The important aspect of this weighted sum method is that a set of Pareto-optimal solutions can be obtained by varying the weights. But this requires multiple runs. Therefore, these methods require large computational time to find Pareto-optimal solutions of large scale OPF problem.To overcome this drawback, this paper presents Pareto based multi-objective teaching learning based optimization (TLBO) and quasi-oppositional teaching learning based optimization (QOTLBO) to find best compromising solution among the conflicting targets of minimum fuel cost, minimum transmission loss and minimum voltage stability index in one single run. Most recently, TLBO has been implemented in solving a few areas of power system [34–36]. A multi-objective teaching learning based optimization (MTLBO) [37] to simultaneously minimize the fuel cost and emission of IEEE 30-bus and IEEE 57-bus systems was introduced by Haghighi et al. To improve the convergence speed of basic TLBO algorithm and provide global optimal solution, quasi-oppositional based learning (QOBL) is integrated with TLBO in the proposed QOTLBO approach. The QOTLBO has recently been successfully applied in the area of economic emission dispatch (EED) [38], hydro-thermal scheduling (HTS) [39] and unit commitment (UC) [40]. However, the proposed QOTLBO has never been used to solve multi-objective OPF problems. This fact motivates the authors to used QOTLBO in the proposed area. The approach adopted to handle multi-objective problem in this article is different from the weighted sum approach. Here, weights are assigned to each solution in the Pareto set obtained after optimization, whereas, in weighted sum method, weights are assigned before optimization. The proposed algorithms are tested on IEEE 30-bus, Indian utility 62-bus and IEEE 118-bus test systems for different single and multi-objective functions. To check the effectiveness, the results of the proposed methods are compared with the results of non-dominated shorting genetic algorithm-II (NSGA-II), multi-objective harmony search algorithm (MOHS), EP, modified EP (EPM) and shuffle frog leaping algorithm (SFLA).The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The problem formulation of OPF is presented in section “Problem formulation”. In section “Teaching learning based optimization”, teaching learning based optimization is introduced. Quasi-opposition based learning is briefly described in section “Quasi-opposition-based learning”. In section “Quasi-oppositional teaching learning based optimization algorithm”, multi-objective QOTLBO is developed. In section “Input parameters and simulation results”, the studies of application cases are presented and demonstrate the potential of the presented algorithm. Finally, in section “Conclusion” some concluding comments are made.The optimal power flow (OPF) is a typical nonlinear and nonconvex optimization problem. Although most of OPF problems involve the total production cost of the entire power system, in some cases some different objective may be chosen. Optimal values of control variables are computed in order to achieve a certain goal such as minimization of generation cost, line transmission loss and L-index while satisfying several equality and inequality constraints. This is a typical nonlinear and nonconvex problem. The OPF problem is generally formulated as follows:(1)OF=minf(x,u)Subject to(2)g(x,u)=0(3)h(x,u)≤0wheref(x,u)is the objective function,g(x,u)is the equality constraint and represents typical load flow equation,h(x,u)is the system operating constraints; x is the vector of dependent variables consisting of slack bus power PG1, load bus voltage VLi, generator reactive power QGi, and transmission line loading SLi. Hence, x can be expressed as:(4)xT=[PG1,VL1,…,VLi,…,VLNL,QG1,…,QGi,…,QGNG,SL1,…,SLi,…,SLNTL]u is the vector of control variables consisting of real power outputs PGiexcept at slack bus, generator voltage VGi, reactive power injection QCiand transformer tap setting Ti. Hence, u can be expressed as:(5)uT=[PG2,…,PGi,…,PGNG,VG1,…,VGi,…,VGNG,QC1…,QCi,…,QCNC,T1,…,Ti,…,TNT]whereNG,NL,NTL,NC,NTare the number of generators, number of load buses, number of transmission lines, number of shunt compensators and number of regulating transformers, respectively.In this paper, three different single objective functions, two bi-objective functions and one tri-objective function are considered to determine the effectiveness of the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms.The main aim of this type of problem is to minimize the total fuel cost or production cost.The fuel cost function of generators, considering the valve-point effect, may be expressed as the sum of a quadratic and a sinusoidal function. The total fuel cost in terms of real power output can be expressed as:(6)f1(x,u)=minf(P)=∑i=1NGfi(PGi)=∑i=1NG(ai+biPGi+ciPGi2+|eisin(fi(PGimin−PGi))|)whereai,bi,ci,eiand fiare cost coefficients of the generating unit i. PGi,PGiminare operating power and minimum power of generator i.In this case the power transmission loss function is set as the objective function. The power loss is a non-linear function of bus voltages and may be expressed as follows.(7)f2(x,u)=min(Ploss)=min∑K=1NTLGK(Vi2+Vj2−2ViVjcosαij)where GKis the conductance of line K connected between bus i and j; Vi, Vjare the voltage magnitude at buses i and j, respectively; NTL is the number of transmission lines; αijthe voltage angle difference between buses i and j.Both reactive and real power losses increase rapidly as the system approaches the maximum loading point or voltage collapse point. Voltage stability problem has a close relationship with the reactive power of the system. Voltage stability can be improved by minimizing the voltage stability indicator L-index. Voltage stability index objective may mathematically be expressed as:(8)f3(x,u)=min(Lmax)=min[max(LK)]K=1,2,…,NLwhere NL is the number of load buses; LKis the voltage stability indicator of node k and may be formulated as [19]:(9)LK=1−∑i=1NGFjiViVj∠{θij+(δi−δj)}where Fjiis the sub-matrix associated with load voltage which is obtained by partial inversion of admittance matrix (YBus); θijis the phase angle of the term Fij; δi, δjare the phase angle of the i-th and the j-th bus voltages, respectively; NG is the number of generated buses.The emission function can be expressed as the sum of all types of emission considered, such as NOX, SO2, CO2, particles and thermal emissions, with suitable pricing of weighting on each pollutant emitted. The total emission can be reduced by minimizing the three major pollutants: oxides of nitrogen, oxides of sulphur and carbon dioxide. The total emission of atmospheric pollutants such as SO2 and NOXcaused by the operation of fossil fuelled thermal generation can be expressed as [41](10)EC=∑i=1Ng(αiPgi2+βiPgi+γi)where αi, βiand γiare emission coefficients.Very often, these objectives are conflicting with each other. Thus, it is essentially to find the best feasible solution which optimizes the opposing objectives simultaneously while satisfying the operational constraints. This type of problem is known as multi-objective optimization problem. In multi-objective optimization problems, the solution is called a Pareto-optimal set. A set of points is said to be Pareto-optimal if any improvement in one of the objectives inevitably leads to the deterioration of at least one of the other objectives. In most cases, the Pareto-optimal solution set is on the boundary of the feasible region.A multi-objective optimization problem consisting of a number of objectives and several equality and inequality constraints can be formulated as follows:(11)MinF=(f1(x),f2(x),…,fi(x),…,fP(x))x=x1,x2,…,xnwhere fi(x) is the i-th objective function andx=x1,x2,…,xnare the control variables of the objective functions.(i)Minimization of fuel cost and transmission lossThe bi-objective OPF problem with simultaneous minimization of fuel cost and transmission loss may mathematically formulated as a nonlinear constrained problem as follows:(12)F1=min[f1(x,u),f2(x,u)]Minimization of fuel cost and L-indexIn this type of optimization problem total fuel cost and L-index are optimized simultaneously and the corresponding objective function is given by:(13)F2=min[f1(x,u),f3(x,u)]Minimization of fuel cost and emissionIn this study, the objective function F3 is considered as the total fuel cost and emission of the system generators is given by:(14)F3=min[f2(x,u),f3(x,u)]In this case, OPF problem is formulated as a tri-objective optimization problem by considering minimization of fuel cost, minimization of transmission losses and improvement of voltage stability as objectives and is mathematically expressed as follows:(15)F4=min[f1(x,u),f2(x,u),f3(x,u)]The system operating constraints are as follows:(16)PGi−PDi−Vi∑j=1NBVj[Gijcos(θi−θj)+Bijsin(θi−θj)]=0,i=1,…,NB(17)QGi−QDi−Vi∑j=1NBVj[Gijsin(θi−θj)−Bijcos(θi−θj)]=0,i=1,…,NB(18)VGimin≤VGi≤VGimax,i=1,…,NG(19)VLimin≤VLi≤VLimax,i=1,…,NL(20)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimax,i=1,…,NG(21)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimax,i=1,…,NG(22)Timin≤Ti≤Timax,i=1,…,NT(23)QCimin≤QCi≤QCimax,i=1,…,NC(24)SLi≤SLimax,i=1,…,NTLwhere Gij, Bijare the real and imaginary part of the bus admittance matrix, respectively, of the (i, j)th entry; PGi, QGiare the active and reactive power generation of generator i;QGimin,QGimaxare the minimum and maximum reactive power generation of generator i, respectively; PDi, QDiare the active and reactive load demand of bus I;VGimin,VGimaxare the minimum and maximum generator voltage of bus i, respectively;VLimin,VLimaxare the minimum and maximum voltage of load bus i, respectively;Timin,Timaxare the minimum and maximum tap setting of transmission line i, respectively;QCimin,QCimaxare the minimum and maximum reactive power injection of shunt compensator i, respectively;SLimaxis the maximum apparent power flow in line i.Teaching learning based optimization (TLBO), is a very interesting population based optimization approach recently proposed by Rao et al. [42]. The proposed algorithm is based on the teaching-learning process. In the proposed algorithm, each candidate solution is characterized by a string of variables which represent the results of a student that consists of grade point of different subjects. The students try to improve their results by acquiring knowledge from the teacher and this process is termed as teaching phase in TLBO algorithm. At the same time they also improve their performance through mutual interaction with other students. This is termed as learning phase. A brief description of these two basic operations of TLBO algorithm is briefly explain below:(i)Teaching phaseThis operator is mainly responsible for global searching of the proposed algorithm. The teacher, most knowledgeable person in the class, always motivates the students to acquire supreme knowledge by which they can improve their academic performances. The goal of the teacher is to improve the average result of the class room from an initial level to his own level. However, in spite of his best effort, the teacher cannot improve the results of the whole class because it largely depends on the students own quality. Therefore, practically, it is impossible to bring the level of the whole class up to his own level and the teacher can only improve the average grade of the class to some extent.Using the above concept, the grade point of subject j of student i may be modified as follows:(25)Gi,jk+1=Gi,jk+λjkwhereλjkis the difference between the existing and new mean of subject j at iteration k which may be formulated as [42](26)λjk=rand×(Mnewjk−tfMjk)whereMnewjkis the mean grade point of subject j at iteration k; tf is the teaching factor which is evaluated randomly using (27):(27)tf=round[1+rand(0,1)]Learner phaseThis phase is mainly performed local search of the algorithm. In this step, the students improve their results through mutual interaction with other students. In this phase of the algorithm, each student randomly chooses one student for interaction and learns new things from the selected student if the selected student has better knowledge than him. It may mathematically be expressed as follows:(28)Gi,jk+1=Gi,jk+rand×(Gi,jk−Gl,jk)iff(OGi)<f(OGl)(29)Gi,jk+1=Gi,jk+rand×(Gl,jk−Gi,jk)iff(OGi)>f(OGl)whereOGl=[Gl,1,Gl,2,…,Gl,j,…,Gl,d]andf(OGl)is the overall grade point of student l.A brief description of different steps of TLBO algorithm is given below:Step 1: Initialize the grade point of each subject of all the students randomly within the given search interval as below:(30)OGi=(G1i,G2i,…,Gji,…,GSi)i=1,2,…,NSwhere, Ns is the number of students and S is the number of subjects offered andGijrepresents the grade point of subject j of student i and is given by:(31)Gji=Gjmin+rand(Gjmax−Gjmin)Step 2: Compute the overall grade point (fitness value) for all the students of the class.Step 3: The grade points of the students of the entire class are arranged in descending order. As the teacher is the most knowledgeable person in the class, if he appears in the examination, best grade point of each individual subject would become the grade point of the teacher. Therefore, the grade point of the j-th subject of the teacher would mathematically be expressed as:(32)Gjteacher=Gjbestj=1,2,…,SwhereGjbestis the best grade point of subject j.Step 4: Update the grade point of each subject of the individual student using learning concept from the teacher as explain in section “Quasi-opposition-based learning”. Modified grade point of the j-th subject of the i-th student is given by:(33)Gjinew=Gjiold+r1×[Gjteacher−round(1+r2)×Mj]where, r1, r2 are the random numbers uniformly distributed between (0,1) and Mjis the average grade point of subject j and is given by:(34)Mj=mean(Gj1,Gj2,…,Gji,…,GjNs)Step 5: In order to improvement the result further, every student exchange his/her knowledge with the other students. The modified grade point of the j-th subject of the i-th student is given by(35)Gjinew=Gjiold+rand×(Gji−Gjl)iff(OGi)<f(OGl)(36)Gjinew=Gjiold+rand×(Gjl−Gji)iff(OGi)>f(OGl)whereOGi=[G1i,G2i,…,Gji,…,GSi]Step 6: The optimization process is repeated for several iterations. This allows individuals to improve their fitness while exploring the solution space for optimal values. The iterative process of teaching phase and learning phase are continued until a user-specified stopping criterion, normally, the maximum number of iterations is met.Opposition-Based Learning (OBL), introduced by Tizhoosh [43], is a machine intelligence strategy and it considers current population and its opposite population at the same time in order to achieve a better approximation for a current candidate solution. It has been proved that an opposite candidate solution has a better chance to be closer to the global optimum solution than a random candidate solution [44]. This concept may be incorporated in any population based optimization technique to improve the convergence speed. The idea of OBL has been used in many basic algorithms [45–50] to speed up their convergence speed.The opposite number xo of a number x may mathematically be expressed as [43]:(37)xo=a+b−xwhere a, b are the extreme points of the search space.Similarly, the opposite pointOP(x10,x20,…,xi0,…,xd0)in d-dimensional search space of a pointP(x1,x2,…,xi,…,xd)may be defined as follows:(38)xio=ai+bi−xi;xi∈[a,b];i=1,2,…,dThe opposite population is created from the current population using(39)OPi,j=aj+bj−Pi,j;i=1,2,…,NP,j=1,2,…,Dwhere Pi,jand OPi,jare jth variable of the ith vector of the population and the opposite population, respectively.Many researchers [32,50] introduced quasi-opposition-based learning (QOBL) and proved that a quasi-opposite point is more likely to be closer to the solution than the opposite point.The Quasi-opposite pointQOP(x1qo,x2qo,…,xiqo,…,xdqo)of the pointP(x1,x2,…,xi,…,xd)may mathematically be expressed as:(40)xiqo=randai+bi2,ai+bi−xi;i=1,2,…,dIn this article, the authors propose quasi-oppositional teaching learning based optimization (QOTLBO) algorithm, by employing quasi-opposition based learning (OBL) concept in original TLBO. In this section, the implementation of QOTLBO to solve optimization problem is described. QOTLBO employs quasi-opposition based population initialization and generation jumping to accelerate the convergence rate of TLBO algorithm.The main steps of the proposed approach are listed as follows:Step 1: Generate initial Pareto front as described below:(i)Create a random initial population of the entire individuals within the upper and lower limits.Each solution is compared with every other solution in the population to determine whether it is dominated of not using the concept described below:x* is said to be a non-dominated Pareto optimal font if there exists no other feasible x in the search space such that, Create subsequent fronts with the vectors remaining in R(41)fi(x)≤fi(x*)i=1,2,…,P(42)andfi(x)<fi(x*)foratleastonevalueofi.Using (41) and (42), first non-dominated front are obtained. In order to find the next Pareto front, the solutions of the first front are temporarily discounted. The generated non-dominated front is temporarily discounted to create subsequent fronts from the remaining vectors and the above procedure is repeated.The above procedures are repeated until the final Pareto font is obtainedStep 4: Select np (population size) fittest individuals from population (P) and quasi-opposite population (QOP) according to the level of non-domination of Pareto frontStep 5: Modify the control variables of each individual using the concept of teaching and learning phase as explain in section “Quasi-opposition-based learning”.Step 6: Generate quasi-opposite population using jumping rate as described as below:ifrand<jrfori=1:npforj=1:ndxi,jq0=randaj+bj2,aj+bj−xi,j;endendendStep 7: Choose np fittest individuals from current population and the quasi-oppositional population using the level of non-domination of Pareto front.Step 8: Repeat Step 5–Step 7 until maximum iteration cycle is reached.Step 9: Obtain the compromise solution using Pseudo-weight vector approach described below: weight vector for each obtained solution is calculated using(43)wi=[fi(x)max−fi(x)]/[fi(x)max−fi(x)min]∑k=1m[fk(x)max−fk(x)]/[fk(x)max−fk(x)min]wherefi(x)max,fi(x)minare the maximum and minimum objective value of objective function i. Once the weight vectors are evaluated, the solution closer to a user-preferred weight vector can easily be obtained. This approach is entirely different from the weighted sum approach. In the proposed approach, weights are assigned to each obtained Pareto solution set after optimization, whereas, in weighted sum approach, weights are assigned before optimization.To the optimal settings of TLBO and QOTLBO parameters, 25 different trials with different set of input parameters on IEEE 30 bus system for the three individual objective functions are made and the following input parameters are found to be best for the optimal performance of the TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms:population size=50; number of iterations: 100; jumping probability (jr)=0.3.However, due to limitation of space, the OF values for different combination of input parameters are not listed in the manuscript.The proposed algorithms are developed in MATLAB 7.5 and run on PC with 2.5GHz core duo processor of 2GB RAM. For implementing the proposed techniques, population size of 50 and the maximum number of iterations of 100 is taken in this simulation study. The study is conducted on IEEE-30 bus, Indian utility-62 bus systems and IEEE-118 bus system for different single, bi-objective and tri-objective functions. The performance of the proposed QOTLBO algorithm is compared with that of basic TLBO algorithm for single objective, bi-objective and tri-objective problems. The obtained results are also compared with the results of the non-dominated shorting genetic algorithm (NSGA), multi-objective harmony search algorithm (MOHS), EP, modified EP (EPM) and shuffle frog leaping algorithm (SFLA). To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, different test systems with various objectives are considered.In this study, the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO approaches are carried out on the standard IEEE 30-bus. This test system consists of 41 branches, 6 generator buses placed at buses 1, 2, 5, 8, 11 and 13; 24 load-buses. Four branches (6–9; 6–10; 4–12 and 27–28), are under load tap setting transformer branches within the interval (0.9, 1.1). The possible 9 reactive power sources each having 5MVAr capacity are installed at bus numbers 10, 12, 15, 17, 20, 21 23, 24 and 29. The bus voltages are within the range of 0.95–1.1p.u. The bus data, transmission line data, load data and cost coefficient data of this system are given in [51]. To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches, three different objectives namely, fuel cost minimization; transmission loss minimization and voltage stability index minimization are considered individually. In addition to this, two bi-objective namely, fuel cost along with transmission loss minimization; fuel cost along with L-index minimization and one tri-objective of fuel cost along with transmission loss and L-index minimization are also considered for the same test system. The simulation results obtained by proposed TLBO and QOTLBO algorithm along with MOHS [28] for three individual objectives are listed in Table 1.It is observed from Table 1 that for cost minimization objective function, the fuel cost obtained by the proposed QOTLBO algorithm is better than that obtained by TLBO algorithm and is comparable to MOHS [28]. The simulation results of voltage deviation minimization objective shows that the proposed QOTLBO method gives much better results than those obtained by TLBO and MOHS algorithm. It may also be found from Table 1 that for L-index minimization the proposed QOTLBO method outperforms TLBO and MOHS algorithms. To illustrate the convergence of the proposed QOTLBO algorithm, fitness values of different objectives over 100 iterations are plotted in Figs. 1–3. It is found that the proposed QOTLBO algorithm converges rapidly towards the optimal solution and gives better improvement of fuel cost, transmission loss and voltage stability index compared to TLBO algorithm.Moreover, statistical analysis is made to check the robustness of the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO methods. The statistical results of average, best, worst objective values and standard deviation from the 50 independent trials obtained by the different methods are illustrated in Table 2. It is observed from the statistical results that mean, worst and best fitness values and standard deviation obtained by QOTLBO are better than those obtained by TLBO method for all the three different objective functions. Therefore, it can be concluded that the proposed QOTLBO method is promising and robust in solving single objective problems.In addition to the single objectives, in this simulation study, two bi-objective and one tri-objective optimization models are also examined. The simulation results of fuel cost-transmission loss bi-objective are shown in Table 3. It is seen from the results that QOTLBO gives best compromise cost and transmission loss of 826.4954$/h and 5.2727MW, respectively. This cost and loss is much less than the previously reported best compromising cost and loss of 832.6709$/h and 5.3143MW, respectively. This clearly proves the superiority of the proposed QOTLBO approach. The Pareto fronts obtained for TLBO and QOTLBO models are illustrated in Fig. 4. It can be observed from Fig. 4 that most of the non-dominated solutions obtained by QOTLBO model are better than those from its corresponding TLBO model. For instance, for the same level of fuel cost, the transmission loss obtain by TLBO is higher than that based on the QOTLBO model. Table 4shows the best compromising fuel cost and L-index obtained by proposed TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms as compared to NSGA [28] and MOHS [28] algorithms for simultaneous fuel cost-Lindex minimization objective. It can be deduced from the simulation results that the best compromise cost and L-index obtained by QOTLBO is least compared with TLBO and other evolutionary algorithms. Fig. 5shows the comparison of Pareto fronts between TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms. It can be appreciated from Fig. 5 that performances of the TLBO method is inferior as compared with the proposed QOTLBO method.Next, the tri-objective optimization problem is examined. In this case, TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms are applied to the problem where fuel cost, transmission loss and L-index objectives are treated simultaneously as competing objectives. Table 5illustrates the compromising fuel cost, transmission loss and L-index for the tri-objective optimization mode. Table 5 shows that QOTLBO gives the best compromising cost, transmission loss and L-index simultaneously, compared to those reported in TLBO, NSGA [28] and MOHS [28].To test the effectiveness of the proposed method for real test system, TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms are further demonstrated on Indian utility 62-bus system [41,52] having 19 generating units, 89 transmission lines, 11 tap changing transformers and 9 injected VAR sources. Moreover, the performance of TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms are compared with EP [41] and EPM [41] to check their superiority. The effectiveness of the proposed QOTLBO and TLBO approaches are judged by applying them in various single and multi-objective functions.Initially, fuel cost and emission cost are considered individually as objectives for Indian utility 62-bus system to check the algorithms’ performance. The optimal settings of control variables along with fuel cost and emission obtained by TLBO and QOTLBO for individual objectives are listed in Table 6. It is clearly visible that without violating any operating constraint, QOTLBO performs better than TLBO for both the objectives. To verify the robustness the statistical results of different algorithms for both the individual objectives are illustrated in Table 7. It is obvious from simulation results that the average, best, worst fitness value and standard deviation obtained by QOTLBO are lower thus better robustness of solution is ensured.Furthermore, to evaluate the performance of the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms for simultaneous minimization of fuel cost and emission, a bi-objective function is considered. Numerical results of the proposed methods are presented in Table 8and it is found total fuel cost and emission are 16,335.8673$/h and 10,711.5531lb/h respectively for QOTLBO algorithm. From the results, it is cleared that emission reduced by 11.1% with increase of 0.6% fuel cost as compared to fuel cost minimization problem. Moreover, with sacrificing the emission, in this case study, the cost obtained is lesser than the previous case of emission minimization objective. Furthermore, to proof the superiority of the proposed QOTLBO method, its simulation results are compared with those obtained by EP [41] and EPM [41]. The results listed in Table 9show that QOTLBO algorithm performs significantly better than all the other reported algorithms for both single and multi-objective problems.To verify the effectiveness and performance of the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO methods, they are finally implemented on a larger test system consisting of 118 buses for fuel cost, emission and power loss minimization. To keep the objective functions intact, for emission minimization objective, a linear emission model as used in [53] is considered in this case. The applied linear model of emission for 118-bus with 54 generators is defined as follows [53]:(44)F2(X)=∑i=1NgenδiPGilb/hwhere, δiis the emission coefficient related to the ith generator.In this simulation study, three single objectives namely fuel cost minimization, emission minimization and transmission loss minimization; one bi-objective namely simultaneous minimization of fuel cost along with emission; and one tri-objective namely simultaneous minimization of fuel cost and transmission loss along with emission are considered to test the performance of the proposed algorithms. The IEEE 118 bus system contains 14 synchronous condensers, 177 lines, 10 transformers and 91 loads. The system line and bus data are given in [54].At initial phase, the proposed algorithms are tested for individual minimization of cost of generation, emission and transmission loss. Tables 10 and 11provide a comparison of OPF results obtained by the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO methods. The comparative result clearly shows that the proposed QOTLBO method is capable of producing higher quality solution than TLBO method.At next phase, for comprehensively investigate the performance of the proposed approaches on multi-objectives OPF problem, QOTLBO and TLBO algorithms are applied on the same test system to solve a bi-objective optimization problem to simultaneously minimize the fuel cost and emission of the generating units. The simulation results listed in Table 12clearly show that QOTLBO produces better results as compared to TLBO in a significant way.Lastly, the proposed approach is implemented to search for the optimal solution of tri-objective optimization problem for simultaneous minimization of fuel cost, emission and transmission loss as objective. The simulation results obtained by TLBO and QOTLBO methods are illustrated in Table 13. The comparative results clearly show that QOTLBO gives lesser fuel cost, emission and power loss as compared to those obtained by TLBO method.Moreover, to validate and check the superiority of the proposed methods for solving individual and multi-objective optimization problems of the IEEE 118-bus system, their results are also compared with those obtained by recently published SFLA algorithm. Tables 14 and 15depict the comparison among various optimization methods for both individual and multi-objective optimization problem. From the comparison, it is found that the proposed QOTLBO algorithm gives the better results for all the objectives which demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. Fig. 6shows non-dominated Pareto-optimal solutions obtained by the proposed TLBO and QOTLBO algorithms after 100 iterations. It can be seen from Fig. 6 that the Pareto optimal solutions obtained by QOTLBO are superior to those obtained by TLBO. Few Pareto-optimal fronts of QOTLBO and TLBO for the tri-objective optimization runs are listed in Table 16.Furthermore, to check the robustness, the statistical results of the different methods for three different single objectives are listed in Table 17. For all the three individual objectives used in this work, it can be noticed from Table 17 that QOTLBO gives the better results in terms of best, worst and average value found in 50 independent runs compared to the TLBO and other methods.Table 18shows two computational sample sets of results with 50 and 100 population size. It is observed that the system performance variation with different population size is not very effective. Minor changes of TLBO performances are observed with the changes of population size. We can conclude from Table 18 that due to higher population size for the same TLBO algorithm, the changes in objective value is very minimal but it may increase the computational burden.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
