@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of stator winding faults severity in inverter-fed induction motors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Present a comprehensive evaluation of intelligent classifiers to identify stator faults in inverter-fed induction motors are presented.Proposed methodology uses the current signal in time domain as the inputs of the pattern classifiers for fault diagnosis.Experimental results with different inverters, operating frequencies and mechanical loads are presented.Three different intelligent methods are presented and compared for multiple faults under dynamic sampling rate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intelligent systems,Fault prediction,Three-phase induction motor,Stator faults,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three-phase induction motor are one of the most important elements of electromechanical energy conversion in the production process. However, they are subject to inherent faults or failures under operating conditions. The purpose of this paper is to present a comparative study among intelligent tools to classify short-circuit faults in stator windings of induction motors operating with three different models of frequency inverters. This is performed by analyzing the amplitude of the stator current signal in the time domain, using a dynamic acquisition rate according to machine frequency supply. To assess the classification accuracy across the various levels of faults severity, the performance of three different learning machine techniques were compared: (i) fuzzy ARTMAP network; (ii) multilayer perceptron network; and (iii) support vector machine. Results obtained from 2.268 experimental tests are presented to validate the study, which considered a wide range of operating frequencies and load conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Three-phase induction motors are now the primary means for industry to transform electrical energy into mechanical driving. Offering robustness and low cost, they can be used in most industrial applications, particularly in the production of components and accessories. As a result, these machines have widespread applications in various industrial processes [1,2].Although typically robust and well constructed, these motors have an inherent possibility of failure when in the operation. Incipient defects inside the machines usually affect their performance even before significant failures occur, which can cause losses in the industrial process. The application of methods for reliable fault diagnosis allows for effective maintenance and a consequent reduction in operational costs [3].According to [4] major faults found in three-phase induction motors are derived from electrical or mechanical problems. Stator faults represent approximately to 36–40% of the electrical problems associated with undesired stops in electric motors [4,5], and these figures were recently confirmed in [6–8].Traditional non-invasive techniques can be used to diagnosis this type of fault. These strategies are based on the analysis of quantities such as vibration, voltage, current, torque and speed [4,7,9,10].Currently, motors driven by using frequency inverters are an integral part of many production processes, due to their characteristics of speed regulation, fast dynamic response and allowing the incorporation of direct torque control schemes. Fault diagnosis in motors driven by frequency inverters has attracted the attention of many researchers in recent years [11]. Diagnostic technology currently available includes in several commercial models overvoltage/undervoltage, overcurrent, motor overload, short-circuit faults on the outputs, and protection against overheating.The literature discusses how faults detection in inverter-fed induction motors is influenced by the dynamics control as well load changes [4,12,13]. In the work [14] stator short-circuit faults in an inverter-fed induction motor were detected by reconstructing the stator current. Constant switching of the inverter voltage source contributed to a temperature increase and consequent wear of the winding insulation, leading to stator faults.In the work of [15] it was proposed the application of voltage tests, with the aid of the frequency converter, to evaluate the degradation of stator insulation in induction motors. These tests were performed when the motor was turned off. Additionally, the work of [8] suggests the diagnosing of stator faults in motor feeds either line connected or by inverters by comparing the analysis signature of instantaneous active and reactive potency obtained through current and voltage measures in the frequency domain.Computational methods have been widely studied for the diagnosis and classification of faults in electrical machines [9,16], and are able to classify and determine the origin of faults which are still evolving [17,18].The area of pattern recognition is based on the automatic discovery of data regularities through the use of computational algorithms, and them using these regularities to take actions such as classification these data in different categories [19].In the work of [20], stator winding fault detection in an inverter-fed motor is performed by analyzing the harmonic content of the stator current signature. The authors analyze a motor working with no load, 50% and 100% of rated load at frequencies of 30, 50 and 60Hz, using a low sampling rate to acquire the signals, which were subsequently interpolated.More recently, [6] developed a method for stator short-circuit fault diagnosis through the use of magnetic signals, by using the numerical finite element method in association with Artificial Neural Networks (ANN).Although the ANN and fuzzy logic have been presented separately as potential candidates for various approaches and pattern recognition applications, hybrid systems that combine fuzzy logic and ANN have been investigated for their pattern recognition and classification properties due to high adaptability and excellent generalization ability [21–23].Research on transient signals of induction motors has also attracted recent attention. Based on techniques for signal processing, [24] addressed the concept of fault identification by using Wavelet to analyze the current during the start-up transitional regime.Reference [2] developed an application based on analysis of the current signal during the transitional regime of the machine. The current signals were decomposed into individual components by Fourier-Bessel expansion, followed by application of generalized discriminant analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the original features of the signal. Finally, the simplified fuzzy ARTMAP classifier is used to identify motor conditions. The authors performed a comparative study with the SVM method.In reference [25] it was examined experimental results for the monitoring of small short-circuit faults by using signal processing techniques and data reduction tools which combined the Park transform and the continuous Wavelet transform. The SVM technique is used to characterize failures based on the fault characteristics extracted by using the Wavelet. In [11], it was investigated the use of vibration signatures to diagnose multiple faults in inverter-fed motors, combining the wavelet transform with the SVM classifier and also k-nearest neighbor (k-NN).Accordingly, the purpose of this work is to present an alternative strategy to traditional methods based on intelligent systems for the diagnosis and classification of faults in the stator winding of an induction motor driven by three distinct inverter models. This is performed by monitoring the amplitudes of the currents signal in the time domain, using the waveform to classify faults of 1%, 3%, 5% and 10% of short-circuit between the turns of the stator winding. A total of 2.268 tests with 1 and 2 HP motors, at steady state are performed by varying the frequency range between 12Hz to 60Hz, under load conditions (10%<Tn<110%), where Tn is the nominal torque. The high dimensionality of the input vectors is solved by a discretization signal capable of translating the information needed without mischaracterizing the waveform, thereby reducing the computational classification complexity. This leads to an accurate diagnosis of motor conditions, which includes detecting incipient defects and predicting the induction mode if the induction motor.This work also compares the performance of three supervised learning machine techniques: (i) the network Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), (ii) the network Fuzzy ARTMAP (FAM), and (iii) Support Vector Machine (SVM/SMO).This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes of the main faults in electric motors, with a focus on the stator faults. Section 3 presents selected approaches of intelligent systems. Section 4 discusses the proposed methodology for network performance evaluation and presents the experimental data results, while the conclusions appear in Section 5.The monitoring of the operating conditions of an induction motor, in order to diagnose faults and predict operating conditions, has attracted the attention of many researchers in recent years. This is due to the considerable influence of these motors on the continued operation of numerous industrial processes [2–4]. The detection and accurate early diagnosis of incipient faults can minimize damage to an industrial process, increasing the availability of equipment and consequent maintenance of financial performance.Electric motors are subjected to various types of failures or faults, which can be divided into (i) electrical; and (ii) mechanical [4,5]. Table 1, shows the classification of the main types of induction motors faults.Any type of fault that causes an unbalance is reflected in characteristics such as torque, the field flux, and stator currents, among others. By analyzing these signals, faults can be detected between the stator windings [23]. The most common faults associated with the stator windings are short-circuit between phase-earth, phase-to-phase, short-circuits between the winding turns of same or different phases [2]. Stator insulation deterioration usually begins with a short-circuit involving just a few turns; however, its evolution is rapidly prejudicial to motor operation [4,8,23]. The situation becomes even worse in the case of inverter-fed motors [18].Reference [26] states that the short-circuit current was approximately twice of the blocked rotor current, causing local heating which rapidly extended to other winding sections. Also, [18] contend that an incipient insulation defect among the stator windings, if not identified, may eventually cause irreversible motor damage.Failure isolation is due to various reasons, but primarily for excessive temperature increases [23], as the temperature in the electric machines windings exerts essential influence on the performance of the insulation. According to [27], an increase of 10°C above the specified threshold can reduce the estimated useful life of a motor by about half. Drives in low frequency ranges associated with high load torque can result in temperature increase in the motor windings, leading to a reduced life span. Other reasons for isolation faults includes voltage surges, aging, vibration, inadequate mechanical handling procedures during maintenance, excess lubrication during replacement of damaged bearings, and also the inevitable natural degradation of the insulation [15,27,28].Fault evolution time is hard to estimate and depends on the operating conditions of a motor. However, the evolution is know to be fast, so continually monitoring and detecting this type of failure is essential [26].The accuracy of short-circuit fault diagnosis involving a small number of turns in the stator winding has long been a challenge for researchers [18]. The diagnosis of stator faults can be affected by an unbalance in the supply voltage, or due to changes in the load level. Diagnoses involving fault analysis during the transitional start-up regime were investigated by [2]. Hence, this work investigates the classification accuracy under various levels of fault severity, at steady state over a wide frequency range and under different loading conditions, using the FAM, SVM/SMO and ANN pattern classification methods.Intelligent systems applied to the machines diagnosis are based on Artificial Neural Networks, Fuzzy Logic, Hybrid Systems and more recently on SVM [2,11,17,26,29,30]. The diagnosis itself can be summarized as the process of identifying and determining the relation of cause and effect, as its function is to isolate and identify faults and their possible causes [16,31,32]. Intelligent systems seek to generate expressions which are simple enough to be easily understood by humans classification systems. A brief description of the algorithms employed in this work is presented in the following sections.Fuzzy Artmap is a neural network architecture which performs incremental supervised learning of recognition categories and multidimensional maps in response to input vectors presented in arbitrary order. These architectures are based on the adaptive resonance theory (ART) developed by [33], as a possible solution to the stability-plasticity dilemma [34].When presenting new patterns to a neural classifier, the network weights must be adapted by adding a new piece of knowledge, i.e. the system must be able to acquire information. At the same time, the accumulated knowledge concerning the standards previously shown must be maintained and the classifier must be stable.The FAM neural network, as well as any other of the ART family, allows users to obtain solutions with fast response and flexibility in adding new patterns and topological changes. This structure has the capacity of continue learning after the inclusion of new standards, without losing memory related to previous standards, which characterizes plasticity [34]. The unique structure of FAM network comprises simultaneous training of two fuzzy ART modules to the supervised association of an analogous pattern: the Fuzzy and the ART. Each of these modules is responsible for associating two distinct but related spaces vector for pattern classification problems: the labels space; and the input space.The first step of the network training consists of the presentation of each input pattern to layerF1a. This layer is responsible for calculating the complementary coding of the input pattern presented to the network, i.e. the pre-processing in layerF1atransforms the input vector a of size M into a vector I=(a, ac) of size 2M, where ac=(1−a) is defined as the complement of a. The vector of synaptic gains is initialized Wjk=1, where j=1, …, Narepresents the Nanetwork categories ARTaand k=1, …, 2M represents each element that comprises the synaptic gains of each category. In addition, the Mapfield synaptic gains are also placed in 1(wjkab=1). After the initialization process, the vector A is sent to the layerF1ain order to calculate the active category by means of the choice function Tj(I) which can be defined by (1):(1)Tj(I)=|A∧wja|α+|wja|where α>0 is the choice parameter, which is a small positive value. The choosing process selects the largest value for the category choice function through the process of competition, where the winner takes all, as per (2):(2)Tvenc=max{Tj},j=1,…,NaAfter choosing the winning category, the verification of the similarity criterion or resonance condition should be performed in the layerF1a, as per (3):(3)|A∧wja||A|≥ρawhere ρais the vigilance parameter.If the resonance condition test fails with the first category (winner), the reset mechanism is triggered and the winning category is inhibited. The second category (second place) is then selected and the process of verifying the resonance condition is repeated. If it is not possible to find a category that passes the similarity test to the presented pattern, a new category can be created which initially represents the pattern presented. On the other hand, if the category promotes a resonance with the pattern, the learning process is started and the weight matrices are updated, as per (4):(4)wja(n+1)=(1−β)wja(n)+β(A∧wja(n))where 0≤β≤1 is the learning rate.A similar procedure is performed in the ARTb, creating Nbcategories which are associated to the ARTacategories through the mapfield responsible for maintaining the association between prediction categories of the ARTaand ARTbnetworks. This module implements the match tracking mechanism that promotes an increase in the vigilance parameter ρain response to an incorrect association between networks categories. The training process stops when the changes in synaptic gains remain unchanged during one training epoch. In this work, the FAM network is compared with other methods of pattern classification, such as SVM/SMO and ANN, which are applied to identify stator faults in induction motors driven by different frequency inverters.The SVM technique is a learning method, which classify the data and denominated patterns, in two class sets (+1, −1) through a separating hyperplane whose margins are denominated as support vectors [35].A training set of N points(xi,yi)i=1Nis considered, with xi∈Rngiven and the corresponding class labels yi∈ (−1, +1). The basic idea of SVM is to map the training data from the input space into a higher dimensional space of features via kernel function, and then build a separating hyperplane with maximum margin in the feature space. The SVM can be formulated as a quadratic optimizer programming which will find the weight for thewparameter and for the b bias parameter. These two parameters will maximize the margin, ensuring that the training samples were well classified. Thus, the SVM calculates the optimal hyperplane of separation by solving the following optimization problem as per (5) and (6):(5)min∥w2∥2+C∑i=1nξisubjected to:(6)yi(wtϕ(xi)+b)≤1−ξξ≥0,i=1,…,Nwhere, ξ≥0, i=1, …, N are slack variables, C parameter is used to adjust the tradeoff between the amount of accepted mistakes and φ(.) is the transformation function.The Lagrange Multiplier αi≥0, i=1, …, N is used to solve the quadratic programming problem and thereby obtain the following optimization problem, called dual, given by (7) and (8):(7)max∑i=1nαi−(∑i=1n∑j=1nαiαjyiyjk(xi,yj))2subject to:(8)∑i=1nαiyi=00≤αi≤C,i=1,…,NFor the classification of nonlinear problems, the data is first mapped in a large space of dimensional characteristics F by the transformation functionφ→φ(x)∈F⊂Rp. Thus, the resulting decision function is given by (9):(9)f(x)=sign(∑αi>0αiyik(x,xi)+b)where k (x, xi) is a Kernel function of mapping between sampling x and the support vector xi.The Sequential Minimal Optimization algorithm (SMO) provides an analytical solution in addition to avoiding the resolution of the of SVM quadratic problem, resulting in the SVM double derivation [30]. The SVM has proven to be a promising tool for classifying fault in electrical motors [2,11], and in this paper, it uses this technique to identify stator faults in inverter-fed induction machines.Neural networks are computational models inspired by the nervous system of living beings for parallel information processing. Such models are a simple composition of processing units interconnected by connections known as artificial synapses [36].The use of ANN has provided alternative schemes to handling problems related to electrical machines [16,22,23]. In this study, ANNs were applied for the classification of stator short-circuit fault diagnosis.For this purpose a MLP was used, which was trained with a backpropagation algorithm [36]. This training algorithm has two basic steps: the first is propagation, which applies values to the ANN inputs and verifies the response signal in its output layer. This value is then compared with the desired signal for that output.The second step occurs in the reverse fashion, i.e. from the output to the input layer. The error produced by the network is used in the adjustment process of its internal parameters (weights and bias). The basic element of a neural network is the artificial neuron which can be modeled mathematically as per (10) and (11):(10)vj(k)=∑i=1nXiwi+b(11)vj(k)=ϕj(vj(k))where: n is the number of input signals of the neuron; Xiis the i-th input signal of the neuron;wiis the weight associated with the i-th input signal; b is the threshold associated with the neuron;vj(k)is the weighted response (summing junction) of the j-th neuron with respect to the instant k; φj(.) is the activation function of the j-th neuron; yj(k) is the output signal of the j-th neuron with respect to the instant k.The adjusting of the network weights(wj)associated with the j-th output neuron is done by computing the error signal linked to the k-th iteration or k-th input vector (training example). This error signal is provided by (12):(12)ej(k)=dj(k)−yj(k)where dj(k) is the desired response to the j-th output neuron. Adding all squared errors produced by the output neurons of the network with respect to k-th iteration, as per (13):(13)E(k)=12∑j=1pej2(k)where p is the number of output neurons.For an optimum weight configuration, E(k) is minimized with respect to the synaptic weightwji. Therefore, the weights associated with the output layer of the network are updated using the relationship defined by (14):(14)wji(k+1)←wji(k)−η∂E(k)∂wji(k)wherewjiis the weight connecting the j-th neuron of the output layer to i-th neuron of the previous layer, and η is a constant that determines the learning rate of the backpropagation algorithm.The adjustment of weights belonging to the hidden layers of the network is carried out analogously. The necessary steps for adjusting the weights associated with the hidden neurons can be found in [36].Thus, the motivation for using the FAM, MLP and SVM/SMO algorithms as the classifiers in this work is based on the fact that in previous studies of multi-class classifiers, these strategies were found to be superior in comparison with traditional statistical and other neural classifiers [2,3,11,16,18,23,26].Induction motors are widely used in various stages of a production system. However, as with any other type of electric machinery they are exposed to a wide variety of electrical, mechanical and environmental conditions which may affect their operating performance and reduce their service life. This is particularly critical in the case of stator short-circuit faults, which rapidly have an impact on operation. Also, correct classification of defects and accuracy in determining their severity can provide a better maintenance schedule, resulting in lower costs and fewer impacts on production [3,4,18].In the context of this work, stator faults are diagnosed in a laboratory environment where several test conditions are combined, using three methods of intelligent pattern classification through experimental data obtained from two motors of differing power. The methodological aspects used in this work are presented in the following sections.For the case study in this work, the stator currents were measured in two different 4 pole, 220/380V, three-phase induction motors of 1 and 2 HP each, with customized stator winding, where several derivations of different coils are constructed. The stator of both motors has six coils, with 306 turns per phase for 1 HP motor and 780 turns for the 2 HP motor. Insulation is consistent with original measures and insulation class. All three-phases of the stator winding were mounted in order to allow the generation of artificial insulation faults between turns, thus permitting tests at 1%, 3%, 5%, 10%, 15% and 20% of stator short-circuit. This allows an emulation of stator faults, which result from deterioration of the insulation between individual coils, i.e. a short-circuit in the stator winding phase. This fact changes the symmetry of the stator current to an asymmetric form [20].Both motors are used in a laboratory environment, i.e. under perfect operating conditions. In this context, the experimental data base comprises 2.268 experimental tests performed on the motors when operating at steady state, under constant load conditions. In order to validate the proposed strategy for different manufacturers and models of commercially available inverters, the motors are driven by using three distinct frequency inverters.The synchronous frequency of each inverter is varied from 12Hz to 60 Hz, with intervals of 6Hz for each frequency value, while load torque ranges from 0.5 N.m to 5.0 N.m, with intervals of 0.5 N.m for each experiment in the 1 HP motor, and from 0.5 N.m to 9.0 N.m in the 2 HP motor with intervals of 1.0 N.m.This study considers a dynamic sampling rate which varies according to the frequency applied in the motor, using the same number of sample points per cycle, independent of the frequency value being evaluated. Each acquisition has a time duration of 3 seconds. Bands of frequency variation due to the sampling rate are shown in Table 2.The motor connection was configured in Delta (Δ) with the line supply voltage for the inverters at 220 V. The DC bus voltage of the frequency inverters is 311 V, working under a open-loop V/Hz control scheme with a switching frequency of 8 kHz for the Siemens Sinamics G110 and Siemens Micromaster 440. The switching frequency for the Schneider model ATV12H075M2 is 4 kHz. All tests are performed to meet motor under normal operating conditions as well as stator short-circuit conditions.The workbench used in this study is designed to monitor the voltage, current, vibration, torque and speed of a three-phase induction motor. Fig. 1illustrates the structure of the laboratory tests and Fig. 2illustrates a general process flowchart of this work.The workbench comprises an induction motor coupled to a DC Generator (DCG) which transmits a torque on the shaft of the machine. The independent phase variable voltage is used to maintain the balance between the voltages. The workbench also has a torquimeter of dual acting band with an integrated speed sensor. The voltage and current signals are measured on the panel where individual boards monitor the line current and the phase voltage of the motor by using Hall sensors. The voltage and current signals are collected individually by six Hall sensors, connected to the data acquisition board, which is itself connected to a personal computer.The signal of −10V to +10V of each sensor is read at one of the analogue channel of the National USB-6221 data acquisition board and the torque is measured by a Kistler torquimeter. Speed is measured by a DC tachogenerator that is applied to the signal conditioning board between 0 and 10V. A detailed operation description of the workbench can be found in the work of [37] and [38].In order to obtain the classification related to proper motor operation, the stator current signals are sampled, comprising 1.096 experiments for the 1 HP motor and 1.172 experiments for the 2 HP motor.Based on the method proposed by [39] and recently used in [38] for determining the load torque on the shaft of an induction motor under voltage unbalance conditions, the sampling data are used to randomly select just one half-cycle of the positive signal, to represent each test, whereby 50 points per half-cycle of each current signal (Ia, Ib, Ic) are extracted, and the amplitude value of each point is presented as input to the classification algorithm. Accordingly, each half-cycle is divided into a number of samples needed to be presented to the inputs of the classification methods being studied, based on the linear signal discretization. Fig. 3illustrates the signal discretization methodology used in this work.After obtaining these data and using a proper import routine, they are manipulated and evaluated with the MATLAB software. Fig. 4illustrates the acquisition routine, data processing and classification used in this work.Fifty points per phase are used as input data of the network, meaning that each positive half-cycle of the signal is represented by 50 discretized signal values which are capable of translating the necessary information without mischaracterizing the waveform.Another aspect concerning the data treatment is the fact that as the signals are line currents of a three-phase induction machine and a column vector must be mounted with points collected for each phase of the system, subsequent to each other, thus creating an array of 150 entry points. Three samples of each current sign per test are randomly selected and used for the creation of the test and validation matrices. Due to delayed currents, and as the analysis is performed per each wave half-cycle, the absolute values of the sampled signals are considered.With respect to the use of real signals of electrical currents from machines of different power, data normalization considered the peak value of each test waveform, where the input vectors of the classifiers are created after a proper encoding. Table 3describes the format of desired output vector, which uses a binary coding for the output quantities being formalized five distinct classes for classification purposes.The learning sets are submitted for implementation in the WEKA software [40]. The algorithms used in this work are configured for supervised training: the characteristics and topologies of FAM, SVM/SMO and MLP classifiers are described in Tables 4, 5and 6, and use the same parameters and values for all tested conditions. For training and testing, each classifier is evaluated by using the cross-validation method, k-folds, using k = 10. Each classifier is trained with randomly chosen (k−1) subsets, and then tested with the remaining subset.Table 4 shows the configuration parameters selected for the FAM classifier. To define the configuration of the vigilance parameter (ρ) for the FAM method, tests are carried out considering a variation from 0.6 to 1.0. The best results are established when ρ was defined as 0.75. Higher vigilance values impacts on greater numbers of output category nodes to form, which degraded the classification tests carried out in this work. The learning rate (β) was defined as 1.0 for fast learning. According to [34], the choice parameter (α) must be kept as a small value close to 0.The SVM/SMO classifier uses the John Platt algorithm of sequential minimal optimization for training [35]. This implementation globally replaces all missing values and transforms nominal attributes into binary, and also performs data normalization.The parameters used in the SVM/SMO are listed in Table 5. Possible combinations of SVM/SMO regularization parameters were made and best results were taken when the tolerance parameter error receive a value of 0.001 and Gamma (γ) as 0.01. The parameter γ controls the flexibility of the kernel function. Small values allows the classifier to adjust all the labels with the risk of overfitting, and larger values reduce the kernel to a constant function and learning becoming impossible. The coefficient C is the parameter for the soft margin cost function, which controls the influence of each individual support vector and it was defined as 1.0. The Polynomial Kernel represents the similarity of vectors in a feature space over polynomials of original variables [41].The training of the MLP network is supervised and considers the backpropagation algorithm, whose function is to find the derivatives of the error function with respect to the ANN weights and bias. To define the configuration of the number of neurons in the intermediate layer for the MLP method, tests are carried out considering 10, 25, 50, 75 and 100 neurons. In this work, the number of neurons in the intermediate layer does not impact in a high rate of classification accuracy, however, it reveals a strong influence on the time taken to create the models. However, the best results are established when it is used 75 neurons. As per [29,42] it is observed that hyperbolic tangent and linear activation functions and also momentum learning rule give the optimum results. Learning rate parameter has influence on the training time and it was varied from 0.1 to 0.4 with no significant impact on the classification results. Thus, this parameter was defined as 0.2 in this work. The configuration parameters of the MLP classifier appear in Table 6.One of the analysis results statistics provided by the tool is the Kappa coefficient, which the authors defined as a measure of association used to describe or test the degree of consistency or reliability and accuracy, in the classification. Reference [43] characterized different ranges for the Kappa values, according to the degree of agreement which they suggest. Accordingly, values greater than 0.79 indicate excellent agreement, while values less than 0.40 represent poor concordance, as shown in Table 7.The proposed classification strategies are trained with the input signals as described in Section 4.2. Tables 8and 9present the classification results for the set of 512 experimental tests, considering all inverters under various load conditions, and frequency ranging from 12 to 36Hz, for 1 HP motor while operating at steady state, resulting in 1.536 samples used for training and validation.Table 8 shows that the MLP algorithm achieves 85.62% of global accuracy, and that it reaches perfect agreement with the results obtained in the tests. The Kappa index is greater than 0.80, thus confirming the ability to generalize of the proposed method for different inverters models with distinct switching frequencies.The SVM/SMO algorithm shows an overall accuracy of 68.03%, and substantial concordance with the results obtained in the tests. The accuracy of the FAM algorithm was 58.34%, with moderate concordance with the test results obtained, demonstrating low classification performance.The confusion matrix quantifies the number of examples taken from the database which were correctly classified by the constructed model (represented in main diagonal), as opposed to the predicted classifications for each class.Table 9 demonstrates an accuracy above 85% for classifying faults of 5% and 10% of stator short-circuit for MLP and SVM/SMO algorithms, as well as accuracy superior to 70% for classifying faults of 3% stator short-circuit.The accuracy of the MLP algorithm exceeds 70% for the classification of faults, even in early stage of development, thus confirms the efficiency method. The accuracy of the FAM algorithm for the healthy motor is 51.8%, and 41.5% for detecting 1% stator short-circuit faults. However, its accuracy climbs to 80.8% when classifying faults of 10% of stator short-circuit.These results indicate that even when faults are in their early stage of development, such as 1% stator short-circuit, the accuracy rate even though it can be confused slightly with the healthy motor, may still be considered satisfactory.Tables 10and 11present the classification results for the group of 584 experimental tests collected from all inverters, considering a frequency range of 42-60Hz, for 1 HP motor operating at steady state under various load conditions, thus generating a set of 1.752 samples for training and validation.As presented in Table 10, the MLP algorithm achieves 85.79% accuracy and perfect concordance with the tests results and the Kappa index exceeding 0.80. The SVM/SMO algorithm reached an overall accuracy of 76.31%, and substantial concordance with the results obtained in the tests. For the FAM algorithm the overall accuracy is 68.26%, with substantial concordance with the test results.Table 11 reveals accuracy in excess of 90% for the classification of 5% and 10% of stator short-circuit faults for both MLP and SVM/SMO algorithms, and greater than 80% for the classification of 3% stator short-circuit fault. The accuracy of the MLP algorithm is greater than 60% for classification of faults which are still in their early stage of evolution.The accuracy of the FAM algorithm is 55.1% for healthy motor and 47% for the 1% stator short-circuit faults, while having 94.4% precision for the classification of 10% stator short-circuit faults.These results confirm that the MLP and SVM/SMO methodologies can be used to classify stator short-circuit faults on inverter-fed induction motors in the frequency range of 42 to 60Hz by analyzing the amplitude of the stator current in the time domain under a wide mechanical load range.Tables 12and 13present the classification results for 1.096 experimental tests, representing a range from 12 to 60Hz, thus resulting in 3.288 samples used for training and validation of the classifiers.Table 12 also shows that over this wide range the MLP algorithm once again present better overall accuracy, reaching 82.21% and substantial concordance with the results obtained in the tests. This confirms the ability of this method to generalize for differing inverter models with differing switching frequencies over a wide range of frequencies and load conditions. The SVM/SMO algorithm shows overall accuracy of 66.36%, followed by the FAM algorithm with 62.05%, both with moderate concordance.Table 13 clearly distinguishes the existence of independent tracks of stator short-circuit. In the range between 5% and 10% of stator short-circuiting, the accuracy of the MLP algorithms exceeds 90%. For the FAM and SVM/SMO algorithms the same accuracy rate can only be attributed to 10% failures. The accuracy for FAM and SVM/SMO is greater than 70% for the classification of 5% stator short-circuit faults.Again, there is difficulty in differentiating between a healthy motor and 1% stator short-circuit fault. In this scenario, the MLP algorithm is more than 70% accurate for classifying failures which are still in their early stage of evolution: this confirms the efficiency of this method over a wide range of frequencies. The accuracy of the FAM and SVM/SMO algorithms is better than 50% for classifying a healthy motor and greater than 45% for classifying 1% stator short-circuit faults.With regards to the run-time spent by the algorithms to construct the models, the FAM classifier features short duration processing times. The MLP algorithms consumes more computing time to build the model; however, their accuracy is superior to the FAM and SVM/SMO algorithms.Tables 14and 15present the classification results for the set of 587 experimental tests collected from all inverters in the range of 12 to 36Hz, for the 2 HP motor, operating at steady state under various load conditions, thus generating a set of 1.761 samples used for training and validation of the classifiers.Table 14 shows that the MLP algorithm presents overall accuracy of 86.31% plus perfect concordance with the results obtained in the tests. The Kappa index exceeds 0.80, which confirms the ability of this method to generalize. The SVM/SMO algorithm reaches 70.07% accuracy, and substantial concordance with the results obtained in the tests. The accuracy of the FAM algorithm is 66.60%, with moderate concordance with the test results and low classification performance.Table 15 presents a high degree of accuracy for classifying faults of 5% and 10% stator short-circuit for the MLP and SVM/SMO classifiers, which is higher than 70% for classifying 3% stator short-circuits faults. The accuracy of MLP algorithm also exceeds 70% for the classification of faults which are still in their early stage of development, which underlines the efficiency and precision of this method. The accuracy of the FAM algorithm for classifying motor under healthy conditions is 57.7% and 52.7% for motors with 1% of stator short-circuit fault; however, this accuracy climbs to 87.7% when classifying faults of 10% stator short-circuit.Tables 16 and 17 presents the classification results of the 585 experimental tests collected from all inverters for the frequency range varying from 42 to 60Hz, for 2 HP motor, operating at steady state under various loading conditions, thus generating a set of 1.755 samples used for training and validation of the classifiers.As shown in Table 16, the MLP algorithm achieves 84.44% of accuracy and perfect concordance with the test results, with the Kappa index above 0.80. Similar results are obtained in the 12 to 36Hz range for the 1 HP motor. The SVM algorithm shows an overall accuracy of 78.91%, and substantial concordance with the test results. For this frequency range, the accuracy of the FAM algorithm is 72.56%, along with substantial concordance with the results obtained in the tests.Table 17shows that the classification precision of 3%, 5% and 10% stator short-circuit faults for MLP and SVM/SMO algorithms is greater than 85%. The accuracy of these classifiers exceeds 60% when classifying the healthy motor and the motor with 1% stator short-circuit fault, which confirms the efficiency of the proposed method. Under the same conditions, the accuracy of the FAM algorithm is greater than 50%. This figure rises 94.8% when classifying faults of 10% stator short-circuit.Tables 18and 19shows the classification results for set of 1.172 experimental tests, collected from all inverters, in the range from 12 to 60Hz for the 2 HP motor, operating at steady state under various load conditions, thus generating a set of 3.516 samples used for training and validation of the classifiers.Table 18 confirms yet again that the MLP algorithm has a better overall classification performance, achieving 83.39% accuracy and substantial concordance with the test results, which confirms the generalization ability of the proposed method for differing inverter models with distinct switching frequencies over a wide range of frequencies. The overall accuracy of the SVM/SMO and FAM algorithms is 67.80% and 65.95%, respectively with moderate concordance with the results obtained in the tests.Overall, the MLP algorithm is slow to construct the models, although this is compensated by the high rate of single precision evaluated for differing inverters models operating in a wide frequency band, in comparison with SVM/SMO and FAM classifiers.Table 19 clearly distinguish the existence of independent fault ranges obtained from the classification algorithms compared in this study. For the MLP algorithm the accuracy for classifying faults of 3%, 5% and 10% stator short-circuit is greater than 85%, while for the FAM and SVM/SMO algorithms, this accuracy rate can only be attributed to 10% failures. The accuracy of FAM and SVM/SMO exceeds 60% for the classifying 5% stator short-circuit faults. Again, these algorithms have difficulty to differentiating between a healthy motor and motor under 1% stator short-circuit fault. In the same range, the accuracy of the MLP algorithm is over to 70%.For the FAM and SVM/SMO algorithms the accuracy exceeds 50% for the healthy motor and 45% for the motor under 1% of stator short-circuit faults.Fig. 5shows individual accuracy rates for each fault class obtained for the 1 and 2 HP motors, where the frequency range varies from 12 to 60Hz, for each tested method. The results in all conditions show that the MLP classifier has accuracy rates above 70%, regardless of the inverter type or operation frequency range. In fact, its accuracy reaches almost 100% when identifying 10% stator short-circuit faults.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
