@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cryptanalysis of Vigenere cipher using Cuckoo Search

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Since the key space of Vigenere cryptosystem is very large, therefore, brute force does not help in the analysis of the cryptosystem in real time. Statistical techniques are also not helpful when the key size is not small.The aim of this work was to examine the feasibility of Cuckoo Search algorithm as a cryptanalysis tool of classical cryptosystems especially Vigenere cipher. We applied Genetic Algorithm, Particle Swarm Optimization and Cuckoo Search techniques for the analysis of Vigenere cipher. After doing lots of experiments we observed that GA and PSO techniques can recover the entire key of Vigenere Cipher correctly for keys of small lengths. However, Cuckoo Search can recover more than 90% of the key characters for keys of size up to 25 characters because GA and PSO get trapped in local minima while Cuckoo Search finds the global optimum solution following characteristics of Lévy flights.Experimental results show the superiority of CS in fast convergence and the accuracy in the cryptanalysis of Vigenere cipher over PSO and GA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cryptanalysis,Vigenere cipher,Genetic Algorithm,Particle Swarm Optimization,Cuckoo Search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Evolutionary techniques such as Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Cuckoo Search (CS) are promising nature-inspired meta-heuristic optimization algorithms. Cuckoo Search combined with Lévy flights behavior and Markov chain random walk can search global optimal solution very quickly. The aim of this paper is to investigate the applicability of Cuckoo Search algorithm in cryptanalysis of Vigenere cipher. It is shown that optimal solutions obtained by CS are better than the best solutions obtained by GA or PSO for the analysis of the Vigenere cipher. The results show that a Cuckoo Search based attack is very effective on the Vigenere cryptosystem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In modern communication world, the transmission can be concealed only by transforming the contents of a message before its transmission. The art of designing such mathematical transformations is called cryptography [1]. An interceptor does not know the key and it is this lack of knowledge which prevents him from knowing the plaintext. The process to find the plaintext without knowing the key is called cryptanalysis. Mathematically and computationally, cryptanalysis is more challenging and complex than cryptography. In a cryptosystem, it is always assumed that the algorithm is known to the cryptanalyst and that all security lies within the key. There are two types of cryptosystems: secret key and public key. In secret key cryptosystems either only one key is used for encryption and decryption both, or the decryption key can be obtained from the encryption key in polynomial time. While in public key cryptosystems both the keys are different and it is computationally hard to find decryption key knowing encryption key. Classical cryptosystem such as simple substitution, Vigenere cipher, Hill cipher are secret key cryptosystems. Nature-inspired computing is a field emerged using computational methods modeled to solve and optimize computationally hard problems by observing the behavior of the nature. The nature inspired techniques such as Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Cuckoo Search (CS) are excellent match in computing environment to develop algorithms for solving search and optimization problems. Cuckoo Search finds the step size based on the Lévy behavior of animals whose probability distribution is governed by power law distribution with heavy tail [2,3]. The step size found using this law helps in searching the key (optimal solution) more quickly and more effectively from the search space in comparison to other nature inspired search techniques. This motivates to investigate the applicability of Cuckoo Search algorithm in cryptanalysis of Vigenere cipher. In this paper, we have applied GA, PSO and CS techniques for the analysis of Vigenere cipher. The application of Cuckoo Search in key search of Vigenere cipher has shown promising accuracy and efficiency.Vigenere cipher is named after Blaise de Vigenere, a 16th century Frenchman, while it was first described by Giovan Batista Belaso in 1553. Vigenere cipher is a polyalphabetic cipher in which a letter is transformed to different letters, depending upon its position in the plaintext, when encoded. In this cipher, the encryption function: Ez(x)=(x+z) mod 26 and decryption function: Dz(x)=(x−z) mod 26 are used, which are similar to the scheme used in the stream cipher. Therefore, Vigenere cipher is also considered as the stream variant of shift cipher where key stream is simply repetition of the key K, which is a string of 26 characters of length m, where m is the size of the key. The key space of the Vigenere cipher is 26mwhich makes brute force techniques infeasible for sufficiently large values of m. The one-to-many transformation flattens the frequency pattern making it difficult to analyze the cipher.Genetic algorithms, based on Darwin's theory of evolution are adaptive heuristic search algorithms introduced by John Holland [4,5]. Particle Swarm Optimization, a type of swarm intelligence is a meta-heuristic optimization technique, first developed by Dr. Eberhart and Dr. Kennedy [6] in 1995. It is based on the movement and intelligence of swarms for searching the food. Swarm Intelligence (SI) is self organized control structure based on the cooperative behavior among individual agents and with the environment. This interaction enhances the progress of the swarm toward optimality. Shi and Eberhart [7] modified PSO by introducing inertia weights. In 2011, Nickabadi et al. [8] introduced adaptive inertia weight approach in PSO. Cuckoo Search developed by Yang and Deb [9,10] is an evolutionary optimization technique inspired by some species of cuckoo (bird) that are obligate interspecific brood parasites. These birds lay their eggs in the nests of other birds and provide no parental care. Host bird may recognize parasitic eggs and remove them from the nest or abandon the nest and re-nest elsewhere.Classical optimization techniques [11] like gradient based optimization, response surface methods, random search, sampling methods, etc. have difficulties in finding the global optimal solution because they are not able to proceed after getting trapped in local optimal solution. Optimal solutions are formed via derivates of the objective functions but for some problems derivative cannot be found implying difficulty in finding the optimal solution using classical method. Evolutionary algorithms (non classical optimization problems) are trained to find multiple solutions from a set of inputs in a single iteration as compared to classical methods which can find one solution per iteration. Meta heuristic algorithms (like GA and other evolutionary techniques) are time taking because of their slow convergence rate, i.e. time taken to arrive at an optimally global solution. Non classical optimization problems claim to find global optimal solution but if we re-run the algorithm it may lead us to quite different solutions which may be due to stochastic nature of search or due to variation in initial position. This requires us to have multiple re-runs of the algorithm which is computationally expensive. Evolutionary algorithms are highly customizable i.e. we can fine tune them using a set of optimization parameters specific to a problem. This creates problem of generalization of the algorithm concerned. CK algorithm is better than PSO algorithm (and other variants of PSO) in finding out the optimal solution [12] of a given problem because PSO suffers from stability problem.This paper is organized as follows. Literature review is summarized in Section 2. Overview of Vigenere cipher is given in Section 3. Genetic Algorithm and Particle Swarm Optimization are introduced in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. In Section 6, Cuckoo Search along with Lévy flight and the proposed Cuckoo Search Algorithm for cryptanalysis of Vigenere cipher are described. Fitness function is given in Section 7. Section 8 reports a thorough set of experimental results, and Section 9 draws conclusions. The paper ends with symbols/notations and references.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
