@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid-biomarker case-based reasoning system for water pollution assessment in Abou Hammad Sharkia, Egypt

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents an automatic system based on biomarker for assessing water quality.The proposed system utilized case-based reasoning for indicating the degree of water quality.Water quality is classified based on the histopathological changes in fish gills and liver.Performance evaluation metrics are retrieval accuracy, receiver operating receiver (ROC) curves, F-measure, and G-mean.That proposed CBR based system has obtained water quality classification accuracy of 97.9%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Case-based reasoning (CBR),Feature extraction,Biomarker,Fish gills,Fish liver,Water pollution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Water pollution by organic materials or metals is one of the problems that threaten humanity, both nowadays and over the next decades. Morphological changes in Nile Tilapia “Oreochromis niloticus” fish liver and gills can also represent the adaptation strategies to maintain some physiological functions or to assess acute and chronic exposure to chemicals found in water and sediments. This paper presents an automatic system for assessing water quality, in Sharkia Governorate – Egypt, based on microscopic images of fish gills and liver. The proposed system used fish gills and liver as hybrid-biomarker in order to detect water pollution. It utilized case-based reasoning (CBR) for indicating the degree of water quality based on the different histopathological changes in fish gills and liver microscopic images. Various performance evaluation metrics namely, retrieval accuracy, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, F-measure, and G-mean have been used in order to objectively indicate the true performance of the system considering the unbalanced data. Experimental results showed that the proposed hybrid-biomarker CBR based system achieved water quality prediction accuracy of 97.9% using cosine distance similarity measure. Also, it outperformed both SVMs and LDA classifiers for the tested microscopic images dataset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Water scarcity does not only represent a lack of available water resources to satisfy the demands of human beings, but it also refers to polluted water sources. Water scarcity affects almost every continent and about 2.8 billion people in all parts of the world as it is both a natural and a human made phenomenon [1].Water pollution threatens the living conditions of human beings as well as all other living creatures. Assessment of water quality is one of the most important ways for enabling management and control of water resources quality. At present, there are two main methods for monitoring and assessing water quality: (a) physical and chemical analysis and (b) biological control methods. Physical and chemical analysis is used to assess water quality by identifying the existence of hazardous substances in water using a variety of tools. To perform chemical analysis on a continuous basis is a complex and expensive process, which provides limited data about chemical compounds. Also, it does not consider the influence of those compounds excluded in the analysis. On the other hand, biological monitoring is applied to reveal changes in water and environmental pollution by identifying changes in health status and physiological characteristics, and behavioral responses of individuals or communities of aquatic organisms [2,3].Biomarker measurement refers to a property that can be used as a bioindicator of biological conditions. This term sometimes refers to a substance, which also indicates the presence of living organisms [4,5]. Histopathological changes have been widely used as biomarkers, also known as bioindicators, in the evaluation of the health of fish exposed to pollution. One of the main advantages of using histopathological biomarkers in environmental monitoring is that this category of biomarkers allows the examination of specific target organs, including gills and liver that are responsible for vital functions. Having fish gills and liver observed microscopically, it showed increasing degrees of damage in the tissues in correlation with bad water quality [6]. That is due to the fact that fish gills are in constant contact with the water and represent important target organs of pollutants dissolved in the water. Also, fish liver is the target organ important for the mechanism of detoxification [7,8]. Morphological changes in fish gills and liver can represent adaptation strategies to maintain some physiological functions or endpoints to evaluate the acute and chronic exposure to chemicals found in water sediments [6,9].In this paper the fish gills and liver have been used as hybrid-biomarker for water quality assessment without recourse to water analysis. Choosing fish as a biomarker is due to that it is one of the elements of the human food chain. Our aim is to use the existing knowledge in order to identify water quality and accordingly the degree of water pollution. To achieve this goal case-based reasoning (CBR) approach is used. The method is based on the idea that similar problems have similar solutions and that old strategies that have been used to solve previous problems can be modified and used to solve new ones. The proposed CBR system consists of five phases; namely case representation phase, retrieve phase, reuse/adapt phase, revise phase and retain phase. The datasets used for the experiments conducted were collected from Abbassa farm, Abo-Hammad, Sharkia Governorate, Egypt. They consist of real sample images for fish liver and gills exposed to copper and water pH in different histopathological stages. The collected datasets contain colored JPEG images as 225 images and 95 images were used as training and testing datasets, respectively. The training dataset is divided into four classes representing the different histopathological changes and water quality degrees.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents recent research work related to using biomarkers for indicating water quality based on laboratory histopathological investigations or based on applying computer vision and machine learning approaches. Section 3 describes the fundamentals of feature extraction and case-based reasoning concepts. Section 4 depicts the different phases of the proposed hybrid-biomarker CBR system. Section 5 describes the tested fish liver and gills microscopic images dataset as well as the performance evaluation metrics and discusses the obtained experimental results. Finally, Section 6 presents conclusions and discusses future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a CBR system based on hybrid liver-gills fish microscopic images as biomarkers has been designed and its performance has been tested. The proposed CBR system consists of five phases; namely case representation phase, retrieve phase, reuse/adapt phase, revise phase and retain phase. During the case representation phase, pre-processing and feature extraction processes, considering color, texture and shape features, are applied for transformation of input images into feature vectors that are consequently combined to extract features and used as PCA inputs. Then, similarity is calculated between the input and case-based databases in order to retrieve similarity of the case, otherwise, the solution should be adapted. Based on the obtained results, the proposed CBR based system achieved 97.9% accuracy for all water quality degrees. Also, it has been observed that the performance of the proposed systems improves according to the number of retrieved cases.Moreover, in order to further validate the prediction performance of the proposed CBR based system, a comparative analysis has been conducted for the proposed CBR system against other water quality degree classification models, developed based on SVMs and LDA classifiers, with respect to F-measure, G-mean, and AUC performance evaluation metrics. Based on the obtained experimental results, it has been generally concluded that the proposed CBR hybrid-biomarker based system outperformed both SVMs and LDA classifiers for the tested microscopic images dataset. For the future work, we plan to enhance the proposed system via applying case-based reasoning in solving bio-inspired optimization based problems for classifying water quality degree using fish liver and gills microscopic images as biomarkers to assessing water pollution. Moreover, in order to improve the system performance, new feature sets and feature extraction approaches should be utilized.