@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Controlling information flow in online information seeking: The moderating effects of utilitarian and hedonic consumers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Information control assists consumer’s information seeking process.Information control works better for utilitarians than for hedonic consumers.Physical control and perceived control have the similar effects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information control,Shopping purpose,Involvement,Product attitude,Website satisfaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Information control has been deemed one of the most prominent features of the Internet for online consumers searching product information. This study examined how information control affects the online information seeking processes of consumers and how the effects are moderated by shopping purposes (utilitarian vs. hedonic). This study recruited 292 respondents to participate in our experiment. The empirical results reveal that information control significantly increases consumer involvement in information seeking, enhances attitudes toward products, and elevates the degree of satisfaction toward commercial websites. Furthermore, the effects of information control on consumer involvement and product attitudes are moderated by their shopping purposes. The results support most of the proposed hypotheses, suggesting that information control works more effectively for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers. The findings of this study offer online practitioners useful recommendations regarding personalization strategies of website design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electronic commerce (e-commerce), particularly the business-to-consumer types such as Alibaba, has grown rapidly in recent years. Online stores attract consumers to shop because of characteristics unique to the Internet, such as easier price comparisons, wider selections, a higher level of convenience, and greater access to information compared with brick-and-mortar stores (Jarvenpaa and Todd 1996, Peterson et al. 1997). However, these characteristics pose two challenges to online retailers: low switch cost, which refers to consumers’ effortlessly comparing prices from different providers and quickly switching to other online stores; and information overload, which overwhelms online consumers and complicates their information seeking and decision making (Hwang and Lin 1999). Thus, it is strategically crucial for online retailers to offer consumers effective assistance in searching information and making purchase decisions efficiently.One of the most prominent features of the Internet is information control, which refers to the level of regulating the content, display order, and display time of information online (Ariely 2000). Under a high information control condition, consumers can actively manage the information seeking process and freely choose information content, display order, and reading time according to their preferences (Liu and Shrum 2002). For instance, consumers can use keywords in search engines and retrieve and read the relevant information that they query. By contrast, under the condition of low control, consumers are passively fed information provided by sellers. For example, pop-up ads are a typical example of low information control, under which the content, order, and time for consumers to read are predetermined. As previous studies have shown, information control facilitates the process of prepurchase information seeking and the purchase decisions of online consumers, by enhancing cognitive involvement (Jiang et al. 2010), attitudes toward websites (Chung and Ahn 2007, Hwang and McMillan 2002, Teo et al. 2003), confidence in judgments (Ariely 2000), intention to use a self-service technology (Collier and Sherrell 2010), and trust in mobile commerce (Lee 2005).Although information control generally has positive effects, recent studies have demonstrated that such effects are not the same for all consumers (Sicilia et al. 2005, Wu and Lin 2006, 2012). Increasingly more researchers have advocated the contingency view of information control, which argues that the effects of information control depend on contingent conditions such as need for cognition (Sicilia et al. 2005), expertise (Wu and Lin 2006), and motivation (Wu and Lin 2012). Because information control is a prominent feature of the Internet, it is worthwhile to determine how user factors serve as critical contingent conditions for the effects of information control. Shopping purposes affect many aspects of online consumers behavior such as search intention (To et al. 2007), decision making (Dhar and Wertenbroch 2000), preference toward online retailers (Overby and Lee 2006), satisfaction with retailers (Jones et al. 2006), and intention to repurchase (Kim et al. 2012). Therefore, this study aims to investigate the moderating effects of shopping purposes on the effects of information control.Similar to consumers in brick-and-mortar stores, online consumers may also have two shopping purposes: utilitarian or hedonic. Utilitarian purpose is described as a mission that is critical, rational, decision-effective, and goal-oriented (Batra and Ahtola 1991, Hirschman and Holbrook 1982, Wolfinbarger and Gilly 2001). Utilitarian consumers shop because of a specific goal or task, and the benefits of shopping depend on whether the goal is achieved or not, or whether the task is completed in efficiently (Babin et al. 1994, Batra and Ahtola 1991). Therefore, they primarily adopt a directed search behavior that is deliberate and mainly focused on the information related to the goal (Hoffman and Novak 1996, Janiszewski 1998, Novak et al. 2003). By contrast, hedonic purpose is defined as shopping for amusement, enjoyment, fantasy, novelty, variety, surprise, awakening, or sensuality (Hirschman and Holbrook 1982). In contrast to utilitarian consumers, the benefits of hedonic consumers are not related to achieving the physical objective or completing the task. By definition, hedonic consumers enjoy shopping and acquire experiential and emotional benefits during the process (Babin et al. 1994). In contrast to utilitarian consumers, hedonic consumers use an exploratory search behavior that is undirected, less deliberate, and less focused when browsing information (Hoffman and Novak 1996, Janiszewski 1998, Moe 2003, Novak et al. 2003). In summary, utilitarian consumers differ from hedonic consumers in their information search behavior online.Thus, information control may have different effects on utilitarian and hedonic consumers in facilitating their information seeking processes. High information control allows utilitarian consumers to search for relevant product information actively and directly, and spend as much time as necessary to read the relevant product information. Hence, a higher level of information control could facilitate the decision making of utilitarian consumers in obtaining and processing useful information efficiently. Regarding hedonic consumers, information control can also facilitate their information seeking processes by offering them the freedom to process information. However, the benefits of information control for hedonic consumers may be fewer than those for utilitarian consumers. Hedonic consumers are undirected and less deliberate when browsing information online and do not need to control the information content or the time of information seeking as much as utilitarian consumers do. Thus, we argue that the positive effects of information control are stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the hypotheses and research model, and Section 3 demonstrates the method, with results presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 offers the conclusion, theoretical contribution, managerial implications, discussion, limitations, and future research.As discussed in the previous section, information control can help consumers improve their shopping experiences. Information control offers consumers freedom and flexibility to select the information they seek (Kleinmuntz and Schkade 1993, Schkade and Kleinmuntz 1994). Thus, information control may benefit consumers by satisfying their various information needs (Beatty and Smith 1987, Furse et al. 1984, Hauser et al. 1993), which may be based on particular motivations, knowledge background, and personal preferences. Furthermore, during the process of information search, consumers may acquire new knowledge and change their focus of information seeking occasionally. A higher level of information control could also provide the opportunity for consumers to search for information according to their evolution of knowledge. Hence, information control is a useful feature for online retailers to support the information seeking and decision making of consumers.In contrast to traditional media, various levels of information control are able to be simultaneously observed on the Internet (McMillan and Hwang 2002). As mentioned, high information control (e.g., search engines) and low information control (e.g. pop-up ads) are common in e-commerce and can exist simultaneously in the same online stores. By contrast, traditional media (e.g., magazines, TV) offer merely one level of information control: either high or low. For instance, magazines have high information control, whereas TV has low information control. When people read a magazine, they can freely select the reading time, order, and information to read. Conversely, when people watch TV, they are merely able to decide to switch the channel or turn off the TV. Because different levels of information control are present on the Internet, the following question remains: How can online retailers leverage the different levels of information control to offer consumers personalized assistance in facilitating their information seeking and decision making behavior?Notably, low information control does not mean that consumers do not have any control at all. The condition of low information control on the Internet is passive control, under which consumers can avoid reading information only by clicking a button or closing a window. Passive control allows consumers to ignore irrelevant or uninteresting information, but it does not provide them with chances to search for relevant or interesting information (Hwang et al. 2003).The concept of information control can refer to either physical or perceived control. Physical control refers to the hardwired opportunity of information control embedded in objective features of information systems (IS) offered to users for making choices regarding information presentation (Liu and Shrum 2002). By contrast, perceived control is defined as “the feeling of the amount of control that people have over the process or outcome” (Bateson and Hui 1987). The current study primarily focused on the effects of physical control because website operators can directly manage it. However, for cases in which physical control is offered, consumers may not experience equivalent levels of perceived control (Bucy and Tao 2007, Song and Zinkhan 2008, Voorveld et al. 2011). For instance, the presence of search engines may not result in an increase in users’ perception of control when they do not have motivations to use search engines. Previous research has shown that physical control and perceived control may be incongruent because of personal and situational factors (Bucy and Tao 2007, Lee et al. 2004, Liu and Shrum 2002, Tremayne 2005). Most importantly, perceived control may mediate the effects of physical control (Bucy and Tao 2007, Wu 2005). Therefore, the current study simultaneously assessed the effects of physical control and perceived control on the shopping experiences of online consumers.Shopping experiences may include product information search, product evaluation, and purchase decision stages. When consumers shop online, they first seek product information and determine the information that they require. After gathering relevant information, consumers process the information and spend time on evaluating products. Finally, they make a purchase decision and cultivate overall attitudes toward websites. During these stages, consumers may be engaged in processing collected information that may lead them to generate attitudes toward products and commercial websites in general. In this study, shopping experiences were measured accordingly: involvement, product attitudes, and website satisfaction.As previous studies have shown, information control facilitates enhancing users’ flow (Huang 2012), perception of efficiency (Crutzen et al. 2012), cognitive involvement (Jiang et al. 2010), and attitudes toward websites (Chung and Ahn 2007, Hwang and McMillan 2002, Teo et al. 2003), and decreases their perception of product uncertainty (Weathers et al. 2007). High information control allows consumers to actively search and process the information they need by providing them with the freedom to choose what to read, in what order, and at what pace. Consequently, the selection process requires close attention from consumers and engages them in elaborating on the collected information (Fortin and Dholakia 2005, Jiang et al. 2010, Liu and Shrum 2002). Moreover, a high level of information control offers consumers the opportunities to spend as much time as they need to understand products of interest so that they can acquire knowledge about products and reduce perceived uncertainty. Therefore, consumers under the high information control condition evaluate products more favorably than do their counterparts under the low information control condition (Weathers et al. 2007). Hence, consumers may feel satisfied with their information seeking process and have positive attitudes toward websites (Chung and Ahn 2007, Hwang and McMillan 2002, Teo et al. 2003). In summary, consumers become more cognitively involved, generate more favorable attitudes toward products, and more satisfied with websites under the condition of high information control than consumers under the condition of low information control.Although information control has positive effects on consumer involvement, product attitudes, and website satisfaction, recent studies have indicated that these effects of information control are not the same for all people (Sicilia et al. 2005, Wu and Lin 2006, 2012). One possible explanation for such inconsistent effects is the existence of contingent factors. Thus, this study adopted a contingency view to explore the effects of information control.The contingency view, which originated in organization theory, argues that there is no “best way” to manage an organization, and the effectiveness of each specific management method depends on different conditions (Galbraith 1973). Applying such a view to the fields of information technology and IS, previous research has shown that contingent characteristics of individuals and organizations are crucial to building an effective information system (Otley 1980, Reinking 2012). Similarly, contingent factors have been explored for the effects of information control in recent studies (Wu and Lin 2006, 2012). Wu and Lin (2006, 2012) found that consumer expertise and motivation were crucial contingent factors for the effects of information control. In addition to studies that have directly investigated information control, other research has revealed that the effects of interactivity, which are closely related to information control, are also contingent on individual characteristics. Liu and Shrum (2002) proposed that the effects of interactivity on user satisfaction may be a function of desire for control and browsing purposes. Amichai-Hamburger et al. (2004) also revealed that the concept of need for closure moderated the relationship between Internet interactivity and consumer preference when there was no time pressure. Sicilia et al. (2005) found that the concept of need for cognition is a moderator in the association between website interactivity and information processing. Therefore, the contingency view of information control has been verified by empirical results.In addition to the mentioned empirical studies, the contingency view of information control is consistent with the concept of affordances, which refer to “the actionable properties between an object and an actor” (Gibson 1987, Norman 1999). For example, a chair has a flat surface that can sustain objects and provide people with sit-ability. Similarly, information control refers to the features that offer people the freedom to choose the reading content, order, and time of IS so that the concept of affordance is the essence of information control. Although affordances inhabit the physical features of the object, this concept still depends on the actor which interact with the object (Torenvliet 2003). For instance, a chair provides sit-ability affordance for an adult, but it does not provide the same affordance for a 1-month-old baby. Thus, the concept of affordances is contingent on the users interacting with it. Equally, the effects of information control also depend on the users interacting with it. Therefore, user factors serve as critical contingent factors for the effects of information control.Zhang (2008) further proposed the construct of motivational affordances and argued that the design of affordances in IS must support users’ motivations. People adopt systems to satisfy their different psychological, cognitive, social, and emotional needs; therefore, system design must consider their various motivations. Similarly, the design of information control should also account for people’s motivations and offer “the properties of information systems that determine whether and how it can support one’s motivation needs” (Zhang 2008). Online consumers have different shopping purposes when surfing commercial websites to acquire product information. The different shopping purposes of consumers may need various levels of information control to facilitate their online information seeking and decision making process. Hence, the objective of this research is to examine the contingent effects of shopping purposes on the relationship between information control and shopping experiences.As argued in the study of Hirschman and Holbrook (1982), the shopping purposes of consumers can be categorized as “utilitarian” and “hedonic.” Utilitarian purpose is defined as mission-critical, rational, decision-effective, and goal-oriented (Batra and Ahtola 1991, Hirschman and Holbrook 1982, Wolfinbarger and Gilly 2001). Hedonic purpose is described as shopping for amusement, enjoyment, fantasy, novelty, variety, surprise, awakening, and sensuality (Babin et al. 1994, Hirschman and Holbrook 1982). Although such a dichotomy of shopping purposes is simple, it is theoretically and empirically comprehensive. This dichotomy relates to the dual process model of human thinking which consists of rational and experiential thinking styles (Epstein 2003). This dichotomy is also parallel to previous empirical research of shopping behavior that describes consumers as functional vs. nonfunctional motivations (Sheth 1983), shopping as work vs. shopping as fun (Babin et al. 1994), economic vs. recreational (Bellenger and Korgaonkar 1980), and goal-oriented vs. experiential consumers (Novak et al. 2003). Therefore, such a dichotomy of utilitarian and hedonic purposes is valid and was used in the current study.When consumers shop for utilitarian purpose, the task of shopping is deemed “work” (Babin et al. 1994). Utilitarian consumers aim to acquire product information of a targeted product to make high-quality decisions and complete the purchase task by a particular deadline. Thus, utilitarian consumers directly search for specific product information related to the needed product with prepurchase deliberation, by considering the product, service, and price features before purchase (Bloch et al. 1986, Hoffman and Novak 1996). Such an information seeking pattern adopted by utilitarians is called directed search behavior (Hoffman and Novak 1996, Novak et al. 2003), which is goal-driven and involves intensive attention and deliberation in the process of online information seeking (Janiszewski 1998). Conversely, when consumers shop for hedonic purpose, the task of shopping is nonfunctional, playful, and viewed as “fun” (Babin et al. 1994). In contrast to utilitarian consumers, hedonic consumers shop for an appreciation of experiences rather than for task completion (Babin et al. 1994). Hedonic consumers do not have specific shopping goals, substantial plans, or immediate needs for purchase (Janiszewski 1998, Wolfinbarger and Gilly 2001). In other words, hedonic consumers typically exhibit a nondirected search behavior. Compared with utilitarian consumers, hedonic consumers apply an exploratory search behavior, which is “not guided by goals or outcomes, but by the process itself” (Bloch et al. 1986, p. 121). Hence, exploratory search behavior is stimulus-driven and demands less attention, and less deliberation when a consumer browses product information (Hoffman and Novak 1996, Janiszewski 1998, Novak et al. 2003). In conclusion, utilitarian consumers differ from hedonic consumers in goal specificity and information seeking behavior.High information control allows utilitarian consumers to actively search for product information related to their purchase goal and allocate as much time as necessary to read the relevant information. Hence, high information control provides them with the chance to collect useful information and efficiently complete their purchase task, which is essential for utilitarians, because they typically must meet a deadline for the involved purchase task. In other words, high information control meets the needs of utilitarians who want to take control over the information seeking and purchase process. Although high information control also provides hedonic consumers the freedom to browse interesting information, the benefits of high information control for hedonic consumers may not be as much for them. Hedonic consumers have no immediate or specific purchase goal such as searching for relevant product information to meet a deadline. The search choice of hedonic consumers does not involve deliberate decisions. Rather, it is driven by a continually changing goal (i.e. whatever interesting coming along the search process) (Deci and Ryan 1985, Hoffman and Novak 1996, Janiszewski 1998). Therefore, utilitarians need the freedom embedded in information control more than hedonic consumers do, and information control may incur different effects for utilitarian and hedonic consumers in facilitating their information seeking.As discussed, information control can enhance consumer shopping experiences, including involvement, product attitudes, and website satisfaction, and we argue that the degree of enhancement can be different for utilitarian and hedonic consumers. For utilitarian consumers, high information control allows them to allocate most of their attentions on collecting and processing the relevant information and ignore the irrelevant information. Because utilitarian consumers must complete the purchase task by a deadline, they have strong motivation to search and process the relevant information. Thus, they could become highly engaged in information seeking activities and cognitively involved in collected information. By contrast, high information control allows hedonic consumers to widely browse various types of product information (Novak et al. 2003) because they do not allocate their attentions on specific products, like utilitarians. Therefore, hedonic consumers may not elaborate on information seeking process as much as utilitarian consumers do. Consequently, we argue that the positive relationships between information control and consumer involvement are stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of both physical control and perceived control, as hypothesized in H1a and H1b:Hypothesis 1Online shopping purpose (utilitarian vs. hedonic) moderates the positive effects of information control on consumer involvement.The positive effect of physical control on consumer involvement is stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers.The positive effect of perceived control on consumer involvement is stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers.In addition to involvement, we also assessed the effects of information control on product attitudes. For utilitarian consumers, high information control allows them to spend as much time as they need on understanding the products to be purchased. Therefore, product uncertainty could be effectively decreased and favorable attitudes toward products could be formed. However, although high information control also allows hedonic consumers to freely read product information on websites, they spend less time on each product than utilitarian consumers do because their attention is divided among products (Chiou and Ting 2011). Hedonic consumers may not be able to comprehend product attributes as much as utilitarians can because of divided attention. Thus, hedonic consumers may also generate favorable attitudes toward a product because of information control, but not as much as utilitarian consumers do. Hence, we argue that the positive relationships between information control and consumers’ product attitudes are stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers. Similarly, we assessed the effects of both physical control and perceived control, as hypothesized in H2a and H2b:Hypothesis 2Online shopping purpose (utilitarian vs. hedonic) moderates the positive effects of information control on consumer product attitudes.The positive effect of physical control on consumer product attitudes is stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers.The positive effect of perceived control on consumer product attitudes is stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers.Finally, the effects of information control on website satisfaction were also studied. Utilitarian consumers need the freedom and control to achieve their purchase task, and a high level of information control fits such needs of utilitarian consumers (Martínez-López et al. 2014, Wolfinbarger and Gilly 2001). For utilitarian consumers, high information control embedded in websites allows them to gather the product information they want and solve the problem in a timely manner. Therefore, utilitarian consumers are satisfied with the assistance of information control and further generate favorable attitudes toward websites. Although high information control also allows hedonic consumers to freely surf commercial websites, hedonic consumers perform such tasks without time pressure to achieve the shopping goal. Thus, hedonic consumers may not need such freedom and control as much as utilitarian consumers do, and hence may not feel as appreciative and satisfied with the assistance of information control embedded in websites. Therefore, we argue that the positive relationships between information control and website satisfaction are stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers. Furthermore, we examined the effects of both physical control and perceived control, as stated in H3a and H3b:Hypothesis 3Online shopping purpose (utilitarian vs. hedonic) moderates the positive effects of information control on consumer website satisfaction.The positive effect of physical control on consumer website satisfaction is stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers.The positive effect of perceived control on consumer website satisfaction is stronger for utilitarian consumers than for hedonic consumers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
