@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Local search based metaheuristics for the robust vehicle routing problem with discrete scenarios

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A robust version of the vehicle routing with uncertain travel times is studied.Uncertainties are given as a set of discrete scenarios.A mixed integer model (MIP), a local search and four meta-heuristics are developed.The meta-heuristics retrieve the optimal solutions of the MIP on small problems.Results are reported up to 100 customers for the meta-heuristics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicle routing,Uncertain travel times,Robust optimization,Greedy randomized adaptive search procedure,Iterated local search,Tour splitting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) is extended here to handle uncertain arc costs without resorting to probability distributions, giving the Robust VRP (RVRP). The unique set of arc costs in the CVRP is replaced by a set of discrete scenarios. A scenario is for instance the travel time observed on each arc at a given traffic hour. The goal is to build a set of routes using the lexicographic min–max criterion: the worst cost over all scenarios is minimized but ties are broken using the other scenarios, from the worst to the best. This version of robust CVRP has never been studied before. A Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP), two greedy heuristics, a local search and four metaheuristics are proposed: a Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure, an Iterated Local Search (ILS), a Multi-Start ILS (MS-ILS), and an MS-ILS based on Giant Tours (MS-ILS-GT) converted into feasible routes via a lexicographic splitting procedure. The greedy heuristics provide the other algorithms with good initial solutions. Tests on small instances (10–20 customers, 2–3 vehicles, 10–30 scenarios) show that the four metaheuristics retrieve all optima found by the MILP. On larger cases with 50–100 customers, 5–20 vehicles and 10–20 scenarios, MS-ILS-GT dominates the other approaches. As our algorithms share the same components (initial heuristic, local search), the positive contribution of using the giant tour approach is confirmed on the RVRP.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) is a classical combinatorial optimization problem raised by the distribution of goods in logistic networks. Due to its important applications in industry and its theoretical interest, it has generated an abundant literature with two strong trends motivated by the lack of realism of academic problems.The first trend is to study rich vehicle routing problems which combine many features from real applications. The other one is to try to build robust solutions, less affected by the various uncertainties encountered on the field. Several communities have their own interpretation of robustness and propose various tools to evaluate or achieve it, e.g., simulation methods, stochastic programming, robust optimization and fuzzy logic.Robust optimization is used here for a Robust VRP (RVRP) with uncertain travel times modeled by a set of discrete scenarios. A mathematical model, two constructive heuristics, one local search and four metaheuristics are proposed to determine a set of routes minimizing the worst cost (total cost of the routes) over all scenarios. The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a literature review. The problem is specified and modeled in Section 3. The lexicographic comparison of solutions is explained in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6 present the greedy heuristics and the local search shared by all our metaheuristics, described in Section 7. A computational evaluation is conducted in Section 8, before a conclusion in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
