@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integration of discriminative and generative models for activity recognition in smart homes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid activity recognition approach that combines DM with PE using SVM.DM is suitable for imbalanced number of activity instances.PE has better generalization ability in activity recognition.Evaluation on five smart home datasets validates an improved performance of the approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Activity recognition,Smart homes,Pervasive healthcare,Distance minimization,Probability estimation,Support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Activity recognition in smart homes enables the remote monitoring of elderly and patients. In healthcare systems, reliability of a recognition model is of high importance. Limited amount of training data and imbalanced number of activity instances result in over-fitting thus making recognition models inconsistent. In this paper, we propose an activity recognition approach that integrates the distance minimization (DM) and probability estimation (PE) approaches to improve the reliability of recognitions. DM uses distances of instances from the mean representation of each activity class for label assignment. DM is useful in avoiding decision biasing towards the activity class with majority instances; however, DM can result in over-fitting. PE on the other hand has good generalization abilities. PE measures the probability of correct assignments from the obtained distances, while it requires a large amount of data for training. We apply data oversampling to improve the representation of classes with less number of instances. Support vector machine (SVM) is applied to combine the outputs of both DM and PE, since SVM performs better with imbalanced data and further improves the generalization ability of the approach. The proposed approach is evaluated using five publicly available smart home datasets. The results demonstrate better performance of the proposed approach compared to the state-of-the-art activity recognition approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recognition of activities performed by a smart home resident is a fundamental task in assisted living and requires a high accuracy due to its use in healthcare services, such as remote monitoring of patients and elderly, and to assess their functional abilities [1–3]. Activity recognition supports independent stay of elderly in their own homes and ensures immediate medical aid as required [4,5]. Early identification of health deterioration can also be possible through the long term analysis of recognized activities [1,5]. Smart homes are equipped with sensors to record the events, such as interaction of the resident with objects and the environment. The sequence of events together defines an activity, such as eating, sleeping, meal preparation, or appropriate usage of medicines [4]. Challenges in activity recognition arise due to high intra-class variations, where varying sequences of events lead to the same activity; high inter-subject variations, where same activity is performed differently by different users; and less inter-class variations, where different activities are performed at the same location, such as preparing breakfast, lunch or dinner [3,5]. In addition, limited amount of training data, variation in frequency of execution of activities and sensor errors may also affect the performance of recognition approaches.Activity recognition can be performed either by discriminative approaches, such as K-nearest neighbor (KNN) [6,7], artificial neural networks (ANN) [8], support vector machine (SVM) [9], distance learning (DL) [5] and conditional random fields (CRF) [10]; or generative approaches, such as naive Bayes (NB) [11], hidden Markov model (HMM) [3,10] and dynamic Bayesian networks (DBN) [12]. Discriminative approaches map the feature space to activity labels by learning the data boundaries [13]. Discriminative models are computationally efficient, capture the fine details in the data and remain robust in prediction of class labels. Discriminative approaches have the capability of tuning the parameters for the task at hand; however, these approaches can suffer from over-fitting [14]. On the other hand, generative approaches improve the generalization ability by modeling the underlying distribution of classes from the obtained feature space. Generative models are flexible, since they learn the structure and the relationship between the classes by exploiting the prior knowledge for the given task such as Markov assumptions, prior distributions and probabilistic reasoning, although the parameters are not optimized. Generative approaches perform well with uncertainty in the data; however, they require a large amount of data for reasonable estimations [13,14]. We provide a hybrid model for activity recognition, which minimizes the limitation of both discriminative and generative approaches.In this paper, we propose an activity recognition approach for smart homes by integrating distance minimization (DM) and probability estimation (PE). The approach exploits the capabilities of both discriminative and generative models. We combine a discriminative model, obtained by measuring inter-class feature distances from the mean representations of each class, with a generative model that measures the actual distribution of the obtained distances by curve fitting. In the case of activities with fewer instances, we use an over-sampling technique to improve the data representation of minority classes. Outputs of both models, the obtained distances and their estimated probabilities, are combined using the learning method multi-class SVM (one-versus-one), which is computationally efficient in the case of multiple classes, and a better choice for imbalance number of activity instances. The validation of the proposed approach using five smart home datasets through a comprehensive evaluation metrics demonstrates an improved performance in correct recognition of activities compared to existing approaches.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related work on activity recognition. In Section 3, we discuss the proposed activity recognition approach. The datasets and experimental analysis are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 draws conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed an activity recognition approach for smart homes that combines DM with PE to improve the reliability of classifications. DM approach is non-biased towards majority classes and also robust in learning activity classes with less inter-class and high intra-class variations; however, DM can lead to over-fitting. PE is effective in providing better generalization, while it requires a large amount of training data. Both DM and PE in the individual capacity remained less effective. However, when DM is combined with PE, a significant improvement in the performance can be attained. Both DM and PE approaches are combined through SVM to minimize their limitations and to improve the recognition performance. The evaluation of the proposed approach using five publicly available smart home datasets demonstrates a better performance compared to existing approaches. Future work includes automated segmentation of data, through trained detectors, before classification.