@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimization of process parameters through fuzzy logic and genetic algorithm – A case study in a process industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Sugar mill industry has been taken for investigation.Failures of the boiler during the co generation process.Failures occur in the screw conveyor, drum feeder and grate.Critical parameters are identified by FMEA and fuzzy FMEA.Parameters are optimized by Taguchi method. Failures are minimized.Further optimized by Genetic algorithm. Failure free system has been obtained.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FMEA,Fuzzy FMEA,Taguchi method,Genetic algorithm,Boiler,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The simultaneous generation of steam and power, which is commonly referred to as cogeneration, has been adopted by many sugar mills in India to overcome the power shortage. It becomes an increasingly important source of income for sugar factories. The problems faced by the sugar mill industry arise mainly due to failures of either the complete system or some specific components during the cogeneration process. This paper presents the failure analysis of the boiler during the cogeneration process and provides solution to overcome these failures. The failures frequently occur in the screw conveyor and in the drum feeder of fuel feeding system and the grate of the boiler. In this research work, the statistical tools viz., Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) and the Taguchi method have been applied to investigate and alleviate these failures. Since conventional FMEA has some limitations and Taguchi method does not give better solution, fuzzy FMEA has been employed to overcome the limitations and genetic algorithm technique has been applied to obtain failure – free system during the cogeneration process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The growth of Indian economy is constrained by shortage of power, which is one of the significant constraints. Therefore simultaneous generation of steam and power, commonly referred to as cogeneration, has been adopted in many of the sugar industries [1]. A steam generating boiler is one of the essential prime movers used in cogeneration process and nevertheless boiler failures are one of the major causes for unexpected shutdown of plant, leading to a great loss of production [2]. This research work has been carried out in one of the leading sugar industries located in Tamil Nadu as a case study. The boiler used in the sugar mill is a high pressure and water tube boiler type which is vertical and top supported. The working pressure, generating capacity and steam temperature of this boiler are 66kg/cm2, 75tonnes/hour (T/h), and 485°C respectively. The main components used in cogeneration boiler are fuel feeding system, furnace (grate), super heater, attemperator, economizer, air pre-heater, Forced Draught (FD) fan, Induced Draught (ID) fan, dust collector, boiler feed water pumps and some auxiliary equipments [3].The fuel feeding system consists of a storage bunker (silo), drum feeder and a screw conveyor. After extracting sugar, the remaining fibrous residue, which is called bagasse, is used as fuel in the boiler, otherwise, it would be conveyed to the storage facilities. In order to compensate the shortage of bagasse, other fuels such as palm boom, wood chips and cane trash are looked for. This boiler is designed to burn bagasse (B), palm boom (PB), cane trash (C) or a mixture thereof [4,5]. The fuel is fed to the vertical column of the storage bunker (silo) from the belt conveyor. The combination of drum feeder and screw conveyor combination is intended to feed desired quantities of bagasse to the furnace.The drum feeder extracts bagasse from storage bunker and the quantity extracted is proportional to the speed of rotation of the drum. The extracted bagasse is fed to the screw conveyor which transports the same longitudinally and further into the chute which connects the conveyor and pneumatic distributor. In fact, four such assemblies are available per boiler in the system. Fuel is burnt in suspension as well as during the forward travelling grate surface. Later the ash is continuously discharged over the front end of the grate into the ash handing system. The formed flue gas is passed around the water tubes and further through the economizer, air pre-heater, super heater, dust collector and finally to the air precipitator. Thus the steam generated in the boiler is utilized for power generation. In the above-mentioned boiler, failures are frequently occurring in the screw conveyor, drum feeder and grate. The work plan for this research work is shown in Fig. 1.In this research work as shown in Fig. 1, a sugar mill boiler has been selected. The problem identified in the above-mentioned industry is minimizing the failures of the system by optimizing the process parameters. The failures have occurred in the drum feeder, screw conveyor and the grate during cogeneration process. In the first stage, RPN values have been ascertained using FMEA and fuzzy FMEA. The most significant parameters that cause the failures are identified from the comparison of conventional RPN and fuzzy RPN values. Further, these significant parameters are optimized by Taguchi method and subsequently by genetic algorithm in order to obtain failure free system.Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is a very powerful tool for evaluating and enhancing system reliability that is used in a wide variety of industries including aerospace, automotive, medical, mining, offshore and power generation. FMEA is a widely used engineering tool for defining, identifying and eliminating known as well as potential failures, problems, errors and so on from system, design, process, and/or service before they reach the customer [6,7]. A system, design, process, or service may usually have multiple failure modes or causes and effects. In this situation, each failure mode or cause needs to be assessed and prioritized in terms of their risks so that highly risky (or most dangerous) failure modes can be corrected with top priority. The traditional FMEA determines the risk priorities of failure modes through the risk priority number (RPN), which is the product of the occurrence (O), severity (S) and detection (D) of a failure. That is RPN=O×S×D, where S represents the severity of the failure, O represents the probability of the failure occurrence, and D represents the probability of the failure being detected [8]. The severity, occurrence and detection factors are individually rated using the 10-point scale described in Table 1. The minimum value (“no risk”) is rated with 1. Failure modes with higher RPN values are considered to be more important and are given higher priorities than those with lower RPN values [9]. However, it suffers from several shortcomings. It has been pointed out that the same RPN can be obtained from different combinations of severity, occurrence, and detection. Although the same RPN is obtained, the risk can be different and the relative importance of three risk factors (O, S and D) is not taken into account. In other words, the three risk factors are given of equal importance, but this may not be the case in practice. The three risk factors are difficult to evaluate precisely. Typically, division is made with the usage of linguistic terms such as low, higher very high. In order to overcome the above shortcomings, fuzzy logic is applied into the conventional FMEA in the present work [10,11].Fuzzy logic system is one of the various names for the systems which have relationship with fuzzy concepts like fuzzy sets, linguistic variables, etc. The most popular fuzzy logic systems in the literature may be classified into three types: pure fuzzy logic systems, Takagi and Sugeno's fuzzy system, and fuzzy logic systems with fuzzifier and defuzzifier. The three inputs S, O and D are fuzzified and evaluated in a fuzzy inference engine built on a consistent base of IF–THEN rules. The fuzzy output is defuzzified to get the crisp value of the RPN which will be further used for a more accurate ranking of the potential risks [12,13]. Fuzzy inference system (FIS) is based on IF–THEN rules which can connect multiple input variables to output variable. FIS could be utilized as a forecasting model when input/output data have some uncertainties. Detection assessment methodology is based on FIS and therefore it provides a flexible way for recognizing their effective factors and modelling. Input variables are fuzzified by the fuzzy membership functions and they are imported to fuzzy inference engine. In a fuzzy inference engine, experts’ knowledge about failure detection is converted into If–Then rules. Fuzzy inputs are assessed by fuzzy inference engine and finally output or detection score is defuzzified [14].Taguchi–genetic algorithm approach has been applied to optimize the welding process parameters of friction welding of tube-to-tube plate using an external tool (FWTPET) [15]. The practical significance of applying GA to FWTPET process has been validated by means of computing the deviation between predicted and experimentally obtained welding process parameters. This process yields high quality and defect-free weld joints with enhanced mechanical and metallurgical properties with lesser energy consumption [15]. Although the evolutionary algorithms offer significant advantages over the traditional techniques, they may have premature convergence towards a local minimum. In order to overcome the weaknesses of evolutionary algorithms and to avoid premature convergence towards a local minimum, evolutionary optimization techniques have been hybridized and commonly used in the optimization of manufacturing and design optimization problems [16]. Fuzzy-genetic algorithm approach has been applied to improve the quality of the drawing in the automatic orthogonal graph drawing and it has been proved that the proposed approach generates the solutions with superior characteristics relatively the solutions obtained with applying the classical approach [17]. While reviewing the GA technique, Oscar Castillo et al. [18] considered the application of genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization and ant colony optimization in the design of optimal type-2 fuzzy controllers. They also mentioned alternative approaches to design type-2 fuzzy controllers without optimization techniques. Comparison of the different optimization methods for the case of designing type-2 fuzzy controllers has been provided. Particle swam optimization (PSO) and genetic algorithms (GAs) are combined for optimization using fuzzy logic to integrate the results of both methods and for parameters tuning. The new optimization method gives improved results than PSO and GA [19]. Fuzzy and genetic algorithm techniques were used in assembly line balancing problem. In this work, fuzzy goal programming has been used to address uncertainties in the conventional criteria and an appropriate genetic algorithm has been developed to deal with the model and results show that well balanced task allocation can be obtained through the proposed model [20]. Finite element method and genetic algorithm approach were applied to optimize the electric discharge machining parameters. It has been found that the proposed approach gives expected optimum performance of the EDM process [21]. The genetic algorithm technique has been used to mechanize the optimal determination of fuzzy logic controller parameters based on an efficient cost function that comprises undershoot, overshoot, rise time, settling time, steady state error and stability. Simulation results show that the proposed strategy performances are desirable in terms of the time response characteristics for both phugoid mode and short period mode, the robustness, and the adaptation of itself with respect to the large commands [22].Generally in sugar mill boiler, in the first instant, conventional FMEA using RPN ranking is applied as a first step to ascertain the failure modes. Mathematically, RPN=O×S×D. FMEA is carried out by a cross-functional team of experts from various departments [23]. By using experts’ knowledge, the values of O, S and D are assigned to various failure modes from Table 1. The RPN values of the identified process parameters causing failures for boiler are shown in Table 2. If the RPN value of any parameter is more than 100, that parameter will be considered as most critical parameters.The membership function represents the degree of memberships of input and output linguistic variables. The fuzzy membership functions for the linguistic terms of the severity, occurrence and detection are described in Table 3. The most common ones are triangular, trapezoidal and Gaussian type membership functions. The three inputs, severity, occurrence and detect are described by remote, low, moderate, high and very high as linguistic terms. The output, risk is described by very low, low, moderate, high and very high as linguistic terms [24,25]. In this paper, the triangular membership functions are used for assessments. Fig. 2represents input variable (severity, occurrence and detection) membership functions. The output variable (risk) membership function is represented in Fig. 3. These membership functions will be used in fuzzy FMEA for determining the potential constructability problems.The membership function derived from the expert is used to generate the fuzzy rule base. Since there are three factors, severity, occurrence and detection and each factor are described by five linguistic terms, the total number of rules is 125. Some of these rules can be combined to reduce the number of rules of the fuzzy rule base. The total number of rules, equal to 125, in the fuzzy rule base, is reduced to 24 for boiler. The rules, which are written in MATLAB software are given below:1.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is M and Detection is H, THEN Risk is H.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is M and Detection is M, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is L and Detection is M, THEN Risk is VL.IF Occurrence is H and Severity is H and Detection is M, THEN Risk is VH.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is M and Detection is L, THEN Risk is VL.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is L and Detection is M, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is H and Detection is H, THEN Risk is VH.IF Occurrence is H and Severity is H and Detection is H, THEN Risk is VH.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is M and Detection is L, THEN Risk is VL.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is L and Detection is R, THEN Risk is VL.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is H and Detection is H, THEN Risk is H.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is L and Detection is L, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is L and Detection is L, THEN Risk is VL.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is M and Detection is L, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is M and Detection is L, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is L and Detection is H, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is L and Detection is L, THEN Risk is VL.IF Occurrence is H and Severity is M Detection is M, THEN Risk is H.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is L and Detection is M, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is H and Severity is H and Detection is M, THEN Risk is H.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is M and Detection is M, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is L and Severity is L and Detection is R, THEN Risk is VL.IF Occurrence is M and Severity is M and Detection is L, THEN Risk is L.IF Occurrence is R and Severity is M and Detection is L, THEN Risk is VL.The fuzzy RPNs or fuzzy risk results are obtained by the defuzzification using the same data from the traditional FMEA, and expressing the three variables considered linguistically with aid of the membership function and the fuzzy rule base. From experts’ knowledge, if the fuzzy RPN value is 5 and more than 5 then it will be considered as one of the most critical parameters. In this study, centroid method is used for defuzzification. The values of conventional RPN and fuzzy RPN for sugar mill boiler are shown in Tables 2 and 4. From Table 2, the most critical parameters identified by conventional FMEA for boiler are fuel type, fuel moisture, drum speed, air flow, motor load, silo level, furnace temperature, oil pressure and hydraulic drive speed. Most of the articles indicated that the conventional FMEA has some limitations [10,26,27]. One of the major disadvantages of the traditional FMEA is allocation of equal weight to each indicator of the RPN. In order to overcome this limitation, fuzzy FMEA has been carried out to the same systems. From Table 4, it has been observed that the most significant parameters identified by fuzzy FMEA for sugar mill boiler are the same and, furthermore, the RPN values are in good agreement with each other. The parameters indicated by an asterisk (*) are considered as critical parameters. Once the RPN values are determined, subsequently corrective action must be taken, on the above mentioned selected parameters in order to minimize the failures. In this paper, the process parameters selected by FMEA and fuzzy FMEA are optimized by Taguchi method and genetic algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Considering the case of the boiler, the process parameters which affect the quality of screw conveyor, drum feeder and grate have been identified and selected by using FMEA. Since the conventional FMEA has some limitations, fuzzy logic is applied into the conventional FMEA. It is clear from Table 4 that the most critical parameters selected by conventional FMEA and fuzzy FMEA are the same, though the rankings differ. Taguchi method has been applied to optimize the process parameters selected by conventional FMEA and fuzzy FMEA. The optimized process parameters, levels, values and the confirmation experiments results have been shown in Table 6, and, it can be observed that the failures of screw conveyor, drum feeder and grate are reasonably minimized. Furthermore, genetic algorithm technique has been applied on the optimized parameters obtained by Taguchi method. The results obtained by GA for screw conveyor, drum feeder and grate have been shown in Tables 7–9. The comparison of results obtained by Taguchi method and GA has been shown in Table 10. The percentage of defects has been significantly reduced after the application of GA technique. From the present study, the following inferences have been arrived at:1.The most significant parameters identified by conventional FMEA and fuzzy FMEA for boiler components failures are drum speed, air flow, fuel moisture and fuel type for screw conveyor; fuel type, fuel moisture, motor load and silo level for drum feeder; and furnace temperature, oil pressure, hydraulic drive speed and fuel type for grate.The best levels and values of process parameters obtained by Taguchi method are E1 (bagasse), F1 (49%), G1 (600rpm), H3 (120T/h) for screw conveyor; P1 (bagasse), Q1 (49%), R1 (11.5A), S3 (100%) for drum feeder; and K1 (800°C), L2 (40kg/cm2), M2 (3rpm), N1 (bagasse) for grate (Table 6).The confirmation experiments results obtained by Taguchi method for screw conveyor, drum feeder, and grate are 0.65%, 0.8% and 0.9% respectively.The genetic algorithm technique has been applied on the optimized parameters obtained by Taguchi method. A mathematical model has been developed for screw conveyor, drum feeder and grate and it has been used as the objective function in the GA.After applying the genetic algorithm technique on the optimized parameters obtained by Taguchi method, the percentage of screw conveyor failure, drum feeder failure and grate failure are drastically reduced to 0.001, 0.002 and 0.004 respectively.