@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A MIDAS modelling framework for Chinese inflation index forecast incorporating Google search data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a MIDAS framework which incorporates Google search data to predict Chinese inflation index.We extract five groups of keywords, which include both subject terms and trends terms to construct search data.The high frequency part of Google search data is directly used in MIDAS model to predict monthly CPI.The MIDAS model outperforms other benchmark models in CPI forecast.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inflation index forecast,Consumer price index,MIDAS modelling framework,User generated content,Google search data,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Increased internet penetration makes it possible for user generated content (UGC) to reflect people’s insights and expectations on economic activities. As representative and easily accessible UGC data that reflect public opinions on economic issues, Google search data have been used to forecast macroeconomic indicators in existing literatures. However, very little empirical research has directly used Google search data to improve the forecast accuracy. This paper proposes an integrated framework, which constructs keywords base and extracts search data accordingly, and then incorporates the search data into a mixed data sampling (MIDAS) model. Five groups of search data are extracted based on the constructed keywords and are then used in MIDAS model to forecast Chinese consumer price index (CPI) from 2004 to 2012. The empirical results indicate that the search data are strongly correlated with CPI, which is officially released by the Statistic Bureau of China; the MIDAS model including the search data outperforms the benchmark models, with the average reduction of root mean square error (RMSE) being 32.9%. This research provides a rigorous and generalizable framework for macroeconomic trend prediction using Google search data, and would have great potential in supporting business decisions by eliciting relevant information from UGC data in the Internet.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Timely and accurate forecast of major macroeconomic indicators (such as gross domestic production, consumer price index and unemployment rate) is essential for the government to take prompt policy decisions on government expenditures, money supply, labor market regulations, etc. It can also guide enterprises to make long-term investment development and strategic decisions. Improper and delayed forecast would probably result in wrong policy decisions and consequently hamper the development of countries and enterprises. If government officials predict an extremely high consumer price index (CPI) in the future months and then decide to conduct quantitative easing monetary policy, the inflation level will be definitely exacerbated (Sims 1990; Schuh 2001). Imprecise forecast of the economic trends would possibly mislead business managers to make wrong development strategy, so as to cause enormous losses, even bankruptcy of enterprises (Norsworthy and Tsai 1998). Among various macroeconomic indicators, CPI is a special and important one as it has a strong connection with peoples’ daily life. It is not only the economic indicator getting most public attentions, but also the one serving as a baseline for most other economic indicators. CPI measures the inflation level of one country and indicates the rise in the general level of prices of commodities and services providing an important foundation for decision making of monetary policy, fiscal policy, national economic accounting, etc. Therefore, timely and accurate forecast of inflation is helpful for the government and enterprise to foresee the price trends and make proper policies.Traditional data source for inflation forecast is the officially released statistical data, which are collected, analyzed and aggregated by survey statisticians in the national statistical system. These data are generally published monthly, quarterly, or yearly by some authoritative institutions, e.g., National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC, http://www.stats.gov.cn). The statistical data are creditable since the data are computed based on statistical theories. According to economic theories, many economic indicators can influence price changes, such as gross domestic product (GDP), rural resident incomes (RRI), consumer sentiment index (CSI), etc. The changes of CPI are relevant with these indicators, which can be used to forecast CPI. In the forecasting practices, many forecast models including time series models, econometric models, intelligent models etc. have been employed to predict inflation. The classical and widely used time series and econometric models are autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA), autoregressive distributed lag (ADL), error correct model (ECM), and dynamic factor models (Stock and Watson 2002, 2005; Forni et al. 2005). Intelligent models like neural network, support vector machine and genetic algorithm are also used to forecast the economic indicators. However, such economic indicators are usually released at a regular time and later than the occurrence of actual economic issues. For example, the CPI of June is available in the middle of July. It means the statistical data lag about fifteen days behind the release of economic indicators. These fifteen days in the past were not long enough to hamper economic growth. However, in the information age, the lags could possibly lead to economic recession if inappropriate policy decisions are made during these days. The traditional data source is then characterized by low frequency and release lags. To improve the forecast accuracy of inflation, there is an urgent need for new data sources with high frequency and no lags. Therefore, new forecast models combining new data sources with different frequencies should be proposed.With the development of Internet technology, search data emerge as a new type of data since they connect closely with people’s daily life. Nowadays, the search engine is the most used tool when people browse the Internet. According to The 31st Internet Network Development State Statistical Report issued by China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC), 80% of Internet users acquire information by search engines, up to a population of 451 million. Among a large quantity of search engines, Google is the most popular one with a market share of 65.2% according to comScore marketing research.1The detailed information can be seen from the website: http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Press_Releases.1Large scale search terms or phrases are accumulated when Internet users use search engines. Then the search volumes of these terms or phrases during a time period can be provided by search engines. Therefore, the search data can be interpreted as the search volumes of specific terms or phrases via search engine during a period of time. Google Trends, a public tool of Google Inc. supplies free download of search data for researchers. Google Trends normalizes each time sequence data by dividing the count of each search keyword by the total online search queries submitted during the week. The Google search data are in the form of time sequences, and available at weekly frequency from January 2004. These data are generated based on the volumes of search queries of keywords that the public submit through the Internet. The keywords could reflect Internet users’ interests and attentions on economic issues (Choi and Varian 2012). For example, if the public attempt to acquire knowledge from the Internet, they tend to search some keywords via the search engine. Suppose that the public realize that the food price in June rises quickly in their daily life, they may search for more information on rising prices through the search engine. They would probably search “food price” or “food price rises” in the search engine, which could represent their judgment on prices in June. The search data series from Google Trends have been applied to predict some economic indicators in US, India, Turkey and many other countries. Therefore, Google search data can provide a compromise and feasible way to measure public opinions, and can be considered as an important data source for economic forecast. To examine the predictive power of Google search data, it is necessary to develop a rigorous econometric forecast model. However, Google search data are issued weekly, of a higher level of frequency than CPI. To use the mixed frequency data in the classical forecast models mentioned above, the high frequency data are needed to be converted into low frequency ones. Specifically, the weekly Google search data are converted into monthly ones by taking the average or sum values during one month. The analysis method of the weekly data presumes that the weights of each week are the same. However, each week contributes to the month with different weights, and just taking the average or the sum would lose much weekly information (Ghysels et al. 2004, 2007). Therefore, how to incorporate the weekly data directly to forecast monthly economic indicator is an imperative issue. Modelling the weekly data directly with varying weights is expected to improve the forecast accuracy. A Mixed Data Sampling (MIDAS) approach can satisfy the needs of directly modelling the mixed frequency data. MIDAS is proposed by Ghysels et al. (2004), and can directly model the mixed frequency data in a simple, parsimonious and flexible way. The technique has been applied to predict volatility (Alper et al. 2008), and macroeconomic forecasts with monthly or daily data (Clements and Galvão 2008). Therefore, it is feasible to combine the Google search data with statistical data by using MIDAS models in order to improve the inflation forecast accuracy.Previous works on incorporating Google search data into forecast models mainly focus on converting the high frequency data into low frequency ones. To construct Google search data, just the terms related with research subjects are defined as the search strings (Choi and Varian 2012; Da et al. 2011). None of these studies have considered the terms or phrases that can reflect economic trends such as “rise” and “decrease”. Since these terms could reflect the public’s judgement on economic trends, it is of great importance t incorporate them into the keywords base. In addition, the existing research did not make the best of the high frequency part of Google search data in forecasting models. The simple time series models or econometric models with the same data frequency are constructed to predict economic indicators. Consequently, the information of search data with high frequency gets lost, which could possibly influence the precision rate of economic forecast. The research gaps need to be filled in order to forecast the economic indicators timely and accurately by using UGC data. Accordingly, two research questions are addressed here. First is how to comprehensively construct Google search data that reflect the public opinions on price dynamics in China. Second is how to make the most use of the Google search data to improve forecast accuracy by combining both the low frequency statistical data and the high frequency Google search data. To solve the questions, this research proposes a rigorous framework on constructing search data series and builds a MIDAS model to incorporate the high frequency Google search data to predict Chinese CPI. The proposed framework is integral and scalable. In this framework, large amounts of keywords reflecting subjects and public’s opinions are extracted from online news, and are used to construct the Google search data. After that, a set of econometric analysis methods such as descriptive analysis, correlation analysis, and lead or lag relationship analysis are conducted to analyze the constructed search data. An empirical study on Chinese CPI forecast from January of 2004 to December of 2012 is implemented. Five groups of keywords and phrases are defined to construct the search data under the framework. The sample sets are classified into two groups in order to compare the performance of the model in different periods. The empirical results show that the constructed search data are strongly correlated with CPI, and can improve the forecast accuracy in comparison with other econometric models without the search data. The main findings also indicate that with proper method for keywords selection, the search series extracted from Google Trends can effectively reflect the public’s opinion on the dynamic of prices and support the more accurate forecast of economic targets. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is the literature review. In Section 3, the MIDAS modelling framework is proposed. Section 4 describes the empirical results of CPI forecast. Discussion of the findings and conclusions are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
