@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic classification of high resolution land cover using a new data weighting procedure: The combination of k-means clustering algorithm and central tendency measures (KMC–CTM)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In this study, an Urban Land Cover Dataset received from the database of UCI machine learning was used as the urban land cover data.A new data weighting method called KMC-CTM was recommended to classify these 9 different patterns automatically.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data pre-processing,Data weighting,The combination of k-means clustering algorithm and central tendency measures (KMC–CTM),Urban land cover,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Information on a well-scale urban land cover is important for a number of urban planning practices involving tree shade mapping, green space analysis, urban hydrologic modeling and urban land use mapping. In this study, an urban land cover dataset received from the database of UCI (University of California at Irvine) machine learning was used as the urban land cover data. This dataset is the urban area located in Deerfield Beach, FL, USA. Separately, this dataset is a high definition atmospheric image consisting of 9 different urban land covers. The characteristics of a multi-scale spectral, magnitude and formal tectology were used to sort out and classify these different images. The dataset comprises a total of 147 features and land covers of 9 different areas involving trees, grass, soil, concrete, asphalt, buildings, cars, pools and shadows. A new data weighting method was recommended to classify these 9 different patterns automatically. This recommended data weighting method is based on the combination of the measures of central tendency composed of mean value, harmonic value, mode and median along with the k-means clustering method. In the data weighting method, the data sets belonging to each class within the dataset are first calculated by using k-means clustering method, after which the measures of central tendency belonging to each class are calculated, as well. The measure of central tendency belonging to each class is divided by the set central value belonging to the class in question, as the result of which the data weight coefficient of that class has already been calculated. This calculation process is performed separately for 9 different land covers, and afterwards, these data weighting coefficients found are multiplied by the dataset, and thus, the dataset has been weighted. In the second stage, on the other hand, 3 different classification algorithms containing k-NN (k-nearest neighbor), extreme learning machine (ELM) and support vector machine (SVM) were used to classify 9 different urban land covers after the data weighting method. In determining the educational and test data sets, the 10-fold cross validation was used. When classification through raw data was performed along with k-NN (for k=1), ELM and SVM classification algorithms, the overall classification accuracy obtained was 77.15%, 84.70% and 84.79%, respectively.When classification through data weighting method (the combination of k-means clustering and mode measure) along with k-NN (for k=1), ELM and SVM classification algorithms was made, the overall classification accuracy obtained proved to be 98.58%, 98.62% and 98.77%, respectively. The obtained results suggest that the urban land cover in an atmospheric image via the recommended data weighting method was classified as 9 different areas with a high classification success rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this study, a new method automatically classifying the land cover of an urban area located in Deerfield Beach, FL, USA [1,2] which comprises trees, grass, soil, concrete, asphalt, buildings, cars, pools and shadows was recommended in 9 different ways. First of all, the subject as to what a land cover is and why it is important was explained; later on, the topic of remote sensing which is the data acquisition stage of an urban land cover was described. The use of GIS (geographic information system) in planning an urban land cover was described, as well. The use of urban land cover dataset in the literature that was acquired from the database of UCI (University of California at Irvine) machine learning [3] was explained along with the conducted studies mentioned in the literature. Information on a well-scaled urban land cover is of importance for a number of urban planning practices that comprise tree shade mapping, green space analysis, urban hydrologic modeling and urban land use mapping. A land cover is defined as the characteristics and the physical combination of land/areal elements at the surface of the earth [1–3].The distribution of a land cover is of great significance for scientists and authorities in order to do the mapping of the patterns of a land cover from global and regional to local sizes and to display the changing world better, since it has a major impact on climate and environment. The climate research committee of the National Research Council [4] emphasized the fact that the distribution of a land cover would have a prominent effect on the radiation balance of the Earth due to the fact that any change in the land cover might have an impact on the vaporization, transpiration and the heat flow of the ground surface. For instance, tree eaves/fringes absorb the solar radiation resulting in the decrease in the land surface temperature over the ground. On the other hand, the increase in the stable/resistant urban patterns within the urban area (asphalt, concrete and paving stones) prevents the underground waters likely to cause a potential risk of flood from leaking out. For this reason, displaying the land cover accurately is inevitable for the decision makers involved in public policy planning and the management of world's resources. As one of the areas of the study, remote sensing has attracted the attention of researchers for the past twenty years. In this field of research, various computer-assisted techniques were used for the data analysis comprising artificial neural networks, decision trees, genetic programming, statistical machine learning and other analysis methods [5,6]. An image through remote perception can be used for a number of practices that involve land use imaging, research missions, predicting environmental damages, city planning, radiation imaging, growth regulation, land evaluation and herbal production review. The classification of this image is an indispensable part of such practices in particular [5,6].Town planners are in need of solutions that appeal to day-to-day business requirements while promoting the ability to predict and respond to the chronic urban problems and market fluctuation for the future. The success of town planners in fighting with chronic urban problems are greatly determined by the ability to use efficient and effective tools and to apply the practice of planning decision support systems. Today, town planners utilize GIS (geographic information system) throughout the world in numerous practices. GIS tools may provide data visualization, modeling, and necessary planning platform for analysis and cooperation [7,23].In the literature, there are two studies regarding the “urban land cover dataset” classification acquired from the database of UCI (University of California at Irvine) machine learning [3]. In a study conducted by Brian A. Johnson [1], a two-stage-classification procedure was proposed to classify the urban land cover dataset. First, a hierarchy of a seven image segmentation was formed for an urban image by means of different scales, and the preliminary classification values were executed for each of the segmentations by using a classification algorithm. The success rate obtained proved to be 82.10%. In the second study conducted, on the other hand, Johnson et al. proposed a multi-scale approach to classify the land cover in a high-definition urban image. They obtained 78.11% overall accuracy and 0.727 kappa coefficient values without any Super-object information. After the Super-object information had been assigned into the images, 84.42% overall accuracy and 0.804 kappa coefficient values were obtained.In this article, a new data weighting method to classify nine different land covers in the urban land cover dataset prepared by Johnson et al. was proposed. This data weighting method consists of three stages. In the first stage, set centers are found by using the k-means clustering algorithm for each class within the dataset. Afterwards, in the second stage, the central tendency measurements comprising the statistical values like mean value, harmonic value, mode and median for each class within the dataset are calculated. In the final stage, on the other hand, the data weighting coefficient belonging to each class is calculated by dividing the central tendency measurement belonging to that class by the set central value of that class. This calculation is performed separately for 9 different land covers, and then these data weighting coefficients found are multiplied by the dataset, and thus, the dataset has been weighted. Following the data weighting process, three different classification algorithms were used to classify 9 different land covers. The kappa coefficient values obtained prior to the application of the data weighting process (the combination of k-means clustering and mode measure) were as follows: 0.30 for k-NN (for k=1) classifier algorithm, 0.45 for ELM classifier, and 0.45 for SVM classifier. The kappa coefficient values obtained in the wake of applying the data weighting process (the combination of k-means clustering and mode measure) were as follows: 0.90 for k-NN (for k=1) classifier algorithm, 0.90 for ELM classifier, and 0.91 for SVM classifier. It is seen that promising results have been obtained in the classification of nine different land covers with the combination of the proposed data weighting method and classification algorithms.In this study, urban land cover dataset acquired from UCI (University of California at Irvine) machine learning database was used as the urban land cover data [3]. This dataset is an urban area situated in Deerfield Beach, FL, USA [1,2]. Separately, this dataset is a high-resolution atmospheric image consisting of 9 different urban land covers. The characteristics of a multi-scale spectral, magnitude and formal tectology were used to sort out and classify these different images. The dataset comprises a total of 147 features and land covers of 9 different areas involving trees, grass, soil, concrete, asphalt, buildings, cars, pools and shadows. There are a total of 675 data within the dataset. The data distribution according to nine different land covers is given in Table 1. The color infrared image of the study area is given in Fig. 1.There are a total of 147 features within the urban land cover dataset, and these features comprise the spectral, magnitude, formal and textural properties of the image in question. While forming the features/properties, the spectral, magnitude, formal and textural properties of the image consist of 21 features.Afterwards, these features were repeated for each coarse scale (scale_20, scale_40, scale_60, scale_80, scale_100, scale_120, and scale_140), and 147 features were obtained. Table 2shows what scale information the features used within the dataset belong to.The proposed urban land cover classification system consists of three stages. In the first stage, the image segmentation relative to the urban land images and the feature extraction were performed. Since this section was acquired from urban land cover dataset and UCI machine learning database [2], it was performed by Johnson et al. In the second stage, on the other hand, after the features with regard to the data had been extracted, the data weighting method was proposed to weight the data according to their classes. In the third stage, on the other hand, three classification algorithms were used to classify the weighted urban land covers. These stages have been explained in the sections below.In the urban land cover dataset, the image of the study area was segmented by Johnson et al. [1] by using a multi-resolution segmentation starting with a pixel image segment and combining the neighboring segments together until a heterogenous threshold was reached [1,2]. In their study, the heterogenous threshold is determined by a “scaling parameter”’ defined by the user. The scaling parameter does not have an actual physical significance (like the mean area of the image segments), however, the increase in the value of the scaling parameter generally causes an increase in the mean magnitude of the segments [1,2]. In multi-scales, a series of segments were formed by using seven different scaling parameters (a total of 7 scales varying between 20 and 140 at 20 intervals) in order to perform the analysis of the image in a proper way. In the studies performed by Johnson et al. [1,2], a spectral NDVI-mean normalized differential vegetation index for each image segment (mean value and variance and average texture for each band) (gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM)) contrast, correlation and entropy for NIR band (all directions), magnitude (area) and shape statistics (roundness, shape index, border index, length/width, rectangular fit, density, border length and asymmetry) values were calculated. [1–3].The data weighting study proposed in this article was inspired by “k-means clustering based feature weighting” proposed by Polat, K. This proposed data weighting method is based on the combination of k-means clustering method and the central tendency measurements comprising the mean value, harmonic value, mode and the median. In the data weighting method, the datasets belonging to each class within the dataset are calculated by using k-means clustering in the first place, and afterwards, the central tendency measurements of each class are calculated. The data weight coefficient belonging to each class is then calculated by dividing the central tendency measurement of that class by the set central value of that class. This calculation is performed separately for 9 different land covers, and then, these data weight coefficients that are found are multiplied by the dataset, and hence, the dataset has been weighted. First of all, k-means clustering method was described, and afterwards, the central tendency measurements were explained.In data mining, k-means clustering, which is popular for the clustering analysis, is a vector quantization method used in signal processing. A process of belonging to the closest average set, k-means clustering in which each observational value serves as the prototype of the set aims to disintegrate the n observational value into the k-set [8–11]. Let each observation be given as the d-dimensional real vector, and let the set of observations indicated as (x1, x2,…,xn) be given, as well. k-Means clustering aims to disintegrate the n observational value into k (≤ n) set (S={S1, S2,…,Sk}) so as to minimize the mean-square value within the set. Eq. (1) shows the model in which the mean square value within the set will be minimized [10,11].(1)argmin∑i=1k∑x∈Si||x−μi||2In Eq. (1), the average of the points in μi, Siare shown.k-Means clustering algorithm consists of 4 stages. The algorithm is presented below [12].Step 1: The location of K points in space indicated by the clustered objects. These points indicate the first group centers.Step 2: Assign each object to the group with the closest center.Step 3: When all objects have been assigned, calculate the positions of K centers over again.Step 4: Repeat 2nd and 3rd steps until any motion in the center values is observed. This procedure generates the distinction of the objects within groups.In the dataset that is the second stage of data weighting process, the central tendency measurements of each feature are calculated. In the proposed data weighting algorithm, the central tendency measurements comprising the statistical values such as arithmetic mean, harmonic mean, median and mode were used. These statistical values have been described below [13]:Arithmetic mean: (or simply the mean, or the average): The sum of the measurements divided by the number of measurements.Harmonic mean: The reciprocal of the average of the reciprocals of the measurements.Median: The middle value of a set of measurements graded in numerical order.Mode: The most frequent value in a set of measurements.The block diagram of the proposed data weighting method is given in Fig. 2.In the wake of the data weighting process, three different classification algorithms were used to classify the urban land covers, which are k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier, extreme learning machine (ELM) classifier and support vector machine (SVM). The classification algorithms used in this study have been explained in the sections below.A classification made by using a sample-based classification is the simple state of placing the nearest neighbor in the sample space, and it is the process of labeling the unknown sample with the same class label of the known neighbor. This approach is preferred as the proximate (closest) classification. The high level of local susceptibility forms the speculative proximate neighboring classifications quite close to the noise in the training data. By placing k where there are neighbors greater than k>1 and in obtaining the outcome of the class label, more powerful models allowing a majority voting system can be acquired. The high value of k value, as a smooth locality, results in a function with less susceptibility/sensitivity. The nearest neighbor classification is generally taken into consideration as a particular state of k-nearest neighbor classification (k-NN) [14]. The classification algorithm of k-NN operates as follows:The training samples are the vectors existing in a multi-dimensional property space where each of them is a class label. The training stage of the algorithm involves loading the class labels of training samples and the property vectors. In the classification stage, k is the constant defined by the user, and an unlabelled vector (a test datum) is classified by being assigned to the most frequently repeated label among the k training samples proximate to the test datum. In general, the distance scale used for continuous variables is the Euclidean distance [15–17].Extreme learning machine (ELM) is an algorithm for the training of the single-hidden layer feedforward neural (SLFN) networks leading to a rapid network training that requires less human consultancy. The main consideration of ELM is based on the fact that the network hidden layer parameter values do not need to be learned, yet, they can be randomly selected. The network output parameters can be calculated analytically. Since the determination of network hidden layer outputs is based on the input weights assigned randomly, the SLFN networks trained by using the ELM algorithm were proved to have possessed the characteristics of global approachers [18–20]. In the original ELM algorithm, the trained network has the tendency to reach the lowest training error; furthermore, it is the lowest output weight norm showing a good generalization performance [18–20]. In this ELM kernel implementation, the hidden layer feature mappings need not to be known to users, and Gaussian kernel was used. Best values for positive regularization coefficient (ɛ) and Gaussian kernel parameter were found empirically after several experiments. Three different positive regularization coefficients (27, 217 and 220) and Gaussian kernel parameters (7, 17 and 20) were used, and the results were presented.In the machine learning process, the support vector machines (SVM) are the guided learning models along with the learning algorithms that analyze the data as well as recognizing the patterns used for classification and regression analysis. Let the dataset of training samples of each of them be given in the way that they will belong to one of the two categories. A SVM algorithm forms a model that enables the new samples to be assigned to a category or to other groups by constituting an unlikely bilinear classifier. A SVM model is the display of samples in the form of points in a mapped space, thus, the samples of separate categories are separated as widely as possible with an open/extended interval. New samples are mapped within the same space and are predicted as belonging to a category by depending on the interval that samples fall into [21,22].The SVM classifier operates by finding a separating hyper plane between two classes, so that the minimal distance with respect to the training vectors is maximum. 1 against all SVM is a combinations k number of SVM models. For the ith SVM, the samples in the ith class is trained with the positive label (+1), while all the other samples are trained with negative label (−1). RBF (radial basis function) kernel was used. Bound on the lagrangian multipliers C and lambda were fixed with three different values (101, 103, 105 and 1e−1, 1e−5, 1e−7).Three different classification algorithms used in this study were classified by being considered as two categories in the classification of nine different patterns. This can be explained as follows: There are 9 different classes comprising trees, grass, soil, concrete, asphalt, buildings, cars, pools and shadows in the dataset of the urban land cover. For instance, in order to classify the data of trees, the classification was made by attributing zero (0) to the data of trees and (1) to all the other classes. This approach is referred to as one versus all approach. Fig. 3shows the block diagram of one versus all approach used within the article.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a new data weighting method to classify a high-resolution atmospheric image composed of 9 different urban land covers belonging to an urban area located in Deerfield Beach, FL, USA was proposed. In order to classify nine different patterns, the characteristics of a multi-scale spectral, magnitude and formal tectology were used. Within the dataset are a total of 147 features and 9 different land covers comprising trees, grass, soil, concrete, asphalt, buildings, cars, pools and shadows. In the data weighting process, k-means clustering algorithm and central tendency measurements were used. As the classification algorithm, k-NN, SVM and ELM classification algorithms were used. The urban land cover dataset was received from UCI machine learning database [3]. The central tendency measurements involving arithmetic mean, harmonic mean, mode and median values were separately combined with k-means clustering, and four different data weighting methods were used. Afterwards, these four data weighting methods were combined with three different classification algorithms, and classifications in various combinations were performed. On the other hand, the support vector machine classification algorithm and KMC-mode integration data weighting method have produced the best success with 98.80% overall classification accuracy and 0.91 kappa coefficient value. As for prospective studies, both a more rapid and real-time operating system can be developed by applying new feature selection algorithms into the urban land cover dataset with 148 features.