@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Energy efficient chain based cooperative routing protocol for WSN

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper has presented the our new routing protocol with all results in QoS (Quality of service metrics) of WSN (Wireless Sensor Nodes) and it is compared with LEACH, SEP, genetic HCR and ERP routing protocols.This research is useful for densely deployed networks (Terrestrial, Environmental and Border surveillance applications).This paper presents the routing protocol in which data is transmitted thorough the CHs and CCOs for intra and inter cluster communication.Our research has optimized many parameters of sensor nodes as Energy, Time, Reliability, Throughput and scalability and results calculated in MATLAB validate our work.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks,Clustering,Energy consumption,Transmission time,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we investigate the reduction in total transmission time and the energy consumption of wireless sensor networks using multi-hop data aggregation by forming coordination in hierarchical clustering. Novel algorithm handles wireless sensor network in numerous circumstances as in large extent and high density deployments. One of the major purposes is to collect information from inaccessible areas by using factorization of the area into subareas (clusters) and appointing cluster head in each of the subarea. Coordination and cooperation among the local nodes via relay nodes in local cluster (By forming sub clusters) helped to serve each and every node. Routing is based on the predefined path, proposed by new transmission algorithm. Transmission distance is minimized by using cluster coordinators for inter cluster communication and relay nodes within the cluster. We show by extended simulations that Chain Based Cluster Cooperative Protocol (CBCCP) performs very well in terms of energy and time. To prove it, we compare it with LEACH, SEP, genetic HCR and ERP and found that new protocol consumes six times less energy than LEACH, five times less energy than SEP, four time less energy than genetic HCR and three times less energy than ERP, which further validate our work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A new category of wireless networks i.e. Wireless sensor networks (WSN) is the consequence of recent growth in wireless infrastructure united with the customary improvement in electronics that facilitate the assimilation of composite components into smaller devices. This network is a group of very low-priced tiny sensor nodes randomly distributed in a monitoring area. Due to the low cost of sensors it is possible to have a network of hundreds or thousands of these wireless sensors which depends upon the requirement of applications, thereby enhancing accuracy of data, the reliability and the area coverage as well. These applications include border security surveillance, disaster relief operations, military protection services, environmental monitoring, location supervision, robotics and many more [11]. WSN is a distributed network, which is different from traditional ad hoc networks as only a little bandwidth is enough for transmitting data and the rate of transmission is low; mostly sensor nodes are static and only few nodes are mobile; energy of sensor nodes is very limited so new ideas are generated to conserve the energy. That is why traditional routing protocols developed for mobile ad-hoc network (MANET) cannot be used for WSN. Some fundamental differences between wireless sensors and mobile ad-hoc network (MANET) can be summarized on the basis of following attributes [26]:1.Data centric: Redundancy is required in WSN but this concept is avoided in MANET until sharing of the some file or data is required.Global Identification: Identification at the global level is not preferred in WSN (Increases overhead at run time) due to the vast number of applications and nodes but it is required in MANET.Soundness and Quality of Service metrics (QoS): MANET is more reliable than WSN and reliability per node is necessary at fair level but in WSN requirements of QoS metrics is different because applications using WSN must be more energy efficient as batteries of sensor nodes cannot be replaced once they are deployed.Scalability: Most of the applications require large number of the nodes to be deployed e.g. USA aims to deploy a huge number of nodes in smart roads project, safety monitoring of the people in country etc., making the network denser which makes it dissimilar from MANET.Fault-tolerant: WSN is expected to work even after the failure of large number of nodes, which is result of restricted battery capacity of sensors. So more attention is needed in case of WSN to make it fault tolerant as compared to traditional network.Traffic patterns: MANETs have more conventional traffic patterns. In contrast to that, WSNs tend to have low data rates for long periods intervened by bursts of data flows and high data rates are frequents in case of some events.Operating Software: WSN's have limited memory and processing capabilities so operating software must be simple but in MANET complexity software (heavy weight routing protocols) can be used.There are many scientific challenges faced by sensor networks, like energy-efficient routing protocols, data aggregation techniques, self-organizing algorithms, and network lifetime improvements. So the routing algorithms which are responsible for the information transmission influences the performance of the network. Recently, research on routing algorithms is mostly focused on some routing metrics, such as the energy consumption, time consumption, reliability, network lifetime etc. Protocols for WSNs must be designed so that the limited battery power in the sensor nodes is proficiently used. Some parameters which can be changed during operation of WSN depending on the application are: Power availability, Reachability (nodes are in the range of base station or not), Type of task (cause for which sensor nodes are deployed). In this type of dynamic environment routing protocol should be fault tolerant.Performance of energy aware protocols is affected by propagation environment and the fading due to multipath propagation of the signals as explained in [1]. Larger the distance traveled by the packet, greater is the effect of propagation environment combined with the effect of multipath fading on the performance of an energy aware algorithm. When a node, C sends data to a node, D with power PT then the power at D node must be PR=PT/dist(C, D)j. Where dist(C, D)jis the function to compute the Euclidian distance for n nodes coordinates i.e.:(1)dist(C,D)=∑1n(C−D)2and j is the path loss component and it holds the value in the real world from 2 to 6 according to the topology [1] of the space. As energy consumption is directly proportional to the distance between the communicating nodes, multi-hop forwarding is preferred over direct transmission when distance between the nodes is increased. In addition, power consumption depends upon the transceiver's architecture as some energy is consumed by active transmitter and receiver when a sensor sends or receives a message. Energy of sensor node as a normal node and as a cluster head (CH) is consumed in the steps mentioned in Figs. 1 and 2.From these figures it can be concluded that more energy is consumed by node in the role of CH. Therefore number of cluster heads must be optimal. To balance the load on the nodes several techniques can be used as: the rotation of the role of the CH, election of CHs according to some optimized formula, to develop a routing path in which load over single CH is not increased and so on.A most popular routing protocol, LEACH [2] was developed in 2000, used the adaptive cluster approach to maximize the energy efficiency. Protocols developed thereafter LEACH, which use the similar approach as used in it but with different communication algorithms show the improvement over it, are TEEN [3], APTEEN [4], PEGASIS [5], HEED [6], SEP [8], HCR [9], ERP [10], EECHA [11] etc. But reconsideration is still required to fulfill the most proficient requirements of WSN like energy, delay and reliability. By considering the problems faced by the WSN due to the limited power of the sensor nodes, we exploit the communication of sensor nodes with cluster heads and the base station, and proposed the chain based and cooperative routing among the sensor nodes, CHs and the base station (BS) for wireless sensor networks. Cooperative routing for source seeking can be all to all (Single hop communication) or the limited communication (neighbor to neighbor) [29]. For this routing location awareness is required in nodes and location of the nodes can be accessed by any localization technique which is beneficial than using GPS capable antennas [30].To improve the overall network properties, cost in terms of distance for the communication of sensor nodes, should be decreased.Compared with the traditional algorithms, Chain Based Cluster Cooperative Protocol (CBCCP) can efficiently improve the quality of service (QoS) metrics of WSN. In this paper we are considering the network in which nodes monitors the data continuously.Objectives of this paper are (1) to decrease the communication distance among the nodes to conserve energy (2) to maintain the connectivity of the nodes (3) manage the working of nodes by multi-level hierarchies (4) to recommend the new robust transmission algorithm (5) to balance the load on the cluster heads to avoid the exhaustion of the energy by overloading.Rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, related work is contemplated, followed by discussion of problem definition and explanation in Section 3. Process of new protocol (CBCCP) is expressed in Section 4. Performance analysis and discussion is evaluated in Section 5 with conclusion in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
