@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive group search optimization algorithm for multi-objective optimal power flow problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new method for solving the multi-objective optimal power flow problem is proposed.Total operation cost, total emitted emission, and proposed N-1 contingency index are considered as objectives.A new security index is proposed.The fuzzy decision-making approach is utilized to handle the multi-objective OPF problem.AGSO is proposed to precise the convergence characteristic of conventional GSO algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal power flow (OPF),Group search optimization (GSO) algorithm,N-1 contingency analysis,Fuzzy logic,Pareto strategy,Adaptive GSO (AGSO),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an adaptive group search optimization (AGSO) algorithm for solving optimal power flow (OPF) problem. In this study, different aspects of the OPF problem are considered to form the accurate multi-objective model. The system total operation cost, the total emission, and N-1 security index are first, second, and third ordered objectives, respectively. Additionally, to consider accurate model of the problem, transmission losses and different equality and inequality constrains, such as feasible operating ranges of generators (FOR) and power flow equations are taken into account. Moreover, this study presents adaptive form of conventional GSO to precise the convergence characteristic of GSO. The effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed method for solving the nonlinear and nonconvex problems is validated by carrying out simulation studies on sample benchmark test cases and 30-bus and 57-bus IEEE standard test systems. Based on the comprehensive simulation studies, the accuracy of the proposed method is validated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electric power system is known as a complex and sophisticated system due to its large scale, different dynamic/static states, and complicated interfaces between its components. Managing and controlling such a system is one of the most challenging duties of the system operators. Efficient operation of the power system requires large range of system data along with different measuring, computing, operating, and controlling functions. The power flow analysis could be assumed as one of most practical computing and operating functions, which plays a considerable role in system planning and operating [1]. The power flow problem subject to the system physical and electrical constraints is known as the optimal power flow (OPF) problem. In other words, OPF is a nonlinear problem, which tries to optimize specific objective function by adjusting determined control variables. Additionally, a set of physical and operational constraints, which are imposed by equipment and network restrictions should be satisfied [2,3].Two types of approaches are broadly used to handle the OPF problem i.e., mathematical techniques [4–7] and stochastic search algorithms [8–25]. The linear programming [4], nonlinear programming [5], quadratic programming [6], and interior point method [7] are some examples of the mathematical based approaches. The specific objective function restriction and being trapped in local optima are the outstanding drawbacks of the mathematical techniques.The heuristic and stochastic search algorithms could somehow overcome the shortcomings of the mentioned mathematical methods. Recently, the OPF problem has been solved using different stochastic algorithms. The evolutionary programming (EP) in [8], improved evolutionary programming (IEP) in [9], multi-agent-based differential evolution approach in [10], the Tabu search (TS) in [11], improved harmony search method (IHS) in [12], black-hole-based optimization approach in [13], stochastic genetic algorithm (SGA) in [14], the enhanced genetic algorithm in [15], fuzzy genetic algorithm in [16], hybrid fuzzy particle swarm optimization and Nelder–Mead algorithm (HFPSO–NM) in [17], expert algorithm based on adaptive particle swarm optimization in [18], mixed-integer-binary small-population-based evolutionary particle swarm optimization in [19], gravitational search algorithm (GSA) in [20], adaptive clonal selection algorithm (ACSA) in [21], and quasi-oppositional teaching–learning based optimization in [22] are some of the recently published methods. In [8,9,11,14–16,20], system total operating cost is considered as the objective function. Moreover, a modified differential evolution algorithm for optimal power flow (MDE–OPF) in [23] and also the genetic evolving ant direction particle swarm optimization algorithm are proposed in [24] considering nonsmooth cost functions. In [25], a hybrid algorithm based on shuffle frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) and simulated annealing (SA) approach is implemented and the effects of the prohibited zones and valve point are taken into account. Nevertheless, owing to the random feature of the heuristic methods, their performance could be improved by using the modified and improved versions of the conventional methods.The thermal power generation units emit polluted gases, such as sulfur oxides (SOx), carbon dioxides, and nitrogen oxides (NOx) into the atmosphere. Based on the recent environmental strategies, the thermal units are promoted to modify their operation mechanism to minimize the pollution level along with operation cost minimization process [26]. As a short term and practical solution, the environmental dispatch is proposed in literature for reducing the emission level [27].Besides the economic and environmental aspects, the security of power systems is an important issue, which should be considered by the system operator. Maximum loadability limit (MLL), as an efficient security aspect, could be considered as a realistic index to evaluate the steady state voltage stability. Recently, the security evaluation and maximum loadability detection, using the novel heuristic methods, is widely gotten understudied in literature. Security constraint genetic algorithm (SCGA) and general PSO (GPSO) in [28], fuzzy logic in [29], general PSO (GPSO), adaptive PSO (APSO), and chaotic PSO (CPSO) in [30] are implemented in order to get the security constraints into account. In [31], the voltage security is considered as a constraint for an optimal reactive power flow problem. On the other hand, the voltage stability analysis under practical security constraints is understudied in [32] using the self-adaptive differential evolutionary (SADE) algorithm. Additionally, the security-based optimal switching under N-1 contingency state is studied in [33]. In [2,34] and [35], improved bacterial foraging algorithm, particle swarm optimization (PSO) method, and neural network-based approaches are proposed for solving OPF problem, considering system capacity requirements, respectively. Additionally, in [36] the hybrid particle swarm optimization technique is used in order to identify the voltage collapse points and weak buses under security constraints.Moreover, multi-objective form of the OPF problem has been the topic of several researches. The multi-objective OPF problem considering FACTS devices in [37], the multi-objective optimal power flow considering cost, loss and voltage deviation index in [38], and the improved particle swarm optimization (IPSO) for the multi-objective OPF problem considering cost, loss, emission, and voltage stability index in [39] are some examples. Generally, three types of approaches are presented to handle the multi-objective optimization problems [39]. The first method is to reduce the multi-objective problem into a single-objective optimization problem. Therefore, the main objective is set as a target and others should be defined as constraints. The second approach, proposes to combine all objective functions into one objective function and perform the conventional single-objective optimization process. The limitation of choices along with weighting coefficients selection problem are the most important deficiency of these methods. However, decision-making based methods, as third types of approaches, provide better performance in comparison with previously mentioned approaches [39].Recently, a new, easy-to-implement, reasonably fast, and robust evolutionary algorithm, known as group search optimization algorithm (GSO), has been presented [40]. According to the results of [41] and the authors previous investigations [42–44], in comparison with recently published papers, improved and modified versions of the GSO have better performance for solving optimizations problems. In this paper, a new version of the GSO algorithm, called adaptive group search optimization (AGSO) algorithm, is proposed and implemented for some benchmark test functions and multi-objective OPF problem. The proposed multi-objective OPF problem is formed by considering the cost, emission, and security objectives, as well. The proposed security objective incorporates bus voltage violations and transmission lines overloads after the most critical N-1 contingency condition. Additionally, in order to handle the multi-objective problem, the fuzzy decision-making method is utilized.Accuracy of the proposed method is investigated by using sample benchmark test cases and IEEE 30-bus and 57-bus standard test systems. Based on the comprehensive simulation studies, efficiency of the proposed AGSO is illustrated for different optimization problems. The proposed method has better performance in comparison with the conventional GSO and some recently published papers.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, the multi-objective OPF problem formulation is discussed. Section 3 presents the proposed AGSO algorithm. In Section 4, the step by step implementation of AGSO for the multi-objective OPF problem is presented. Section 5 presents simulation studies. Finally, Section 6 concludes the findings and contributions of the paper.The total fuel cost of conventional thermal units can be expressed as follows [39]:(1)F1(x)=∑i=1NgenaiPgi2+biPgi+ci($/h)where F1(x) is the total fuel cost ($/h). The ai, bi, and ciare fuel cost coefficients of the ith unit. Additionally, Pgiand Ngen are the real power generation of the ith unit and the total number of generation units, respectively. For the OPF problem, the control vector could be defined as follows:(2)X=[Pg,Vg,Tap,Qc]According to Eq. (2), X presents the control vector. In addition, Pg, Vg, Tap and Qcare active power of the ith unit, the voltage magnitude of the ith generator, the tap level of the ith transformer, and the reactive power of the ith compensator capacitor, respectively.The emission objective could be considered as the sum of different types of emissions, such as thermal emission, SOx, NOx, and, etc. In this paper, NOx, SOxgases as the most pollutant gases are considered. The total emission could be formulated as follows [39]:(3)F2(x)=∑i=1Ngen(γiPgi2+βiPgi+αi+ξiexp(λiPgi))(ton/h)where F2(x) is total emission. Additionally, the γi, βi, αi, ζiand λiare the emission coefficients of the ith unit.In this study, the security index is defined as follows:(4)F3(x)=SI=wl∑l=1nlSlSlmax+wv∑i=1nbΔViwhere F3(x) is the proposed security index. The Sland Slmax are the complex power and the apparent complex power rate of line l, respectively. nl is the number of transmission lines and nb is the number of buses. Additionally,wl,wvare weighting coefficients. The ΔViis defined as follows:(5)ΔVi=Vrefmin−ViVrefVi<Vrefmin0Vrefmin<Vi<VrefmaxVi−VrefmaxVrefVrefmax<Viwhere Viis voltage magnitude related to bus i. Vrefmin and Vrefmax are lower and upper limits of voltage magnitude, respectively. In this study, the security index is computed for the most critical contingency scenario. To do so, ranking index for determining the severity of the contingency condition is defined as follows:(6)RI=ωLNOLL+ωVNVVBwhere RI is the ranking index. The NOLL presents the number of overload lines and NVVB is stands for the number of voltage violated buses. Additionally, ωLand ωVare weighting coefficients for over loaded lines and voltage violated buses, respectively. After selecting the most sever contingency scenarios, these scenario would be evaluated by F3, (4), during each iteration.As an optimization problem, the OPF problem should be considered with respect to the set of physical and operational constraints. In the following, equality and inequality constraints are presented:The power flow equations, as the main equality constraint, present the physics of the power systems. The general form of power flow equations are as follows:(7)Pi(V,θ)+Pdi−Pgi=0(8)Qi(V,θ)+Qdi−Qgi=0where Piand Qiare injected active and reactive powers corresponding to bus i, respectively. Pdipresents the active power and Qdistands for reactive power of load related to ith bus. Pgiand Qgiare generated active and reactive powers corresponding to bus i, respectively. According to Section 2.1, all generator outputs are decision variables of the OPF problem. However, the output of slack generator should be calculated using an iterative process. Fig. 1depicts the iterative process of computing slack generator output.According to Fig. 1, slack generator attempts to handle the equality constraint related to generation level and the load level+system total loss. However, in some cases, the slack generator, owing to the generation limitations, could not handle the equality constraint. Therefore, the randomly generated variables should be revised to satisfy the equality constraint.The inequality constraints of the OPF problem indicate the limits on physical devices. Eqs. (9–13) summarize the inequality constraints of the OPF problem:(9)Pgimin≤Pgi≤Pgimaxi=1,2,…,Ngen(10)Qgimin≤Qgi≤Qgimaxi=1,2,…,Ngen(11)Vimin≤Vi≤Vimaxi=1,2,…,NL(12)Qcimin≤Qci≤Qcimaxi=1,2,…,NCap(13)Timin≤Ti≤Timaxi=1,2,…,NTranwhere Pgimax, Pgimin, Qgimax, and Qgimin are the maximum active power, minimum active power, maximum reactive power, and minimum reactive power of the ith generation unit, respectively. The NLis the number of load buses. In addition, Vimax, Vimin are the maximum and minimum limits of voltages amplitude, respectively. Qcimin stands for lower and Qcimax stands for upper limits of compensator capacitor. Finally, Timin and Timax presents lower and upper bounds of tap changer in ith transformer.Fuzzy system could be efficient for the multi-objective problems with objective functions in contradiction [45–48]. Therefore, in this paper, the fuzzy decision-making approach is utilized to handle the multi-objective OPF problem, which considers cost, emission, and proposed security index as objectives. The fuzzy approach utilizes membership function to model each objective function. The membership function of the ith objective function could be defined as follows:(14)μi(X)=0Fi(X)≥FimaxFimax−Fi(X)Fimax−FiminFimin≤Fi(X)≤Fimax1Fi(X)≤Fiminwhere μi(X) is the membership function of the ith objective function. Additionally, Fi,Fimin, andFimaxare the objective function, upper and lower limits associated with the ith objective function, respectively. The limits could be computed by separate optimization of each objective function. The membership function for ith objective function is depicted in Fig. 2.Afterwards, the decision-making function should be computed. The decision-making function Nμk, could be defined as follows:(15)Nμk=∑j=1Nωj×μj(k)∑k=1M∑j=1Nωj×μj(k)where ωjis the weight coefficient and N represents the number of objective functions. The weight coefficient should be defined by the system decision maker with respect to the importance of the objective function. Additionally, M is the number of nondominated solutions. The nondominated solutions could be identified by using Pareto strategy [49]. According to [49], vector X1 dominates X2, if the following constraints are satisfied:(16)∀i={1,2,.……,m}Fi(X1)≤Fi(X2)∃j∈{1,2,.……,m},Fi(X1)<Fi(X2)where m is the number of objective functions and Fiis the objective function. For the multi-objective problem, usually, the objectives are in conflict with each other. Therefore, the Pareto strategy tries to offer a set of optimal solutions instead of a single one. The optimal set is called Pareto-optimal solution. By performing Eq. (16), the solutions, which are nondominated throughout the entire searching space, are appointed as the Pareto-optimal solution. During each iteration, the corresponding Pareto-optimal solution is stored in a repository. Finally, the decision-making function should be computed for all stored sets and the set with the maximum decision-making function is reported as the most preferred solution.This paper proposes the adaptive group search optimization (AGSO) algorithm for solving the OPF problem. Therefore, in this section, firstly the basics of the conventional GSO algorithm are reviewed. Afterwards, the proposed AGSO is presented.The main idea of the GSO is inspired by animal group-living theory. The searching behavior of animals combined with the producer–scrounger (PS) model, which utilizes either “producing” as the finding process or “scrounging” as the joining strategy, are the main bases of GSO. The GSO is a population based heuristic algorithm and the population is called the group. In each iteration, the group members are identified by both their position and head angle. The position and head angle of ith member at the kth iteration areXik∈Rnandφik=φi1k,…,φi(n−1)k∈Rn−1, respectively. where R is the set of real numbers and n is the dimension of search space. Afterwards, a search direction vector is defined for each member as follows:(17)Dik(φik)=di1k,…,dink∈RnwhereDik(φik)is the search direction vector of ith member at the kth iteration. Each member of the search direction vectordijk, could be computed as follows [50]:(18)dijk=∏q=1n−1cos(φiqk)j=1sin(φi(j−1)k)∏q=jn−1cos(φiqk)j=2,…,n−1sin(φi(n−1)k)j=nThe GSO group members are classified into three types, i.e., producer, scroungers, and rangers. The definitions of each type of members are as follows:-Producer: a member which utilizes its vision ability to find the best opportunities.Scroungers: scroungers are joiners, which follows the producer member.Rangers: random walkers.At each iteration, a group member, which has the best fitness value is assigned as the producer. The producer scans the vicinity of its current position to find better states. The scanning ability is called vision ability and refers to a process in which the producer tests some points in the vicinity of its current position. The producer scans three points around by certain distances and head angles. During kth iteration, the producer behaves as follows:1)The producer scans and checks three points, which are called zero, right, and left point, respectively. The process could be formulated as follows:(19)Xz=Xpk+r1lmaxDpk(φk)(20)Xr=Xpk+r1lmaxDpk(φk+r2θmax/2)(21)Xl=Xpk+r1lmaxDpk(φk−r2θmax/2)where Xpis position of the producer, r1∈R1 is a normally distributed random number with mean 0, and standard deviation 1 and r2∈Rn−1 is a uniformly distributed random number in the range of (0, 1). Additionally, lmax is maximum pursuit distance and θmax is maximum pursuit angle.1)Afterwards, the producer will chose the best point among the zero, right, and left points. If the best point has a better value in comparison with its current position, producer will fly to that point. Otherwise, it will stay in its current position and revises its head angle as follows:(22)φk+1=φk+r2amaxwhere amax∈R1 is the maximum turning angle.If the producer could not find any better solution after a iterations, it will reset its head angle to initial zero degree as follows:(23)φk+a=φkThe group members which are assigned as the scroungers will keep searching for opportunities by tracking the producer member. At the kth iteration, the ith scrounger members are modeled as random trackers of the producer. The mathematical model could be formulated as follows:(24)Xik+1=Xik+r3∘(Xpk−Xik)whereXikis position of ith scrounger at kth iteration. The r3∈Rnis a uniform random number in the range of (0, 1). Additionally, the operator “∘”calculates the entry wise product of the two vectors [40].As the third type of GSO members, rangers play an important role in GSO searching and finding procedure. Rangers are modeled as random position vector and random head angle. During kth iteration, the random length is defined using (25):(25)li=ar1lmaxAfterwards, in order to compute the random position vector, the random length should be inserted to Eq. (26):(26)Xik+1=Xik+liDik(φk+1)The AGSO is achieved by applying some modifications on the conventional GSO. According to the results of some recently published papers [41,44], in the restricted runtime process, the conventional GSO mostly tends to find near to optimum instead of an optimal solution. Nevertheless, the modified versions of GSO provide more efficient searching tool [42–44]. In the following, the proposed AGSO is discussed.According to Section 3.1, ranger members are committed to perform random walk in the search space. Additionally, if a ranger has better fitness value in comparison with the producer, the ranger is appointed as producer. In some cases, when the producer is located in the local minima, the producer may provide better fitness value compare to the rangers. However, some rangers may approach to the global minima in following iterations. Therefore, it could be worthy to pay attention and organize ranging process. Based on the discussions of Section 3.1, only producer member is equipped to the vision ability. However, if some other special member has the same ability, the searching process could be prompted. In addition, the probability of getting stuck in the local minima is minimized.During each iteration, the ranger members should be sorted with respected to their fitness value. The ranger member with the least fitness value is appointed as producer of rangers. The producer of rangers, also, is equipped to the vision ability. The producer of rangers is defined as follows:(27)XpRk=sort(XRk,'ascend')whereXpRkis the producer of rangers. Additionally,XRkpresents all rangers of kth iteration. The sort operator sorts the fitness value of all ranger members in ascending order and offers the least value as output. Afterwards, the vision process is performed as follows:(28)XpRzk=XpRk+r1lmaxDpk(φk)(29)XpRrk=XpRk+r1lmaxDpk(φk+r2θmax/2)(30)XpRlk=XpRk+r1lmaxDpk(φk−r2θmax/2)whereXpRzk,XpRrk, andXpRlkare zero, right, and left contender points, which are generated by the vision ability of the producer of rangers. Since the subsequent performance of the producer of rangers is modeled by the contender points, it is more probable to find better opportunities in the vicinity of either the contenders or the producer of ranger. Therefore, in addition to the vision ability, some scrounger members are committed to follow the producer of rangers as follows:(31)Xik+1=Xik+r3∘(XpRk−Xik)whereXikis position of ith scrounger at kth iteration. The r3∈Rnis a uniform random number in the range of (0, 1). The number of scroungers, which should follow the producer of the rangers is chosen randomly. The detailed information is presented in Section 4. Fig. 3depicts the paths of members after considering the producer of rangers.In order to avoid the consequent delays, the discussed process should be performed with respect to the output state. In other words, the amendment process should be performed adaptively. Therefore, an index should be defined to detect the state in which the amendment process should be applied. The index could be defined as follows:(32)IfVARi=1N(Y)≤εwhere VAR is an operator, which computes the variance of N different values of argument Y. Additionally, ɛ is a threshold value and Y is output parameter. Eq. (32) confirms that the improvement process would be adaptively performed if the variance of the output variable does not change for certain iterations.The flowchart and pseudo code of the proposed AGSO are presented in Fig. 4and Table 1, respectively.This section provides the implementation process of the proposed algorithm for the multi-objective OPF problem. The following steps are required to apply AGSO to the multi-objective problem:Step 1. Acquisition step: In this step, the input data should be acquired. The feasible operating ranges, cost coefficients, and emission coefficients, etc. are some examples.Step 2. Generating initial members: according to Eq. (2), the active power of generation units, the voltage magnitude of the generator, the tap level of transformers, and the reactive power of compensator capacitor are decision variables. Therefore, each variable of Eq. (2) is initialized as follows:(33)X=XL+r(XU−XL)where X is the decision variable. The XUand XLare upper and lower limits of the variable, respectively. Additionally, r is uniformly distributed random number in the range of (0–1). According to (33), the decision variables would be initialized within their feasible zones.Step 3. Evaluating initial members: In this step, each member should be evaluated. According to Section 2, three objectives are considered in this study. Therefore, a set of objectives should be evaluated as follows:(34)F(X)=F1(X)F2(X)F3(X)where F1(X), F2(X), and F3(X) are total cost, total emission, and security objectives. In addition, constant handling process is performed by using some penalty coefficient. Therefore, the following equation is considered as the objective function:(35)F(X)=F1(X)F2(X)F3(X)+ΛCOwhere Λ is penalty coefficient, say 1×109, and CO is the set of constraints.Step 4. Normalize objective functions: according to Section 2.5, Eq. (14) should be utilized to compute the membership function.Step 5. Evaluate decision-making function: in this step, firstly, the Pareto strategy based nondominated solutions are identified by using Eq. (16). Afterwards, the decision-making function is evaluated using Eq. (15).Step 6. Perform searching process: in this step, the searching process is accomplished. Firstly, the producer member is identified and performs producing using Eqs. (19–23). Afterwards, scrounging and ranging process are derived using Eqs. (24–26), respectively. In this study, 40% of group members are chosen as scroungers and the rest members perform ranging.Step 7. Index computation: the index which is proposed in Section 3.2 is computed using Eq. (32). If the index value is lower than the threshold, the process continues from step 8; otherwise, it goes to step 9.Step 8. Adaptive searching: in this step, based on Section 3.2, the adaptive searching process is performed.Step 9. Termination criterion: in this study, the terminating criterion is selected to be the maximum number of iterations. The algorithm will be terminated if the maximum iteration number reaches; otherwise it continues from Step 4.The flow chart of the proposed method for multi-objective OPF problem is depicted in Fig. 5.In this section, simulation studies are carried out to investigate the performance of the proposed model and algorithm. Firstly, the proposed method is applied to some benchmark functions. Subsequently, performance of the proposed method in analyzed on the IEEE 30-bus and 57-bus test systems. The proposed method is developed by MATLAB 7.6 in 2.5GHz, i5, personal computer. The maximum number of iterations is set to 1000 for all benchmarks and 300 for OPF problems and population size is set to 30.In this section, the proposed AGSO algorithm is applied to seven well-known benchmark functions. Benchmark functions definitions are provided in Table 2. The proposed AGSO algorithm is applied to the mentioned benchmark functions with maximum 1000 iterations and average of the results are reported in Table 3. Moreover, Table 3 presents the comparison results of AGSO with genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimization algorithm (PSO), and conventional GSO. The results of PSO and GA are quoted from [40]. As obvious from Table 3, proposed AGSO has either better or equal performance in comparison with mentioned methods.In this case, the proposed method is applied to the IEEE 30-bus test system. This system incorporates 41 transmission lines, six generators, and four transformers. Detailed system information is available in [51] and the generation cost and emission coefficients are presented in Table 4and Table 5, respectively. The lower and upper voltage magnitudes are considered as 0.9 and 1.1pu for load buses.In this case, each objective function is deliberated individually. Hence, not only the performance of the proposed method could be validated, but also,FiminandFimaxfor (14) could be computed. The numerical results are presented in Table 6, Table 7, and Table 8. Additionally, comparison study is performed in these tables to validate the performance of the proposed method. In Table 6, best generation cost for different approaches are reported. According to Table 6, the proposed AGSO is capable of offering better solution for cost objective, in comparison with other recently proposed algorithms. Moreover, the efficiency of proposed AGSO in comparison with conventional GSO could be concluded. According to Table 6, it seems that, there are little differences among the proposed solution by the AGSO and those are proposed by other methods. However, these values are not ignorable due to the continuous operation of power dispatch. The convergence characteristics of conventional and proposed adaptive GSO algorithms, for best generation cost case are depicted in Fig. 6. Moreover, the proposed method is performed to find the optimal solution when the total emission is considered as the objective function. Table 7 presents the best emissions for different algorithms. Similar to results of Table 6, the proposed method could achieve better solution in comparison with convention GSO and other method.According to Table 7, the total emission obtained by GA [39] and PSO [39] are 0.20,723 and 0.2063, respectively. In addition, the results of IPSO [39] and conventional GSO are somehow the same. On the other hand, proposed AGSO proposes 0.2059, which is the best result in comparison with mentioned methods in Table 7. Although there are little differences among the proposed solutions, these values are not ignorable due to the continuous operation of power dispatch. The convergence characteristics of conventional and proposed adaptive GSO algorithms, for best emission case are depicted in Fig. 7.Moreover, the proposed method should be performed to find the best results for the proposed security index in Eq. (4). Since this index is proposed in this paper, there is no other reference to compare with the results of AGSO. Hence, the results of AGSO are only compared with the results of conventional GSO. Table 8 presents the results when the proposed security index is considered as the main objective. According to Table 8, the efficiency of the proposed method in comparison with the conventional GSO could be concluded. In addition, detailed results are presented in Table 9. In Table 9, the values of different objective functions, while minimizing one specific objective are presented. According to the results of Table 9, it is clear that, the problem objectives (cost, emission, or security), violate their optimum point, while considering the other one as the optimization objective. In the other words, these objectives operate in contrast to each other and optimization of an objective would not result in minimization of all objectives. For instance, in the case of cost based OPF, total emission and security index violate 80 and 340% of their optimum point, respectively. In addition, in the case of emission based OPF, generation cost is increased 19% and security index is increased 366% in comparison with their optimum value. According to the results of Table 9, the objectives are in conflict with each other. Therefore, proposed multi-objective approach should be utilized.In this case, the proposed multi-objective OPF problem is considered. The proposed method is used to solve the multi-objective OPF where system total fuel cost, total emission, and proposed security index are deliberated as objectives. As mentioned in Section 2.5, the fuzzy decision-making approach is utilized to handle the multi-objective OPF problem. All obtained Pareto fronts using (16) along with best compromise (BC) results are depicted in Fig. 8. It should be noticed that, in this case, all three objectives are considered simultaneously. However, in order to clarify the results, Pareto optimal fronts are presented in two-dimensional figures. According to (15), weight coefficients should be determined for different objectives. In this study, firstly, weight coefficients for cost, emission, and security index are set on 0.4, 0.3, and 0.3, respectively. Subsequently, simulation results of other weight coefficients would be presented. Moreover,Fiminfor fuzzy decision-making function is determined by the results of case II and Table 9 for each objective function. In addition,Fimaxfor each objective is assumed to be three times greater than associatedFimin. Note that,Fimaxfor each objective could be determined based on results of Table 9; however, proximity of theFimaxtoFiminjeopardize appropriate performance of the decision-making engine. Based on comprehensive simulation and sensitivity analysis it is concluded that settingFimaxon the aforementioned value instead of results of Table 9, would bring about better results in multi-objective model. It should be mentioned that finding an appropriate upper bound for each objective function by deployment of mathematical approaches is an interesting issue and the authors are planning to perform such an investigation in their future work.According to Fig. 8, superiority of the proposed method could be demonstrated by the Pareto fronts. As obvious, for each Pareto, the results, which is proposed by the AGSO is much better than that of conventional GSO. Similar discussion is valid for BC result where significant difference is observable between BC results reached by AGSO and GSO. The detailed results and BC result are presented in Table 10. Since the proposed security index is not offered for OPF problem previously, the results of AGSO are only compared with the conventional GSO. The results of Table 10 are related to the case where weight coefficients for cost, emission, and security index are set on 0.4, 0.3, and 0.3, respectively. According to the results of Table 10, the proposed method offers better solution in comparison with the conventional GSO. According to Table 9 and 10, as a multi-objective problem, the fuel cost is increased 5.22% in comparison to cost based OPF. At the same time, emission and security index are decreased 24.5 and 56% in comparison to cost based OPF, respectively. In addition, although, total emission is increased 35.74% in comparison to emission based OPF, total cost and security index are decreased 11.5 and 58.5%, respectively.Similar discussions are valid for security object. Based on the results of simulation studies, the efficiency of the proposed method as a multi-objective optimization algorithm could be concluded. Moreover, by comparing the results of Table 9 and 10, deviation of BC result related to the cost, emission, and security objectives are 5, 18, and 23.61%, respectively. The main reason for deference in the deviation is that weighting coefficient associated with cost objective is greater than the others, Therefore, the BC result would be steered toward the its cost only solution. In order to investigate the sensitivity of proposed model and method to the, the simulation results for other weight coefficients are reported in Table 11. According to the results of Table 11, as the weight coefficient of a particular objective is set higher than the others, a closer result to the associated optimal solution would be reached. Therefore, it could be concluded that the proposed method has no sensitivity to these coefficients and accurate result would be provided based on the requirement of the user.In this case, the proposed method would be implemented on IEEE 57-bus test system to investigate its performance in the case of larger test case. This system consists of seven generators located at the buses 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 12, and 15 transformers with off-nominal tap ratio. In addition, shunt VAR compensators were planned at buses 18, 25, and 53. Detail information regarding to this system is available in [46]. The emission coefficients for all generators are supposed as Table 12.The minimum and maximum generator-bus voltage magnitudes limits were assumed to be 0.94 p.u. and 1.06 p.u., respectively. In addition, minimum and maximum voltage magnitudes of the other buses were supposed to be 0.9 and 1.1 in p.u, respectively. Furthermore, tap setting of the regulating transformers and VAR injection of the shunt capacitors were considered as discrete variables. The transformer-tap settings were assumed to vary in the range [0.9, 1.1] p.u. and VAR injection of the shunt capacitors were assumed to vary in the range [0, 0.3] p.u. The total system demand is 12.508 p.u. active and 3.364 p.u. reactive powers at 100 MVA base. Bus 1 was taken as the slack bus. Firstly, in order to defineFiminrelated to the fuzzy decision-making process, each objective is optimized individually. The results are outlined in Table 13. As obvious from Table 13, superiority of the proposed AGSO in comparison with GSO could be concluded.Once the optimum results of the individual objectives were computed, the Pareto fronts could be plotted. The weight coefficients related to the cost, emission and security index are set on 0.4, 0.3, and 0.3, respectively. Fig. 9depicts the Pareto fronts obtained by the proposed AGSO and conventional GSO method. In addition, detailed results along with BC result are presented in Table 14. As clear from Fig. 9 and Table 14, validity of the proposed method as a multi-objective optimization scheme and associated superiority in comparison with the conventional GSO. Since the proposed mathematical multi-objective model including cost, emission, and security index is not covered in the available literature, comparison study is just carried out between proposed AGSO and conventional GSO.Comparing results of Tables 13 and 14, the cost, emission, and security objective violate their optimal value, 4.4, 4.4, and 2.9%, respectively. However, according to Table 13, emission and security objectives violate their optimum value 45.46 and 10.6%, respectively, for the cost based OPF. In addition, when the emission objective is only considered, 10 and 12.5% violations are observable for cost and security objectives, respectively. These violations demonstrate that the objectives are act in contrast to each other and optimization of the cost objective, for instance, would not result in optimal security and emission values. However, according to Table 14, when these objectives are aggregated and converted to the multi-objective model by the proposed method, the violations would be reduced to 4.4, 4.4, and 2.9% for cost, emission, and security objective, respectively. Finally, to perform illustrative comparison between proposed AGSO and conventional GSO, some indices are evaluated to highlight superiority of AGSO, i.e., time comparison index, convergence rate index, and success rate index. The details related to these indices are available in [32]. The comparison results are presented in Table 15. Referring to Table 15, supremacy of the proposed AGSO in comparison with the conventional GSO could be observable. Based on the results of simulation studies, the efficiency of the proposed method as a multi-objective optimization algorithm could be concluded.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
