@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel approach for failure mode and effects analysis using combination weighting and fuzzy VIKOR method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel FMEA approach is proposed using combination weighting and fuzzy VIKOR.Combination of fuzzy AHP and entropy method is applied for risk factor weighting.Fuzzy VIKOR method is used to determine the risk priorities of failure modes.An empirical example is offered to illustrate the effectiveness of the new method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Failure mode and effects analysis,Fuzzy AHP,Entropy,Fuzzy VIKOR,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is one of the most popular reliability analysis tools for identifying, assessing and eliminating potential failure modes in a wide range of industries. In general, failure modes in FMEA are evaluated and ranked through the risk priority number (RPN), which is obtained by the multiplication of crisp values of the risk factors, such as the occurrence (O), severity (S), and detection (D) of each failure mode. However, the conventional RPN method has been considerably criticized for various reasons. To deal with the uncertainty and vagueness from humans’ subjective perception and experience in risk evaluation process, this paper presents a novel approach for FMEA based on combination weighting and fuzzy VIKOR method. Integration of fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and entropy method is applied for risk factor weighting in this proposed approach. The risk priorities of the identified failure modes are obtained through next steps based on fuzzy VIKOR method. To demonstrate its potential applications, the new fuzzy FMEA is used for analyzing the risk of general anesthesia process. Finally, a sensitivity analysis is carried out to verify the robustness of the risk ranking and a comparison analysis is conducted to show the advantages of the proposed FMEA approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is a widely used engineering technique for defining, identifying and eliminating known and/or potential failures, problems, errors and so on from system, design, process, and/or service before they reach the customer [1]. FMEA, intended to provide information for making risk management decisions, was first proposed by NASA in 1960s for their obvious reliability requirements. When it is used for a criticality analysis, it is also referred to as failure mode, effects and criticality analysis (FMECA). FMEA requires a cross-functional team which is built by experts from different departments (e.g., design, production, and quality) to systematically examine and quantify the relationships between failure modes, effects, causes, current controls, and recommended actions. Different from other risk assessment tools, the major concern of FMEA is to emphasize the prevention of problems linked to the proactive treatment of the system, rather than finding a solution after the failure happens. This can help decision makers adjust the existing programs, increase compensating provisions, employ the corrective actions to reduce the likelihood of failures, decrease the probability of failure rates and avoid hazardous accidents. As of now, FMEA has been widely used as a critical safety and reliability analysis tool in various industries, especially in the aerospace, automotive, nuclear, and healthcare industries [2–5].Generally, criticality or risk assessment in FMEA is implemented by calculating the risk priority number (RPN) of each failure mode, which is obtained by multiplying the scores of risk factors like occurrence (O), severity (S), and detection (D). However, in many real-life cases, the conventional RPN method shows some important weaknesses regarding the rationality of the approach. Therefore, a wide variety of methods have been proposed in the literature to overcome the shortcomings and improve the effectiveness of the traditional FMEA. Among these methods we can mention artificial intelligence techniques such as fuzzy rule-base system [6–9], adaptive resonance theory [10], and cognitive map [11]; mathematical programming methods such as data envelopment analysis (DEA) [12] and linear programming [13]; multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) methods such as technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) [14,15], decision-making trial and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) [16,17], and gray relational analysis (GRA) [18,19]; integrated approaches such as similarity measure and adaptive resonance theory [20], D numbers and gray relational projection method [21], fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and fuzzy TOPSIS [5], and other methods and techniques [22–24]. Furthermore, it is usually difficult and inaccurate to give a “direct” and correct numerical evaluation of the three risk factors and much information in FMEA can be expressed in linguistic terms such as likely, important or very high and so on [25,26]. Fuzzy set theory [27] is the tool for transforming the vagueness of human perception and recognition and its decision making ability into a mathematical formula. It provides meaningful representation of measurement for uncertainties and vague concepts expressed in natural language. In comparison with strictly numerical models, the approaches based on fuzzy logic provide a lot of benefits [7,8,28,29], and the most important ones are stated below: First, both quantitative data and qualitative information can be used and managed in a consistent manner during the FMEA analysis. Second, the risk of failure modes can be assessed directly using the linguistic variables that are employed in making the criticality assessment. Finally, fuzzy logic allows vague data to be used, so it enables the treatment of many states of components and system and other fuzzy information included in FMEA.On the other side, VIKOR (VIsekriterijumska optimizacija i KOmpromisno Resenje) method was first developed by Opricovic and Tzeng [30] to solve MCDM problems with conflicting and noncommensurable (different units) criteria, assuming that compromising is acceptable for conflict resolution, the decision maker wants a solution that is the closest to the ideal, and the alternatives are evaluated according to all established criteria. This method focuses on ranking and selecting from a set of alternatives in the presence of conflicting criteria, and on proposing compromise solution(s) [31]. Due to its characteristics and capabilities, the VIKOR method has been considerably employed by researchers to resolve many practical decision making problems. For example, Liu et al. [32] used a hybrid MCDM model combining DEMATEL-based analytic network process (DANP) and modified VIKOR for solving the material selection problems of multiple dimensions and criteria that are interdependent. Hu, Lu and Tzeng [33] utilized a MCDM model combining DEMATEL with ANP and VIKOR methods to handle the complex interrelated relationships among dimensions and criteria and find the best way to explore smart phone improvements and Hsu et al. [34] used a hybrid MCDM model integrating DANP with VIKOR to select the best vendor for conducting the recycled material. Rezaie et al. [35] applied a combined fuzzy AHP and VIKOR method to evaluate the performance of the cement firms in Iran and Pourebrahim et al. [36] used an integrated VIKOR-fuzzy AHP method to make a selection among criteria and alternatives for conservation development in coastal areas. Yalcin et al. [37] utilized an evaluation approach using both fuzzy AHP and VIKOR methods to rank the companies of each sector in the Turkish manufacturing industry. On the other hand, some researchers have employed VIKOR method under fuzzy environment. For instance, Mehbodniya et al. [38] used a fuzzy extension of VIKOR for target network selection in heterogeneous wireless environments and Liu et al. [39] utilized an extended VIKOR method for site selection in municipal solid waste management under fuzzy environment. Tadić, Zečević and Krstić [40] developed a novel hybrid MCDM model that combines fuzzy DEMATEL, fuzzy ANP and fuzzy VIKOR for city logistics concept selection. Dincer and Hacioglu [41] evaluated the performance of the banks in Turkey based on the customer satisfaction competencies applying fuzzy VIKOR and AHP methods. Vinodh et al. [42] dealt with the concept design selection in fit environment using fuzzy VIKOR method so as to satisfy the customers’ dynamic requirements.In this paper, the fuzzy VIKOR method is extended to find a compromise priority ranking of failure modes according to the risk factors in FMEA. To deal with the uncertainty and vagueness in risk evaluation process, linguistic variables, expressed in triangular fuzzy number, are used to assess the fuzzy relative importance among risk factors and the fuzzy ratings of failure modes. Combination of fuzzy AHP and entropy method is applied for risk factor weighting. The extended fuzzy VIKOR method is used to rank failure modes in term of their overall risk on risk factors. As a result, a risk evaluation methodology by using combination weighting and fuzzy VIKOR method is presented to deal with the risk evaluation problems in FMEA. To validate the application of the model and to examine its effectiveness, the proposed methodology is used for analyzing the risk of general anesthesia process in a university hospital.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The traditional FMEA and its shortcomings are presented briefly in Section 2. The fuzzy set theory, fuzzy AHP method, Shannon Entropy and fuzzy VIKOR method are introduced in Section 3. Section 4 is about the proposed risk evaluation methodology for FMEA. A numerical example of general anesthesia process is offered in Section 5 and some conclusions are made in Section 6.FMEA is an important technique used to identify and eliminate known or potential failures to enhance the reliability and safety of complex systems. For analyzing a specific product or system, a cross-functional expert team should be set up to conduct FMEA first. The first step in FMEA is to identify all possible failure modes of the product or system. Next, critical analysis is performed on the identified failure modes taking into consideration the risk factors: occurrence (O), severity (S), and detection (D).Conventionally, the ranking of failure modes for corrective actions is determined in terms of the risk priority number (RPN), which is the mathematical product of the O, S, and D corresponding to the failure modes. That is(1)RPN=O×S×D,where O is the probability of the failure, S is the severity of the failure, and D is the probability of not detecting the failure. In order to obtain the RPN of a potential failure mode, the traditional FMEA uses an integer scale from 1 to 10 for evaluating the three risk factors. Generally, the failure modes with higher RPNs are considered to be more important and will be given higher priorities for correction. According to the values of RPNs, the failure modes can be prioritized and then proper remedial actions should be preferentially taken on the failure modes with high levels of risk.The traditional FMEA is a systematic, efficient and effective method, capable of improving the safety and reliability of systems; however, the conational RPN method has been criticized as having many limitations and problems [6,7,13,17,28,43,44], some of which are given as follows:•The relative weights of risk factors are not taken into account. The risk factors O, S, and D are given to have the equal importance, which may not be the case in many practical applications of FMEA.Different sets of O, S, and D scores may produce exactly the identical value of RPN, but their hidden risk implications may be completely different. This may cause a waste of resources and time, or in some cases, some high-risk failure modes being ignored.The mathematical formula for computing RPN is questionable and strongly sensitive to variations in risk factor assessments. Small variations in one risk factor may lead to vastly different effects on the RPN, depending on the values of the other risk factors.The three risk factors are mostly difficult to be precisely determined. Much information in FMEA is often uncertain or vague and can be expressed by using linguistic terms such as likely, important or very high and so on.The risk factors O, S, and D are evaluated according to discrete ordinal scales of measure. But that the calculation of multiplication is meaningless on ordinal scales. Thus the results obtained are not only meaningless but also in fact misleading.In this section, we briefly introduce some relative mathematics tools, such as fuzzy set theory, fuzzy AHP, Shannon Entropy and fuzzy VIKOR method, which will be used in the proposed model.Fuzzy set theory is a mathematical theory first proposed by Zadeh [27] to deal with the uncertainty and ambiguity existed in real-life world problems. This theory has an advantage over the classical notion of set when dealing with the uncertainty and vagueness of human cognitive processes. Let X be the universe of discourse, X={x1, x2, …, xn}, a fuzzy seta˜of X is characterized by a membership functionμa˜(x), which maps each element x in X to a real number within the interval [0,1]. The function valueμa˜(x)denotes the degree of membership of x ina˜. The biggerμa˜(x), the stronger the degree of membership for x ina˜.A fuzzy number is a special fuzzy set in the universe of discourse X whose membership function is both convex and normal. Different types of fuzzy membership functions, such as triangular and trapezoidal fuzzy numbers, have been employed in fuzzy logic. However, triangular fuzzy numbers are more practical in applications because of their calculation easiness and features, and they are useful in promoting representation and information processing in a fuzzy environment. Hence, triangular fuzzy numbers are preferred to express experts’ linguistic evaluations in this study.A triangular fuzzy numbera˜can be represented as (a1, a2, a3) and its membership functionμa˜(x)(as shown in Fig. 1) can be defined as:(2)μa˜(x)=x−a1a2−a1,a1≤x≤a2a3−xa3−a2,a2≤x≤a30,otherwisewhere a1 and a3 denote the lower and upper bounds, and a2 is the modal value of the fuzzy numbera˜.Give any two positive triangular fuzzy numbersa˜=(a1,a2,a3),b˜=(b1,b2,b3)and a positive real number r, the algebraic operations of the triangular fuzzy numbers can be expressed as follows [40,45]:(3)a˜⊕b˜=(a1+b1,a2+b2,a3+b3),(4)a˜⊖b˜=(a1−b3,a2−b2,a3−b1),(5)a˜⊗b˜≅(a1b1,a2b2,a3b3),(6)r⊗a˜≅(ra1,ra2,ra3),(7)a˜⊘b˜≅a1b3,a2b2,a3b1,According to Chen [46], the distance between two triangular fuzzy numbers can be calculated by using the vertex method as:(8)d(a˜,b˜)=13[(a1−b1)2+(a2−b2)2+(a3−b3)2].The concept of linguistic variable is very useful in dealing with situations which are too complex or too ill-defined to be reasonably described by traditional quantitative expressions [27]. A linguistic variable is a variable whose values are words or sentences in a natural or artificial language. These linguistic values can also be expressed in fuzzy numbers. In this paper, the fuzzy relative weights of risk factors and the fuzzy ratings of failure modes with respect to each risk factor are considered as linguistic variables. For example, these linguistic variables can be represented by positive triangular fuzzy numbers as presented in Tables 1 and 2. Figs. 2 and 3show their membership functions for the sake of visualization.A vital step in fuzzy modeling and fuzzy multi-criteria decision making is the procedure of defuzzification which locates the best nonfuzzy performance (BNP) value. Various techniques for such defuzzification are available, including the mean of maxima (MOM), center of area (COA), and α-cut. Different defuzzification methods extract different levels of information. Utilizing the COA method to find out the BNP is a simple and practical method, and there is no need to bring in the preferences of any decision makers, so it is used in this study. The BNP value of the triangular fuzzy numbera˜=(a1,a2,a3)can be expressed by the following relation [47,48]:(9)x¯0(a˜)=13[(a3−a1)+(a2−a1)]+a1,wherex¯0(a˜)is the defuzzified value of the fuzzy numbera˜.The analytic hierarchy process (AHP), originally developed by Saaty [49], is a useful approach to tackle the complexity of decision problems by means of a hierarchy of decision layers. It prioritizes the relative importance of a list of criteria (critical factors and sub-factors) via pairwise comparisons amongst the factors by relevant experts using a nine-point scale. Although it can handle experts’ opinions and make an evaluation based on multi-criteria, the classical AHP is not fully capable of reflecting the human judgments since it uses exact numerical values in the pairwise comparison matrix. As a result, fuzzy AHP [50] was introduced to remove the deficiencies of the traditional AHP and to ease the adaptation to real life problems. So, fuzzy extension of the AHP methodology is employed in this study to calculate subjective risk factor weights.Assuming K decision makers DMk(k=1, 2, …, K), we proceed to decision making on m alternatives with n criteria. Each decision maker DMkis given a weight λk>0(k=1, …, K) satisfying∑1Kλk=1to reflect his/her relative importance in the decision making process. The procedure for determining the evaluation criteria weights by fuzzy AHP method can be summarized as follows:Step 1: Comparing the performance score.Through expert questionnaires, each expert is asked to assign linguistic variables by triangular fuzzy number (see Table 1 and Fig. 2) to the pairwise comparisons among all criteria in the dimensions of a hierarchy system. Leta˜ijk=(aij1k,aij2k,aij3k)(i=1,2,…,(n−1), j=2,3,…,n) be the fuzzy relative importance by comparing criterion i with criterion j provided by the kth decision maker. Then, the aggregated fuzzy relative importance (a˜ij) can be calculated as:(10)a˜ij=(aij1,aij2,aij3),i=1,2,...,n−1,j=2,3,...,n,whereaij1=∑k=1Kλkaij1k,aij2=∑k=1Kλkaij2k,aij3=∑k=1Kλkaij3k.Step 2: Construct the fuzzy pairwise comparison matrix.The result of the comparisons is constructed as a fuzzy pairwise comparison matrix (A˜), such that(11)A˜=[a˜ij]=a˜11a˜12…a˜1na˜21a˜22…a˜2n⋮⋮…⋮a˜n1a˜n2…a˜nn=1a˜12…a˜1n1/a˜121…a˜2n⋮⋮…⋮1/a˜1n1/a˜2n…1.Step 3: Examine the consistency of the fuzzy pairwise comparison matrix.Assume A=[aij] is a positive reciprocal matrix andA˜=[a˜ij]is a fuzzy positive reciprocal matrix. As pointed out by Buckley et al. [50], if A=[aij] is consistent,A˜=[a˜ij]will also be consistent. Therefore, this research employs this method to validate the questionnaire. In case the consistency of the comparison matrix is not verified, the evaluation procedure has to be repeated to improve consistency.Step 4: Compute the fuzzy geometric mean for each criterion.The geometric technique is adopted to define the fuzzy geometric mean (r˜i) of the fuzzy comparison values between criteria, as shown in Eq. (12),(12)r˜i=(a˜i1⊗a˜i2⊗…⊗a˜in)1/n,wherea˜inis a fuzzy comparison value of criterion i to criterion n.Step 5: Compute the fuzzy weights of criteria.The fuzzy weight of the ith criterion (w˜is) can be derived as follows:(13)w˜is=r˜i⊗(r˜1⊕r˜2⊕…⊕r˜n)−1,wherew˜iscan be indicated by a triangular fuzzy number,w˜is=(wi1s,wi2s,wi3s).Step 6: Defuzzify the values ofw˜is.The subjective weight of criterion i (wis) can be first defuzzified using Eq. (9) and then normalized using Eq. (14).(14)wis=w¯is∑i=1nw¯is,wherew¯isis referred to as the crisp number of fuzzy weight determined by Eq. (9).Shannon Entropy [51] is a measure of uncertainty in information formulated in terms of probability theory. It is well suited for measuring the relative contrast intensities of criteria to represent the average intrinsic information transmitted to the decision maker. Therefore, this concept has been highlighted by many researchers for deciding the objective weights of criteria [52–54]. According to the entropy method, if all alternatives are the same in relation to a specific criterion, then that criterion should be eliminated because it transmits no information about decision-makers’ preferences. On the opposite, the criterion that transmits the most information should have the greatest importance weighting.Entropy concept is capable of being deployed as an objective weighting calculation method through the following steps:Step 1: Normalize the evaluation criterion as(15)Pij=xij∑i=1mxij,where Pijmeans the projected outcome of criterion j.Step 2: Calculate the entropy Ejof the set of projected outcomes of criterion j using the following equation:(16)Ej=−1lnm∑i=1mPijlnPij,where m is the number of criteria and guarantees that Ejlies between 0 and 1.Step 3: Define the divergence through(17)divj=1−Ej,where divjis the divergence degree of the intrinsic information of criterion j. The greater the value of the divj, the more important the criterion is in the decision making process.Step 4: Obtain the objective weights of criteria as follows(18)wjo=divj∑j=1ndivj.The VIKOR method was first proposed by Opricovic [55] for multi-criteria optimization of complex systems, which can determine compromise solutions for a problem with conflicting criteria and help the decision makers to reach a final decision. In this section, a modified fuzzy approach to the normal VIKOR method is presented to process uncertain data and to solve fuzzy multi-criteria problems with conflicting and noncommensurable criteria. This proposed fuzzy VIKOR method offers more rational formulas for computing the gaps between the status quo and the ideal point for failure modes in FMEA.Suppose that a group MCDM problem has K decision makers DMk(k=1, 2, …, K), m alternatives Ai(i=1, 2, …, m), and n decision criteria Cj(j=1, 2, …, n). Each alternative is assessed with respect to the n criteria. Letx˜ijk=(xij1k,xij2k,xij3k)be the fuzzy rating of the ith alternative on the jth criterion provided by the kth decision maker, and λk(k=1, …, K) be the relative importance weights of the K decision makers, satisfying∑1Kλk=1and λk>0 for k=1,2,…,K. Then, the procedure of the modified fuzzy VIKOR method consists of the following steps:Step 1: Aggregate the decision makers’ opinions to get the aggregated fuzzy ratings of alternatives and construct a fuzzy decision matrix.The aggregated fuzzy ratings (x˜ij) of alternatives with respect to each criterion can be calculated as:(19)x˜ij=(xij1,xij2,xij3)wherexij1=∑k=1Kλkxij1k,xij2=∑k=1Kλkxij2k,xij3=∑k=1Kλkxij3k.A group MCDM problem can be concisely expressed in matrix format as follows:D˜=x˜11x˜12…x˜1nx˜21x˜22…x˜2n⋮⋮…⋮x˜m1x˜m2…x˜mn,wherex˜ijdenotes the rating of alternative Aiwith respect to criterion Cj,x˜ij=(xij1,xij2,xij3), i=1,2,…,m and j=1,2,…,n are linguistic variables which can be approximated by triangular fuzzy number.Step 2: Determine the fuzzy bestf˜j*and the fuzzy worstf˜j−values of all criteria ratings, j=1,2,…,n.(20)f˜j*=maxix˜ij,forbenefitcriteriaminix˜ij,forcostcriteria,i=1,2,...,m,(21)f˜j−=minix˜ij,forbenefitcriteriamaxix˜ij,forcostcriteria,i=1,2,...,m.It is worth highlighting that all the methods found in the literature for determining the BNP values are also applicable for ranking fuzzy numbers. For simplicity, the COA technique is recommended in this study to rank the aggregated fuzzy ratings and determine the fuzzy best and the fuzzy worst values of the criteria ratings.Step 3: Calculate the normalized fuzzy distance dij, i=1,2,…,m, j=1,2,…,n,(22)dij=d(f˜j*,x˜ij)d(f˜j*,f˜j−).Step 4: Compute the values Siand Ri, i=1,2,…,m, by the relations(23)Si=φ∑j=1nwjsdij+(1−φ)∑j=1nwjodij=∑j=1n[φwjs+(1−φ)wjo]dij=∑j=1nwjcdij,(24)Ri=maxj[φwjsdij+(1−φ)wjodij]=maxj(wjcdij).wherewjc=φwjs+(1−φ)wjoare the combination weights of criteria, and φ∈[0, 1], expressing the relative importance between the subjective and the objective weight. In this paper, the two kinds of weights are assumed to be equally important, that is φ=0.5.Step 5: Compute the values Qi, i=1,2,…,m, by the relation(25)Qi=vSi−S*S−−S*+(1−v)Ri−R*R−−R*,whereS*=miniSi,S−=maxiSi,R*=miniRi,R−=maxiRiand v is introduced as a weight for the strategy of maximum group utility, whereas 1−v is the weight of the individual regret. The value of v is set to 0.5 in this study.Step 6: Rank the alternatives, sorting by the values S, R and Q in decreasing order. The results are three ranking lists.Step 7: Propose a compromise solution, the alternative (A(1)), which is the best ranked by the measure Q (minimum) if the following two conditions are satisfied:C1. Acceptable advantage: Q(A(2))−Q(A(1))≥1/(m−1), where A(2) is the alternative with second position in the ranking list by Q.C2. Acceptable stability in decision making: The alternative A(1) must also be the best ranked by S or/and R. This compromise solution is stable within a decision making process, which could be: “voting by majority rule” (when v>0.5 is needed), or “by consensus”v≈0.5, or “with veto” (v<0.5).If one of the conditions is not satisfied, then a set of compromise solutions is proposed, which consists of:•Alternatives A(1) and A(2) if only the condition C2 is not satisfied orAlternatives A(1), A(2),…,A(M) if the condition C1 is not satisfied; A(M) is determined by the relation Q(A(M))−Q(A(1))<1/(m−1) for maximum M.The traditional FMEA has been largely criticized for the reason that it takes no account of the relative importance of risk factors and treats them equally. Moreover, the great majority of improved FMEA methods only consider the subjective or objective weights of risk factors separately. However, both the subjective and objective weighting methods have their own shortages. To alleviate the above drawbacks, a combination weighting method, which integrates fuzzy AHP with entropy method, is provided to indicate the weights of risk factors. This combination weighting method, overcoming the limitations of both subjective and objective weights, is thus helpful to reflect the essential characteristics of the risk evaluation in FMEA.In this paper, we treat FMEA as a group MCDM problem and obtain FMEA team members’ pinions in the form of linguistic variables. Then, these linguistic variables are converted into triangular fuzzy numbers. As a result, a systematic approach based on combination weighting and fuzzy VIKOR method is proposed to determine risk priorities of failure modes in this study. All necessary steps required for making a fuzzy criticality assessment using the proposed approach are outlined in Fig. 4. These steps involved are explained in detail as follows:Step 1: Identify the objectives of the risk assessment process and determine the analysis level.Step 2: Establish the FMEA team, list the potential failure modes and describe a finite set of relevant risk factors.Step 3: Determine the appropriate linguistic variables for risk factors and their relative weights.Step 4: Obtain the subjective weights of risk factors by using fuzzy AHP approach:•Each team member is asked to assign linguistic variables to the pairwise comparisons among all risk factors.The team members’ linguistic evaluations are aggregated to get fuzzy relative importance, and a fuzzy pairwise comparison matrix for O, S, and D is constructed.Consistency of the fuzzy pair-wise comparison matrix is examined after defuzzification of each value in the matrix according to the COA method.Fuzzy geometric means for risk factors are computed.Fuzzy weights of risk factors are calculated.The values of fuzzy weights are defuzzified and normalized to get the subjective weight of each risk factor.Step 5: Obtain the objective weights of risk factors by using entropy method:•The team members’ linguistic evaluations of each failure mode with respect to risk factors are defuzzified and normalized to get the projected outcomes.The entropy of the set of projected outcomes for each risk factor is computed.The divergence degree of the intrinsic information for each risk factor is defined.The subjective weights of all the risk factors are obtained.Step 6: Calculate the S, R and Q values by applying fuzzy VIKOR approach:•The team members’ linguistic evaluations of each failure mode with respect to risk factors are aggregated.Fuzzy bestfj*and fuzzy worstfj−values are determined.Normalized fuzzy distances are calculated.The values S, R and Q are calculated, respectively.Step 7: Determine the risk priority order of all failure modes in terms of the values S, R and Q in decreasing order.Step 8: Analyze the results and take necessary corrective actions to improve the reliability and safety of the system.To demonstrate the proposed approach for the risk evaluation in FMEA, a real-world application in medical risk management is employed in this section. Recently, a tertiary care university hospital has applied the proposed FMEA as its technique to analyze the risk of general anesthesia process. The steps and analysis of this application example are given below.The hospital desires to identify several most serious failure modes during general anesthesia process to take corresponding measures in advance and prevent the incidence of medical accidents (Step 1). A FMEA team of five decision makers, DM1, DM2, DM3, DM4 and DM5, has been set up in the hospital in order to evaluate the failure modes in general anesthesia process. The decision makers included two anesthetists, two chief physicians and one operating room nurse. It deserved mention that the five decision makers are assigned the following relative weights: 0.15, 0.20, 0.30, 0.25 and 0.10 to reflect their differences in performing FEMA.Seven potential failure modes have been identified by the FMEA team that included arterial gas bolt (FM1), visceral injury (FM2), respiratory depression (FM3), not check anesthesia equipment completely (FM4), not estimate surgery enough (FM5), blood transfusion wrong (FM7), go esophageal (FM6). The risk factors, O, S, and D, have been defined according to the historical data and the questionnaire answered by all team members (Step 2).The five decision makers use the linguistic variables shown in Table 1 to assess the subjective importance of the risk factors. Also the decision makers use the linguistic rating variables shown in Table 2 to evaluate the ratings of failure modes with respect to each risk factor. The evaluations of the five FMEA teams for the risk factors with respect to each failure mode are obtained as expressed in Table 3(Step 3).According to the fuzzy AHP method, evaluations of FMEA team members in linguistic variables are used to calculate the subjective weights of risk factors by pairwise comparisons, and the results are given in Table 4(Step 4). In this study, the consistency ratio calculated is lower than 0.1 according to the results of experts’ evaluations. Thus, the pairwise comparison matrix can be considered as consistent and the survey is valid in terms of fuzzy AHP.Subsequently the linguistic evaluations shown in Table 3 are converted into triangular fuzzy numbers. Then the aggregated fuzzy ratings of failure modes are calculated to determine the fuzzy decision matrix, as in Table 5. Based on the entropy methodology, the objective weights of risk factors can be obtained, which are shown in Table 6(Step 5). As noted in Table 6, the risk factor D has larger weight than other risk factors and in contrast, the O and S weights are very small because as mentioned before if all failure modes are the same in relation to a specific risk factor then that risk factor should be eliminated because it transmits no information about decision-makers’ preferences.In the next step, the fuzzy bestfj*and fuzzy worstfj−values of all risk factor ratings are determined by Eqs. (20) and (21) as follows:f˜O*=(0.80,2.60,4.60),f˜S*=(1.70,3.70,5.70),f˜D*=(0.00,0.25,1.50),f˜O−=(8.20,9.40,9.80),f˜S−=(7.80,9.40,10.00),f˜D−=(4.40,6.40,8.40).The normalized fuzzy distance can be calculated using Eq. (22) for each risk factor of the failure modes identified in the FMEA, as shown in Table 7. Then, the values of S, R and Q are calculated for all failure modes as in Table 8(Step 6). Finally, the risk priority orders of the failure modes by S, R and Q in decreasing order are shown in Table 9(Step 7).From Table 9, it can be seen that the ranking order of the integrated risks of the seven failure modes is FM3≻FM2≻FM6≻FM7≻FM1≻FM5≻FM4 (Step 8). According to the comprehensive evaluation results, FM3 is the most serious failure mode and should be given the top risk priority by the hospital; this will be followed by FM2, FM6, FM7, FM1, FM5 and FM4.In the proposed FMEA model, the parameter v has been introduced as weight of the strategy of the maximum group utility. It plays an important role in the ranking of failure modes. Generally, the value of v is taken as 0.5. However, v can take any value from 0 to 1. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct a sensitivity analysis on the parameter v for validating the obtained results. The related results according to the value of v are illustrated in Fig. 5. As can be seen, the ranking orders of five failure modes were not at all influenced by the v value. This means that the risk priorities of these failures are the same in terms of both maximum group utility and minimum individual regret. This result shows that the obtained results of the proposed approach are robust and reliable. On the other hand, the ranking of FM2 was improved according to increase of v value. This fact reveals that FM2 has higher level of risk when one focuses on maximum group utility. Also, the ranking of FM7 was high when the v value was small, indicating that its ranking was increased when the importance of minimum individual regret was increased. In other words, it scored high risk level when minimum individual regret was considered to be important.To further illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed fuzzy FMEA, the traditional FMEA model and the fuzzy TOPSIS approach [56] are considered. Also, to demonstrate the reflection of the risk factors’ combination weights in the computing process, we perform the procedure of the proposed approach with considering only the subjective (φ=1) or objective weights (φ=0) of risk factors on the application example. Table 10exhibits the ranking comparison of all the seven failure modes as obtained using these approaches.Based on the information in Table 10, the findings can be summarized as follows:•Failure modes can also be ranked when only the subjective or objective weights of risk factors are taken into account, but this may result in biased or even misleading ranking. For instance, FM6 turned out to be the second critical failure mode when considering only the subjective weights, while, considering only the objective weights, it ranks only at the fourth place, with a score of 0.224. At the same time, FM2 becomes the second critical one, with an overall score of 0.660. Hence, setting a suitable φ according to real situations and experts’ opinions is of great importance and benefit to the risk ranking of failure modes and the following corrective precautions.The final risk priority order can be definitely affected by selection of weight restriction φ. With the changing of the weight restriction from 1 to 0, the ranking orders of five of seven failure modes (71.4%) are different, such as FM1, FM2, FM3, FM6 and FM7. In this sense, the differences between the risk rankings under different weight restrictions are very big.The ranking order of the seven failure modes obtained by the fuzzy TOPSIS is remarkably different from that obtained by the proposed approach. A very different ranking is found in FM1 and FM7 for the proposed approach with combination weights and fuzzy TOPSIS with combination weights. The main reasons that brought the differences mainly lie in the characteristics of VIKOR and TOPSIS. First, the aggregation approaches of both methods are different. The VIKOR method introduces an aggregating function, representing the distance from the ideal solution. The TOPSIS method is based on the principle that the optimal point should have the shortest distance from the positive ideal solution and the farthest from the negative ideal solution. Second, the two methods use different kinds of normalization to eliminate the units of the criteria functions [35], whereas the VIKOR uses linear normalization and the TOPSIS adopts vector normalization.On the other hand, the results of the proposed risk evaluation model and the conventional RPN method are somewhat similar. Except for FM1, FM5, and FM7, the risk priority rankings of the other failure modes provided by the proposed approach exactly match with those by the traditional FMEA. But the advantages of the proposed FMEA can be identified by a close look at the values of the risk factors for the failure modes with inconsistent rankings. For example, FM5 is ranked behind FM1 because it has a small detection rating in comparison with FM1. In the healthcare context, more weighting should be given to the risk factor of D due to the fact that healthcare failures may lead to serious injury or death to the patients once happened. Moreover, FM7 is successfully distinguished from FM5 in line with the proposed fuzzy FMEA. Both the two failure modes have the same detection rating, but the former has a very high severity rating and is therefore ranked higher than the latter. So, proposing FM7 as the fourth ranking and FM5 as the sixth ranking which is given by the proposed FMEA seems more genuine than those given by the traditional FMEA and the fuzzy TOPSIS methods. The analysis of the results produced by the conventional RPN, the fuzzy TOPSIS and the proposed fuzzy FMEA indicates that a more accurate and reasonable risk evaluation can be achieved by integrating the combination weighting and the fuzzy VIKOR methods.The empirical example provided has demonstrated and validated the proposed FMEA approach for solving the risk analysis problem of the healthcare environment. From the analysis above, we can conclude that the obtained results of the proposed FMEA methodology are superior to those obtained by the listed methods. In summary, compared with the traditional FMEA and its variants, the model proposed in this paper has the following properties: First, the proposed fuzzy FMEA sufficiently considers the different importance of risk factors. The risk factor weights are determined by combining the fuzzy AHP and Shannon Entropy measure, which makes the risk analysis result more consistent with the actual situation. Second, based on the extended fuzzy VIKOR method, the proposed approach can simultaneously consider the maximum of group utility of the majority and minimum of the individual regret for the opponent. The analysts may choose different coefficients of analysis mechanism (i.e., v) to rank failures according to their own subjective preferences. Thus, the risk priority model proposed in this paper is of efficiency and flexibility. In addition, for verifying the performance of the proposed approach, this research has gathered medical doctors and staff to check the results of the orderings of risk for the identified failure modes. According to the professional experts, the proposed FMEA model is more suitable for the risk assessment problem considered and can help decision makers figure out the most serious failures effectively. Consequently, the safety and reliability of the general anesthesia process can be assured by adopting the new risk assessment approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Risk evaluation in FMEA, due to its intrinsic ambiguity and difficult formalization, is a particular complex task, usually accomplished by FMEA team members’ experience and intuition. In this paper, a new risk evaluation methodology for FMEA based on combination weighting and fuzzy VIKOR method was proposed to deal with the risk factors and identify the most serious failure modes for corrective actions. In this methodology, the weights of risk factors were determined by a combination weighting method, which integrates fuzzy AHP with entropy method. The risk priorities of the identified failure modes were obtained via the extended fuzzy VIKOR method. The combination weighting method can combine the desired properties of the subjective and objective weighting methods, which is also helpful to reflect the essential characteristics of the risk evaluation problem. In addition, the fuzzy VIKOR method helps decision makers in FMEA achieve an acceptable compromise of the maximum group utility for the “majority” and the minimum of the individual regret for the “opponent”.The example provided has demonstrated that the proposed approach is an effective and useful tool to assess the risk of potential failure modes in fuzzy FMEA. The results could help the hospital identify the high-risk failure modes during general anesthesia process and take appropriate measures in advance to prevent the incidence of medical accidents. Furthermore, a sensitivity analysis of the proposed fuzzy FMEA and a comparison analysis with some comparable methods have confirmed that the proposed approach gives rational and robust final results, such as the priority ranking of the failure modes.Future research could apply this new methodology flexibly to other situations and identify additional risk factors that are not considered in the present study. An optimization model for deriving the influential parameters (i.e., φ and v) objectively should be developed in the future. Besides, studies based on different multi-criteria decision making techniques are also suggested.