@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An extended partitioning technique to transform trees into single-row networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a transformation technique to transform a tree graph into single-row network.The properties of an arbitrary graph and its relation to a single-row network were studied.We report the fundamental concepts for optimal single-row transformation of a tree.Single-row transformation enables the assignment of telephone channels to each caller-receiver pair in cellular network.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tree transformation,Single-row routing,Mathematical modeling,Simulated annealing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present a Tree Sequence Model (TSM) that transforms a tree into a single-row network. This transformation provides a working model for real-time channel assignment problems, such as the assignment of telephone channels to caller-receiver pairs in a cellular network. Each caller-receiver pair represents two nodes in a graph and the connection between each pair forms an edge of this graph. This tree graph is transformed into its corresponding single-row network to enable the assignment of telephone channels to each caller-receiver pair. TSM begins with the formation of partitions from the tree and the formation of zones from these partitions through an insertion mechanism. This process is followed by the formation of terminals and intervals using Enhanced Simulated Annealing for Single-Row Routing (ESSR) to optimize the transformation of nets into single-row networks. Experimental results show that the TSM can optimally and efficiently transform all types of trees into single-row networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Single-row routing is crucial for the design of printed circuit boards (PCBs). Optimal single-row routing requires minimal congestion and doglegs to ensure a smooth communication between the components in the PCBs. Single-row routing can also be applied to any network problems that involve routing, scheduling or assignments.The single-row routing problem is NP-complete [1]. Heuristic methods have been used to solve this problem efficiently. Both Ting et al. [1] and Kuh et al. [2] have derived the necessary and sufficient conditions for optimal single-row routing. A partitioning strategy has been developed to group the nets into zones, which produces optimal solutions for some restricted models [3]. As a complement to this work, a graph theoretical approach has been introduced to relate the intervals of the single-row network with overlap and interval graphs [4].The main objective of the single-row routing problem is to minimize congestion. However, the minimization of doglegs or inter-street crossings is also crucial for problems such as printed circuit boards because the presence of doglegs increases the system overhead. The single-row routing problem also applies to wireless networks in which a flow between two nodes indicates the transmission of a signal between the nodes. Congestion occurs in the wireless network when several packets are forwarded by the same intermediate nodes at the same time, which causes a packet latency. The minimization of this congestion, which improves the packet latency as well as the lifetime of the wireless network, has become an important objective in message transmission.A model called ESSR was proposed to minimize both congestion and doglegs in single-row networks [5]. ESSR is based on a simulated annealing technique [6], in which the energy function is a function of the height of the segments of the nets in a single-row network. This technique has successfully produced optimal solutions for all net sizes and performs better than most of the previously developed models.Many engineering and science problems can be reduced to single-row networks. The graphs that represent these problems are transformed into single-row networks and solved as single-row routing problems. Formulations of the relationship between the complete graph and its single-row representation are proposed in [7,8]. Both models were developed to solve the transformation of a graph into a single-row network using ESSR [5] to optimize results. One application of this transformation is the assignment of telephone channels to caller-receiver pairs in a cellular network on a real-time basis. In a cellular network, each caller and receiver represent nodes and the connection between these nodes forms an edge. The resulting graph is a specific case of a tree graph, which is then transformed into a single-row network.Salleh et al. [7] proposed the transformation of a complete graph into a single-row network. The model creates zones from an arbitrarily connected graph that maps onto a single-row network. The properties of an arbitrary graph and its relation to a single-row network have been studied to optimize the single-row transformation. This effort has been extended to transform a perfect binary tree [9] into a single-row network. This transformation technique can be generalized from a perfect binary tree to an arbitrary tree.Our present work focuses on the transformation of a tree. A tree is a graph in which unique paths exist between any pair of vertices with no cycle. The relationship between a tree and its single-row representation is studied to yield the derivation of some important fundamental concepts. We propose a model called the Tree Sequence Model (TSM) to transform a tree into a single-row network in two steps. In the first step, a tree is partitioned and grouped into two trees with different zone arrangements. In the second step, the zones are formed through an insertion mechanism to obtain optimal node labeling using the fundamental concepts that we have derived. ESSR is then applied to generate an optimal single-row network.The transformation of a tree into a single-row network is useful for many applications that involve matching between pairs of nodes in a network. One potential application is the processor design model in a parallel computing network, in which all processors are arranged on a single axis. Another potential application is the assignment of radio channels for caller-receiver pairs in a cellular network.The remainder of this paper is organized into six sections. Section Trees and single-row networks describes the problem. Section Relevant background explores the relationship between a tree and its single-row representation. Section Fundamental concepts presents the fundamental concepts that have been derived to develop our technique. Section TSM: the transformation model introduces our Tree Sequence Model (TSM) to perform a single-row transformation of a tree. Section Experimental results and discussion discusses the experimental results. Final section summarizes the findings and suggests extensions to the research.Our earlier work [7] involves the transformation of an arbitrary graph G into a single-row network S, where each edge in G forms a net in S. This work inspired the present work to transform a tree T into a single-row network. For example, in a cellular network, a node may represent a user and the link between a pair of nodes may represent a real-time telephone line between two users from different locations. The transformation from T to S has the potential to produce an optimal path that represents fast and uninterrupted communication between the two users.In a single-row network, the terminals (or pins) are arranged horizontally on a single horizontal line known as a single-row axis. These terminals are joined by nets that consist of horizontal and vertical line segments that are drawn from left to right to form non-crossing paths in which reverse directions are forbidden.Fig. 1shows a single-row routing network from the ordered list L={N1, N3, N5, N4, N2}. The number of horizontal tracks in the upper street is called an upper street congestion, Qu, and the number of horizontal tracks in the lower street is called a lower street congestion, Ql.The overall street congestion, Q, is defined as the maximum of its upper and lower street congestions such that Q=max(Qu, Ql=3) in the example shown in Fig. 1. The vertical crossing on the single-row axis between terminals 4 and 5 in Fig. 1 is called a dogleg.ESSR is based on simulated annealing, which minimizes the congestion in a single-row network by minimizing the energy function [5](1)E=∑i=1r∑j=1ri|hi,j|where hi,jis the energy of segment j of net i and riis the number of segments in net Ni, i=1, 2, …, r.A tree T has n nodes with a height h and a total level Ttl_L=h+1. The height of the tree is the maximum path length from the root node to any other node on the tree. The set of nodes with the same path length from the root node is called a level. If a path exists from node r to node s such that node r is closer to the root node than node s, then r is an ancestor of s and s is a descendant of r. Ancestors and descendants are known as parents and children, respectively, if the path between nodes r and s is exactly one unit length. Each node vihas its respective orders of children nodes, #childi, and descendants, #Desi, for i=1, 2, …, n. The root node has no parent and the leaf nodes have no children. Therefore, apart from the root node, the set of nodes on a tree are the descendants of the root node.The present work considers a tree as a special case of a graph. In a tree, there are n nodes, and each node vihas degree di. The nodes vifor i=1, 2, …, n in T are transformed into zones ziin a single-row network S, and each zone has diterminals. The terminals are aligned evenly on the single-row axis. The edges between nodes viand vjin T are preserved as the nets linking ziand zjin S. The nets consist of horizontal and vertical line segments that are drawn from left to right to form non-crossing paths.The order of zones cjfor j=1, 2, …, n in S as well as the sequence of the intervals influence the results of the transformation. The optimal sequence of intervals is produced by ESSR [5]. The main objective of this research is to achieve the optimal arrangement of zones and intervals to minimize congestion and the number of doglegs.The transformation problem can be stated as follows:Given a graph in the form of a tree T, how can the graph be optimally transformed into a single-row network S to minimize congestion and doglegs in the network?This problem is illustrated in Fig. 2. The figure shows both a tree T with n=9 nodes and its single-row representation, S. The tree has two heights and the root node has two children. Each node in level 1 has three children and every node in level 2 is a leaf node with no children. A zone in S is an image of the node in T. A terminal in S is a pin in the zone that is part of a pair joined by a net, and the net is an image of an edge in T. The transformation from T to S results in every node viin T forming a zone ziin S such that the number of terminals in zone ziequals the degree diof node vifor i=1, 2, …, 9. For example, v2 has a degree of 4 and z2 has four terminals. In S, the terminals are aligned evenly on a node axis. The edges in T are preserved as nets in S. For example, v1 is adjacent to v2 in T; therefore, there exists a net that joins the terminals from z1 to z2. All nets are formed as non-crossing paths in S.The optimal transformation minimizes congestion and doglegs in S. The zone arrangement is a key step toward the achievement of an optimal transformation. The zone arrangement needs to allow for the formation of short sets of nets, as will be explained in the next section.The zone arrangement in S is based on the graphical properties of T to achieve optimality. The relationship between a tree and its single-row representation is crucial to determine an efficient transformation model for optimal node labeling, which leads to optimal interval construction. The fundamental concepts of this relationship are obtained from two- and three-level trees and are generalized to a k-level tree.A two-level tree has two levels of nodes in which (n−1) leaves are joined to the root node only. Zone z1 in S corresponds to the root node v1 in T, which has a net that is formed with each of the (n−1) zones that correspond to the leaves in T. Any permutation of zifor i=2, 3, …, n on the node axis gives rise to an identical set of intervals provided that the position of z1 remains unchanged in all permutations of the set of zones in S.The zone seat refers to the position of the zone on the node axis in S. Simulations of all single-row representations from the two-level tree, T, show that the energy value decreases as z1 moves from the first to the middle zone seat and increases as z1 moves from the middle to the last zone seat. The intervals that are formed when z1 is in the middle zone seat are equal on both sides of z1. This finding shows that the middle zone seat is the best position for z1 because this position results in the shortest set of intervals which produce better results. The optimum result for the single-row representation of a two-level tree, T, can be summarized as(2)E=Q(n−1−2Q)whereQ=(n−3)/4and D=0.Fundamental Concept (F1)1.The results are affected by the position of z1 in S only.A balance of the set of intervals on both sides of z1 must be achieved. Therefore, the middle zone seat on the node axis is the optimum position for z1 in S because this position:(i)produces the shortest set of intervals.yields optimal results as shown in Eq. (2).There are two cases for three-level trees, which are based on the similarity in the order of children between the nodes in level 1. In case 1, every node in level 1 has an identical order of children. In Case 2, every node in level 1 has a different order of children.The tree in Case 1 has n1 nodes in level 1. Each of these nodes has n2 child nodes in level 2. To achieve a balanced set of intervals in S, the tree in Case 1 is transformed into a single-row representation in three steps: (1) nodes in levels 0 and 1 are transformed into zones based on fundamental concept F1; (2) each n1 node in level 1 is independently treated as a root node of its respective n2 node in level 2 to form the zones based on fundamental concept F1; and (3) all sets of zones that are formed are merged into a sequence of zones. This arrangement of zones results in the shortest set of intervals and leads to optimal routing.Fundamental Concept (F2)Given that νjis a descendant of νiand an ancestor of νk, if zjis located on the left-hand side (right-hand side) of zion the node axis, then zkis also located on the left-hand side (right-hand side) of zi.The tree in case 2 is identical to the tree in Case 1, except that each node in level 1 has a different order of children. The single-row transformation in Case 2 is similar to the transformation used in Case 1. However, the sets of zones that are formed in step 2 should not be merged sequentially because the n1 nodes in level 1 each have a distinct order of children. Therefore, the nodes νjthat have a larger order of descendants will have a larger degree of terminals in S, which leads to the formation of wider intervals between z1 and zjfor j=2, 3, …, n1+1.To overcome this problem, the order of descendants for each node in level 1 is considered in the zone arrangement. The notation LOHIi,jpresents the children of νiin ascending order of #Desj. To obtain a balanced and shorter set of intervals, the nodes in LOHI1jare assigned alternately on both sides and in the direction away from z1.Fundamental Concept (F3)A node νjwith a large order of descendants in T has a large degree of terminals in S. Therefore, a large number of terminals in zone zjshould be avoided to remain near the zone that corresponds to the parent node of νj.The single-row transformation for a k-level tree T is based on Case 2 in the previous section. νais a child node of parent node νp. Given this constraint, zpis occupied either immediately before or after the partial set of zones that are formed from νaand its descendants. The interval between zaand zpcan be reduced by occupying smaller set(s) of zones next to zain the direction toward zpwithout a loss of balance on the set of intervals.Fundamental Concept (F4)1.Given νawith n1 children, the arrangement of zjfor j=1, 2, …, n1 is altered as follows:(i)When n1 is odd, (n1−1)/2 zones are located next to zain the direction toward zpand the remaining zones are located on the other side of za.When n1 is even, the number of zones on each side of zais equal.The allocation of the largest set of zones next to zain the direction toward zpshould be avoided.A model founded on the fundamental concepts of F1 through F4 transforms a tree into a single-row network with the shortest set of intervals. The interval of one unit length is called the zero-energy net and contributes a zero-energy value. An optimal result requires a maximum number of zero-energy nets. The leaves of a tree contribute the majority of zero-energy nets. To enhance the scalability of our new model, partition enhancement is introduced to boost the number of zero-energy nets in S.In partition enhancement, a tree is divided into several partitions that each has two consecutive levels of nodes. The tree level with the highest number of nodes is identified as Lk. Two levels of nodes, Lkand Lk−1, are then assembled into a single partition. This partitioning strategy is applied to the remaining pairs of consecutive levels of nodes before Lk−1 and after Lk(if any remaining pairs exist). For example, Lk−2 and Lk−3 form a partition, as do Lk+1 and Lk+2.The partition that includes Lkhas the greatest number of links because Lkcarries the greatest order of nodes, which may generate more zero-energy nets in S. To boost the number of zero-energy nets in S, an attempt is made to preserve the links between the two levels of nodes from each partition as zero-energy nets in S to obtain optimal results.Fig. 3shows the schematic flow of the Tree Sequence Model (TSM). This model includes two main steps: (1) partitioning a tree into several partitions and (2) assembling the partitions into two groups to form zones through an insertion mechanism. The single-row transformation of a tree into a single-row network involves the formation of zones, terminals and intervals. We propose a new technique that involves the formation of partitions and an insertion mechanism to obtain an optimal arrangement of zones.To form the zones, n nodes in T are mapped onto n zones in S. Each node νiin T has degree difor i=1, 2, …, n. As a result, the number of terminals in each zone zithat corresponds to viequals di. The formation of zones begins with the formation of partitions, which is followed by an insertion mechanism to form the optimal arrangement of zones.The tree is divided into several partitions that each consist of two consecutive levels of nodes. The partitioning strategy begins by identifying the level with the greatest number of nodes as LMax_L. The first partition includes the nodes from LMax_LandLMaxL−1, followed by pairs of consecutive levels of nodes starting fromLMaxL−2andLMaxL+1for the remaining partitions.A partition consists of two consecutive levels of nodes; the upper level nodes, Lupp, and the lower level nodes, Llow. Communication links between the nodes in Llowand Luppare preserved as zero-energy nets in S. However, every zone can form a maximum of two zero-energy nets, except for the zone that occupies the first or last zone seat. Therefore, the zone zjthat corresponds to the node from Llowwith the least or second least number of total descendants must form a zero-energy net with the zone that corresponds to its parent node, zi, from Lupp, according to fundamental concept F3. This type of zjis categorized as “false” for its class Groupj, and the remainder of the zones are categorized as “true”.The class of a node determines the arrangement mode of its corresponding child nodes in the arrangement of zones. Fundamental concept F1 provides the arrangement mode for zones categorized as “true”. Because zone zjmust form a zero-energy net with zi, zones zkthat correspond to the child nodes of vjcannot occupy the space between zjand zi. This result contradicts fundamental concept F1, which states that zones zkshould be located equally on each side of zj. To eliminate this problem, a new arrangement mode is developed for zones that are categorized as “false”, in which zones zkare inserted immediately before (after) zjin decreasing (ascending) order of the total descendants when zjoccupies the left-hand side (right-hand side) of zi.This process enhances the arrangement of zones because the formation of partitions leads to the shortest set of intervals and the greatest number of zero-energy nets. The algorithm for the formation of partitions is outlined in Algorithm 1(a).The insertion mechanism, which is based founded on fundamental concepts F1 to F4, is presented in this section. In T, each node νihas a number of child nodes that are included in sequence LOHIijfor i=1, 2, …, n and j=1, 2, …, #childiin ascending order of their total descendants. The insertion mechanism inserts the zones LOHIijinto a sequence called the backbone Pk, which is known as an optimal ordering of zones when k reaches n. This mechanism begins with an initial backbone, P1, which is formed by the zone that corresponds to the root node. Position ziin backbone Pais determined prior to the insertion of zones LOHIijbased on Groupi.As mentioned in the previous section, there are two types of Groupi, which differ by the arrangement modes of the zones. Zones LOHIijare allocated alternately on each side and in the direction away from zi, which is located at Paif Groupiis true. Conversely, zones LOHIijare inserted immediately before or after ziif Groupiis false.If νiis a child node of νp, then the position of zirelative to νpon a node axis, i.e., the position representation, Ri, for i=1, 2, …, n, determines the starting point of the insertion for both arrangement modes. The position representation, Ri, is “true” for all zithat are allocated on the right-hand side of zpand vice versa. The backbone Pkis updated after every insertion until the list of zones is completely formed. The algorithm for the insertion mechanism is outlined in Algorithm 1(b).Terminals are formed for each zone to join the intervals in the next step. In S, every zicorresponds to viin T for i=1, 2, …, n. Therefore, the number of terminals for every ziequals the number of degrees diof vi. Terminals are aligned on the node axis and numbered successively based on the order of the zones, Pkfor k=1, 2, …, n.Following the formation of terminals, the nets that connect their own pairs of terminals are constructed under the formation of intervals. All zones have their own unique corresponding nodes in T. Zone ziis adjacent to zjin S if and only if νiand νjare adjacent in T.There are two steps to construct the nets. In the first step, a net is formed on a node axis between two consecutive terminals from two consecutive adjacent zones. This step provides the nets with zero-energy, which helps to minimize congestion in the network.In the second step, the list g={g1, …, gn} is defined as the zone ordering for interval formation. The middle zonezcjin S is set as the first element (g1=j) in the g list because the middle zone will be the first zone from where the nets begin to form. The two zones that are adjacent to the middle zone on the left- and right-hand side are set as the second and third elements in the g list, respectively. The two zones that are second from the middle zone on the left- and the right-hand side are set as the fourth and fifth elements, respectively. This process is repeated until the whole ordering list is completed.In zonezcg1, a net is formed between the first available terminal and the last available terminal in the zone on the left-hand side that is nearest and adjacent tozcg1. Each zone on the left-hand side ofzcg1is checked individually fromzcg1in a leftward direction. The process is repeated until every zone on the left-hand side that is adjacent tozcg1produces a net formed fromzcg1. It follows that a net will be formed between the last available terminal inzcg1and the first available terminal in the zone on the right-hand side that is nearest and adjacent tozcg1. Next, each zone on the right-hand side ofzcg1is checked individually fromzcg1in a rightward direction. This process is repeated until each zone on the right-hand side that is adjacent tozcg1produces a net formed fromzcg1.When the net construction is completed forzcg1, the iteration is repeated forzcg2individually for n iterations up to the last zone,zcgn, to produce a complete initial single-row network. The net construction procedure is outlined in Algorithm 2.Once the construction process is complete, the nets are ready to sort. The nets are numbered from their beginning terminals in ascending order. Then, each net is assigned to a unique level, which represents the ordering of the nets. ESSR [5] is applied to this ordering of the nets to obtain an optimal sequence that produces a single-row network with the least congestion.We applied TSM on several trees with different graph orders. The trees were randomly generated by a program that we had developed. The results of the energy values (E), congestion (Q) and number of doglegs (D) are summarized in Table 1.TSM produces optimal results even as the order of the tree grows. The formation of partitions maximizes the formation of zero-energy nets and the insertion mechanism minimizes the width of the intervals, which contributes to the low energy value in the single-row networks. Fig. 4(a) shows the ordering that is produced by TSM on trees with 30 nodes. The final network following the application of ESSR is shown in Fig. 4(b).The results from the simulations are derived from the unique characteristics of the tree such that each path in the tree is a unique path. Each level has a number of nodes, and each node has a unique number of child nodes except for the leaves. The development of the TSM is based on these unique features of the tree to efficiently optimize the single-row transformation of the tree.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
