@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Range-free 3D node localization in anisotropic wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose two computationally effective range-free (RF) 3D node localization schemes using applications of biogeography based optimization (BBO) and hybrid particle swarm optimization (HPSO) for anisotropic wireless sensor networks.Nodes are randomly deployed with constraints over three layer boundaries. The anchor nodes are randomly distributed over top layer only and target nodes are distributed over the middle and bottom layers.Non-linearity between received signal strength (RSS) and distance is modeled using fuzzy logic system (FLS) to reduce the computational complexity and further optimized by HPSO and BBO to minimize the error.Knowledge based edge weight of the anchor node to determine the accurate coordinates of the target node.A novel proximity based performance index, to evaluate the proposed schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid-particle swarm optimization (HPSO),Biogeography based optimization (BBO),Wireless sensor networks (WSNs),Radio irregular model (RIM),Fuzzy logic system (FLS),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose two computationally efficient ‘range-free’ 3D node localization schemes using the application of hybrid-particle swarm optimization (HPSO) and biogeography based optimization (BBO). It is considered that nodes are deployed with constraints over three layer boundaries, in an anisotropic environment. The anchor nodes are randomly distributed over the top layer only and target nodes distributed over the middle and bottom layers. Radio irregularity factor, i.e., an anisotropic property of propagation media and heterogenous properties of the devices are considered. To overcome the non-linearity between received signal strength (RSS) and distance, edge weights between each target node and neighboring anchor nodes have been considered to compute the location of the target node. These edge weights are modeled using fuzzy logic system (FLS) to reduce the computational complexity. The edge weights are further optimized by HPSO and BBO separately to minimize the location error. Both the proposed applications of the two algorithms are compared with the earlier proposed range-free algorithms in literature, i.e., the simple centroid method and weighted centroid method. The results of our proposed applications of the two algorithms are better as compared to centroid and weighted centroid methods in terms of error and scalability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
WSN is an emerging technology, which has captured the attention and vision of many researchers, encompassing a broad spectrum of ideas since last decade. Despite their variety, all WSN have certain fundamental feature in common. Perhaps most essential is that they are embedded in the real world.Since the last decade, it has been observed that there is substantial furtherance in hardware and wireless networking technologies that have fueled the development of multi-hop wireless networks consisting of tiny, low-power, sensor devices termed as WSNs. Primal design objectives of the sensor networks focus on reliability, accuracy, flexibility, cost, effectiveness and ease of deployment. The fast and easy deployment, self-organization and fault-tolerance characteristics of WSNs make them be promising for a number of military and civilian applications [1–3]. In most of the applications, the basic principle of a WSN is to detect, compute, and report events which can be meaningfully ingested and responded to only if the precise location of the event is known. The locations of sensor nodes are often needed when identifying the location from where the accumulated information comes. Finding the coordinates of the sensors is one of ambitious problems and is referred to as the localization problem, in WSNs.Localization techniques are employed to gauge the location of the sensor nodes whose coordinates are not known in a network (termed as target nodes). Using available a priori knowledge of positions of typically a few sensor nodes called anchors, based on inter-sensor parameters/measurements such as connectivity distance, time of arrival (TOA), time difference of arrival (TDOA), and angle of arrival (AOA) [4,5].WSN localization is a two-phase process, i.e., ranging and position estimation process.To overcome the limitations (i.e., hardware cost, energy consumption, scalability, limited range, etc.) of the range-based localization schemes, range-free solutions have been proposed. Range-free solutions calculate the coordinates of sensor nodes, either, based on the radio connectivity information among neighboring nodes, or based on the sensing capabilities that each sensor node possesses but less precise than range-based methods. Nowadays, range-free algorithms are currently/commonly used to find the coordinates of target nodes than the range-based algorithms [6–8].In [9–11], we proposed the application of HPSO and BBO for range-based, distributed and non-collaborative 2D and 3D node localization. In this paper the application of HPSO and BBO algorithms for range-free is used for 3D node localization in anisotropic WSNs. Both algorithms performed better in terms of the more number of nodes localized, high localization accuracy and less computation time as compared to the earlier proposed algorithms.Nodes are randomly deployed with constraints over three layer boundaries. The anchor nodes are randomly distributed over top layer only and target nodes distributed over at bottom layers. Radio irregularity factor, i.e., anisotropic properties of propagation media and heterogenous properties of devices are considered. Non-linearity between RSS and distance is modeled using FLS to reduce the computational complexity and further optimized by HPSO and BBO to minimize the error.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Literature appraisal on WSNs localization is presented in Section 2. Section 3 ushers the readership into a gentle overview of FLS, HPSO and BBO algorithms used for localization in this paper. This is followed with discussion on radio irregular model (RIM) in Section 4. Implementation of above said algorithms, simulation results and comparative study are presented in Section 5. Finally, conclusions and a projection on possible future research path are presented in Section 6.In range-free localization algorithms, the information is usually collected by radio coverage and a number of hops to an anchor node. Anchors beacon their positions to neighbors that keep an account of all received beacons. Using this proximity information, a simple centroid formula is applied to estimate the listening nodes’ locations. Ref. [7] proposed a range-free, proximity-based, coarse-grained localization algorithm, that uses anchors beacon, containing location information (xi, yi), to estimate node positions. After receiving these beacons, the node estimates its location using the centroid formula for 2D space [12]. Examples of classical range-free localization algorithms are centroid (CL) [7], DV-hop [13], Convex [4], approximate point-in-triangulation (APIT) [14], semi-definite position (SDP) [15], etc.The range-free localization algorithms are cost effective, i.e., of lower cost as compared to range-based and easier calculation than the range-based ones, but the results of range-free algorithms are not more accurate than the range-based algorithms. Nowadays, the range-free algorithms are more popular than the range-based methods due to the cost factor.In range-free schemes, only the path information, i.e., number of hops to an anchor node is used to calculate the Euclidean distance between two nodes. The Euclidean distance provides the real distance between the nodes. In isotropic networks, the hop count between two nodes can be used to estimate the distance between them. Thus, the distance is determined by computing the average per-hop distance multiplied by the hop count between the two nodes as in [6].In [16], range-free weighted Voronoi diagram-based localization scheme (W-VBLS) is proposed to extend Voronoi diagram-based localization scheme (VBLS). In this scheme, RSSI technique is used to estimate distance from three similar distance neighbor. Further, node and two beacon form a triangle to calculate weighted bisector. Finally, estimate the position of the node with the biggest RSSI value as weight by three bisectors of the same group.In [17], a multi-hop range-free localization algorithm is proposed for anisotropic networks with a small number of anchors. A detoured path detection is proposed to detect if the shortest path between nodes is detoured from their direct path by measuring the deviation in the hop count between the direct and shortest paths. A novel distance estimation method is introduced to approximate the shortest path based on the path deviation and to estimate their distance by taking into account the extent of the detour of the approximate shortest path.In [18], two range-free localization schemes based on RSS information are presented. They employ soft computing techniques to overcome the limitations of previous range-free localization methods. In the first scheme, the localization is decomposed into a collection of individual problems in which the proximity of a sensor node to each anchor node is computed. The edge weights are modeled by FLS and optimized by GA. Contrary to the first scheme, the localization as a single problem is considered in the second scheme and approximate the whole mapping from the anchor node signals to the locations of sensor nodes by NN.The methods proposed in this paper have following features:1.Knowledge-based edge weight of the anchor node to determine the accurate coordinates of the target node.A novel proximity-based performance index, to evaluate the proposed schemes.Soft computing algorithms have plenteous source of ideas for optimization, due to which these algorithms are popular because of their accuracy, and their meek computational burden [18–29]. An improve version of PSO, i.e., HPSO and a recent optimization algorithm, i.e., BBO are applied in [9–11] to achieve better and faster solution for range-based node localization. Ease of implementation and fast convergence are the qualities of gbest PSO, however, it is likely to get trapped in local optima that leads to pre-matured convergence. In this paper, we extend the application of HPSO and BBO for range-free 3D node localization. The following sections present a condensed overview of FLS, HPSO, and BBO.Fuzzy logic is one of the most pragmatic ways to mimic human expertise in a naturalistic manner [30]. Computing with words allows us to develop mathematical models of the events articulated in language only. Fuzzy logic enhances the robustness of a system in that it arrives at an accommodation with the imprecision pervasive in any real world system. Its basic configuration consists of input and output scaling factors, fuzzifier, rule base, inference engine and a defuzzifier as shown in Fig. 1.The structure of the rule base can be stated as in Eq. (1)(1)Ri:ifx1isAi1andx2isAi2and…xnisAinthenyiisWiwhere Riis ith rule, xjis jth input variable of FLS; n is the number of input variables, yiis the ith output variable; Aijare the fuzzy membership functions for inputs and Wiare the fuzzy membership functions for output in case of Mamdani type systems (functions of input variables in case of Sugeno type systems [33]). In this paper, we use Mamdani implication (though Sugeno type systems are more accurate but consistency of Mamdani systems cannot be ruled out. Mamdani System has solid defuzzification process and that keeps the result in consistent form), max aggregation (2) and center of sums defuzzification method [33] for an input X=(x1, x2, …, xn), then y* is the crisp (defuzzified) output of the fuzzy system and can be expressed as (3) while the overall output fuzzy set can be expressed as in (2):(2)μ(y)=max(min(Ain,Wi))where max is aggregation operator and min is implication operator(3)y*=∫yy{∑k=1mWk}dy∫y{∑k=1mWk}dywhere y is a running point in a discrete universe of discourse, Wkare the individual output fuzzy sets and m is the number of individual output fuzzy membership functions.Eberhart and Kennedy developed the PSO in 1995 [32] based on the analogy of bird flocks and fish schools where each individual is allowed to learn from the experience of its own and from its neighbors. The PSO technique employs a set of feasible solutions within the search space, called a Swarm of Particles with random initial locations. The value of the objective function (which reflects error between absolute values and estimated values) corresponding to each particle location is evaluated. These particles move in the search space obeying rules inspired by bird flocking behavior [33,34] to find new locations with better fitness. Each particle is induced to move toward the best position, the particle has come across so far (pbest) and the best position encountered by the entire swarm (gbest). The gbest PSO model is endowed with quality of faster evolution due to involvement of less number of computations but prone to be trapped in to the local optima. To get an accurate solution, the whole swarm is subdivided into sub-swarms, and the particle with the best fitness within the local swarm is termed as lbest. The lbest PSO model provides matured but slow convergence, whereas, in our proposed PSO variant named HPSO, the ithparticle belonging to a sub-swarm feels collective attraction toward its past pbest location, Pi, the locally best location within the sub-swarm, Pl, and the overall best location Pgas explained below. Consider a search space is d-dimensional and ith particle in the swarm can be represented as Xi=[xi1, xi2, …, xid] and its velocity can be represented by another d-dimensional vectorVi=[vi1,vi2,…,vid]. Let the best position ever visited in the past by the ithparticle be denoted by Pi=[pi1, pi2, …, pid]. Many a times, the whole swarm is subdivided into smaller groups and each group/sub-swarm has its own local best particle denoted Pl=[pl1, pl2, …, pld], and an overall best particle, denoted as Pg=[pg1, pg2, …, pgd], where subscripts l and g are particle indices. The particle iterates in every unit time according to (4) and (5):(4)vid=wvid+c1r1(pid−xid)+c2r2(pgd−xid)+c3r3(pld−xid)(5)xid=xid+vid(The Eq. (5) is dimensionally valid in unit time). The parametersw, c1, c2 and c3 are termed as inertia weight, cognitive, social and neighborhood learning parameters, respectively, and have a critical role in the convergence characteristics of HPSO. The particles randomize the attraction with uniform random numbers r1, r2, and r3 in the range [0, 1]. The weight factorwshould be neither too large (which results in an early convergence), nor too small (which, on the contrary, slows down the convergence process). A value ofw=0.7and c1=c2=c3=1.494 were recommended for fast convergence by Eberhart and Shi after experimental tests in [35].Biogeography is the study of migration, speciation, and extinction of species, that has often been considered as a process which enforces equilibrium in the number of species in habitats [36–39]. Each habitat is classified by habitat suitability index (HSI) that is termed as ‘fitness’ in other evolutionary algorithms (EAs). The features that characterize habitat are called suitability index variables (SIVs). Habitats with high HSI have large population, high emigration rate, μ, simply by virtue of large number of species that migrate to other habitats. The immigration rate, λ, is low for these habitats as these are already saturated with species. Habitats with low HSI have high immigration, λ, and low emigration, μ, because of sparse population. The suitability index of habitats with low HSI is likely to improve with the influx of species from other habitats as it is a function of its biological diversity. However, if HSI does not increase and remains low, species in that habitat go nonexist and this needs additional immigration. The immigration and emigration rates depend upon the number of species in the habitats. These relationships are shown in Fig. 2. The values of immigration and emigration rates are respectively given as:(6)λ=I1−knand(7)μ=Enwhere I is the maximum possible immigration rate; E is the maximum possible emigration rate (I is not necessarily equal to E); k is the number of species of the kthindividual and n=Smaxis the maximum number of species in a habitat (refer to Fig. 2)The flow chart of the BBO algorithm is given in Fig. 3. For a pseudo-code of the algorithm, one may refer to [36].Radio irregularity is caused by two categories of factors: devices properties and the propagation media. Device properties include antenna type (directional or omnidirectional), sending power, antenna gains (at both the transmitter and receiver), receiver sensitivity, and signal–noise-ratio (SNR) threshold. Media properties include media type, background noise, and some other environmental factors such as temperature and obstacles within the propagation media [40].The radio irregularity model (RIM) proposed in [40] enhances the isotropic radio model by approximating three main properties of radio signal, i.e., anisotropy, continuous variation and heterogeneity. The irregularity of a radio pattern is denoted by the parameter Degree of Irregularity (DOI) introduced into the RIM. The DOI parameter is defined as the maximum path loss percentage variation per unit degree change in the direction of radio propagation. The RIM is a general radio model, which defaults to the isotropic model when the DOI value is 0 as shown in Fig. 4.In anisotropic environment, the RSS is measured as in (8)[40]:(8)RSS=Sendingpower−(DOIadjustedpathloss+Gaussiannoise)where DOI adjusted path loss is path loss ×Ki; Kiis a coefficient to represent the difference in path loss in different directions.Due to differences in battery statuses and hardware, the RSS can be different from two sending nodes of the same type in the same experimental setting. In RIM, the variance of signal sending power accounts for such a difference. The second parameter named VSP (variance of sending power), which is defined as the maximum percentage variance of the signal sending power among different devices is considered. The new signal sending power is modeled in (9)[40](9)VSP=Sendingpower×(1+Rand×VSP)where rand is used to generate uniformly distributed random values between 0 and 1.With the two parameters DOI and VSP, the RIM can be formulated as follows in (10)[40](10)RSS=VSP−(DOIadjustedpathloss+Fading)In this paper, we have used anisotropic properties of RIM. In isotropic properties, each node must have uniform radiation pattern same RSS, same battery status and similar hardware. However, in this paper radiation pattern of each node is not uniform, different RSS, battery status and hardware configuration is also different.As discussed above, the anchor nodes are distributed at the top layer and target nodes are distributed randomly in the middle and lower layer(s). The whole area is divided into grids and the interspacing between the grids is less than the range of the anchor nodes. An anchor node covers a block of cubes that are within its radio range. The cube size is such that it covers the largest area in the sphere formed by the radio range. The target nodes are randomly distributed in the sensing field and receive message from each neighboring anchor node. The main responsibility of the anchor nodes is to send out beacon signals to help the target nodes to localize themselves. Each target node listens the anchor nodes’ beacons for a fixed time period and collects the RSS information of adjacent anchor nodes. In this paper, the environment considered is a highly noisy environment. It is assumed that:1.The positions of anchor nodes are known either through GPS or by some other means. The coordinates of target nodes are to be determined from known coordinates of neighboring anchor nodes. In a hardware implementation, the received signal strength (RSS) is physically available at a target node from the neighboring anchor node(s) can serve to convey the distance between this target node and the corresponding anchor node (from which the signal is received). However, in the absence of RSS and to simulate the scenario available in hardware, what is done in simulation environment is that, initially the coordinates of each target node are assumed to be known and are used to find the Euclidian distances (termed as actual distances) between the target node and each anchor node.Radio propagation is not perfectly spherical (due to radio irregularity) and the transmission ranges for all radios are not identical (due to heterogeneity properties, i.e., differences in battery backup statuses).The following steps are performed for 3D node localization:1.A list is maintained by each target node that contains the number of anchor nodes and distance between target and each anchor node.Collect the ID's and positions of anchor nodes and measure their RSSs by using (11).(11)RSSij=Kdijαwhere RSSijis the RSS between the ith target node and the jth anchor node, K is constant, α is attenuation exponent and dijis the distance between ith target node and jth neighboring anchor node.Check whether the number of adjacent (to the target node under consideration) anchor nodes ≥ 4 or not; if ≥ 4 then the target node is localizable.Calculate the edge weights between each target node and neighboring anchor nodes. These edge weights are modeled using FLS.By using the edge weights between the target node (under consideration) and each neighboring anchor node, determine the positions of target nodes by a method used in [8]. More specifically, when the position of anchor nodes are (x1, y1, z1), (x2, y2, z2), …, (xk, yk, zk), then the position of target node is estimated as in (12):(12)(xt,yt,zt)=(w1x1)+⋯+(wkxk)∑i=1kwi,(w1y1)+⋯+(wkyk)∑i=1kwi,(w1z1)+⋯+(wkzk)∑i=1kwiwhere xt, yt, ztare the coordinates of tth target node, andw1,w2,…,wkare the edge weights between the considered target node and kth neighboring anchor nodes.In this paper, the fuzzy rule base is discussed with identification of linguistic fuzzy model (Mamdani fuzzy model). Consequent part of the rule base, i.e., consequents fuzzy sets and the weights are generated by using the HPSO and BBO automatically to get an appropriate and less redundant rule base to achieve accurate target nodes’ locations.RSS is a voltage measured by a receiver's received signal strength indicator (RSSI) circuit from the anchor node, and not a distance measurement. However, it can provide a clue for finding the distance between anchor node and target node. To overcome the uncertainty of RSS and the non-linearity between RSS and the distance (RSS is inversely proportional to distance), we use FLS with Mamdani implication [41–43] and model the relationship between the weight of an anchor node and its RSS. The fuzzy model is in the following form (13):(13)Ri:ifxisAithenyisWiThe input variable x is the RSS from anchor node and takes a value in the interval [0, RSSmax], where RSSmax(i.e., 100db) is the maximum RSS value. Input variable RSS is mapped into five membership functions (by using S, triangular, and Z type membership functions) as shown in Fig. 5.In this paper, output variable y is the edge weight of each anchor node for a given target node and takes a value in the interval [0,wmax], wherewmax(i.e., 1) is the maximum edge weight. Bases of the membership functions of output variable y are generated by HPSO and BBO individually and each membership function is labeled with a linguistic label as shown in Figs. 6 and 7respectively.By putting either of the consequent membership group values to complete the rule set, i.e., Wiis (either Vlow or Low or Med or High or Vhigh), the rule base is completed as shown in Table 1.A degree of importance is assigned to each rule as in (14), so the redundant rules from the preliminary rule Table 1 can be eliminated (i.e., rules which have low degree of importance) and the final rule base is given in Table 2.(14)Degreeofimportance=μ(x)×μ(y)where μ(x) is membership grade of input and μ(y) is membership grade of output. By using Mamdani implication operator, i.e., (min(antecedent, consequent)), max aggregation and center of sums defuzzification, a single crisp value is concerted from fuzzified values.Since the FLS needs tuning, we use HPSO and BBO to optimize the FLS independently. Only the membership functions of the output variable (edge weight) are optimized.In the proposed method, HPSO parameters to get the optimal weight value of ‘each’ anchor node are fixed (according to [35,19,20]) as:1.Population size (swarm size) = 20.Max. no. of iterations = 200.DOI = 0.01.Inertia weight (w) = 0.729 (as in [35])Cognitive learning parameter (c1), social learning parameter (c2) and neighborhood learning parameter (c3) = 1.494 each.(as in [35]).Random numbers, i.e., r1, r2 and r3= random values between the interval 0 and 1, both inclusive, for each.Noise variance(σd2)= 0.02.Distance between middle and each of the top and bottom layers = 2, 2.5 and 3m (for three sets of simulation experiments).Number of trials = 30 (each trial consisting of 200 iterations).BBO parameters’ values (as per [36]) to accumulate the optimal weight values in the proposed work are given as:1.Population size (swarm size)=20.Max. no. of iterations=200.Probability of mutation of particle weights=0.05.DOI=0.01.Noise variance(σd2)=0.02.Distance between middle and each of the top and bottom layers=2, 2.5 and 3m (for three sets of simulation experiments).Number of trials=30 (each trial consisting of 200 iterations).Maximum rate of Emigration, i.e., Emax=1.Maximum rate of Immigration, i.e., Imax=1.The WSN localization simulations are conducted to show the effectiveness of the proposed intelligent localization methods in MATLAB environment with 80 target nodes deployed randomly in a sensor field of 10l×10l units (here unit is in meter). Each anchor has a maximum transmission range of R=4l units. A target node can communicate with adjacent anchor nodes, if its distance from each anchor node is less than the target node's transmission range. For the simulations, we have considered the RSS model with noise as in (15):(15)RSS=Kdijα−(DOIadjustedpathloss+Gaussiannoise)where K is constant.Thirty independent trials of HPSO and BBO are conducted to optimize the edge weights. Figs. 8 and 9show the optimization results of the best trial.To evaluate the proposed algorithms, following performance indices have been considered and results are tabulated in Table 3:A novel performance index as a linear combination of RSS and proximity is proposed, whereas other indices are the standard indices available in the literature, i.e., location error and average location error.1.Linear combination:(16)Linearcombination=a×proximity+b×RSSa+bwhere(17)Proximity=1distancebetweenanchornodeandtargetnodeand a and b are the respective weights whose values are generated between 0 and 1 by HPSO and BBO. The final values of a and b are obtained as 0.37 and 0.29.Location error: The distance between the estimated position and actual position of each target node.(18)LE=(xest−xact)2+(yest−yact)2+(zest−zact)2Average location error: The average distance between the estimated position and the actual position of each target node.(19)ALE=(xest−xact)2+(yest−yact)2+(zest−zact)2numberoftargetnodeswhere (xest, yest, zest)=estimated coordinates of target node and (xact, yact, zact)=actual coordinates of target node.In this paper, four localization methods have been implemented for comparison: the simple centroid method [7], the weighted centroid method [8], and the two proposed methods, i.e., range-free using application of HPSO (RFHPSO) and range-free using application of BBO (RFBBO). Figs. 10–13show the spatial results of all the four methods respectively. Further, it is observed that target nodes localized by RFHPSO and RFBBO are just near to actual positions of the target nodes (as shown in Figs. 12 and 13 respectively) as compare to simple centroid and weighted centroid method (as shown in Fig. 10 and 11 respectively). The location error (between actual position and calculated position) for each target node is shown in Figs. 14–17, for all the four methods respectively. The simulation results are further tabulated in Table 3. It is observed that the methods proposed in this paper perform better as compared to earlier proposed two methods [7,8]. Further, it is observed that HPSO based algorithm gives better accuracy and fast convergence but BBO based algorithm gives better accuracy, however, convergence is significantly slower than that for HPSO. A choice between HPSO and BBO is dependent upon the requirement of accuracy or fast convergence.From Table 4, it can be clearly seen that as the number of anchor nodes and target nodes are increased in the networks, the performance of the proposed applications of the two algorithms (RFHPSO and RFBBO) becomes better as compared to the performance of the methods proposed by [7,8]. It supports the fact that as the number of anchor nodes in the network increases, percentage of localized target nodes, i.e., percentage of success increases. It is also noticed from Table 4 that beyond a particular threshold (i.e., 200 Anchor nodes), effect of anchors on the performance becomes negligible.(20)%ofsuccess=NumberoftargetnodeslocalizedTotalnumberoftargetnodes×100Comparison results between range-based [9] and range-free methods for 3D node coordinates using application of HPSO and BBO are tabulated in Table 5. Range-based methods perform better than the range-free methods but range-free methods are cost effective and easier in calculation. In [10] author(s) proposed 2D node localization algorithms using application of PSO, HPSO and BBO for isotopic environment and sensor nodes were deployed over the plane area, whereas, in this paper and in [9], author(s) have taken the same environment, i.e., 3D and anisotropic. The choice between range-free and range-based approaches depends upon the requirements, i.e., either accuracy or cost. However, in this paper, it is observed that performance of range-free methods (RFHPSO and RFBBO) is also acceptable in terms of accuracy and scalability.In this paper, we have proposed two Range-free 3D node localization techniques using applications of HPSO and BBO algorithms for anisotropic WSNs referred as RFHPSO and RFBBO. The proposed methods do not require much hardware to get the distance information between target node and its neighboring anchor nodes, only RSS information between them is sufficient for the target nodes to estimate their positions. Edge weights between each target node and neighboring anchor nodes have been considered to compute the location of the target node. These edge weights are modeled using fuzzy logic system (FLS) to reduce the computational complexity. The edge weights are further optimized by HPSO and BBO separately to minimize the location error. The results of the proposed applications of the two algorithms are better as compared to centroid and weighted centroid methods in terms of error and scalability. Further, proposed RFHPSO and RFBBO methods are compared with range-based methods proposed in [9].Range-free localization algorithms are cost effective but less accurate, a range-free localization algorithm needs to be develop in such a manner that it does not require costly RSS based techniques but can determine the node locations with high accuracy. A combination of range-based and range-free localization algorithms can be an effective solution for localization problems. A few challenges that remain are: centralized, multi-hop and minimize the hardware requirement for range-free approaches.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
