@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving the multidimensional sequencing of hotel rooms on an online travel agency web site

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A proposed model optimally sequences hotel choices and determines the number of choices.A new approach, stochastic programming model (with uncertain customer arrival), is used.The multi-preferences of customers are incorporated to maximize the users’ expected net utility gained.Numerical results are tested with survey data of customers and OTA’s hotel characteristic.The model can be practically applied to evaluate the directions of improvement for a hotel.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hotel recommendation,Online hotel booking,Online review,Online travel agency,Multi-criteria decision,Multi-dimensional sequencing,Multi-preference consumer,Stochastic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The focus of this study is customer behavior during the process of booking a hotel through online travel agencies (OTAs). We developed a stochastic programming model to design the optimal sequence of hotels that enables customers to find hotels at the minimum search cost and maximum utility gained from hotels. The number of available hotels in the sequence was strategically decided to minimize search cost. We considered the multidimensional preferences of customers, including price, star rating, review rating, and reservation price. We collected customer information through a survey and took hotel information from a selected OTA. This information was then used through numerical simulations to test the performance of the modeling approach. The results suggest that hotels with higher utility, review rating, star rating, and price should be ranked in the upper position of the sequence. We highlight an application of the proposed model that can help improve hotel performance in today’s competitive market.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The tourism industry has driven economic activity in many countries. The World Travel and Tourism Council (2015) reported that the tourism industry contributed 9.8% of the GDP in 2014, a figure that is forecasted to reach 10.5% by 2025. Online travel agencies (OTAs) have been a major channel for travel distribution, representing 38% of the global online market and 13% of the total market (PhoCusWright, 2014). A hotel is a top tourism product sold through the online channel, and its online sales have accounted for US$164 billion with a 23% penetration rate (Euromonitor International, 2014).In recent years, the Internet has changed the way customers behave when they search for travel information (No and Kim, 2015). Due to the intangibility of a travel product prior to purchase, and to the complex choice involved, customers must deal with perceived risk from a poor purchase decision that may result in an unfavorable experience (Lin et al., 2009). Moreover, the information overload on OTAs can lead to ineffective decision making. These problems significantly affect the online travel booking experience, especially when the price of a travel product is expensive. Perceived risks in the purchase of online travel products includes performance risk, financial risk, physical risk, psychological risk, social risk, time risk, and security risk (Lin et al., 2009).In our study, we investigated customer behavior in the process of booking a hotel through OTAs. OTAs present a sequence of available hotels along with hotel information and online reviews. The hotel sequence is normally sorted by one-dimensional attributes such as price, distance, and review rating. The current sorting procedure of most OTAs is somewhat limited when it comes to meeting the expectations of customers because each customer will have multiple, highly specific preferences (price, star rating, review rating, reservation price, etc.). The position of hotels in the sequence has an effect on the booking decision, as the hotels placed at the top positions are the preferable choices. Customers evaluate the online product on the basis of the presentation of the product list and the information available on the web page. Thus, ineffective sequencing of hotels can lead to an unfavorable hotel experience if customers unknowingly book an unfavorable hotel. Moreover, a large number of available hotels on OTAs increases the search cost and exceeds the limits of human cognition. In practical terms, this means a customer may fail to notice a satisfactory hotel if that hotel is placed at the bottom of a long sequence. The number of hotels in the sequence has to be strategically optimized in such a way as to balance the quality of available hotels with the search cost.To address these issues, we propose a new approach to understand what customers need and have designed an optimal sequence with the optimal number of hotels to meet the multidimensional preferences of different customers. OTAs can adopt the proposed method and implement in their hotel sequencing mechanism to improve customer searching experience. For a hotel, maintaining a competitive advantage is the key to surviving in today’s market. Performance improvement, while necessary, takes a lot of effort, has a long lead time, and requires a large investment. It is essential to develop a decision tool to evaluate the marketing position and suggest possible ways to improve the performance. Our model can help a hotel analyze its competitive position in the market and thus provide useful guidelines for improving the performance so that the reservation rate can be increased.In summary, this research aims to present a theoretical work to optimize the experience of customers who visit OTAs. We expect that it can promote a more accurate understanding of profitable design for OTAs. Even though our work falls into a category of a theoretical study, we incorporate the important parameters derived from several surveys including the one we conducted to reflect actual behavior of customers at online hotel booking sites. Another objective aims to apply the proposed model to provide improvement suggestions to hotels competing in today’s online market. Thus, this research aims to meet the expectations of the current tourism industry.Many researchers have studied hotel selection factors. The importance of hotel attributes in terms of the booking decision varies depending on the type of traveler (Yavas and Babakus, 2005), the region (Li et al., 2013), customer characteristics (Prud’homme and Raymond, 2013), and gender (McCleary et al., 1994). Chu and Choi (2000) found that business travelers concentrate on room and hotel appearance while leisure travelers focus more on security. Interesting analyses of the influence of hotel attributes on the selection of a hotel can be found in Masiero et al. (2015) and in Chu and Choi (2000). Sohrabi et al. (2012) pointed out that protection and security, promenade and comfort, network, staff and services, news and recreational information, pleasure, cleanliness and room comfort, expenditure, room facilities, and car parking are all perceived as major attributes for hotel selection.Online reviews play an important role in travel planning, as well. A survey by Gretzel et al. (2007) revealed that 97% of respondents read online reviews, with 58.1% of the reviews being those on sites managed by OTAs. The readers of online travel reviews have indicated that the reviews are quite important when it comes to making their hotel booking decision. For example, it helps them increase their awareness of the hotel, compare hotel choices, avoid unsatisfactory choices, narrow down choices, and perceive credibility (Cantallops and Salvi, 2014; Gretzel et al., 2007). The quality of a hotel can be evaluated by its star rating and review rating, in which the review content provides the details of previous customers’ experiences (Fang et al., 2016). The review rating, scored on a scale of 1–5, presents a summary of traveler votes. It has been effectively used in the process of hotel evaluation in many studies. For example, a positive relationship between review rating and online hotel sales was reported by Singh and Torres (2015). Öğüt and Taş (2012) found that a 1% increase in a review rating could increase the online sales of a hotel up to 2.68% in Paris and 2.6% in London.The overall review rating is perceived as the most important factor determining hotel performance, in which the ratings for money value, location, and cleanliness are the key attributes (Xie et al., 2014). Using the eye-tracking approach, Noone and Robson (2014) found that a customer looks at the hotel information and review rating during the process of hotel evaluation. Moreover, Casaló et al. (2015) found that the review rating list has an effect on the customer’s booking attitude in the sense that hotels appearing in the best hotel rating list are perceived as having a higher booking intention. Review ratings are typically more useful and credible when they appear on well-known online travel communities such as Trip Advisor. The effect of online reviews has been analyzed in many studies. Sparks and Browning (2011) revealed that the valence of a positive review increases the booking intention and trust in a hotel. However, a consumer is more influenced by early negative information, especially when the valence of reviews is negative. The work of Casaló et al. (2015) also supports the finding that negative reviews have a significant effect on travelers with higher risk aversion.Product sorting and recommendation tools have been mentioned in many studies. Effective design and presentation of product lists on an online shopping web site is quite important (Hong et al., 2004), and product lists and web interface design play a key role in online shopping behavior because customers evaluate the products on the basis of information available on the sites (Bettman et al., 1990; Tam and Ho, 2005). Most customers generally search for a few choices on a list of available choices in which a choice ranked on the upper position is more attractive (Tam and Ho, 2005). The importance of order effect (e.g., the effect of position and sorting) on online retailing and search behavior has been discussed in many studies (Cai and Xu, 2006; Diehl and Zauberman, 2005).It is also important to note that human attention is limited when faced with a long list of available choices. Recommendation systems are useful for recommending the most attractive choices. They can facilitate the processing of information, resulting in shorter lead time for a booking and a tailoring to the customer’s preference (Nilashi et al., 2015). Senecal and Nantel (2004) found that online product recommendations influence customer choices and also that online retailer recommender systems have a greater effect on the potential choices than recommendations from human experts or other customers. Tam and Ho (2005) found that the presence of sorting could attract customer attention: specifically, 37.50% of target objects were clicked when they were on the top of the sorting cue while only 15.19% of the same objects were clicked when no sorting was in place.Various approaches for developing a sequencing and recommendation system can be found in the literature. Ghose et al. (2012) proposed a hotel ranking system that mines user-generated and crowd-sourced content to recommend the best value hotel. Ngai and Wat (2003) proposed a hotel advisory system that takes a fuzzy expert approach to hotel selection. Liu et al. (2013) proposed a novel recommendation algorithm based on the analysis of online reviews in the restaurant industry. Nilashi et al. (2015) developed a multi-criteria collaborative filtering recommender system for hotel recommendation using a Gaussian mixture model with an expectation maximization algorithm and an adaptive neuro-fuzzy interface system. Other approaches for developing a recommendation system can be found in Ładyżyński and Grzegorzewski (2015) and in Vansteenwegen and Souffriau (2010). There is also the recommendation approach of Liu and Yang (2015) and Mao et al. (2015), which is mainly based on ranking algorithms. Web site design is considered a key factor determining online hotel booking intention, customer satisfaction, and e-Trust on OTAs. Another major component for a quality web site design is the utilitarian feature, which refers to the efficiency of supporting and fulfilling what the customer needs (Bilgihan and Bujisic, 2015).However, prior studies on recommendation systems have ignored the recommendation of set size. The number of available choices is related to cognitive load and the decision process. This is quite important, especially on OTAs, as they collect the information of millions of hotels around the world. The suitable number of choices should be considered to balance the variety of available choices with the search cost. To the best of our knowledge, our research is the first attempt to investigate the optimal number of choices for optimal sequencing from the online tourism perspective. This issue could enhance the customer experience of using OTAs by lowering the search cost and providing the hotel with higher utility.Diehl and Zauberman (2005) found that the order of choices and amount of search have an effect on the quality of choices. Specifically, the declining order leads to a higher quality of choices when the amount of search items is limited. Iyengar and Lepper (2000) found that customers were more likely to purchase products when the number of available choices was small (e.g., 6, than when it was high at 30). Pan et al. (2013) proposed eye tracking to examine the effect of the number of options and images on the customer’s attention and ultimate hotel booking decision. They found that a suitable number of hotel options and presentation of hotel images should be determined.In the present work, we have developed a mathematical model to design an optimal sequence of available hotels so that a customer can find a hotel at the minimum search cost and maximum utility gained from a hotel. There are four unique points that set our work apart from prior literature. (i) We proposed applying a stochastic programming model to the optimal sequencing problem under the conditions of uncertain customers, sequence of customer arrival, and uncertain customer’s preference. (ii) We designed the optimal sequence of hotels with the optimal number and position effect of available hotels in OTAs. Our optimal sequence was re-optimized at suitable junctures. (iii) Our sequencing was developed to meet the multiple preferences (price, star rating, review rating, reservation price) of different customers. Actual customer data was collected through a survey and hotel information was taken from OTAs so that our model and numerical simulation tests represent a realistic case of online hotel booking. (iv) Our model incorporates multi-objectives from using OTAs, including the minimum search cost, maximum utility gained from a hotel, and recommendation of a good hotel at the top position. We conducted numerical simulation tests using survey data and found that the performance of our sequencing model comparable to existing sequences from OTAs. Moreover, there are two main contributions from the business point of view. One, we illustrate how OTAs can easily sort hotels on a web site in response to online shopping behavior, and two, we provide guidelines of improvement for a hotel to increase its reservation rate and maintain an advantage over other hotels.The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the problem and propose a mathematical model. In Section 3, we present the data collection for the numerical simulation tests. The numerical simulation tests and results are discussed in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5.We consider an OTA that provides a sequence of available hotels to serve heterogeneous customers. This problem is motivated by a customer product choice in an online shopping context. As shown in Fig. 1, a number of available hotels are sequentially displayed on a web site along with hotel information (e.g., price, star rating, and available rooms) and online reviews (e.g., review rating). The position of the choices in the sequence has an effect on the booking decision, as the upper positions are more attractive (Tam and Ho, 2005; Xu and Kim, 2008). Customers search all available hotels in the sequence and select the hotel that best satisfies their expectation. Search cost is incurred per hotel. In online hotel booking, various objectives (e.g., search cost, utility gained from hotel) are considered. Most OTAs sort the sequence of hotels by price, star rating, review rating, and popularity. If customers consider just one dimension, they can sort hotels and select the best one according to their most important preference. However, in reality, customers have multidimensional booking preferences when making a booking decision, and these preferences vary depending on the customer.The sequence of hotels thus needs to be decided such that it meets the multidimensional preferences of customers and multiple objectives for using the OTAs. If we know a customer’s preference, we can recommend the best candidate hotels to enable him or her to find a hotel at maximum utility and minimum search cost. However, the arrival of customers and their preferences are random; moreover, their preferences are different. Thus, we need to prepare an optimal sequence with the optimal number of available hotels to serve all customers suitably. Our three objectives for sequencing include (i) minimum search cost from the optimal number of hotels, (ii) maximum utility gained from hotel above the reservation price, and (iii) recommendation of most preferred hotel at the top position.Two-stage stochastic programming (2SSP) is a framework formodeling optimization problems that involve uncertainty. The basic idea is that (optimal) decisions should be based on data available at the time the decisions are made and should not depend on future observations (Shapiro and Philpott, 2007). 2SSP has been widely applied to optimization problems dealing with uncertainty, such as those relating to scheduling (Parisio and Jones, 2015) and transportation network design (Liu et al., 2009). The notations and descriptions used in this article are as follows (Table 1).Decision variables and auxiliary decision variables are as follows.Second-stage decision variables:yi,j,k=1 if customer i selects hotel j located at ranking position k in the sequence; 0 otherwisesi=The list position number of the hotel selected by customer iFirst-stage decision variables:xj,k=1 if hotel j is located at ranking position k in the sequence; 0 otherwisezn=1 if n is the last position in the sequence chosen by all customers; 0 otherwise2SSP can be suitably applied in our study by referring to the optimization problem of sequencing under an uncertainty of customers. In 2SSP, the decision variables are partitioned into two sets. The decision variables of the first stage are decided before the actual realization of the uncertain parameters is known. In our study, sequencexj,kwith the number of available hotelsznneeds to be prepared before the customer’s preference is realized. The sequence of hotels should be prepared to serve all customers, as each customer is equally likely to arrive first. After the random events are observed, further decisions can be made at a certain cost known as the second-stage decision variables (Sahinidis, 2004). In our study, after a customer arrives at a web site, she makes a booking decision with the given sequence of hotelsyi,j,kto maximize the utility at minimum search cost. Then, the position number of the hotel selected by customer i,si, is determined. The decision stages of our model are shown in Fig. 2.To decide the optimal sequence, it is essential to understand the customer’s search behavior and booking decision. We assume that a customer has multidimensional preferences (e.g., price, expected star rating, review rating, number of rooms, reservation price). These preferences are different depending on the individual and on the type of customer. Moreover, the expected utility gained from each hotel is perceived differently among customers. To imitate the customer’s decision-making process, we assume that a customer will search all hotels available in the sequence and then select the hotel with the highest utility gained above the reservation price (net utility gained) while all constraints of price, star rating, review rating, and availability are satisfied to his or her minimum expectation. We prepare the optimal sequence with the optimal number of hotel choices to close with the customer’s search behavior and decision-making process. Our mathematical model of the consumer’s decision-making process is as follows.(1)Maximize utility gained=∑i=1N∑j=1K∑k=1K(ui,j-pj-ξi)×yi,j,kSubject to:Customer choice constraints(2)∑j=1K∑k=1Kyi,j,k⩽1∀i(3)yi,j,k⩽Oi,j∀i,∀j,∀k(4)(ui,j-pj-ξi)×yi,j,k⩾0∀i,j,k(5)yi,j,k⩽xj,k∀i,∀j,∀k(6)yi,j,k⩽(1-zn)∀i,∀j,∀k,∀n=1,..,k-1After searching all hotels shown on the web site, a customer will select the hotel with the highest utility gained above the reservation price, and all hotel attributes are satisfied with the minimum expectation. Thus, the objective function Eq. (1) aims to maximize the expected utility gained from selecting a hotel above the reservation price. Eq. (2) states that the customer can either book an available hotel or leave without booking. Eqs. (3) and (4) set the customer choice decision. Specifically, Eq. (3) states that the customer will select a hotel if all hotel attributes are satisfied with the minimum expectation (price, review rating, star rating, and availability) and Eq. (4) states that the customer will select a hotel if the utility gained from that hotel exceeds the reservation price. Eq. (5) states that customer can select a hotel shown on the sequence at the given position. Eq. (6) states that the customer can select a hotel if it is shown on the web site.In the second stage, the random event (i.e., a customer with a given preference arrives) occurs. In this stage, we know the preferences of the next customer and therefore we know which hotel and which hotel position will be selected (on the basis of the sequence set earlier in the first stage) using the consumer decision model above. However, this choice selected by the customer occurs with an equal probability of1/N. Therefore, in the second stage, the model will first try to maximize the expected utility gain of the next customer (due to its larger weightw2in the objective function compared to the other weight) to represent the optimal choices of the next customer. This is the first goal of the second-stage model. To find the optimal sequence that ranks the popular hotels on the top of the list, the second-stage model needs to record the expected number of positions of hotels selected by the next customer.For example, suppose there are two customers: customer A and customer B. If customer A comes first (with probability=0.5), she will select a hotel at position 3. If customer B comes first (with probability=0.5), he will select a hotel at position 2. The expected number of positions selected by the next customer will be(0.5×3)+(0.5×2)=2.5. To set up a good sequence, this expected step should be as small as possible because it means that the hotel selected by the next customer under any scenario is ranked mostly at the top of the list. Therefore, the second stage will record this expected step in the objective function as the second goal and pass this to the first stage to minimize while deciding the sequence.2nd stage model(7)Minimize composite score=-w2×1N∑i=1N∑j=1K∑k=1K(ui,j-pj-ξi)×yi,j,k+w3×1N∑i=1NsiSubject to:Customer choice constraints(8)∑j=1K∑k=1Kyi,j,k⩽1∀i(9)yi,j,k⩽Oi,j∀i,∀j,∀k(10)(ui,j-pj-ξi)×yi,j,k⩾0∀i,j,k(11)yi,j,k⩽xj,k∀i,∀j,∀k(12)yi,j,k⩽(1-zn)∀i,∀j,∀k,∀n=1,…,k-1(13)si=∑j=1K∑k=1Kk×yi,j,k+1-∑j=1K∑k=1Kyi,j,k×K∀iEq. (7) represents the composite score that combines two goals. The first goal aims to maximize the expected utility gained from the hotel above the reservation price and the second goal aims to minimize the expected position of hotels selected by the customer. The objective function aims to minimize the composite score so that both goals are satisfied. Eq. (8) states that a customer can either book an available hotel or leave without booking. Eq. (9) states that the customer will select a hotel if all hotel attributes are satisfied with the minimum expectation. Eq. (10) states that the customer will select a hotel if the utility gained from that hotel exceeds the reservation price. Eq. (11) states that the customer can select any hotel shown in the sequence at the given position. Eq. (12) states that the customer can select a hotel if it is shown on the web site. Eq. (13) indicates the position of the hotel selected by each customer.The first term in Eq. (7),-w2×1N∑i=1N∑j=1K∑k=1K(ui,j-pj-ξi)×yi,j,k, serves as the expected utility gained by the next customer weighted by the importance factorw2. The second term in Eq. (7),w3×1N∑i=1Nsi, represents the expected positions of hotels selected by the next customer weighted by the importance factorw3. As the sequence is not set up in the second stage, the termw3×1N∑i=1Nsiwill be minimized by the first-stage decision. However, the second-stage model will work as expected only when the customer choices of hotels solved from the consumer decision model are exactly the same as the customer choices of hotels solved from the second-stage model. Potential differences could occur due to the difference in objective functions (from the second goal of the second-stage model). To minimize this effect, the weightw3should be set relatively very small compared tow2. With a very small value ofw3compared tow2, the objective function of the second-stage model closely represents the objective function of the consumer decision model. In our numerical simulation test,w3selected is tested with 80 customers and 10 replications such thatw3is small enough to ensure the customers’ hotel choices from the customer model and the second-stage model are identical.According to the customer choice decision, if we know which customer comes first, we can arrange the optimal sequence of available hotels to satisfy all goals of the customer. However, in practice, we don’t know which customers will come first, so each customer is assumed to arrive first with equal probability. Therefore, in the first stage, we need to decide the optimal number of available hotels with the optimal sequence to serve all of the possible requirements of the next customers. The sequence should also put the popular hotels (selected by the majority of next customers) on the top of the list (to minimize the termw3×1N∑i=1Nsi). The two stages are combined into one two-stage stochastic programming (2SSP) model.(14)Minimize composite score=w1×N×t×∑n=1Kn×zn-w2×1N∑i=1N∑j=1K∑k=1K(ui,j-pj-ξi)×yi,j,k+w3×∑i=1NsiSubject to:First-stage constraints: Sequencing constraints(15)∑n=1Kzn=1(16)∑n=1Kn×zn⩽Ub‾(17)∑n=1Kn×zn⩾Lb‾(18)∑k=1Kxj,k=1∀j(19)∑j=1Kxj,k=1∀kSecond-stage constraints: Customer choice constraints(20)∑j=1K∑k=1Kyi,j,k⩽1∀i(21)yi,j,k⩽Oi,j∀i,∀j,∀k(22)(ui,j-pj-ξi)×yi,j,k⩾0∀i,j,k(23)yi,j,k⩽xj,k∀i,∀j,∀k(24)yi,j,k⩽(1-zn)∀i,∀j,∀k,∀n=1,…,k-1(25)si=∑j=1K∑k=1Kk×yi,j,k+1-∑j=1K∑k=1Kyi,j,k×K∀iGiven a sequence of available hotels, a customer searches all hotels shown in the list and select the hotel with the highest utility gained above the reservation price that meets their minimum expectation of all attributes. Eq. (14) represents a composite score comprised of three main goals, namely (1) to minimize search cost from searching all hotels shown on the web site (2) to maximize the utility gained from the hotel above the reservation price, and (3) to minimize the position of hotels selected by customers. Therefore, the objective function is to minimize the composite scores so that all goals are satisfied. Eqs. (15) to (19) are the first-stage constraints to decide the sequencing and the number of available hotels shown on the web site. Eq. (15) determines the number of hotels selected to show in the sequence. Eqs. (16) and (17) set up the bounds on the number of hotels shown on the web site.Eqs. (18) and (19) assign the ranking position of each hotel in the sequence. Eq. (18) states that each hotel can be assigned to only one position. Eq. (19) states that each position can be assigned by only one hotel. Eqs. (20) to (25) are the second-stage constraints to decide the customer choice. Eq. (20) states that the customer can either book a hotel or leave without booking. Eqs. (21) and (22) set the criteria to select a hotel. Eq. (21) states that a customer will select a hotel if all attributes (price, star rating, review rating, availability) are satisfied with the minimum expectation. Eq. (22) states that a customer will select a hotel if the net utility gained from the hotel exceeds the reservation price. Eq. (23) states that the customer can select a hotel shown in the sequence at the given position. Eq. (24) states that customers can select a hotel shown on the web site. Eq. (25) calculates the position of a hotel selected by each customer (if not selected, the position K is assigned).After the two-stage model is run, the optimal sequence is found for the next customer and it remains optimal until the availability of the hotel rooms changes. As the availability of rooms is limited, customers are allowed to reserve a room if it is available. Customers who arrive or decide first have priority to book and later customers can book if there are still rooms available. After a booking by a customer, the sequence should be re-optimized, but re-optimizing after every booking takes up too much computation time to be practical. In our proposed method, we propose re-optimizing the sequence every Mthcustomer’s arrival where 1⩽M⩽N. For example, If M=10 and the total number of customers (N)=50, it means that we run the model to decide an optimal sequence every 10th customer’s arrival. In other word, the sequence will be re-optimized after 10th 20th, 30th, 40th and 50th customers arrive at the web site. The appropriate value of M will be tested in our numerical simulation tests. In summary, we propose that the optimal sequence be re-optimized for the next customer every Mthcustomer’s arrival.Step 1:Initialize customer counter m=0.In the first stage, make decisions on the sequence of n available hotels.Solve forxj,k,zn.In the second stage, make decisions on the customer choice using the model.Given the solution ofxj,k,zn, solveyi,j,k.After every customer’s arrival, update the availability of hotel room and the customer counter.After a customer at the web site, increase customer counter m by 1 or let m=m+1. Then, update the availability of a hotel room. If the room is already sold out, remove it from the current sequence and shift up to next one. Then, provide the updated sequence of hotels to the next customers.Check if the number of customers’ arrival reaches M.If the customer counter m=M where 1⩽M⩽N, go to Step 1. Otherwise, go to Step 4.This section describes the data set that is used to generate the hotel characteristics and customer profiles used in the numerical simulation tests. The sample data of hotel characteristics and customers in a selected area were collected from a popular OTA, Hotels.com, which is ranked number 524 in the eBizMBA ranking with 16,000,000 estimated unique monthly visitors (eBizMBA, 2015). The daily page views per visitor were 5.24 (Alexa, 2015).Our selected area was Chachoengsao Province, Thailand. Chachoengsao Province is located to the east of Bangkok in Thailand’s central region. It is a tourist attraction representing traditional culture and old history of Thailand. Within the province, the traditional markets and temples, such as Talat Khlong Suan and Wat Sothon, have been located (Barrow, 2015). Also, many industrial parks are located within Chachoengsao Province. Chachoengsao Province was selected for the numerical simulation tests because the number of hotels and booking transactions made by various types of travelers are large but its size is still manageable to create a data set manually. Hotel information related to Chachoengsao Province, Thailand for the check-in dates of February 11 to 12015, were considered. A total number of 42 available hotels on Hotels.com were collected and used as input data for the numerical simulation tests. Hotel characteristics including price (in Thai Baht), star rating, availability (room), overall review rating, and review rating based on five attributes (location, comfort, service, cleanliness, and hotel condition) were collected. Also, the existing sequences sorted by the Web site (sorting by star rating, price, review rating, popularity) were collected to compare the sorting performance with that by our proposed model.We assumed the historical ratio of customers in Chachoengsao Province, Thailand from the history of online reviews from all hotels available on Hotels.com. Table 2provides a ratio summary of customer types, namely, solo traveler, couple, business traveler, family, and friend. We generated an independent customer set based on the ratio of customer types, where the arrival of customers is random and each customer is equally likely to arrive first.Anderson (2011) reported that customers spend an average of five minutes on each OTA page to search hotels. We assume that customers incur a search cost per hotel. Customer incomes were extracted from our survey and time value was converted into the equivalent monetary value (in Thai Baht). The search cost per hotel at 0.3484 Baht was adopted to conduct the numerical simulation tests.Customer data was collected from Thai customers by means of a survey administered between November 3 and 19, 2014. In total, 120 questionnaires were completed, with 60.8% female respondents and 39.2% male. Slightly over half of the respondents had experience with online hotel booking. Classified by customer type, most respondents were families (43.57%) and friends (32.96%) while couples, solo travelers, and business travelers accounted for 15.08%, 5.59%, and 2.79%, respectively. Table 3lists the descriptive statistics of the respondents.With our data analysis, we were aiming to obtain customer characteristics that faithfully represent online customers in Thailand. The respondents were asked to provide their personal information and hotel selection factors. Table 4contains the customer characteristics (e.g., budget, expected star rating and review rating) of each type of customer while Table 5shows the characteristics of all customers. Using survey data, we generated customer sets by Monte Carlo sampling. Customers were classified by type using the proportions in Table 2. For each customer, on the basis of his or her type, the parameters were generated using a normal distribution with the mean and standard deviations in Table 4. Note that review rating is scored using a five-point scale (1=Very poor, 3=Neutral, 5=Very excellent) according to Hotels.com. Table 5 shows the number of searched hotels, reservation price, and demand for all types of customers. Customers are randomly assigned in the numerical simulation test of the performance of the modeling approach using a normal distribution with the mean and standard deviation in Table 5. We found that most customers search between 2 and 30 hotels before making a booking decision.To estimate the expected utility gained from a hotel, respondents were asked to give values of their recent hotel service experience (self-stated valuation). Multiple regression analysis was then performed between the expected utility as a dependent variable and seven independent variables including hotel price, star rating, and review rating on five attributes (location, comfort, service, cleanliness, hotel condition). Table 6shows the results of regression analysis. Our survey data fit the multiple regression model with an adjusted R2 of 0.86. In our analysis, stepwise regression was used to select or remove variables, and two out of seven variables were selected to be in the final model. Thus, 86% of the variation in expected utility is explained by two variables (price, review rating). We used this regression to generate a data set on utility gained from each hotel. These varied based on the different perceptions of individual customers. With a normal distribution, we used the standard error equal to 901.46 to randomly assign each customer the expected utility gained from each hotel.Moreover, on OTAs, the sequence of available hotels is displayed by different methods, such as sorting by price, star rating, review rating, and Web site suggestion. In this section, respondents were asked to indicate their preferred sorting method. Table 7shows that sorting by price is the preferred sorting method when searching for a hotel on OTAs.We conducted numerical simulation tests to determine the performance of our sequencing model and discuss the managerial insight that arose from doing them. Similar to our work, the experimental research based on a simulation approach can be found in Chen et al. (2010), Leloup (2003) and Tewoldeberhan and Janssen (2008). In our work, the input data was generated from the survey results described in Section 3. Survey data was adopted to show the application of the model in business practice. The optimization software, IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio Version 12.6, was used to solve the problem. Our simulation tests were conducted using a personal computer with a 64-bit Intel(R) Core(TM) i3-2348M CPU, 2.30GHz clockspeed, and 8.0GB of RAM.We randomly generated different customers with the varying total number of customers, N, where N∈{60,80,100,150}, to design a sequence that would satisfy the various characteristics of independent customers. The sequence is re-optimized every time a new customer (independently selected from the customer pool) arrives. As a result, the sequences are selected to optimally fit these sets of customers. To test the sequence, we randomly generated another five independent customers following the same procedure. Then, a sequences of hotels designed using the varying total number of customers N∈{60,80,100,150} were tested with these five independent customers. (In other words, the sequence was re-optimized five times per test.) The larger sample size required longer computation times but provided a slightly different composite score, as shown in Table 8and Fig. 3(a) and (b). We found that the sample size of 80 provides the lowest composite score within the acceptable computation time per customer. The computation time will increase significantly with the number of independent customers and with the problem size, so in this study we adopted the sample size of 80 customers to make our sequencing decision.Figs. 4and 5(a)–(d) show the criteria of our proposed model to design the sequence of available hotels. These numerical simulation tests highlight the importance of sorting position in the sequence, where the most attractive hotel is recommended in the upper position. According to our survey result, customers normally search between 2 and 30 hotels before making a booking decision. Thus, in this numerical simulation test, we fixed total number of hotels selected to be shown in the sequence (n) at 30 positions. We conducted numerical simulation tests with three replications using three different customer sets. That is, three sets of 80 customers were generated to make the sequence, and the average results from three replications were analyzed. The results show that the hotel that is able to attract more customers is assigned at the top position, as shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 shows the characteristics of the hotel in each position. From the decreasing linear trends observed in Fig. 5(a) and (b), we can see that not only the number of potential customers (shown in Fig. 4) determines the ranking position but also other factors such as net utility, review rating, star rating, and price. These results show that the position of a hotel in a sequence is designed on the basis of multidimensional criteria to satisfy the multidimensional preferences of customers. Hotels with higher net utility, review rating, star rating, and price are placed in the upper positions of the sequence.Table 9compares the sequence sorting performance by our proposed model with that offered by the Web site function. We performed this simulation test to determine the suitable number of available hotels in the sequence and the sequence sorting performance by different methods. Each sequence method was tested using three replications with three different customer sets. That is, three sets of 50 independent customers were generated, and the average result from three replications was calculated. We divided the numerical simulation tests into two parts. First, our sequencing model decided the optimal number of n hotels in the sequence and the sequence was re-optimized every time a new customer arrives, or M=1. Thus, 50 sequences were generated for every replication. The average from three replications was 9.31 hotels, which is lower than the maximum number of ranking positions (30) because most customers will pick hotels in the top positions.If all 30 hotels were to be included in the sequence, the customer utility gained would increase marginally but the search cost of all customers would be much higher. To reflect this, in the second part, we fixed the total number of hotels selected to be shown in the sequence (n) at 30 for all sequences sorted by the proposed model and the Web site function. The results show that our model with the optimal number of 9.31 hotels provides the highest utility gained from hotels above the reservation price, lowest search cost, and lowest position from booked hotels, resulting in the lowest composite score (lower is preferred). However, with the fixed 30 hotels, our model provides a higher utility and higher number of sold rooms, resulting in a lower composite score compared with the other sequences sorted by the Web site. This reflects how our model helps enhance the quality of the sequencing to fulfill what the customer needs. We also found that sorting by review rating provides the lowest composite score among the sequencing methods of the Web site. Although sorting by price is the most preferable method according to Table 7, our results here show that it had the lowest performance.Table 10reports the impact of the number of hotels on the composite score of the customer. We varied the total number of hotels selected to be shown in the sequence n∈{10,20,25,30,35}. Fifty customers were randomly generated to test each of them. The results show that both the average utility per customer and the search cost increased along with the number of hotels. The larger number of hotels increased the probability to match a hotel with the customer’s preferences but caused a higher search cost. Thus, OTAs need to balance increased search cost and utility gained from the hotel. Our results demonstrate the need for a suitable number of hotels to balance the utility and search cost. For example, to obtain the lowest composite score, the suitable number of hotels is 25.Fig. 6shows the composite score from different sequence methods and the number of available hotels. The different sequence methods, including our proposed model, price, review rating, star rating, and popularity, were compared. We varied the total number of hotels selected to be shown in the sequence n∈{10,15,20,15,30} for each sequence method, each of which was run by three replications with three different customer sets. That is, three sets of 50 independent customers were generated and we recorded the average. The results show that the number of hotels affects the composite score. For each sequence method, there is a certain number of hotels that provides the optimal solution. For example, the sequence sorted by review rating will reach the lowest composite score when providing 25 hotels on the sequence while the sequence sorted by star rating will be optimal when providing 15 hotels. Also, the sequencing methods have an effect on the composite score. Sorting by our model generates the lowest composite score in every case. These results provide managerial insight to consider the number of available choices on the sequence and the best sequencing method to use in the online shopping context.Table 11reports the impact of the computation time to re-optimize the new sequence on the composite score and computation time. We recorded the computation time to re-optimize the sequence every Mthcustomer’s arrival, M∈{1,5,10,20,50}. Again, 50 independent customers were randomly generated to test each of them. From the numerical simulation, we tested to find the sequence should always be re-optimized to match hotels the uncertainty of customers (e.g., preference, arrival), as this results in the lowest composite score. However, the time to re-optimize should be optimally determined because it greatly affects the computation time. The more often a sequence is re-optimized, the longer the computation time gets. In our simulation tests, we decided to re-optimize the new sequence every new actual customer arrives, because this provides the lowest composite score, and also every arrival of five customers, because this provides good solutions at an acceptable computation time. We intend to shorten the computation time by using a proposed heuristic in a future study.Table 12shows the impact of the weight of search cost on the number of available hotels and the composite score. We varied the weight of search cost w1∈{0.5,1,3,5}. Fifty customers were randomly generated and the sequence of hotels was re-optimized every Mthcustomer’s arrival where M=5. Thus, ten sequences were generated and the average number of hotels from all sequences was recorded. We found that when customers place a higher value on time (e.g., business travelers), the number of available hotels in the sequence was reduced, resulting in a slight decrease in the utility gained from hotels.At present, it is important to adapt business services so as to compete with other providers and fulfill customer needs. In the next numerical simulation test, we show that our proposed model can suggest ways for a hotel to improve the service performance. This highlights the usefulness of our sequencing model in terms of creating a competitive advantage as the practical implication. Table 13shows the information of a sample hotel. In our assessment, this hotel failed to get any bookings. Our model analyzed the competitive position of this hotel in the market, which was ranked number 23 out of 42 hotels, and provided a suggestion for how to increase the reservation rate. As shown in Table 14, our model suggests that, under the current hotel and service conditions, this hotel should reduce the price to less than 1100 Baht to attract more customers.An improvement of just one attribute (e.g., star rating, review rating) may not be enough to remain competitive in the market, however. Thus, we provide guidelines to improve two attributes at the same time, as shown in Table 15. For example, a hotel should reduce the price to 700 Baht and improve its service quality in order to gain a review rating of at least 3.8 to get the reservation of four rooms; otherwise, they have to reduce the price to 700 Baht and improve the facilities in order to gain a hotel star rating of at least 4.5. Since our model suggests improvements on the basis of an analysis of the current market situation (e.g., the selected area, possible competitors, and characteristics of potential customers), this strategy has a lot of potential to create a competitive advantage. This will help hotel managers evaluate the direction of improvement that is most practical for the hotel.The Internet has become an important channel to search for travel information and conduct booking transactions. OTAs provide a large number of hotels to heterogeneous customers. Matching a hotel with a customer’s preference is a challenge, especially when customers have multidimensional preferences. Also, a large number of hotels increases the search cost. The sequence of choices has an effect on online shopping. Product choices placed in the top position of a sequence are the desired choices. The sequence of hotels is normally sorted by one-dimensional attributes such as price, review rating, distance, star rating, or popularity. As a result, the sorting method offered by OTAs may not fully meet the customer needs, as they have multidimensional preferences.In this article, we proposed a sequencing model to design an optimal sequence with the optimal number of available hotel choices. The multidimensional preferences of customers (e.g., price, expected star rating, review rating, reservation price) were considered and an optimal sequence of hotels was designed to meet these preferences. Our three main objectives were to (i) minimize search cost, (ii) maximize the utility gained from the hotel above the reservation price, and (iii) recommend the most selected hotels in the top positions. Customer information was collected through a survey and the heterogeneity among customer types was extracted. Hotel information was taken from the selected OTAs. The expected utility gained from a hotel was estimated on the basis of the hotel attributes and customer’s preferences. The problem was formulated as a two-stage stochastic programming model with the uncertainty of customers. Numerical simulation tests were conducted using survey data.With this research, we make several contributions to the e-commerce, tourism industry and academic literature. We proposed a new approach called a two-stage stochastic programming (2SSP) model for solving the optimal sequencing problem under the uncertainty of the customers. This methodology has never before been applied to this problem. We collected actual customer data through a survey and actual hotel information from OTAs. The multidimensional preferences and heterogeneity of customers were realistically captured. Using survey data, we found that the numerical results closely represent the results to be expected from actual usage of the model. Unlike other methods, the optimal number of hotels available on the sequence was decided to reduce the search cost while maintaining high utility gained from available hotels. Also, our model helps hotel managers understand how customers evaluate their hotel compared to other hotels. It can analyze a hotel’s competitive position in the market and is able to provide useful guidelines to improve the performance. And our model can be applied to other types of online products; it is not limited to hotels.From our tests with simulated data, we showed that the sequence sorting performance of our proposed model outperformed other sequencing methods offered by the Web site function, especially sorting by price. The main findings are as follows:1.We clarified the importance of the sequence of hotels on the online booking decision making process. Different sequencing methods lead to a different booking decision and composite score (e.g., search cost, utility gained from hotel, position of popular hotel). Also, we found that the multidimensional attributes of a hotel should be incorporated when making a sequence decision because customers have multidimensional preferences. Our model suggests that the hotels with a higher net utility, review rating, star rating, and price should be ranked in the upper positions of the sequence. However, when considering one-dimensional hotel attributes, a hotel with higher review rating should be considered in the upper position because its result is close to that of the optimal sequence. Also, the sequence of hotels should always be renewed at the suitable period to cope with the uncertainty of customers (e.g., arrival, preferences).We found that the optimal number of choices should be decided strategically together with the quality of choices to balance search cost and utility gained from available hotels.We found that there are many ways to improve a hotel to increase its room bookings. Our model can suggest those directions. The suggested improvements include the combinations of attributes such as price, hotel star rating, and review rating to make the hotel more attractive relative to other hotels.In future research, we will consider heuristics to speed up the sequencing. A full-scale survey to extract the customer characteristics will be conducted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
