@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An evidential DEMATEL method to identify critical success factors in emergency management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method to figure out important and urgent critical success factors is proposed in this paper.Dempster–Shafer theory and DEMATEL method is aggregated together in our method to compute the relationship among factors.DEMATEL is applied on each fused BPA to seek for final result from different aspects.The proposed method could promote the effectiveness and efficiency of the whole emergency management.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emergency management,Critical success factors (CSF),Dempster–Shafer theory,DEMATEL,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As the result of the warmer climate and the worse environment, human beings are facing with more serious natural disasters. It is urgent to improve emergency management. Due to the fact that performance of emergency management is affected by many factors, it is difficult to improve all of them in limited resources. Thus, a feasible way is to figure out some important and urgent ones to optimize. For this purpose, a new method identifying the critical success factors (CSF) is proposed in this paper. In this method, the evaluations of influencing factors in the form of intuitionistic fuzzy numbers (IFNs) are converted into basic probability assignments (BPAs). Then Dempster–Shafer theory is adopted to combine group decision. By doing so, there is no need for defuzzification of IFNs, and DEMATEL is applied on each fused BPA to seek for a final result from different aspects. Finally, five CSFs are found out. By optimizing the five CSFs, the effectiveness and efficiency of the whole emergency management could be greatly promoted.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the global climate warming, social wealth accumulating and population expanding, human beings are facing with increasingly serious issues of natural disasters. These natural disasters have been causing enormous losses. But the performance of emergency management needs great improvement due to its current level. Such as emergency information system for ensuring information transferring is not so effective. And lacking of modern logistics technology is also an issue. So a growing number of researchers focus on optimization of emergency management. Until now, most existing studies just focus on choosing one or two specific procedures of emergency management to optimize. But this kind of measures cannot systematically improve the overall emergency performance and management. Therefore, to enhance the efficiency of emergency management as a whole, it is useful to segment the emergency management into meaningful factors so as to find out the relationship among them and to promote the whole process stepwise.Since many related works addressing the specific activity of emergency management have actually involved influencing factors, it is a feasible way to extract influencing factors from these literatures. Based on an intensive literature review, influencing factors have been managed to derive from the summary of factors in prior researches [1]. However, it is unrealistic to improve all influencing factors simultaneously due to limited resources of emergency management. A more feasible way is to clarify the relationship among factors and to find out the most urgent and important factors. These kinds of factors are named as critical success factors (CSF) and they have the greatest influence on the whole emergency management [1]. If these factors are improved, the efficiency of emergency management can be greatly facilitated. So decision makers can only focus on these CSFs.In prior research, CSFs are identified by case study and interviewing with experts. Nevertheless, these methods are easily influenced by the subjectivity of humans. In order to address the issue, a better way is to utilize multiple criteria decision making methods [2,3] to identify CSFs. Some similar but technically different solutions were also proposed by Tseng et al. [4], Wu [5] and Zhou et al. [1]. In these literatures, before fuzzy DEMATEL is applied to identify the CSFs, triangular fuzzy numbers are converted into crisp values by a series of defuzzification steps. However, our method is not just to extend this issue to group decision making, but also to acquire the final results from two different aspects. For this purpose, instead of converting intuitionistic fuzzy numbers to crisp values before employing DEMATEL method, we transform them into a similar form, namely, basic probability assignments (BPAs) and fuse them by Dempster–Shafer theory. In addition, to find out the CSFs, we take both the degree of direct relation and the degree of indirect relation into consideration. Based on our knowledge, it is the first time that Dempster–Shafer theory and DEMATEL method have been combined together to deal with emergency management. And in the proposed method there is no need for defuzzification of fuzzy numbers before utilizing DEMATEL method. So, this method can faithfully reflect the uncertainty of evaluation. Finally, we apply DEMATEL twice on each fused BPA to seek for the final results from different aspects, which is another contribution of our study.Former researchers focus on one or two specific activities, trying to optimize certain procedures of emergency management. For example, Rouvroye and Bliek [6] proposed an approach for comparing different safety analysis techniques in emergency management system and described the qualitative and quantitative results from the comparison. Park et al. [7] using a training simulator of the nuclear power plant to analyze operators’ performance under emergencies. Cowing et al. [8] discussed tradeoffs between productivity and safety in critical engineering systems. Park and Jung [9] designed a human performance database under simulated emergencies of nuclear power plants to act as a serviceable data source for scrutinizing human performance.In this paper, the process of figuring out CSFs is considered as a multiple criteria decision making problems [10]. Thus, Decision Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL) method can be adopted to find out the total relation of the factors in emergency management and to figure out CSFs [11]. Evaluation given by experts is always linguistic assessment. For the convenience of express uncertainty, linguistic values can be represented by intuitionistic fuzzy numbers (IFNs) [12–15]. In prior research, DEMATEL is extended to fuzzy DEMATEL method to deal with fuzzy numbers [16]. In this paper, IFNs are not converted into crisp values directly, but transformed into BPAs. By doing so, the uncertainty of evaluation is still kept. And then, Dempster–Shafer theory which has been applied in many fields [17–22] is adopted to aggregate the group assessment BPA matrix. Under this circumstance, DEMATEL method can be applied directly on each BPA. As mentioned above, based on two different aspects, CSFs can be identified.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic theories applied in this paper. The proposed method is described in Section 3. Effectiveness of the method is analyzed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.Dempster–Shafer theory, was first proposed by Dempster [23] and then developed by Shafer [24]. It has the ability of combining pairs of bodies of evidence to derive a new evidence. With the ability of dealing with the uncertainty, Dempster–Shafer theory has been widely applied to many fields, such as identifying influential nodes [19], decision making [17] and so on [18].In Dempster–Shafer theory, a problem domain, which may be the set of states in an event or the set of targets to be identified, is denoted by a finite nonempty set U of mutually exclusive and exhaustive hypotheses, called frame of discernment. Let 2Udenote the power set of U, which means for any element of 2U, such as A, A is a subset of U, and A is called a proposition.Definition 1Mass functionFor a frame of discernment U, a mass function is a mapping m from 2Uto [0, 1], formally defined by:(1)m:2U→[0,1]which satisfies the following conditions:(2)m(∅)=0and∑A∈2Um(A)=1A mass function is also called a basic probability assignment (BPA) of the frame of discernment U. Consider two pieces of evidence indicated by two BPAs m1 and m2 on the frame of discernment U. Dempster's rule of combination described as follows is used to generate a new BPA from two or more BPAs.Definition 2Dempster's rule of combinationDempster's rule of combination, also called orthogonal sum, denoted by m=m1⊕m2, is defined as follows(3)m(A)=11−K∑B∩C=Am1(B)m2(C)with(4)K=∑B∩C=∅m1(B)m2(C)Definition 3Let X={x1, x2, ···, xn} be a finite universal set. An intuitionistic fuzzy set A in X is an object having the following form [25]:A={<xj,μA(xj),vA(xj)>xj∈X}where the functionsμA:X↦[0,1]xj∈X→μA(xj)∈[0,1]andvA:X↦[0,1]xj∈X→vA(xj)∈[0,1]It is obvious that for every xj∈X, 0≤πA(xj)≤1.Following the conceptions of IFS, [26] introduced the concepts and arithmetic operations of intuitionistic fuzzy numbers, shortly, IFNs. An IFN a is defined as an ordered pair (μa, νa) satisfying the following conditions:μa∈[0,1],νa∈[0,1],μa+νa≤1IFNs have been widely applied in MADM problems, and the final ranking of the alternatives is determined by the ranking of corresponding IFNs [26].The methodology of the Decision Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL), originally developed by the Battelle Memorial Association in Geneva [27,28], is an effective method for analyzing direct and indirect relation between components of a system in respect to its type and severity. Through the analysis of total relation of the components by DEMATEL, a better understanding of the structural relationship and an ideal way to solve complicate system problems can be obtained. Essentially speaking, for a large number of factors which impact each other a lot, emergency management is a complex system. So, DEMATEL can be adopted to rank factors influencing emergency management, and to find out the CSFs to improve emergency management. The basic steps of DEMATEL are as follows.(1)A committee of experts evaluates the relationship between sets of paired alternatives. As the result of this evaluation, a matrix of direct relations M=[mij] is obtained as the initial data of the DEMATEL analysis.According to Eqs. (5) and (6), the elements of direct relation matrix are obtained. The matrix N is a matrix of direct relations between alternatives. It is also the normalized version of matrix M.(5)s=maxi(∑j=1nmij)(6)N=ZsAccording to Eq. (7), the elements of total relation matrix are obtained. The matrix consists of all the relations, including direct and indirect relations between alternatives.(7)T=limk→∞(N+N2+⋯+Nk)=N(I−N)−1Using the values of R+C and R−C where C is the sum of columns and also R is the sum of rows in the matrix of T, a level of influence and a level of relationship are defined. The value of R−C indicates severity of influence for each alternative. Alternatives having higher values of R−C have higher influence to another and are assumed to have higher priority, and those having lower values receiving more influence from another are assumed to have lower priority. In similar, the value of R+C indicated degree of relation between each alternative with others and alternatives having higher values of R+C have closer relationship with another and those having lower values of R+C have less relationship with others.To find out a satisfactory evaluation due to the judgment of several experts in emergency management can be considered as a group decision. Group decision is to get an agreement through interaction of many experts, and then an acceptable determination can be obtained. It is common that the evaluation given by experts is always expressed in lingual expressions rather than crisp values. Such linguistic evaluations are vague. Under such circumstance DEMATEL can not be applied directly to identify the CSFs in relation to the success of emergency. So, intuitionistic fuzzy set could be implemented to measure ambiguous concepts associated with human beings’ subjective judgments. Then, the ambiguous judgments of experts can be turned into IFNs. Besides, the experts’ opinions have to be aggregated in order to make group decision. Since the expression form of IFN and BPA is similar, IFN can be converted to BPA, and then Dempster–Shafer theory is utilized in this paper to combine the decision.The procedures of the proposed method are described as follows:(1)Factors which influence the emergency management should be figured out through investigation. Then, experts would give their judgment of the interaction between each pair of factors. By doing so, the linguistic assessments of direct relations among factors are obtained.Turn the linguistic evaluation into IFN matrixes to express the relations. For combining the group IFN matrixes efficiently, IFN matrixes are converted into BPA matrixes. Thus, by applying Dempster's rule of combination in Eq. (3) to every element of the BPA matrixes, a comprehensive matrix which represents the initial relation can be constructed.Apply DEMATEL approach in Eqs. (5)–(7) to calculate the total relation according to the basic probability number of each proposition. In this way, DEMATEL approach is utilized in different aspects. Then the importance of factors can be visualized from different aspects.Identify CSFs in comprehensive consideration of the indexes R−C on the basic probability number of each proposition. Considering the order of each factor, the ones which are more important and can greatly improve the efficiency of the system can be found out if these factors are optimized. Factors of this kind are definitely CSFs.Following the procedure of the proposed method 10 system factors which influence emergency management are figured out, as shown in Table 1.To measure the relationship between evaluation factors, it is necessary to ask experts who come from different working backgrounds to make assessments in terms of influences and relationship among factors. So we find three experts, who come from a group named Reliability and Risk Engineering and Management in Vanderbilt University, USA, an office of disaster assistance of local government of Chongqing, China, and an emergency management company in Chongqing, China, respectively. They give their linguistic assessments about the influence, which factors have direct impacts on each other. These assessments are converted into IFN matrix. Thus, the initial direct relation matrixes whose elements are IFNs as Tables 2–4shown are obtained. Three initial direct relation matrixes have been got to evaluate the relation of the factors in this paper. IFN number (0.3, 0.5) in Table 2 indicates the membership degree of direct relation between factor F1 and factor F6 is 0.3, while the non-membership degree is 0.5. This IFN can be converted into BPA as follows.m(Y)=0.3,m(N)=0.5,m(θ)=0.2where m(Y)=0.3 expresses the degree of direct relation of factor F1 on factor F6 is 0.3, and m(N)=0.5 indicates the degree of no direct relation between F1 and F6 is 0.5. Thus, m(θ)=0.2 describes the uncertainty. By doing so, BPA matrixes of direct relation can be obtained. Due to space limitation, these BPA matrixes are not included in this paper. Then Eq. (3) is applied to aggregate BPA matrixes of the three experts to get a comprehensive BPA matrix whose elements are (m(Y), m(N), m(θ)). Due to space limitation, this comprehensive BPA matrix is placed into three tables (Tables 5–7). So, the initial direct relation matrix is constructed. Since the value of m(Y), m(N) and m(θ) in Tables 5–7 is crisp value, it is feasible to compute the total relation according to m(Y), m(N) and m(θ) by Eqs. (5)–(7), respectively. Table 8expresses the total relation matrix according to m(Y), which represents the degree of total relation (direct and indirect relation) between factors. Table 9indicates the total degree of no relation (direct and indirect relation) between factors.Indexes of R, C, and R−C can be computed according to Table 8 and 9 respectively, as shown in Tables 10 and 11. As factors having higher values of R−C have higher influence to another and are assumed to have higher priority. So, R−C is a good criterion for factors prioritization. Therefore, factors having higher values of R−C on m(Y) have higher influence to another and have higher priority. Meanwhile, factors having lower values of R−C on m(N) have higher influence to another and have higher priority. So, in terms of the values of R−C on m(Y) and m(N), we can get a comprehensive final result from two different aspects. And the CSFs of emergency management can be identified. Since m(θ) expresses uncertainty, it is not appropriate to identify CSFs by m(θ). For plotting convenience, let m(N′)=−m(N) for every values in Table 11, then, the prioritization diagram of factors is acquired (Fig. 1) by mapping the dataset of (Order, R−C) of m(Y) and m(N′).As shown in Fig. 1, “Reasonable organizational structure and clear awareness of responsibilities” (F2) has the highest value of R−C on m(Y) and on m(N′), which means that F2 dispatches more impact on emergency management. Besides, F2 has the highest value of R on m(Y) and on m(N′) as well, which indicates that F2 has remarkable impact on other factors. Consequently, improve the efficient of F2 will greatly ameliorate the whole system. Therefore, it is reasonable to identify F2 as a CSF.The factors “Clear procedure of reporting and submitting information” (F9), “Government unity of leadership to plan and coordinate as a whole” (F6) and “Application of modern logistics technology” (F10) have higher values of R−C on m(Y) and on m(N′), which shows that these three factors have higher impact on other factors. Hence, F9, F6, F10 can be recognized as CSFs. For the similar reason, F5 (Regular organization of simulated disaster exercise) can also be identified as a CSF.The values of the second row of the total relation matrix according to m(Y) (Table 8) are the highest among the other rows. Meanwhile, the values of the second row of the total relation matrix according to m(N) (Table 9) are the lowest among the other rows. Since the higher value in Table 8 influences others the more and the lower value in Table 9 influences others the more. Therefore, factor F2 has higher influence to almost all of the other factors. From this aspect, F2 can be considered as a CSF. For the similar reason, factor F9, F6, F10 and F5 also can be considered as CSFs. Then the factors are divided into two groups, one is CSFs (F2, F9, F6, F10 and F5), the other is non-CSFs (shortly, NCSF) (F1, F3, F4, F7 and F8). From the second row of Table 8, we find that the sum of the values among CSFs is lower than that of the NCSFs. The process of calculation is shown as below.0.0899+0.1878+0.2221+0.2316+0.1097=0.84100.3160+0.1751+0.0844+0.3016+0.2960=1.1731Based on the row of factor F9, F6, F10 and F5 in Table 8, the sum of the values among CSFs is also lower than that of the NCSFs. It means that CSFs have higher influence to NCSFs compared with that of CSFs, which reveals that if the performance of CSFs is improved, the performance of NCSFs can be greatly facilitated. From this point of view, it is appropriate to consider factor F2, F9, F6, F10 and F5 as CSFs.Indeed, as shown in Fig. 1, these five factors can be considered as a group with similar features. All of them are located above the parallel line which passes the intersection between the curve of R−C on m(Y) and the curve of R−C on m(N′). These five factors have higher values of R−C on m(Y) and on m(N′). The other factors are less important compared with them. Practically, to improve and promote the efficiency and performance of the emergency management system, it is essential to optimize organization structure and to keep clear awareness of responsibilities. Besides, the clear procedure of reporting and submitting information is vital for rescue, so it is worth to pay more attention. Government unity of leadership to plan and coordinate as a whole can greatly enhance efficiency of the execution of emergency response. What is more, the application of modern logistics technology can dramatically promote the transportation of relief supplies. And regular organization of simulated disaster exercise is essential for escaping from natural disasters. Therefore, during the planning phase, these CSFs should be paid more attention to improve the efficiency of emergency management. Therefore, the CSFs identified by the proposed method are consistent with the real world.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
