@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new hybrid algorithm for optimal reactive power dispatch problem with discrete and continuous control variables

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hybrid MICA-IWO algorithm has been offered as a novel solution for solving ORPD problem.Hybrid MICA-IWO approach was successfully implemented.Confirm the superiority of the hybrid MICA-IWO approach for the ORPD problem.Proposed hybrid MICA-IWO is able of swift and effective solving ORPD problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD),Imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA),Hybrid MICA-IWO,Control variables,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a reliable and effective algorithm based on hybrid modified imperialist competitive algorithm (MICA) and invasive weed optimization (IWO) is proposed for solving the optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problem. Without doubt, one of the simple but powerful optimization algorithms in the field of evolutionary optimization is imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA) outperforming many of the already existing stochastic and direct search global optimization techniques. The original ICA method often converges to local optima. In order to avoid this shortcoming, a new method is propose that profits from IWO method to improve local search near the global best and a series of modifications is purposed to the assimilation policy rule of ICA in order to further enhance algorithm's rate of convergence for achieving a better solution quality. The hybrid MICA-IWO method is then offered for handling ORPD problem. The introduced method is applied to ORPD problem on IEEE 30-bus, IEEE 57-bus and IEEE 118-bus power systems for testing and validation purposes. The hybrid MICA-IWO provides better results compared to the original ICA, IWO, and other methods reported in the literature as demonstrated by simulation results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the main sub problems of optimal power-flow (OPF) calculation is optimal reactive power dispatch problem (ORPD) which can be used to figure out controllable variables such as reactive-power outputs of generators and VAR sources, and to minimize desired objective functions including transmission losses, while simultaneously satisfying a given set of operating and physical constraints. The problem of ORPD for goal of improving economy and security of a power system operation has gained considerable attention. The main idea behind using an ORPD problem in improving a power system operation is to redistribute reactive power in a system in the way that the minimum amount of transmission line losses and also improvement the voltage profiles can be attained [1–3].In the past, extensive efforts have been done development and utilization of several conventional optimization techniques such as dynamic programming, Newton method, linear programming, quadratic programming and interior point methods [4–8] for the purpose of solving an ORPD problem. However, these techniques generally suffer from algorithmic complexity, insecure convergence, and sensitivity to initial search point [9].In last years, stochastic search methods have been widely considered and used as a more efficient alternative for the global optimization problem. Examples of this development are Wu's application of an evolutionary programming (EP) for global optimization of a power system in order to achieve optimal reactive power dispatch and voltage control [10]. Lai and Ma [11] also demonstrated higher capability of EP in handling non-continuous and non- smooth functions in comparison to nonlinear programming. In [12], Lee used the mixture of successive linear programming with simple genetic algorithm (SGA) to solve reactive power operational problem. Particle swarm optimization (PSO) was another approach to this problem applied by Yoshida in [13] for reactive power and voltage control with regard to voltage security assessment, Zhao in [14] purposed a multi-agent based PSO for the ORPD problem. In [15], a fuzzy adaptive PSO for reactive power and voltage control is used, and in [16], differential evolutionary algorithm formed the core of the solution applied to the optimal reactive power dispatch problem. In another case, Mahadevan and Kannan [17] also presents another method based on CLPSO for solving ORPD problem. Other approaches for handling the above mentioned problem such as SOA and SARCGA are also presented in [18,19] and finally a stochastic reactive power method is solved by GA in [20].In 2007, Atashpaz-Gargari and Lucas introduce a novel with inspiration from social and political relations [21]. The performance of this evolutionary optimization algorithm has been continuously reinstated by successful utilization in many engineering applications such as control [22], data clustering [23], and industrial engineering [24] in recent years and has demonstrated great effectiveness in both critical factors of convergence rate and capability in achieving global optimal. In [25], a new modified ICA method further improves the performance of ICA method by taking advantage of chaotic maps to determine the movement angle of colonies toward imperialist's position in order to enhance the escaping capability from a local optimal trap. The ICA algorithm can be used for neural network learning based on chaotic imperialist competitive algorithm [26].The rests of this article are classified in four sections as follows: Section 2 covers formulation of an optimal reactive power dispatch while Section 3 explains the standard structure of the ICA, IWO and hybrid modified ICA and IWO (MICA-IWO) algorithms, Section 4 of the paper is allocated to presenting optimization results and undertaking comparison and analysis of the performance of the mentioned methods used to solve the case studies of optimal reactive power dispatch problem on IEEE 30-bus, IEEE 57-bus and IEEE 118-bus systems and finally, in Section 5, the conclusion of the implementation for the hybrid method is presented.In general, the goal of a solution of ORPD is to optimize the active power loss in the transmission network through optimal adjustment power system control parameters while satisfying equality and inequality constraints at the same time [14,17].The ORPD problem can be mathematically formulated as follows:(1)MinPloss=J(x,u)=∑k∈NTLgk(Vi2+Vj2−2ViVjcosδij)(2)Subject to:g(x,u)=0(3)h(x,u)≤0In the above equation, J(x,u) is the active power loss function of the transmission network, gkis the conductance of branch k, Viand Vjare the voltages of ith and jth bus, respectively, NTL depict the number of transmission lines, δijphase difference of voltages between bus i and bus j and x is the vector of dependent variables (state vector) consisting of:1.Load bus voltage VL.Generator reactive power output QG.Transmission line loading (or line flow) Sl.Accordingly, the x vector can be illustrated as the following:(4)xT=[VL1…VLNPQ,QG1…QGNG,Sl1…SlNTL]where NG defines the number of generators; NPQ depict the number of PQ buses.u is the vector of independent variables (control variables) consisting of:1.Generation bus voltages VG(continuous control variable).Transformer taps settings T (discrete control variable).Shunt VAR compensation QC(discrete control variable).Therefore, u can be expressed as:(5)uT=[VG1…VGNG,QC1…QCNC,T1…TNT]where NT and NC represent the number of tap regulating transformers and number of shunt VAR compensators, respectively.In the below terms, g is the equality constraints, illustrating typical load flow equations [1–3]:(6)PGi−PDi−Vi∑j=1NBVj[Gijcos(δij)+Bijsin(δij)]=0(7)QGi−QDi−Vi∑j=1NBVj[Gijsin(δij)−Bijcos(δij)]=0where NB is the number of buses, PGiis the active power generation, QGiis the reactive power generation, PDiis the active load demand, QDiis the reactive load demand, Gijand Bijare the conductance and susceptance, respectively.h is the inequality constraints that include:i.Generator related constraints: the active power generation at slack bus, generation bus voltages, and reactive power outputs are restricted by their lower and upper limits as:(8)PG,slackmin≤PG,slack≤PG,slackmaxVGimin≤VGi≤VGimax,i=1,…,NGQGimin≤QGi≤QGimax,i=1,…,NGwhereVGiminandVGimaxare the minimum and maximum generator voltage of ith generating unit;PGiminandPGimaxthe minimum and maximum active power output of ith generating unit and,QGiminandQGimaxare the minimum and maximum reactive power output of ith generating unit.Transformer limitations: transformer tap settings are restricted by their lower and upper limits as:(9)Timin≤Ti≤Timax,i=1,…,NTwhereTiminandTimaxdefine minimum and maximum tap settings limits of ith transformer.Shunt VAR compensator constraints: shunt VAR compensations are restricted by their limits as:(10)QCimin≤QCi≤QCimax,i=1,…,NCwhereQCiminandQCimaxdefine minimum and maximum VAR injection limits of ith shunt compensator.Security constraints: include the constraints of voltages at load buses and transmission line loading as:(11)VLimin≤VLi≤VLimax,i=1,…,NPQ(12)Sli≤Slimax,i=1,…,NTLwhereVLiminandVLimaxare the minimum and maximum load voltage of ith unit. Slidefines apparent power flow of ith branch.Slimaxdefines maximum apparent power flow limit of ith branch.Dependent variables are constrained using penalty terms to the objective function. Therefore, Eq. (1) is changed to the following form:ICA [21] method is purposed for general searching that is inspired from imperialistic competition in geopolitical interactions between countries. Fig. 1shows the flowchart of the ICA. Generally, this algorithm starts with an initial population. Each individual of the population is called a ‘country’. The countries in the population with the minimum cost (equal with elites in GA) are selected to be the imperialist states and the rest countries form the colonies of these imperialists. Then imperialistic competitions among these empires form the basis of the ICA. The imperialist states together with their colonies form empires. Imperialistic competitions converge to a state in which only one empire remains and its colonies are in the same position and have the same cost as the imperialist. Note that the power of each country is inversely proportional to its cost.The goal of optimization is to determine an optimal solution in form of the problem variables. The algorithm-user creates an array of variable values which are desired to be optimized. In the ICA terminology, this array is called a ‘country’ (equal with ‘chromosome’ in GA). It is clearly figured out that when solving a Nvardimensional optimization problem, a country is a 1×Nvararray. This country is defined as follow:(16)country=[P1,P2,P3,…,PNvar]where Pisare considered as the variables that should be optimized.The candidate solutions of the problem, called country, include a combination of some socio-political characteristics such as, welfare, culture, religion and language. Fig. 2shows the interpretation of country using some of socio-political characteristics.When the problem is optimized, the optimal solution is the maximum power (minimum cost). By evaluating the cost function, f, for variables (P1,P2,P3,…,PNvar), the cost of a country can be found (Eq. (17)):(17)costi=f(country)=f(P1,P2,P3,…,PNvar)In the first step of the algorithm, the initial population of size Ncountryis produced. Nimp is selected from the strongest population in order to form the empires. The remaining Ncolof the population will form the colonies which are under control of one of the empires. Some of these colonies are given to each imperialist for dividing the early colonies among the imperialist according to their power. To proportionally divide the colonies among imperialists, the normalized cost of an imperialist is explained as follows:(18)Cn=maxi{ci}−cnIn the above mentioned equation, cnis defined as the cost of nth imperialist and Cnis its normalized cost. When the normalized costs of all imperialists are gathered, the normalized power of each imperialist is evaluated according to the following equation:(19)Pn=Cn∑i=1NimpCiThe initial colonies are distributed among empires based on their power. Accordingly, initial number of colonies for nth empire will be:(20)N.C.n=round{Pn.Ncol}where N.C.nfactor represents the initial number of colonies of the empire and Ncolis the total number of existing colonies countries in the initial countries crowds.As it was explained in previous subsection, imperialist states force their colonies to move toward themselves along different socio-political axis such as welfare and culture. Actually, the central government attempts to close colony country to its own imperialist by applying attraction policy, in different political and social dimensions, with considering showing manner of country in solving optimization problem. Fig. 3illustrates this movement in which a colony moves toward the imperialist by units.In Fig. 3, d and x variables present distance between imperialist and colony countries and accidental number with steady distribution, respectively.Therefore, x can be defined as follows:(21)x∼U(0,β×d)where β is a number greater than one and nears to two. A good selection can be β=2. A random amount of deviation is added to the direction of movement in order to increase the ability of searching more area around the imperialist. In Fig. 3, θ is a parameter with uniform distribution. Then:(22)θ∼U(−γ,+γ)where γ is an ideal parameter that it's growth causes increase in searching area around imperialist and reduction of its value causes colonies close possibly to the vector of connecting colony to the imperialist. In most of implementations, the value of γ is arbitrary and about π/4 (Rad).If a colony reaches a better point than an imperialist in its movement toward the imperialist country (equal to having more power than the country), it will replace that imperialist country. Causing the algorithm to continue with an imperialist country in new location and in this time it is the new imperialist country in which begins to applying assimilation policy for its colonies.The sum power of an empire is mainly under influence of the power of imperialist country. However, the power of the colonies of an empire also has a negligible effect on the sum power of that empire. Taking into account the both above mentioned factors affecting the power of the empire, the sum cost of an empire calculates as follow:(23)T.C.n=Cost(imperialistn)+ξmean{Cost(coloniesofempiren)}where T.C.nis defined as the total cost of the nth empire and ξ is a positive number that has value between zero and one and near to zero. A low value for ξ results in calculation of total power of the empire solely by the power of imperialist, and growth of it will increase the share of the colonies in determining the total power of an empire. The value of 0.15 for ξ has shown good balanced results in most of the implementations.There has always been a race among the empires to expand their territory by taking control and hold each other's colonies. The imperialistic competition in this algorithm is modeled by the above fact and works by just picking some (usually one) of the weakest colonies of the weakest empire and making a competition among all empires to possess these (this) colonies. In this competition, each of the empires will have a certain probability of taking possession of the mentioned colonies relative to their total power. These weakest colonies will not definitely be possessed by the most powerful empires, but these empires will be more likely to control them.In the first step of modeling of the competition between the empires for possessing these colonies, the weakest empire is selected and then the possession probability of each empire (PP) is estimated proportional to the total power of the empire. The normalized total cost of an empire is determined by:(24)N.T.C.n=maxi{T.C.i}−T.C.nwhere T.C.nis total cost of nth empire and N.T.C.nis normalized cost of that nth empire. By having the normalized total cost, the possession probability of each empire is defined by:(25)Ppn=N.T.C.n∑i=1NimpN.T.C.iIn next part, the mentioned colonies will be divided accidentally between the empires with ascertain probability which is related to ownership probability of each empire. In order to divide the given colonies among the empires, vector P is formed as follows:(26)P=[Pp1,Pp2,Pp3,…,PpNimp]After that, the vector R should be defined with the same size of vector P. The arrays of this vector are accidental number with the same distribution in [0,1].(27)R=[r1,r2,r3,…,rNimp]Then, vector D is constructed by subtracting R from P.(28)D=P−R=[D1,D2,D3,…,DNimp]=[pp1−r1,pp2−r2,pp3−r3,…,ppNimp−rNimp]We give the mentioned colonies to the empires with having vector D so that related index in vector D is bigger than others.The imperialistic competition will gradually result in a growth of the power of great empires and a decline in the power of weaker ones. The weak empires will slowly lose their power and getting weakened by the time.In the main ICA, only the absorption policies, applied by the imperialist countries against their colonies are modeled. However, in real geo-political interactions between countries, the imperialist countries themselves will also move toward the most powerful imperialist countries on different economic, political and social axis which they see themselves weak.Even at some points, the affiliated imperialists will overtake the greater imperialist in this axis and its power will be increased as the result. Of course they do not always succeed or will face some resistance. But this interaction will force inevitable changes on geopolitical status of imperialist countries and as a result of that, force changes on absorption of their colonies. On this modification of ICA, the sections have been modeled between imperialist countries.Fig. 4illustrates the whole schematics of this movement, which is similar to the movement of colonies toward their imperialists. But, the difference of this movement is that the movement will occur only if the new position gives more power to the imperialist country. Otherwise the imperialist will maintain its previous position. As it is shown in Fig. 4, the imperialist which sees itself weaker at some axis such as economic, political and social, will move toward the position of the most powerful imperialist by ximpunits and take new position with condition of more power. As it is shown in Fig. 4, the ximpis a random value with uniform distribution, and the distance between to imperialists is illustrated by dimp. Of course this movement of imperialists does not fully comply with the applied policies of the imperialist country and some deviation was observed in the final result which is modeled by adding random angle (θimp) to the movement course of imperialists. The θimpangle is also a random value with uniform distributed (although any other appropriate distribution can be used). So we have as follows:(29)ximp∼U(0,βimp×dimp)(30)θimp∼U(−γimp,+γimp)The act βimpand γimplike the β and γ.Fig. 5illustrates the new absorption action, in which first imperialists move toward the most powerful imperialist to increase their power, and then colonies will be pulled to their imperialists.One of the population based optimization algorithms is IWO algorithm which is inspired by colonial behavior of weeds, first introduced by Mehrabian and Locus [27]. The IWO algorithm is a very simple and yet effective algorithm in determining optimal point of the objective function, which is developed on the basis of natural and basic features of weeds in a colony such as reproduction, growth and struggle to survive. In comparison to other algorithms, IWO is simpler and has appropriate capability and convergence rate to the global optimal point of objective function. Some of the primary characteristics of this algorithm which distinguishes it from other approaches are reproduction, space distribution and exclusive competition. The results of comparison between IWO, shuffle frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) and PSO indicates IWO's competitive and even at some points, better performance relative to the mentioned approaches [27].In order to simulate behavior of a weed, we have the follows according to [28]:Step 1: Initial population production: a population of N0 seeds is randomly distributed in an n dimensional space.Step 2: Reproduction: each seed grows and turns into a mature plant and then, begins seed production for newer generation. The amount of seeds produced by a plant increases linearly between two possible values of minimum (Smin) and maximum (Smax) possible amounts of produced seeds. The amount of produced seeds for the ith plant in every repeat is dependent to its goal value (Fi), its best (Fg) and worst (Fw) goal values in that repeat and is calculated with the following equation:(31)num_seeds(i)=Fi−FwFg−Fw(Smax−Smin)+SminStep 3: Distribution space: the randomness and assimilation of the algorithm are related to this stage. The produced seeds are distributed in the n dimensional search space with normal distribution which has zero mean and different variance of (N(0, δiter)n). In this state, the seeds will be near the breeder plant. Although, the standard deviation decreases from initial amount (δstart) to final amount (δstop) in each repeat, in the simulations, non-linear variation of standard deviation causes satisfactory results which are illustrated below:(32)δiter=itermax−iteritermaxλ∗(δstart−δstop)+δstopIn Eqs. (13)–(15), itermax represents the maximum number of repeats related to (iter) and λ is the non-linear modulation factor. In this status, the positions of seeds (Sj) for the ith plant (wi) are calculated as follows:(33)Sj=wi+N(0,δiter)n,1≤j≤num_seeds(i)Step 4: Exclusive competition: by several repeats, the number of plants produced by rapid reproduction reaches its maximum value (Wmax), in this situation, every plant is permitted to produce seeds by in accordance with reproduction method. The seeds are authorized to spread in search space with correspondence to distribution space method, when the seeds find their position; they form a colony alongside their parent plants. Then members with less propriety are deleted in order to number of members reach its maximum allowed value. In this method, the parent plants combine with their children and the plants with most propriety from the group are preserved and allowed for replacement. This crowd control mechanism will be imposed on next generations until reaching the final period.This step is undertaken just after falling of a weak empire in imperialist competitive algorithm. Each imperialist plays the role of a mature plant and the seeds it produces play the role of new colonies. At this moment, reproduction will be done just like IWO. The number of colonies (seeds) that each imperialist (plant) produces is figured out by Eq. (31). In the next step, distribution space stage in IWO is implemented on new colonies. The new colonies spread randomly in an n dimensional space with normal distribution with zero mean and different variance. In this case, the produced colonies by imperialists will be near to their own imperialist.The new position of produced colonies is calculated from Eq. (33) in which the position of parent plant is actually the position of imperialist. After calculating the power of new colonies, they combine with previous colonies and from them; the most powerful colonies are selected for an imperialist with equal number to the number of previous colonies of the imperialist. As the result, the imperialist gains more power and in a possible case that one of the new colonies has better position than its imperialist, the position of the colony will be replaced by the imperialist's position, the flow chart of combining these two algorithms is shown in Fig. 6.In order to verify the performance and efficiency of the proposed hybrid MICA-IWO based reactive power optimization approach, the hybrid algorithm is tested on IEEE 30-bus, IEEE 57-bus and IEEE 118-bus power systems. The hybrid MICA-IWO and other algorithms have been implemented in MATLAB 7.6 and the simulation run on a Pentium IV E5200 PC 2GB RAM. Iterations for all the test systems are limited to maximum number of 300.The population size and the number of the imperialists in ICA are, respectively, set as 100 and 10 for IEEE 30-buspower system; 160 and 14 for IEEE 57-bus power system; 300 and 20 for IEEE 118-bus power system and the population size and the number of the imperialists in MICA-IWO are, respectively, set as 40 and 6 for IEEE 30-bus power system; 80 and 8 for IEEE 57-bus power system; 160 and 10 for IEEE 118-bus power system and initial population size for IWO are, 120, 220 and 400 for IEEE 30-bus power system, IEEE 57-bus power system and IEEE 118-bus power system, respectively. A good selection can be β=βimp=2 and γ=γimp=π/4 (Rad). The reactive powers of shunt compensators and the transformer taps are discrete variables with the step size of 0.01 p.u. and the penalty factors in (13) are set to 500. The results of ICA, IWO and hybrid MICA-IWO algorithms, which follow, are the best solutions over 30 independent trails.In the following section, numerical results extracted from solving ORPD problems by implementation of ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO algorithms in the simulation runs will be presented. In order to evaluate the performance of the ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO approaches, the standard IEEE 30-bus test system was used as shown in Fig. 7.The IEEE 30-bus test system's components include six generators at the buses1, 2, 5, 8, 11 and 13 and. In addition, buses 3, 10 and 24 have been chosen as shunt VAR compensation buses, and four transformers which are placed in lines 6–9, 4–12, 6–10 and 27–28 [14,17,32,33,39,40].The system loads are given as follows:Pload=2.834p.u.,Qload=1.262p.u.The initial total generations and power losses are as follows:∑PG=2.893857p.u.,∑QG=0.980199p.u.,Ploss=0.059879, 0.0566, 0.0572538 p.u. for different cases, respectively, Qlosss=−0.064327 p.u.There are three bus voltages outside the limits in the network:V26=0.932 p.u., V29=0.94 p.u., V30=0.928 p.u.In all of these references some of the constraints and initial settings of the ORPD problem are different with the assumed values and constraints. So, to coincide the ORPD problem solved by proposed algorithm in this paper with the introduced algorithms and obtaining a reasonable comparison the constraints and initial values are changed according to the constraints used in each of these papers. In this paper the three standard IEEE 30-bus test systems with different data and initial operating conditionsare used to test the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, the various cases of IEEE 30-bus test system for ORPD problem are:•Case 1: IEEE 30-bus test system with constraints used in [14,32].Case 2: IEEE 30-bus test system with constraints used in [38,39].Case 3: IEEE 30-bus test system with constraints used in [40].The minimum and maximum limits for the control variables for different cases IEEE 30-bus test system are given in Table 1.Tables 2–4illustrate the best ORPD solutions obtained by the methods in the 30 trials for the different standard IEEE 30-bus test systems. A Comparison between simulations results with simulations results various techniques are given in references. The results show that employing MICA-IWO results in 0.048599, 0.049178 and 0.045984 p.u, active power loss for different cases, respectively, which is less than the amount obtained by other algorithms.When considering convergence characteristics for different cases, Figs. 8–10show the MICA-IWO algorithm has faster convergence to a better solution than ICA and IWO algorithms. Also, Figs. 11–13show the convergence graphs of the optimized control variables by the MICA-IWO algorithm with respect to the number of generations for the best solution for case 1. The control variables have a serious vibration at the early search phase, and then converge to a steady state at the late search phase, namely, a near optimum solution found by the MICA-IWO method. A comparison of specifications between results of the optimal settings as obtained by MICA-IWO, ICA and IWO algorithms after 30 runs are shown in Table 5.The concerned performance indexes including the best active power losses (best), the worst active power losses (worst), the standard deviation (Std), the mean active power losses (mean), average execution times (s) and the saving percent of the reactive power losses (%Psave) for IEEE 30-bus system for 30 independent runs are shown in Table 6. Judging from the presented results, it turns out that MICA-IWO algorithm has better performance and robustness than other algorithms. Table 6 indicates that MICA-IWO algorithm literally has the Best, Worst, Mean and Std. The Table 6 illustrates that an 18.84, 13.11 and 19.68% decrease in active power loss which are achieved by employing the MICA-IWO algorithm for different cases, respectively, which is the biggest reduction of active power loss compared to that obtained by the other approaches.In order to evaluate the effectiveness and performance of ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO methods in larger scale power systems, a standard IEEE 57-bus test system is introduced as the test system for phase 2 of the simulations. The IEEE 57-bus test system as shown in Fig. 14includes seven generators at the buses 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9 and 12, 80 transmission lines and 15 branches under load tap setting transformer branches. The shunt reactive power sources are considered at buses 18, 25 and 53. The bus data, the line and minimum and maximum limits of real power generations are taken from Refs [19,30,32,33] and the variable limits are given in Table 7.The system loads are given as follows:Pload=12.508p.u.,Qload=3.364p.u.The initial total generations and power losses are obtained as follows:∑PG=12.7926p.u.,∑QG=3.4545p.u.,Ploss=0.28462p.u.,Qlosss=−1.2427p.u.There are five bus voltages violate the lower limit in the base case:V25=0.938p.u.,V30=0.92p.u.,V31=0.9p.u.,V32=0.926p.u.,V33=0.924p.u.Table 8illustrates the best results obtained by ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO methods and other algorithms. In the 30 trial runs performed, MICA-IWO found the best solution. It can be seen that the active power losses obtained by the MICA-IWO method is 0.2425684 p.u. Fig. 15shows the convergence characteristics of real power loss by the number of iterations and as it can obviously be seen, the MICA-IWO obtained solution converges to high quality solutions at initial stage. A good optimization results in convergence of all control variables to a steady value. Fig. 16shows the variation of the continuous control variable, VG, with respect to the number of generations. It is observed that by 55 iterations all generator voltages settle to a steady value. Figs. 17 and 19show the variation of the discrete control variables – tap position and capacitor bank switching. It can be seen that all discrete control variables also converge to an acceptable state before 50 iterations (Fig. 18).Table 9summarizes the results of the optimal settings as obtained by different methods. Study of robustness of the proposed methodology simulation is based on the information obtained by 30 independent runs with different initial populations. For each run, the final solution and cpu time were observed and important statistical details are listed in Table 9. It can be seen that MICA-IWO algorithm is more robust than ICA and IWO. In this table we can see that a 14.7746% reduction in power loss is accomplished using the MICA-IWO approach, which is more than that obtained by the other approaches. In order to guarantee a near optimum solution for any random trial, the standard deviation for multiple runs should be very low, which is satisfied better by MICA-IWO in comparison with main ICA and IWO (Table 10).Further study of performance and effectiveness of the proposed MICA-IWO is done by employing the algorithm on a practical 118-bus system. The IEEE118-bus system data and initial operating conditions of the system are given in [19,31,39]. The minimum and maximum limits for the control variables are presented in Table 11.The IEEE 118-bus test system includes 54 generators, and nine transformers with off-nominal tap ratio, and 14 shunt VAR compensation [19,31,39].The system loads are given as follows:Pload=42.42p.u., Qload=14.38p.u.The initial total generations and power losses are as follows:∑PG=43.7536p.u.,∑QG=8.8192p.u.,Ploss=1.33357p.u.,Qlosss=−7.8511p.u.Table 12shows the control variable setting and active power losses obtained illustrates the best ORPD solutions found by the methods in 30 runs. Again, the numerical results indicate lower active power loss by MICA-IWO when compared to ICA and IWO algorithms. The numeric values of power losses obtained by the ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO methods are 1.1832197, 1.3729544 and 1.1404568 p.u., respectively.Fig. 20illustrates the convergence characteristics of transmission loss obtained by ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO. According to this figure, the MICA-IWO algorithm has faster convergence to a better solution than the ICA and IWO algorithms. The best ORPD solutions in 30 runs for ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO algorithms and results in the [19,33,37,39] are presented in Tables 13 and 14. Comparing the results given in Table 13, it is concluded that MICA-IWO has the best performance among all rival approaches. The information of Table 14 demonstrates that a power loss reduction of 14.48% is achieved using the MICA-IWO approach, which is biggest reduction of power loss than the results obtained by other algorithms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, an ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO algorithms has been offered as a novel solution for solving ORPD problem. The proposed ICA, IWO and MICA-IWO approaches have been evaluated on IEEE 30, IEEE 57, and IEEE 118-bus systems and the gathered results are compared with other methods reported in the references. The simulation results confirm the capability of MICA-IWO in more efficiently balancing global search ability and convergence speed than other algorithms. So, it is believed that the proposed MICA-IWO approach is able of swift and effective solving reactive power dispatch problem as one of the candidates.