@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using computational intelligence to forecast carbon prices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel neuro-fuzzy controller to forecast carbon emission prices was built.A closed loop mechanism to enhance the forecasts was used.Forecasting performance in terms of errors end directional prediction was examined.Trading simulation results with the Buy and Hold strategy was compared.The neuro-fuzzy controller with the closed loop outperformed the other models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ANFIS forecasting,Carbon allowance,Carbon price forecasting,Computational intelligent forecasting,Neuro-fuzzy forecasting,PATSOS forecasting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
European Union has introduced the European Trading System (ETS) as a tool for developing and implementing international treaties related to climate changes and to identify the most cost-effective methods for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, in particular carbon dioxide (CO2), which is the most substantial. Companies producing carbon emissions must effectively manage associated costs by buying or selling carbon emission futures. Viewed from this perspective, this paper provides a model for managing the risk by buying and selling carbon emission futures by implementing techniques that leverage computational intelligence. Three computational intelligence techniques are proposed to provide accurate and timely forecasts for changes in the price of carbon: a novel hybrid neuro-fuzzy controller that forms a closed-loop feedback mechanism called PATSOS; an artificial neural network (ANN) based system; an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS). Results are based on 1074 daily carbon price observations collected to comprise a useful time-series dataset and for evaluation of the proposed techniques. The extra-sample performance of the proposed techniques is calculated. Analysis results are compared with those produced by other models. Comparison studies reveal that PATSOS is the most accurate and promising methodology for predicting the price of carbon. It is stated that this paper registers a first attempt to apply a hybrid neuro-fuzzy controller to forecasting carbon prices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An organization's ability to achieve its business objectives and its financial well being can be seriously affected by environmental risk. Existing and forthcoming legislation and regulations can influence an organization's financial performance. EU-ETS was introduced in 2005 to address the problem of growing greenhouse gas emissions. ETS represents a major milestone in the EU climate policy, being the first large-scale policy aiming to reduce global emissions, and it remains the largest one to date [1,2]. As of 2013, ETS policy has been followed by 31 countries being applied to more than 11,000 factories, power stations, and other installations with a net heat excess of 20MV. These installations are collectively responsible for close to half of EU's CO2 emissions and 45% of its total greenhouse gas emissions [3].Corporations and their directors and officers are at increasing environmental risk of facing serious financial cost for not properly addressing EU environmental issues. Policies outlined by EU affect costs incurred by those companies to which the policies are applied. For example, the price of carbon emissions represents a new asset class called ‘carbon emission allowances’. Like any other commodity, carbon emission allowances may be bought and sold in international markets. Companies that generate carbon emissions through their production activities can reduce costs by strategically buying or selling emission allowances and their futures. As such, carbon prices as well as predictions thereof are of critical importance to certain companies, brokers, traders, and investors. Thus, market investors with knowledge of and access to accurate carbon price forecasting models could benefit, in principle, by following efficient trading strategies with reduced risk leading to potentially better investment decisions [4].Given the utility of an effective forecasting tool, researchers have developed several methods for forecasting outcomes associated with complex, real-world, nonlinear problems. For example, new data-driven models that incorporate bio-inspired computational algorithms have been developed. These new models are commonly referred to as computational intelligence (CI) based models and methods [5,6].In this paper, three CI based techniques, a hybrid neuro-fuzzy controller system (PATSOS), an ANFIS and an ANN, are used to forecast the short-term carbon future prices. Using well-established measures of statistical error, the accuracy of each technique is evaluated and compared to the accuracy of other researchers’ models. Further, the trading results of the PATSOS model are used to offer effective Buy and Hold strategies.The contributions of this research may be summarized as follows: (i) Development and implementation of fuzzy logic and neuro-fuzzy controllers applicable to price carbon forecasting. (ii) Development and implementation of closed-loop feedback control to account for uncertainties associated with forecasting carbon prices (dynamic behavior). (iii) Although forecasting of carbon prices has become an increasingly popular subject for practitioners and academics, there has been little empirical work to investigate the most effective models. Moreover, there has been limited research using hybrid models. This paper uses and implements such models to forecast carbon prices. (iv) This research represents a first attempt to use a hybrid ANFIS to forecast carbon prices. (v) The paper includes (for the first time) a carbon forecasting model that is evaluated by comparing the results of a simulating trading period with a Buy and Hold strategy. (vi) Reported research fundamentally extends and supplements the growing empirical literature on carbon price forecasting. Overall, this paper presents a novel tool to manage and evaluate environmental risk companies face because of EU legislation related to carbon emissions. The use of the proposed model contributes to managing the cost of carbon emissions. The proposed model is a computational model that may be tuned and used in diverse disciplines to support decision making in similar problems.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 focuses on literature review closely related to carbon price forecasting. Section 3 describes the proposed techniques. Section 4 centers on describing the used dataset and on reporting obtained results. Sections 5 and 6 discuss and concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The methodology here described allows for the proper estimation of carbon prices without the need of any presumptions. It is a model-free, easily implementable approach. The ANFIS subsystems implement a single-fitting procedure for nonlinear data that does not require the establishment of a formal model for the problem being resolved. Given this, researchers are required to have no a priori information regarding the empirical relationship between the model's input and outputs.Furthermore, the results produced by the proposed model can be easily interpreted due to the ‘if-then’ rule knowledge base, which further suggests the importance of the proposed model. In contrast, the NN is akin to a ‘black box’ given that it is unable to explain how the model infers. All the synergies incorporated into the proposed system are successfully used to capture the nonlinear relationships of carbon prices.The superior performance of the proposed model is clearly support the results of the application of the model to solve other problems. For example, past literature has shown PATSOS to have superior forecasting accuracy than other models in stock market forecasting [50]. Despite requiring 6.60min to arrive at the simulation's results, the PATSOS is relatively simple to implement and the benefits associated with its accuracy supersede the small disadvantage of its computation time.In general sense, this study presents a tool to manage the carbon emissions problem that a company faces due to the EU environmental policies. It narrows the gap between academics and practitioners by providing an efficient and profitable tool for end users that can be leveraged to manage the cost incurred by international treaties related to environmental risk and climate change.Future attempts to improve the PATSOS model should focus on the development of a friendlier user interface to increase the ease with which the model can be utilized by future users. Moreover, the PATSOS model could be made available online to users. Also, future work can consider comparisons with other types of models such as vector mechanic, fractal analysis, etc.In PATSOS controller, an off-line learning technique is applied. Turning to online learning can help researchers to identify ways in which they can cope with the time-variant dynamics of carbon prices. Because the price of carbon is time-variant, researchers should use in future offline learning to identify the suitable controller, and then use online learning to refine the controller they identify.Additional future work will be focused on the influences of chances in industry and in statistical indicators for predicting prices of carbon emission allowances [11]. Also, the implementation of K-fold cross validation can be examined in order to explore if it influences the predictability of the proposed models.According to rules stipulated by the EU ETS, companies will be penalized 100€ for every ton of carbon emissions over their allowance. Given this, future research may benefit from improving the accuracy of the PATSOS trading results by accounting for penalty costs and the costs of having to deliver any lacking carbon allowances.