@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A stochastic evolutionary coalition game model of secure and dependable virtual service in Sensor-Cloud

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Formulate a novel SECG defense model against attackers for VSSNs.Propose a mechanism of coalition formation based on Barabási–Albert(BA) model.Expand the technique of Markov decision process (MDP) for the SECG.Obtain the optimal defense strategies using the minimax-Q learning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Security mechanism,Evolutionary coalition game,Stochastic evolutionary coalition game,Sensor-Cloud,Virtual networks,Reinforcement learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Various intrusion detection systems (IDSs) have been proposed in recent years to provide safe and reliable services in cloud computing. However, few of them have considered the existence of service attackers who can adapt their attacking strategies to the topology-varying environment and service providers’ strategies. In this paper, we investigate the security and dependability mechanism when service providers are facing service attacks of software and hardware, and propose a stochastic evolutionary coalition game (SECG) framework for secure and reliable defenses in virtual sensor services. At each stage of the game, service providers observe the resource availability, the quality of service (QoS), and the attackers’ strategies from cloud monitoring systems (CMSs) and IDSs. According to these observations, they will decide how evolutionary coalitions should be dynamically formed for reliable virtual-sensor-service composites to deliver data and how to adaptively defend in the face of uncertain attack strategies. Using the evolutionary coalition game, virtual-sensor-service nodes can form a reliable service composite by a reliability update function. With the Markov chain constructed, virtual-sensor-service nodes can gradually learn the optimal strategy and evolutionary coalition structure through the minimax-Q learning, which maximizes the expected sum of discounted payoffs defined as QoS for virtual-sensor-service composites. The proposed SECG strategy in the virtual-sensor-service attack-defense game is shown to achieve much better performance than strategies obtained from the evolutionary coalition game or stochastic game, which only maximizes each stage's payoff and optimizes a defense strategy of stochastic evolutionary, since it successfully accommodates the environment dynamics and the strategic behavior of the service attackers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sensor-Cloud consists of a large number of sensing devices called sensor nodes, cloud gateways and virtual sensor services. It is a heterogeneous computing environment in which physical sensor nodes are used by the virtualization of sensing services. This virtualization technology significantly expands the boundary of the service capabilities to manage physical sensors and to facilitate a variety of tasks [1]. The variety of multi-sensing activities for multiple missions can be simultaneously performed via the cloud, which greatly enhances the usability of devices and networks. We can use Sensor-Cloud infrastructure to many real-life applications like environmental monitoring, disaster monitoring, telemtry, agriculture, irrigation, healthcare, and so forth [2,3]. However, with increasing applications of the Sensor-Cloud, security issues in Sensor-Cloud computing systems become serious.Physical sensor nodes are interconnected through wireless links to perform distributed sensing tasks and are deployed in unattended environments where sensor nodes are prone to physical attacks. Virtual sensor nodes are interconnected through virtual links and are deployed in virtual machines (VMs) where virtual sensor nodes are prone to cyber attacks. These attacks of virtual-sensor-service networks (VSSNs) in Sensor-Cloud is considered as the top security threat [4–7], in which attackers can exploit vulnerabilities in clouds and utilize cloud system resources to deploy attacks. These newer threats and attacks include three dimensions: secure pre-deployment, secure pre-processing, and secure run-time. The intrusion detection and monitoring technology in cloud [8,9] has been proposed as a promising paradigm to solve the defense between the VM capacity (e.g. CPU, memory, bandwidth resources) and the increasing resources attack for virtual sensor services. Exploiting the intrusion detection and monitoring technology, virtual sensor nodes can sense the capacity of VM to determine which portion of the capacity is available, and select the best available virtual sensor nodes to compose services by forming coalitions, coordinate the capacity of access between the private cloud and the public cloud, and vacate the resource when a virtual sensor node reclaims the capacity usage.In order to utilize resource efficiently in cloud computing, various resource management approaches have been proposed in the literature, such as the resource management based on a mixed-integer nonlinear optimization [10], whose goal is to devise resource allocation strategies for virtualized cloud environments that satisfy performance and availability guarantees as well as minimize energy costs in very large cloud service centers. The network bandwidth allocation based on a rigorous cooperative game-theoretic approach is proposed [11], which designs a distributed algorithm to achieve efficient and fair bandwidth allocation corresponding to the Nash bargaining solution (NBS). The distributed resource allocation based on a cooperative game in horizontal dynamic cloud federation platform, which uses price-based resource allocation strategy and presents both centralized and distributed algorithms to find optimal solutions for maximizing the utility of the cooperative resource allocation game [12].Although these proposed approaches have been shown that are able to improve the resources utilization or bring gains for data center networks, most of them only aim at maximizing the resources utilization in a cooperative way in which all users are coordinated by the network controller. However, such a resource allocation scheme may not be valid when the virtual sensor services are in a hostile environment where there exists malicious attackers whose objective is to cause damage to virtual-sensor-service nodes and prevent the service from being composted efficiently for QoS. Therefore, how to secure capacity sharing is of critical importance to virtual sensor cloud services that are deployed widely.In this paper, first we try to define an attack model for VSSNs in Sensor-Cloud. The data communications scenario based on coalition formation is adopted where carry-and-forward-based cooperative service delivery is used to send data among virtual sensor nodes. Malicious attackers can launch various resources attack activities in virtual coalitions, which makes many virtual sensor nodes become unreliable. Virtual sensor nodes can estimate the type of a particular node whether it is reliable enough or unreliable by maintaining its own reliability based on its experience of interactions with other nodes. Second, we develop an adaptive defense framework based on self-learning for VSSNs. In this framework, the decision problem of multiple attackers and defenders can be modeled as a stochastic game. The interactions between attackers and defenders can be modeled as a Markov decision process. Finally, we propose a SECG model of secure and dependable virtual services in Sensor-Cloud for efficiently protecting VSSNs against capacity attacks. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:(1) We formulate a SECG model to obtain optimal strategies to defend attackers. The optimization model takes variations uncertainties of the attackers’ strategy, the resources availability, and QoS into account. In addition, to reduce formation times of cooperation coalitions, a method of the evolutionary coalition formation based on Barabási–Albert (BA) model is applied.(2) We leverage and expand the technique of Markov decision process (MDP) by considering the interactive cooperation in coalitions and the stochastic strategies selection game between attackers and defenders.(3) We analyze the cooperation coalitions formation and the strategies optimization among virtual sensor nodes. The dynamics of cooperation coalitions formation is analyzed by proposing a reliability update mechanism. Virtual-sensor-service nodes can obtain the optimal strategies using the minimax-Q learning and the distributed strategic learning algorithm combing the stochastic game with the evolutionary coalition game.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: we review the related work in Section 2. The adaptive defense framework based on self-learning for VSSNs is discussed in Section 3. We present a SECG scheme in Section 4. The optimization and learning strategy of the stochastic game and evolutionary coalition game are discussed in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Analytical simulation results are given in Section 7, followed by a conclusion and future work in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have studied the design of defense mechanism in virtual sensor service networks. Considering the Sensor-Cloud computing environment is time-varying, and the attackers are able to use an adaptive strategy, we model the interactions between the coalition players and the attackers as a stochastic evolutionary coalition game. The coalition players not only adapt their strategy according to their observation about the capacity availability, QoS and the attackers’ actions, but also rationally form coalitions to maximize the individual's payoff according to their preference. Simulation results show that the optimal strategy obtained from the Q-learning, the strategy learning and the payoff estimation in the stochastic evolutionary coalition game can achieve much better performance in terms of the average payoff, the sum of discounted payoff and the network traffic, compared to the SG and ECG strategy which only maximizes the payoff at each stage without considering the evolutionary coalition and the dynamic defense strategy. The proposed stochastic evolutionary coalition game framework can be generalized to model various defense scenarios in other cloud computing service networks.