@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Smart control techniques for design of TCSC and PSS for stability enhancement of dynamical power system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Smart control techniques used for design of power system stabilizer and thyristor control series capacitor.Individual application of PSS and simultaneous application of PSS and TCSC to dynamical power system.Nonlinear simulation has been carried out.Effectiveness of LMNN and ANFIS based TCSC and PSS analyzed with different loading and disturbances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Levenberg–Marquardt neural network,Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system,Power system stabilizer,Thyristor control series capacitor,Power system dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper deals with the simultaneous application of thyristor controlled series capacitor based damping controller and power system stabilizer for stability improvement of dynamic power system. The adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system and Levenberg–Marquardt artificial neural network algorithm are used to develop the control strategy for thyristor controlled series capacitor based damping controller and power system stabilizer. The power system stabilizer generates appropriate supplementary control signal to an excitation system of synchronous generator to damp the frequency oscillations and improves the performance of the power system dynamic. The performance of power system affected due to the system configuration and load variation. In order to achieve the appreciable damping, the series capacitor is suggested in addition to the power system stabilizer. Nonlinear simulations of single machine infinite bus system are carried out using the individual application of power system stabilizer and simultaneous application of power system stabilizer and thyristor controlled series capacitor. The comparison analysis between conventional and smart control strategies based controllers is demonstrated. Single machine infinite bus system is tested under various operating conditions and disturbances to show the effectiveness of proposed control schemes.rotor angle in radianrotor base speed, rad/sgenerator slip, p.u.initial operating slip, p.u.inertia constantdamping coefficientmechanical power input, p.u.electrical power output, p.u.open circuit d-axis time constant, sopen circuit q-axis time constant, sq-axis transient voltaged-axis transient voltaged-axis synchronous reactance, p.u.d-axis transient reactance, p.u.q-axis synchronous reactance, p.u.q-axis transient reactance, p.u.d-axis currentq-axis currentgenerator terminal voltageinfinite bus voltage

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Small signal stability and transient stability are key issues for satisfactory operation of complex and dynamic power system. The stability of the power system is affected due to disturbances like sudden change in load, loss of a generator and widespread use of high gain fast acting excitation system. The instability and low frequency oscillations limit the power transmission capability and cause the eventual breakdown of the entire power system under various operating conditions and configurations.Applications of power system stabilizers (PSSs) are mandatory in power system to damp out rotor oscillations of generators. PSS provides an additional input control signal for the excitation system of the generator, which produces a torque component, is in phase with the rotor speed deviation. Conventional power system stabilizers are designed very extensively using phase compensation techniques, and their parameters have been calculated based on the linearized model of the power system [1,2]. Improvement in small signal oscillations and in transient stability of the power system using power system stabilizer has been discussed in [1–6]. Two-stage phase compensator with washout filter and gain is the most common structure of PSS [1,2,6], which are used for power system analysis in normal operating conditions.The artificial neural network and adaptive neural network based power system stabilizer have been proposed in [7–9]. Computational optimization techniques [9–16] such as genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization and simulated annealing can be used for the parameter optimization of the conventional and proportional integral derivative (PID) -PSS. The PSS may not produce satisfactory damping at some operating conditions and disturbances, hence other effective alternatives are to be required in addition to the PSS. During the last decade, a number of the Flexible Alternating Current Transmission System (FACTS) control devices are proposed and which are implemented in real power system [17]. Nowadays, the FACTS controller plays very important role in the deregulated electric market [18,19]. One of the most important devices of series FACTS controller is thyristor controlled series capacitor (TCSC) to improve the performance and loadability of the high voltage transmission network. The nonlinear H∞ controller and LQR/LTR controllers based TCSC as reported [20,21], while the design of TCSC using fuzzy logic, neural network and search algorithms have been discussed in [22–26]. The PSS and TCSC operate in a coordinated manner to enhance the performance of the dynamic power system. Coordinated design of PSS and TCSC using different computational intelligent techniques has been mentioned in literatures [27–30].The third order dynamic model and Philips-Heffron linear model of the synchronous machine is most preferable for a researcher for stability analysis of power system. This model only takes into account the generator main field winding. In this paper, the fourth-order dynamic power system model is considered for in depth analysis of single machine infinite bus system, which model includes both the generator main field winding and the damper winding on q-axis. This paper utilizes PSS and TCSC simultaneously for stability improvement of dynamic power system. The methods are developed using two intelligent techniques, namely adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system based (ANFIS) control algorithm and Levenberg-Marquardt Artificial Neural Network algorithm (LMNN).The performance of the power system is evaluated through simultaneous application of ANFIS and ANN based TCSC and PSS, and independent application of intelligent PSS and conventional power system stabilizer (CPSS).Fig. 1shows the single machine infinite bus system with generator connected PSS and transmission line equipped TCSC. Where Vtand Ebare generator terminal voltage and infinite bus voltage respectively. Xeand Xtare transmission line reactance and transformer reactance respectively.The synchronous generator is represented by nonlinear equations which includes both the generator main field winding and the damper winding on q-axis. Mathematical model of the power system is described in [6] and the set of nonlinear equations are given in Appendix I.The output response of the PSS is shown as a feedback element from generator speed [2,6] and is described by Eq. (1)(1)Vpss(s)=KpssT0s1+T0s(1+T1s)(1+T2s)(1+T3s)(1+T4s)ωm(s)The first term in Eq. (1) is a reset term, which is used to washout the compensation effect after the time lag T0. The second term of Vpss(s) is a lead compensation pair, that can be used to improve the phase lag through the system from Vrefto generator shaft speed ωm.Thyristor controlled series capacitor provides the fast, continuous and dynamic control of power by varying the apparent reactance of the specific transmission line. The TCSC can enhance the oscillatory stability by damping of oscillations and can improve the dynamic and transient stability of the power system. Fig. 2illustrates the one line diagram of the basic module of the TCSC. A TCSC is a parallel combination of a fixed series capacitor and a variable thyristor controlled reactor.The TCSC can be modelled as the variable reactance. The TCSC has two operating ranges around its internal circuit resonance. One is αclim≤α≤180°, where XTCSC(α) is capacitive, and the other is the 90°≤α≤αLlim, where XTCSC(α) is inductive. The internal circuit resonance depends on the ratio of inductor and capacitor reactance of TCSC. The steady state [31] relationship between firing angle ∝ and the reactance XTCSCcan be described by Eq. (2).(2)XTCSC(α)=XC−XC2(XC−XL)(μ+sinμ)π+4XC2(XC−XL)cos2(μ/2)(p2−1)ptanpμ2−tanμ2πwhere, XCis reactance of the fixed capacitor, XLis inductive reactance of inductor L connected in parallel capacitor, compensation ratiop=XC/XLand conduction angle of TCSC is μ=π−a.The model of the TCSC for the stability study has shown in Fig. 3, which model is based on the variation of the reactance of the TCSC in the capacitive region [31,32]. Fig. 3 shows, Xmodis the stability control modulation reactance value, which is determined by the stability control loop, while Xrefdenotes the TCSC steady state reactance or set point, whose value is calculated from power flow or steady state control loop. The sum of these two values produces Xtotal, which is the final reactance offered by the external control block. This signal is passed through first order lag transfer function and produced the final value of the reactance XTCSC(α).The time constant TTCSC presents the natural response of the device and the delay introduced by the internal control. The limits are given by XCmin=XTCSC(180°)=XCand XCmax=XTCSC(αCmin). Here, the controller is assumed to operate in the capacitive region only, it means αmin<αr, where αrcorrespond to the resonant point.The dynamic equation of the TCSC reactance can be expressed as Eq. (3).(3)X˙TCSC(α)=1TTCSC(Xmod+Xref)−XTCSC(α)The mathematical model of the stability control loop can be described by Eq. (4).(4)Xmod=∫0tX1Tc3Tc2Tc4−Tc1Tc3Tc2Tc4Tw+X21Tc4−1Tc2+Tc1Tc2Kcω˙m−1Tc4Xmodwhere X1 is the output of the washout filter, X2 and Xmodare output of the first stage and second stage of the phase compensator respectively, Twand Kcare time constant and gain of the washout filter respectively. Tc1, Tc2, Tc3 and Tc4 are time constant of the phase compensator, which provides the appropriate phase-lead characteristics to compensate for the phase lag between input and output signals.ω˙mis derivation of the rotor speed, which can be calculated from synchronous machine equations [6].Combining the learning power of neural network with knowledge representation of fuzzy logic gives a Neuro-Fuzzy system. It gives the advantage of neural networks as well as fuzzy logic system and it removes the individual disadvantages by combining them with the common features. Fuzzy logic has tolerance for imprecision of data, while neural networks have tolerance for noisy data.It is assumed that the fuzzy inference system under consideration has two inputs x and y and one output z. For a first order Sugeno fuzzy model, a common rule set with two fuzzy if–then rules is the following.Rule 1: If x is A1 and y is B1, then f1=p1x+q1y+r1Rule 2: If x is A2 and y is B2, then f2=p2x+q2y+r2The reasoning mechanism for the Sugeno model [33,34] and the corresponding equivalent ANFIS architecture have shown in Figs. 4 and 5respectively.The following are steps for designing of ANFIS based PSS and TCSC1.To generate the input data pattern and corresponding the target data pattern.To develop the fuzzy inference system (FIS).To select the number and type of the membership functions.Application of rules extracted algorithm to initialize the rules of FIS.To train the FIS using of learning algorithm such as hybrid learning or back propagation learning algorithm.Testing of FIS through testing data.If desired solution is achieved, then stop training otherwise to change the fuzzy membership functions, types of fuzzy membership function, change the rules extracted algorithm, FIS learning algorithm, no. of epochs, error tolerance and repeat the algorithm from the Step 2 to 6.To implement of the ANFIS based controller in real system and to compute the output of the system.The conventional power system stabilizer (CPSS) is replaced by the ANFIS based PSS. The mathematical model of the CPSS is used to generate the sample data for the training of ANFIS based PSS. The Takagi-Sugeno FIS is used for designing of ANFIS based PSS. Sugeno has high computational efficiency and it works well with optimization and adaptive techniques [35]. The network has trained using 2000 sample data, which are generated under the consideration of the different operating conditions and dynamic behaviour of the power system. The two inputs and one output are used for the training of ANFIS. The speed ωm(t) and change in speed dωm(t)/dt are selected as dynamic inputs [1–6] and corresponding Vpssis selected as output value of the ANFIS based PSS. Fig. 6represents the fuzzy logic controller (FLC) based PSS with inputs and output.Four types of membership functions are selected such that gbell, gauss, gauss2 and dsig for inputs and output variables of ANFIS-PSS. The general rule for selection of type of MFS is to produce a satisfactory response of the system with designed ANFIS controller at a minimum computational time with minimum error as well as less training parameters. Numbers of membership functions are selected such that less numbers of membership functions have produced a satisfactory response of the system. Consequently, memory utilization should be reduced by ANFIS controller and obtained a quick response in less computational time. Table 1shows the generating mean square error of ANFIS-PSS structure with different membership functions. Inputs and output variables of ANFIS-PSS controller are designed using different number of rules. The triangle and trapezoidal membership functions are not suitable for ANFIS structure, which are used to design of fuzzy logic controller based system. 3, 4, 5 and 7 variables are selected for two inputs; hence corresponding 9, 16, 25 and 49 fuzzy rules are developed. Forty nine rules based structure of the ANFIS-PSS controller is not preferable as it takes high computational time for the execution compared to the other ANFIS structures. The best ANFIS-PSS structure is selected after testing with the real power system. The gbell type four membership functions are selected and resulting total sixteen rules are developed for inputs and output variables of ANFIS structure.Speed signal range and change in speed signal range are selected between −0.002527 and 0.003344 and −0.06441 to 0.1094 respectively for definitions of the input membership functions. The output membership functions have varied between −0.09217 and 0.1112. Fig. 7represents the ANFIS–PSS structure with inputs and output. Fig. 8(a) and (b) represent gbell type four linguistic membership functions for speed and change in speed. The decision surface viewer of inputs and output of the PSS has shown in Fig. 9.The grid partition method is used for initialization of fuzzy inference system (FIS) and then the initial rules are extracted. The hybrid learning algorithm is used for training of FIS parameters after the application of the grid partition method. The hybrid algorithm combines the least square and backpropagation gradient descent algorithm. In the hybrid algorithm, as shown in Fig. 5, the node outputs go forward until layer 4 and consequence parameters are estimated by least-squares method. In the backward phase, the error signals propagate backward and the gradient descent algorithm iteratively learns the parameters. The training is continued until the error becomes constant. 10 numbers of epochs are selected for training of ANFIS based PSS. The numbers of epochs are selected such that expected goal is to be achieved with a minimum value of error. After the 10 number of iterations, the error between actual output and ANFIS output would be minimized. The training should be completed, when the constant error reaches at value 0.00248381.The stability control loop of the TCSC is designed by Sugeno ANFIS–TCSC. The stability control loop is used for generation of the training data pair of ANFIS-TCSC controller under consideration of plant dynamics. The speed ωm(t) and change in speed dωm(t)/dt are considered as inputs [1–6] for ANFIS-TCSC, and corresponding Xmodis selected as output for ANFIS–TCSC. The speed and acceleration are selected as input signals of ANFIS–TCSC [1–6], so communication delay is taken into consideration to compensate the time lag between generator signal and transmission side input of the TCSC. The first order transfer function with 0.5s delay is used as communication time delay for generation of input and output data. The comparative analysis between types of MFs with different number of rules is illustrated in Table 2. Table 2 shows the generating means square error of ANFIS–TCSC structure with different membership functions. Three types of membership functions are selected with different number of rules for designing of inputs and output variables of ANFIS-TCSC controller. It is experimentally verified that 49 rules based structure of the ANFIS controller is not preferable as it takes high computational time compared to the other ANFIS structures. Type of MFs, number of MFs and number of FIS rules is selected such that generating error should be minimized. The best ANFIS-TCSC structure is selected after the testing with the real power system. The TCSC model as per Fig. 3 has implemented in power system with ANFIS based stability control loop.The gauss type five membership functions are selected and total 25 rules are designed for inputs and output. Speed signal range is taken between −0.003313 and 0.003808 and change in speed signal is taken between −0.05169 and 0.1172 for defining of the inputs membership functions. The range of output membership functions is varied between −0.2143 and 0.234. After 10 numbers of iterations, the mean square error between actual output and ANFIS output would be minimized. Fig. 10represents the structure of ANFIS based TCSC controller. Fig. 11(a) and (b) represent membership functions of speed and change in speed for the ANFIS-TCSC controller respectively. Fig. 12shows the decision surface viewer of ANFIS-TCSC controller. The ANFIS training would be continued till the desired mean square error becomes constant. The training would be completed when the constant error reaches at value 0.000805447.The artificial neural network is one of the most interesting topics in the control community because which has ability to treat many problems, which problems cannot be handled by traditional analytical techniques. There are different approaches to train the neural network for determining an appropriate set of weights. The feedforward multilayer neural network is the most common neural network architecture for obtaining the solution of control problem. The back propagation algorithm is widely used for training of feedforward multilayer neural network. The standard back propagation learning algorithm has several limitations. Most of all have a long and slow training process, when the plant is non-linear and parameters of the plant are dynamics. The rate of convergence is seriously affected by the initial weights of NN and the learning rate of NN training.In this paper, the learning rule is common to a standard nonlinear optimization or least-squares technique. The weights and bias of NN are adjusted at the end of the iteration and the sums of squares of all errors are used as the objective function for the optimization problem. In this problem derivative based optimization Levenberg-Marquardt method is used for solving the nonlinear least squares problem. The Gauss Newton Levenberg-Marquardt method works well in practice and has become standard of nonlinear least squares routines [34,36].The following are steps for designing of LMNN based PSS and TCSC:1.To generate the input data pattern and corresponding the target data pattern.To develop the feedforward neural net.Training of the neural network using Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm.To update the NN parameters such as weights and bias using LMNN algorithm.Calculation of mean square error between actual output and targeted output.To compute the output of the NN network.If desired value of error is achieved, then stop the iteration of algorithm otherwise changes of NN parameters such as the NN goal, learning rate, no. of epochs and then repeat the algorithm from the Step 4.The conventional power system stabilizer is replaced by the ANN based PSS. Genetic algorithms based CPSS [37] is used for the generation of the training data for the artificial neural network. The network has trained using 8000 sample data, which are generated under the consideration of the different operating conditions and dynamic behaviour of the power system. Speed signals ωm(t), ωm(t−1), ωm(t−2), ωm(t−3) are selected as dynamic inputs u(t) [1–6] and corresponding Vpssis selected as output y(t) for training of feedforward neural network whileyˆ(t)is targeted output of the neural network.Table 3presents the mean square error (mse), number of iteration and training time (seconds) with different learning rate and different combination of neurons in the input layer, hidden layer and output layer. The different combinations of neurons are selected and to train the neural network such that the error should be reduced with less number of iterations and less amount of time. Each trained neural network has tested with the real power system and performance is analyzed. The dynamic data are used for training of neural network so large numbers of neurons are required for satisfactory performance of the system. Hence the feedforward network is developed with 50 neurons in the input layer, 30 neurons in hidden layer and 1 neuron in the output layer with hyperbolic tangent sigmoidal transfer function in the first layer and hidden layer, and linear transfer functions in the output layer. Higher learning rate neural network has produced better response corresponding [50301] neurons in different layers.During the training of ANN, the weights and bias of the network are adjusted such that the error between the actual output and the targeted output should be minimized and desired goal is achieved through Levenberg–Marquardt derivatives-based optimization. The optimization function can be represented by Eq. (5).(5)Ji(k)=12∑[y(t)−yˆ(t)]2The relation between training data versus output data and targeted data has shown in Fig. 13.The trained LMNN–PSS has produced mse 3.3377×10−5 in 24s with 0.5 learning ratings. The training is performed for 5 numbers of epochs through appropriate adjustment of weights and bias of neural network.The stability control loop of the TCSC is trained by artificial neural network. The gain and time constant of TCSC controller are tuned by genetic algorithms. TCSC model is used to generate the training data for the NN under the different operating conditions and dynamic behaviour of the power system. Selection procedure of number of neurons in different layers for LMNN-TCSC controller is similar to the ANN-PSS. Speed signals ωm(t), ωm(t−1), ωm(t−2), ωm(t−3) are selected as dynamic inputs u1(t) [1–6] and Xmodis selected as corresponding output y1(t) for training of feedforward neural network whileyˆ1(t)is targeted value of the neural network. The first order transfer function with 0.5s delay is used as communication time delay. The feedforward network is developed with 30 neurons in the first layer, 10 neurons in hidden layer and 1 neuron in the output layer with hyperbolic tangent sigmoidal transfer function in the first layer and hidden layer, and linear transfer functions in the output layer. The optimization function can be represented by Eq. (6).(6)Ji(k)=12∑[y1(t)−yˆ1(t)]2The mean square error reaches at value 0.00002947×10−5 after the 13 numbers of iteration through appropriate adjustment of weights and bias of a neural network using Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
