@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Commodity or competitive advantage? Analysis of the ERP value paradox

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Organizational resources play a more important role than IT resources in generating business integration capability.Neither IT nor organizational resources directly provide firms with competitive advantage.Business integration capability plays a mediating role through which business achieves competitive advantage.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
B2B supply chain integration,Enterprise resources planning (ERP),Resource based view (RBV),IT value paradox,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A true e-business enabled firm needs the support from a well-tuned enterprise resource planning (ERP) system for providing real time data. However, many companies complain that after their huge investments in ERP systems, they found the ERP systems do not bring them new orders, new profits, or competitive advantage as ERP vendors claim. Academic studies also found mixed results regarding ERP’s payoff. In line with resource based view (RBV), the study proposes an integrated model to shed light on the ERP value paradox. We try to answer “With what organizational resources and by building what firm specific capabilities, the investment in ERP systems may bring firms competitive advantage”. Using a sample of 150 ERP and e-business adopters in the US, we found that (1) organizational resources such as managerial skills and organizational change management play a more important role than IT resources (ERP, e-Business technologies) in generating business integration capability. (2) However, neither IT resources nor organizational resources directly provide firms with competitive advantage. Instead, business integration capability built from the two resources plays a mediating role through which business achieves competitive advantage.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Enterprise resources planning (ERP) systems are large commercial software packages that digitalize business processes (Banker et al. 2006, Davenport 1998, Markus 2000). ERP systems codify and organize an enterprise’s business data into an integrated database, and transform the data into useful information that supports business decisions (Norris et al. 2000). The ability to access information from various parts of an organization helps firms streamline their business processes and reduce inefficiencies (Swaminathan and Tayur 2003). A well-tuned ERP system is also a critical backend solution that supports frontend e-business functionalities (Norris et al. 2000). A true e-business, whose supply, production, logistics, and distribution networks all need to be digitally enabled with a tight linkage from raw materials to end customers (Kauffman and Walden 2001), needs a well-functioning ERP system to provide accurate information in real time. Without seamless internal processes and data provided by ERP systems, e-business may simply be flashy web pages with no real substance behind them (Norris et al. 2000). Many researchers have pointed out that while buzzwords like “B2B,” “B2C,” and just about anything preceded by an “e-” seem to have taken center stage, yet ironically, each of these new terms at its most basic level represents an extension of an ERP system to customers and suppliers (Jacobs and Bendoly 2003).In theory, an integrated ERP system that allows information to transparently flow inside and outside an enterprise would benefit a firm’s supply chain efficiency (Lee et al. 1997, Rai et al. 2006). ERP vendors, therefore, often claim that ERP systems can bring firms operational excellence and competitive advantage. However, in practice, it is often observed that while firms spend hundreds of millions of dollars implementing ERP systems, not all of them find the systems beneficial to their bottom line (Banker et al. 2006, Seddon et al. 2010). Some firms complain the expensive ERP systems do not result in new orders, increased profits, or competitive advantage as the vendors claim. Even worse, a few of firms experienced disastrous outcomes resulting from failed ERP implementations (Barker and Frolick 2003, Zhu et al. 2010). Academic studies also found mixed results regarding ERP’s payoff. Some studies found that ERP system implementation has positive associations with firm performance, including better productivity (Aral et al. 2005, 2006; Hitt et al. 2002), greater shareholder returns (Ranganathan and Brown 2006), decreased lead-time (Cotteleer and Bendoly 2006), and improved information quality and coordination (Gattiker and Goodhue 2005), while others did not find similar evidence. For example, Poston and Grabki (2000) reported that ERP adoption has no association with firms’ income changes. Hitt et al.’s (2002) study found that ERP adoption has a significant negative relationship with Return on Equity (ROE), while Aral et al. (2005, 2006) found that ERP implementation has no association with Return on Assets (ROA), ROE, and profit margin. Seddon (2005) argues that, although ERP may be critical to a firm’s operation, it is an unlikely source of competitive advantage. He believes that ERP systems have become a commodity and the benefits gained from ERP systems are competed away in the long term. Thus, there is an ERP value paradox: Is ERP merely a commodity to firms’ e-business operations or is it a resource that can bring firms competitive advantage?In order to address the ERP value paradox, we draw from two streams of literature to ascertain what has been done in the area and build our knowledge foundation. The first stream is IT value literature that focuses on ERP systems. IT value literature provides evidence that the mere adoption of IT systems does not by itself guarantee competitive advantage. Rather, it requires complementary organizational resources to develop effective capabilities for competitive advantage (Wade and Hulland 2004). However, while the importance of building these resources/capabilities has become evident, the traditional IT business value literature that applies a production function approach does not clearly explain what these resources/capabilities are (Mata et al. 1995, Melville et al. 2004). Given this, we examined the Resource-Based View (RBV) which provides a framework for identifying valuable resources and capabilities and can be used to analyze whether IT resources (such as an ERP system) and organizational capabilities might be associated with competitive advantage (Barney 1991). RBV also proposes two rent-creation mechanisms—“resource picking” and “capability building”—that could guide us to understand how ERP and other resources can generate business value (Makadok 2001).The purpose of this study, therefore, is to shed light on the ERP value paradox. In line with the Resource Based View, we propose an integrated model to investigate with what organizational resources and by building what firm-specific capabilities, the investment in ERP systems can generate competitive advantage. In our study based on RBV, it was found that business integration capability—built from ERP, e-Business technologies, and organizational resources—represents an important mechanism explaining how resources are picked, combined, and transformed into a differential competitive advantage. By building the firm-specific business integration capability, ERP systems will not be merely a commodity but will bring firms competitive advantage.In this section, we first review existing ERP studies that build our knowledge: (1) IT value literature that focuses on ERP systems and (2) critical success factors of ERP. We then draw from the Resource Based View (RBV) to develop a theoretical framework to examine ERP’s effects on firm performance.One stream of existing research investigating ERP investments and firm performance basically follows the “IT value paradox” paradigm—use a production function to examine the relationships between IT investments and productivity (Aral et al. 2005, 2006; Hitt et al. 2002). The IT productivity research has produced mixed findings and contradictory results (see Dedrick et al. 2003, for a review) and, similarly, current ERP value studies also show inconsistent findings. For example, while ERP implementation has a positive relationship with productivity measures (value added) and market value (Tobin’s q) (Hitt et al. 2002), it has no effect on profitability measures (ROA, ROE, and profit margin) (Aral et al. 2005, 2006). Furthermore, while some studies found that ERP adoption was related to decreased lead-time (Cotteleer and Bendoly 2006), improved information quality and coordination (Gattiker and Goodhue 2005), better process efficiency, effectiveness, and flexibility (Karimi et al. 2007a, b), others reported that ERP adoption has no association with firms’ income changes (Poston and Grabki, 2000). Huge performance differences are often observed across ERP adopters, even for companies that operate in the same industry and use systems from the same vendor (Seddon et al. 2010). Trying to find reasons to explain the mixed findings, IS researchers have started to argue that the IT productivity function approach, despite its analytical rigor, does not include organizational and environmental factors, thereby overlooking the impact of firm-specific features that can shape the impact of IT on firm performance (Melville et al. 2004).The second stream of current ERP literature examines ERP’s critical success factors. This research aims to find key success factors that have enabled some firms to capture benefits from their ERP systems while others have abandoned their ERP systems due to failed implementation (Liang et al. 2007, Seddon et al. 2010, Stratman and Roth 2002). These types of studies focus on many factors that are theoretically important organizational aptitudes reflecting a competence in the use of information systems (O’Leary 2000, Umble et al. 2003). For instance, one of the first studies addressing ERP CSFs was carried out by Holland et al. (1999), which proposed a CSF model with strategic and tactical factors. Somers and Nelson (2001) then identified a list of 22 CSFs associated with ERP implementation. Among them, top management support, project team competence, interdepartmental cooperation, and clear goals and objectives, were found to be highly important. Nah et al. (2001) attempted to group related sub-factors to form 11 CSFs and showed that top management support, project champion, ERP teamwork, and change management were the most critical to successful implementation of ERP. Since numerous ERP CSF studies (Akkermans and Helden 2002, Nah et al. 2001, Nah and Dellgado 2006, Remus 2007, Umble et al. 2003) based on different samples and research settings have identified a variety of CSFs yet there is no general agreement, Finney and Corbett (2007) conducted a comprehensive literature review of 45 ERP CSF articles. They found that top management support, change management, business process reengineering (BPR) and software configuration, training, and project team are the most frequently cited CSFs in the literature, and concluded the five most cited CSFs are significantly more important than others. Similarly, through literature reviews, Ngai et al. (2008) and Françoise et al. (2009) identified 18 and 13 CSFs, respectively, and indicated that top management support, BPR, change management, and training were most frequently cited as critical factors.However, while many of these studies used case analysis, descriptive analysis, or factor analysis to provide initial empirical scales to measure the theoretical constructs (Moohebat et al. 2011, Snider et al. 2009), few of them examined these constructs in a model to understand their impact on final firm performance. In other words, these organizational factors can be prerequisites for successful “installation” of information systems, but are not necessarily related to improvements in firm performance. Furthermore, none of the previous studies investigated the role of an ERP system linked with the organizational factors in an integrated model to examine the inter-relationships and their relative impact on business performance. Therefore, this study aims to address this gap with a focus on the Resource-Based View.A potential framework for augmenting the theoretical basis of IT value is the Resource-Based View of the firm, which combines the rationale of economics with a management perspective (Melville et al. 2004). The joint perspective provides a robust framework to link the ERP value literature and the ERP CSF literature in one model.RBV argues that firms possess resources; a subset of which enables them to achieve competitive advantage, and a further subset leads to superior long-term performance (Barney 1991, Grant 1991, Wade and Hulland 2004). Resources and capabilities are two terms that have been frequently used in RBV theory. This paper distinguishes between the two based on definitions in the RBV literature (Amit and Schoemaker 1993, Grant 1991, Makadok 2001, Wade and Hulland 2004). Resources are inputs into a firm’s production processes, such as capital, equipment, information systems, and individual employees (Amit and Schoemaker 1993, Grant 1991). Capabilities, on the other hand, refer to a firm’s capacity to deploy resources, usually in combination, using organizational processes (Amit and Schoemaker 1993, Grant 1991, Makadok 2001). Through continued use, capabilities become more difficult for competitors to understand and imitate (Wade and Hulland 2004). Fig. 1shows the core concepts of the Resource-Based View.Based on the RBV framework above, we develop a conceptual model in Fig. 2. The left side of the model shows the two independent variables representing the two different types of resources: IT Resources and Organizational Resources. On the dimension of IT Resources we include ERP modules and e-Business Technologies—the two complementary ITs that are used to build a firm’s e-integration capability. On the dimension of Organizational Resources, based on previous ERP CSF literature, we chose two strongly argued theoretical factors: Managerial and Technical Skills, and Organizational Change Management (Stratman and Roth 2002). In the middle of the model, we propose Business Integration Capability as a mediating construct that links IT Resources and Organizational Resources to Competitive Advantage. Business Integration Capability refers to the level of a firm’s business coordination with its suppliers and customers, and within the firm using IT (ERP and e-Business technologies) and other organizational resources. Competitive Advantage is the dependent variable, while firm size and years of ERP use are used as control variables in the model.The IT Resources construct has two dimensions: ERP Modules and e-Business Technologies. ERP systems are configurable information systems that integrate information and information-based processes within and across functional areas. ERP systems consist of a set of integrated modules intended to automate business operations (Hitt et al. 2002). Using a single repository of data, ERP aims at seamless integration of all information flowing through an organization. Consistent with previous studies (Banker et al. 2006, Kauffman and Walden 2001, Zhu et al. 2004), e-Business technologies are defined as the Internet-based technologies, such as Extranets, Websites, and EDI communication technologies that link two firms for performing e-business functions, such as online selling, online purchasing, online coordination, and online information sharing (Kauffman and Walden 2001). With the growth of e-business technologies that allow information made from the ERP systems to be integrated with other firms in the extended supply chain (Swaminathan and Tayur 2003), ERP systems and e-business technologies are the two IT resources that help firms build business integration capability.From a technical point of view, Fig. 3shows how ERP combines with e-business technologies to build a firm’s electronic integration capability. In the middle is a focal firm’s ERP system that originally was only used internally. From the left side, with middleware software based on pre-defined industry standards, such as RosettaNet, XML (extensive markup language) and more recently web services and service oriented architecture (SOA), information generated by ERP systems can be shared via e-business technologies (Internet/EDI) directly with suppliers’ ERP systems. If a supplier does not have an ERP system, it can still receive and exchange business information through an Extranet website. Therefore, useful information such as inventory levels, production planning, and materials purchasing can be exchanged between the focal firm and suppliers via ERP and e-business technologies. This is called business to business (B2B) integration. Similarly, on the right side, the focal firm can exchange valuable business data, such as order status, invoices, and online order fulfillment with its customers. This is called business to customer (B2C) integration. Therefore, we hypothesize that:H1A firm with greater IT resources (ERP Modules and e-Business technologies) is more likely to generate greater business integration capability.Gurbaxani and Whang (1991) argue that IT can reduce both internal and external coordination costs from transaction cost economics. Internal coordination costs include agency costs (monitoring costs and bonding costs) and decision information costs (information processing costs and opportunity costs due to poor information). Since ERP systems focus on internal process efficiency and effectiveness, and can coordinate information across different departments within a company, ERP systems are expected to affect internal firm operations by decreasing internal coordination costs (Poston and Grabski 2000). External coordination costs include operational costs (search, transportation, inventory holding, and communication costs) as well as contractual costs (costs of writing and enforcing contracts). Since e-business technologies are focused on external, cross-enterprise process efficiency and effectiveness, they can reduce external coordination costs and reap the benefits of supply chain integration (Lee et al. 1997, Poston and Grabski 2000, Wu and Chuang 2009). The above discussion suggests there are, potentially, substantial benefits for firms that successfully implement ERP systems and e-business technologies. Therefore, we hypothesize that:H2A firm with greater IT resources (ERP modules and e-Business technologies) is more likely to gain competitive advantage.Information Technology implementation studies and the Resource-Based View suggest that the benefits an organization derives from using IT are dependent on the characteristics of the organization (Ragowsky and Somers 2002); therefore, not all companies will gain the same benefits from using the same IT. Borrowing from ERP literature that investigates Critical Success Factors (CSFs) of ERP implementation from organizations’ perspectives, we define two dimensions that form the Organizational Resources construct: Managerial and Technical Skills and Organizational Change Management. The two dimensions and their sub-factors are chosen for they are the most frequently cited CSFs and are considered as more important than other factors in the CSF literature (Finney and Corbett 2007, Ngai et al. 2008, Françoise et al. 2009).Managerial and Technical Skills are comprised of three facets based on the RBV’s position on Human Resources including top management, ERP committee members, and IT staff (Bharadwaj 2000). First, Top management involvement refers to top management’s willingness to champion ERP within the organization and allocate the resources required for successful ERP infusion (Stratman and Roth 2002). Top management commitment is a recurring factor in studies examining large-scale implementation of new processes and information technologies (Duchessi et al. 1988, Liang et al. 2007, Teo et al. 2006). Second, Business process skills refer to ERP committee team members’ understanding of how the business operates and their ability to predict the impact of a particular decision or action on the rest of the enterprise (Ranganathan et al. 2011, Roth et al. 1995). A thorough understanding of the firm’s business processes appears to be critical to ERP infusion since its implementation is accompanied by significant process changes (Davenport 1998). Third, IT skills refers to the IT staff’s technical capabilities to configure and maintain the ERP system (Stratman and Roth 2002). Technical IT skills are required beyond the time of initial installation; post-installation support is generally required to refine and adjust specific system attributes on an ongoing basis (Davenport 1998). In summary, Managerial and Technical skills are viewed as competencies by RBV researchers (Mata et al. 1995).Within the Organizational Change Management construct, the ERP CSF literature proposed four factors that are important for ERP implementation: Business Process Reengineering (BPR), Software Customization, Data Conversion, and Training (Finney and Corbett 2007, Françoise et al. 2009, Ngai et al. 2008). One of the most challenging problems associated with implementing an ERP system is the incompatibility of the system’s features with business needs (Janson and Subramanian 1996). To solve the incompatibility problem and achieve the greatest benefits from an ERP system, a firm can either reengineer its business processes to align with the ERP system or customize the ERP system to fulfill the firm’s needs. The Business Process Reengineering literature suggests that restructuring business processes is easier than ERP Software Customization (Somers and Nelson 2001). Because customizations are usually associated with increased information systems costs, longer implementation time, and inability to benefit from vendor software maintenance and upgrades, customization should only be requested when essential and/or when the competitive advantage derived from using non-standard processing can be clearly demonstrated. Data conversion from legacy systems to ERP systems is a fundamental requirement for effective use of ERP systems (Malhotra and Temponi 2010). The availability and timeliness of accurate data represents a critical issue throughout the ERP implementation process (Norris et al. 2000, Somers and Nelson 2001). Within the company, the challenge lies in finding the proper data to load into the system and converting all disparate data structures into a single, consistent format. ERP training refers to the processes involved in teaching each of the various user groups how to use the ERP system efficiently in their day-to-day activities (Stratman and Roth 2002). The role of training to facilitate software implementation is well documented in the IS literature (Somers and Nelson 2001) and the integrated, cross-functional scope of an ERP system requires a large proportion of the workforce to be trained in various system skills (Stratman and Roth 2002).IT scholars of the RBV perspective argue that it is only when organizational resources complement IT that firm-specific IT capability can be built and the investments in IT can pay off (Wade and Hulland 2004). Thus, we hypothesize that:H3A firm with greater Organizational Resources is more likely to generate greater business integration capability.A firm with greater Organizational Resources is more likely to gain competitive advantage.Barney (1991) suggested that the competitive advantage creating resources must possess four key attributes: value, rareness, inimitability, and non-substitutability. Given the four attributes, different types of resources would make differential contributions to the competitive advantage. Following Barney’s suggestion, many studies investigating the relationship between IT resources and firm performance found that tangible IT resources (e.g., technology-based infrastructure) are the easiest resources for competitors to copy and, therefore, represent the most fragile source of sustainable competitive advantage for a firm (Teece et al. 1997). In contrast, there is growing evidence that competitive advantage often depends on the firm’s superior deployment of intangible organizational resources (e.g., IT managerial skills, organizational change management). From a RBV perspective, this advantage may result from the development of intangible resources that become embedded in a company over an extended period of time and are difficult to imitate (Wade and Hulland 2004). Therefore, we argue that while IT resources may positively influence firm capability and performance, intangible organizational resources are more valuable than tangible IT resources in building integration capability and providing competitive advantage. We hypothesize that:H4aThe importance of Organizational Resources is greater than IT Resources in generating business integration capability and competitive advantage.Business Integration Capability is conceptualized from a process orientation as consisting of three dimensions—supplier e-integration, internal e-integration, and customer e-integration. It is suggested in the literature that the higher the level of integrated upstream and downstream coordination, the greater the benefits (Frohlich 2002). Frohlich and Westbrook (2001) found that those with the strongest degree of integration with both suppliers and customers had the greatest performance improvement including market share, profitability, productivity, and intangible benefits. Truman (2000) investigated EDI and the integration of internal systems and found that greater integration is associated with better performance outcomes, and Frohlich’s (2002) study shows a positive link between e-integration and performance (e.g., faster delivery times, reduced transaction costs, and enhanced inventory turnover).From the RBV perspective, business process integration built from ERP systems, e-Business technologies, and organizational resources is a firm-specific capability, because integrating the three resources is an extremely complicated process (Rai et al. 2006). As firms integrate ERP and e-Business resources to develop an IT infrastructure that links key suppliers and customers, they develop elaborate rules regarding the distribution and management of hardware and software, and have to reengineer business processes along the supply chain (Barki and Pinsonneault 2005). Business processes, such as procurement and fulfillment, are inherently complex and enabling these transactions over electronic systems is even more challenging (Sodhi 2001). Such complexity places substantial strain on a firm’s knowledge resources and absorptive capacity (Ross 2003), thus it is considered to be valuable, heterogeneously distributed, difficult to imitate, and hard to find substitutions (the four criteria that RBV proposes as a source of competitive advantage). Accordingly, we hypothesize that:H5A firm with greater business integration capability is more likely to gain competitive advantage.Furthermore, in the RBV literature, Capability, refers to a firm’s capacity to deploy Resources, usually in combination, to create economic rents (Makadok 2001). Thus, capability can abstractly be thought of as “intermediate goods” generated by a firm to provide enhanced productivity of its resources (Amit and Schoemaker 1993). A firm’s capabilities can only generate profits after resources are acquired (Makadok 2001). Accordingly, we hypothesize that:H5aA firm’s business integration capability, mediates the relationship between resources and competitive advantage.Competitive advantage is normally defined as the ability to earn returns on investment better than others in the same market (Porter 1998). Porter argues that a firm with a competitive advantage will (1) be more profitable than its rivals and (2) receive a larger share of market or economic benefits than competitors (Clemons and Row 1991, Porter 1998). Thus, the two dimensions of competitive advantage in this study are grounded in Porter’s resources of competitive advantage: Profits and Market Share. Profits and Market Share are what companies care about the most, and they have also been broadly used in the IS literature to study the business value and competitive advantage provided by IT (Frohlich and Westbrook 2001). The way we operationalize the construct is similar to previous studies that investigated the relationship between IT and competitive advantage from the RBV perspective (Bhatt and Grover 2005, Pavlou and Sawy 2010).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper attempts to answer the question, “With what organizational resources, and by building what firm-specific capabilities, can investment in ERP systems bring firms a competitive advantage?” In line with the Resource-Based View, we propose that ERP and its complementary resources require the development of business integration capability before achieving a competitive advantage. Our study is unique in its extension of the locus of ERP business value to internal organizational resources. It extends current ERP studies that test only IT (i.e., using a production function approach to examine ERP value) or those that investigate organizational factors alone (i.e., ERP CSFs studies). Our integrated model helps IT scholars and practitioners understand that, under the resource picking and capability building mechanisms that RBV proposes, ERP has to be combined with e-Business technologies and organizational resources to build integration capability in order to receive any possible payoff. Given the right organizational resources (managerial skills and change management), and by building firm-specific e-integration capability, ERP systems will not be merely a commodity but will help to generate a competitive advantage.ConstructsIndicatorsLiteratureIT ResourceERP modulesSupplier Integration Module [SIM], measured by the number of modules the organization uses from the following list:Hitt et al. (2002) and Banker et al. (2006)• Purchasing module• Inventory/Material Management module• Production planning/Manufacturing module• Supply chain management/Advance planning and scheduling moduleCustomer Integration Module [CIM], measured by the number of modules the organization uses from the following list:• Sales/Order entry module• Distribution/Logistics module• E-commerce/E-retailing module• Customer relationship management moduleInside Integration Module[IIM], measured by the number of modules the organization uses from the following list:• Financial/Accounting module• Human Resource module• Data warehouse/Business intelligence moduleE-business technologiesDoes your firm…Zhu et al. (2004)[EBI1] Use an extranet[EBI2] Use a website[EBI3] Use EDIOrganizational ResourcesManagerial & technical skillsOn a scale of 1 to 5 where “1” means “not at all” and “5” means “a great deal,” please rate the extent to which, in your firm:Stratman and Roth (2002) and Mabert (2000)[MTS1] Top management is involved in the ERP project[MTS2] ERP project team members understand business processes[MTS3] Your IT staff has technical capability to configure and implement ERP systemsOrganizational Change ManagementOn a scale of 1 to 5 where “1” means “not at all” and “5” means “a great deal,” please rate the extent to which your firm has:Somers and Nelson (2001) and Mabert and Soni (2003)[OCM1] Reengineered business processes to accommodate ERP use[OCM2] Customized ERP software to fit your business processes[OCM3] Converted data from legacy systems to ERP systems[OCM4] Provided training for employees to use ERP systemsBusiness Integration CapabilitiesSupplier e-IntegrationOn a scale of 1 to 5 where “1” means “not at all” and “5” means “a great deal,” to what extent does your firm and your suppliers use electronic networks to:Markus (2000) and Forhlich (2002)[SI1] Share inventory availability or stock levels[SI2] Share production planning or schedule capacity[SI3] Share demand and forecasting informationInternal e-IntegrationOn a scale of 1 to 5 where “1” means “not at all” and “5” means “a great deal,” to what extent does your firm use electronic networks to achieve the following inside your firm:[II1] Data sharing among various internal systems[II2] Employee retrieval of information from various databases[II3] Collaboration and workflow managementCustomer e-Integration[CI1] On a scale of 1 to 5 where “1” means “not at all” and “5” means “a great deal,” to what extent are your firm’s total customer orders conducted over electronic networks (the Internet or EDI)[CI2] Online service, measured by the number of functions the organization’s website provides in the following list:• Shipping and fulfillment• Tracking order status• Service and technical support• Product customization (i.e., build-to-order)Competitive AdvantagesTo what extent have the following increased, decreased, or stayed the same in your firm after using ERP?Porter (1998), Pavlou and Sawy (2010) and Bhatt and Grover (2005)[MP1] Profitability[MP2] Market ShareWe consulted Preacher and Hayes (2004) paper, and used their “bootstrap method” (i.e. an SPSS macro provided by Preacher and Hayes) to run mediation tests.First, we tested whether there is a mediation effect between “IT resources” and “Competitive advantage”. As shown in the following, the total effect between “IT resources” on “Competitive advantage” is 0.1875**. Then, after introducing “Business integration capability”, we found it significantly mediated IT resources and competitive advantage.The output of the SPSS mediation test (macro).Furthermore, the output of SPSS shows after bootstrapping the sampling distribution of the mediation effect, the true mediation effect is estimated to lie between 0.0260 and 0.1939 with 95% confidence. Because zero is not in the 95% confidence interval, we can conclude that the mediation effect is indeed significantly different from zero.Similarly, we tested whether there is a mediation effect between “Organization resources” and “Competitive advantage”. As shown in the following, “business integration capability” mediates the “organizational resources” and “competitive advantage”. Furthermore, bootstrapping result also shows that the true mediation effect is estimated to lie between 0.097 and 0.2533 with 95% confidence. Because zero is not in the 95% confidence interval, we can conclude that the mediation effect is indeed significantly different from zero.