@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tumor volume fuzzification for intelligent cancer staging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Current crisp cancer staging systems suffer major drawbacks.A fuzzy overlapping staging system is proposed, tested, and validated.Measuring cancer size with largest diameter lead to incorrect cancer staging.Fuzzified volume size estimation is introduced and compared.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy volume,Fuzzy image segmentation,Cancer staging,MR imaging,Alpha Cut,Tumor size,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cancer staging has been regarded as a critical activity for cancer control. Cancer staging systems typically split tumors into 5 crisp categories. The classification of the tumor into one of the five stages significantly affects not only the treatment design and surgical decision for individuals but also cancer control for populations. Several cancer staging systems have been in use of which the TNM is the most widely applied. The acute distinction between the stages makes the staging unrealistic since the drastic modification in treatment based on a change of stage may be based on a slight shift around the stage boundary. Tumor size is the major component of staging systems. The TNM is no exception, where the T represents the size which is the dominant component of the staging system. In this paper we discuss the need for a fuzzy cancer staging system to capture the uncertainty and use it for more accurate treatment and medical decisions. The authors then focus on the size computation component of the cancer staging presenting a new approach depending on fuzzy volume computation. In the course, the authors demonstrate how the fuzzy volume can affect the staging system and, consequently, the medical treatment, decision, and possibly drug design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer staging has been recognized as a critical activity for cancer control on both the populations and individuals levels for more than 50 years. The term cancer control is not limited to diagnosis and treatment. It further defines a continuum starting from risk assessment and preventative care until the end-of-life care. The continuum now also includes cancer survivorship with all its physical, psychological and even economic impacts [1]. The International Union Against Cancer Committee defined the use of cancer staging to (1) aid cancer treatment planning, (2) assist prognosis, (3) be used for treatment results evaluation, (4) enhance communication between treatment centers, and (5) continue the investigation of human malignancies [2,3]. Cancer staging is used to describe and rank the severity of cancer. It typically classifies the cancer into 5 stages ranging from Stage 0, in situ, up to Stage IV where the disease has already spread to other organs [4,5]. It is well known that sharp boundaries do not exist in biological systems and phenomena, and cancer is no exception. The fuzzy nature of biological systems was realized since the early inception of fuzzy set theory by Lotfy Zadeh himself [6]. Since then, gradation of biological phenomena has been emphasized and applied extensively [7]. Cancer staging is a perfect example of such application. The current staging system divides into 5 stages. Clearly, a composite indexing system has to be used. Depending on the value assigned as index the patient will fall into one of the 5 stages. The problem is what to do when the index falls around class boundaries. For example, if a stage falls between the values 2 and 4 as lower and upper bounds, respectively, what about the values 1.99 and 4.01? Should we shift the whole treatment plan or drug design from one stage to another for such a minor deviation from the boundaries? If we do not, then at what index value should we set the limit? This is a typical example of the paradox for which fuzzy set theory was invented [8].From the above introduction, it is clear that a cancer staging system ought to capture and model the uncertainty and gradation in the cancer stage. Since tumor size is the most important component of staging systems, it is important to have a realistic and intelligent size estimation technique. The current tradition of calculating crisp size classes goes against the intuition and fact that biological systems are fuzzy by nature. Thus, for size estimation to be accurate, the fuzziness and gradation must be computed and used for the computation of the overall estimated stage. The use of such gradation can be critical and vital for many treatment decisions and plans especially with surgical treatment. For example, a surgeon would act according to a rather low Alpha Cut if the tumor is in a vital life threatening organ such as the brain since the unnecessary removal of a minimal cancerous structure may lead to death or drastic consequences worse than cancer itself. On the other hand a surgery for the removal of a tumor in a non-vital organ may involve the consideration of a higher Alpha Cut to elevate the survival chances at the expense of mostly cosmetic factors. The Alpha Cut, a well known fuzzy computing concept, here represents the level of target certainty or cancer concentration.In this paper the authors concentrate on cancer tumor size estimation as a major component of any cancer staging system. The Tumor Node Metastasis (TNM) is the most widely used system of staging. The literature stresses the need for many developments to the current TNM staging system to be more accurate, realistic, and effective [9]. Under TNM, T is the component standing for size estimation. The authors will present how T is computed currently showing the unacceptable variation in volume estimation under several assumptions and how they may lead to inaccurate staging which may in turn lead to wrong treatment decisions. The authors then introduce the concept of fuzzy volume estimation showing the computation methodology and how the current traditional approaches and assumptions deviate drastically from the accurate estimation carried out by the fuzzification of the tumor size.To serve the purpose, the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 states the specific research problem and its scope. Section 3 exposes the related work. Section 4 covers the necessary image processing background. The authors then introduce the proposed fuzzy volume computation in Section 5. The validation of the proposed methodology is made in Section 6, followed by a discussion of the proof of concept and comparisons under different assumptions in Section 7. Section 8 provides the conclusions.Medical imaging became the dominant means of tumor assessment in general and tumor size estimation in particular for more than 30 years. The switch from analog to digital technology, the revolution in digital communication and storage, and rapid development of devices for non-invasive internal body investigation all contributed to the drastic change leading to the fundamental dependence on medical imaging for tumor investigation and size estimation [10]. There are many medical imaging techniques currently in use for different purposes. Among those techniques, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has become increasingly important for cancer diagnosis and treatment. It can also be of special importance during the clinical testing of novel therapeutic drugs to measure the treatment response repetitively. Such evaluation of drug potency is especially attractive in cancer since tumor size can be sequentially monitored before and through the treatment period to any time length and frequency [11].In this paper the authors contend that the current staging systems and specially the TNM suffer from 2 major weaknesses. First, the current tumor size estimation builds on uni-dimensional measurement. More specifically, the T indexing of the TNM staging system takes the longest lesion diameter as the main parameter for size estimation [9]. This could lead to terribly erroneous sizing especially with the cases where the tumor is of irregular shape or when the difference between the longest and shortest dimensions is large. Fig. 1illustrates an example of the latter case. In the illustrated example, volume estimation based on the longest diameter as typically done leads to much larger volume size than the reality of the case. This measurement technique can be accurate only for perfectly or near perfect spherical lesions.The second problem with the current staging systems is that they do not take the intrinsic tumor fuzziness into consideration. It is well known that biological systems in general and cancerous tumors in particular do not exhibit sharp boundaries. Thus, the intrinsic gradation must be taken into account for precise description of the tumor to both evaluate the initial tumor structure and trace the therapeutic progress. A tumor of certain size with small region of 100% cancerous cells is different from a tumor of the same size with a different 100% region or different gradation. The current TNM system does not provide for such differences. Fig. 2illustrates the current T sizing of the TNM system excluding the subcategories [9].According to the illustrated staging system, a change in size from 1.99cm of the longest diameter to 2cm merits a change of treatment plan from T1 stage to T2 stage. Similarly, a slight change around the stage boundary between T2 and T3 necessitates the change of treatment design from a stage to a completely different stage. Therefore, the authors of the current paper propose a fuzzy size estimation system to capture the fuzziness and gradation from a stage to another for more accurate size estimation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
