@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid multi-population genetic algorithm for the dynamic facility layout problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an effective novel hybrid multi-population genetic algorithm in which we separate solution space into different parts and each subpopulation represents a separate part.This assures the diversity of the algorithm.We design the operators so as to search only the feasible space; thus, we save computational time by avoiding infeasible space.After perfectly tuning the algorithm, it is compared with 11 available algorithms in the literature.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic facility layout problem,Multi-population genetic algorithm,Heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to inherent complexity of the dynamic facility layout problem, it has always been a challenging issue to develop a solution algorithm for this problem. For more than one decade, many researchers have proposed different algorithms for this problem. After reviewing the shortcomings of these algorithms, we realize that the performance can be further improved by a more intelligent search. This paper develops an effective novel hybrid multi-population genetic algorithm. Using a proposed heuristic procedure, we separate solution space into different parts and each subpopulation represents a separate part. This assures the diversity of the algorithm. Moreover, to intensify the search more and more, a powerful local search mechanism based on simulated annealing is developed. Unlike the available genetic operators previously proposed for this problem, we design the operators so as to search only the feasible space; thus, we save computational time by avoiding infeasible space. To evaluate the algorithm, we comprehensively discuss the parameter tuning of the algorithms by Taguchi method. The perfectly tuned algorithm is then compared with 11 available algorithms in the literature using well-known set of benchmark instances. Different analyses conducted on the results, show that the proposed algorithm enjoys the superiority and outperformance over the other algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The facility layout problem consists of the determination of the most efficient facilities arrangement within a factory. The facility can be defined as a manufacturing cell, an administrative office building or a machine. An efficient layout causes an efficient material handling (MH) between facilities and consequently decreases the work-in-process and inventory holding costs. An efficient layout also contributes to the overall efficiency of operations and can save many overall costs such as production costs and inventory holding costs.For manufacturing plants, material handling cost is the most frequently used indicator to determine the efficiency of a layout; since it represents 20–50% of the total operating cost and 15–70% of the total cost of manufacturing a product [1]. Throughput time, quality and inventory levels are also indirectly related to the material flow. The material handling cost is calculated based on flows of materials between facilities and distances between the locations of the facilities. If the flows of materials do not change for a long time, the static facility layout problem can be used to specify the best layout. Meller and Gau [2] provided a comprehensive review of recent studies about the facility layout models and algorithms.In real world industry, companies often work in dynamic and changeable environments. Thus, we should analyze the current layout and restructure the layout according to the changes occurred. Francis et al. [3] discuss some reasons to modify the layout. Among all, one can refer to the following: changes in the product/process design, adding/deleting a product, significant increase/decrease in the demand of a product, the replacement of equipment, the adoption of new safety standards and unexplainable.Afentakis et al. [4] stated that when system characteristics change, the MH costs will likely significantly increase. An important way to reduce this increment is to rearrange the workstations (facilities). But the rearranging of workstations may impose some cost such as labor cost, equipment cost, and the cost of production loss. Consequently, there is a tradeoff between increased MH cost and the rearrangement cost for the shift from the present layout to a new layout. The problem of compromising a balance between MH cost and the rearrangement cost is known as the dynamic facility layout problem (DFLP).In the DFLP, the future is divided into a number of periods of time where a period may be defined, for instance, as a week, a month, or a year. For each period, data related to the flow of materials between each pair of facilities are forecasted. It is assumed that the flow does not change throughout a period. The objective of DFLP is to obtain layouts for each period in the planning horizon in order to minimize the sum of the material handling and rearrangement costs. The assumptions for the standard DFLP are explained as follows [5]:1.The distances between locations are known and constant.Planning horizon is divided to T period.In each time period, each facility should be put on only one location and one facility can be placed to only one location.In each time period, the material flow between each pair of facilities is known and does not change over the period.The objective is to obtain the layout plan (i.e., the layout for all periods) which minimizes the sum of the material handling and rearrangement costs.In this paper, we present a novel hybrid multi-population genetic algorithm (HMPGA) to solve DFLP. We also introduce a heuristic algorithm to generate the individuals of the initial populations. We describe a representation of layouts that can be used efficiently in genetic encoding. In our multi-population strategy each population evolves independently from each other. After a pre-determined number of generations, all the populations are combined and make a new population (main population). The main population continues to evolve until stopping criteria is satisfied. In this way, we can guarantee that the various parts of the solution space are most likely searched. After a comprehensive parameter tuning, the algorithm is evaluated using advanced statistical tools. To evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, we compare it with 11 available algorithms in the literature on well-known set of benchmark instances presented in Balakrishnan and Cheng [6].The structure of this paper is as follows: In “Literature review” section, a review of related works to DFLP is presented. In “Problem formulation” section, the mathematical formulation of the problem is described. In “The proposed hybrid multi-population genetic algorithm” section, we introduce the proposed hybrid multi-population genetic algorithm. The experimental evaluation of the proposed algorithm is given in “Parameter tuning” section. A summary and discussion on future works concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
