@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Managing multi-line power congestion by using Hybrid Nelder–Mead – Fuzzy Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization (HNM-FAPSO)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nonlinear congestion management problem is solved using Hybrid Nelder–Mead – Fuzzy Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization (HNM-FAPSO).Congestion is managed by rescheduling generators and sensitive generators are selected based on Apparent Power Sensitivity Factor (APSF).The congestion cost, rescheduled real power, power loss and computation time are less using HNM-FAPSO.The feasibility and performance of the HNM-FAPSO algorithm is compared over other algorithms like FAPSO, NM, SBF, ABFNM, GA and S-PSO.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid Nelder–Mead – Fuzzy Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization,Nelder–Mead algorithm,Multi-Line Congestion Management,Apparent Power Sensitivity Factor,Optimal generator rescheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a Hybrid Nelder–Mead – Fuzzy Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization (HNM-FAPSO) for a Multi-Line Congestion Management (MLCM) problem. MLCM is a nonlinear optimization problem in deregulated power system. The generators which are sensitive to the congested lines are selected based on the novel Apparent Power Sensitivity Factor (APSF) and are rescheduled by using the HNM-FAPSO algorithm. The objective of hybridizing the Nelder–Mead (NM), Fuzzy adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization (FAPSO) is to blend their unique advantages as well as their efficacy. The NM method is a very efficient local search procedure and is used to initialize the population for Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) which is used to search global best value. But PSO has a problem of premature convergence due to linear variation of its internal parameter i.e. inertia weight. To overcome this, a fuzzy inference system is used to dynamically update the inertia weight. The feasibility and performance of the HNM-FAPSO algorithm is demonstrated on the standard IEEE 30-bus system and IEEE 118-bus system. A comparison of simulation results and statistical analysis reveal optimization efficacy of the HNM-FAPSO algorithm over other algorithms like FAPSO, NM, Simple Bacterial Foraging (SBF), adaptive bacterial foraging algorithm with Nelder–Mead (ABFNM), Genetic Algorithm (GA) and PSO available in literature. The main outcome of the proposed algorithm in solving MLCM is reduction in congestion cost, rescheduled real power, power loss and computational time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The MLCM is the emerging problem in deregulated power system. As consumers have open access to get power, the transmission lines may violate the power transfer limits and the situation is called power transmission congestion. If congestion is expected frequently, then remedy can be done by three approaches: reducing demand in the congested area by demand side management programs and by adopting energy efficient measures; constructing more generating utilities near demand area; adding new transmission lines to import power from distant generators [1]. But, to manage congestion on a day-ahead basis or an hour-ahead basis, rescheduling generator output, load curtailment, adjusting FACTS controllers, providing reactive power support are the usual practices.Various Congestion Management (CM) measures are proposed and practiced by energy consultants in the power industry and researchers in the literature. Initially, heuristic algorithms are used to mitigate congestion. Christie et al., explained the Optimal Power Flow (OPF), price area and transaction based methods of CM [2]. In [3], CM and emission are considered as multi-objective optimization and is solved by using stochastic augmented є-constraint followed by TOPSIS analysis.The bidding strategy is another modeling technique in congestion management. A two level optimization problem using bacterial foraging optimization is formulated in [4] considering suppliers’ rivals bidding nature and its influence on congestion, where as in [5], evolutionary bipartite complex network theory is employed for bidding strategy. Congestion management with dynamic voltage stability is proposed in [6] where post congestion system security is also analyzed. In [7], lower congestion cost is achieved using bifurcation theory along with more dynamic voltage stability margin.From consumer point of view, rescheduling generator outputs is a better way in tackling congestion because customer satisfaction is one of the major goals in deregulated power system. The sensitivity of the congested line to the line current is derived in [8] and the bidding cost on generator and load shedding has been considered for rescheduling. The real and reactive power rescheduling is done in [9] based on the calculation of real and reactive transmission congestion distribution factors. Using benders decomposition technique, congestion relief is presented in [10]. By employing genetic algorithm, the location and sizing of distributed generation are analyzed in [11] and the congestion cost is obtained by rescheduling thermal generators and distributed generators. The rescheduling of coordinated operation of hydro and thermal based generators in pool market is formulated in [12]. The coordinated operation of hydro and thermal plants are modeled in [13] as bilateral contract for congestion mitigation. Using shift factor based OPF, the locational marginal pricing is formulated in [14] by giving importance to congestion control as well as the technical challenges of redispatch of generating units.Conventional algorithms need derivative of objective function in order to find the optimal solution. Therefore they are less effective and rather consume more operational time which is seldom permissible as all process warrants optimal solution with less time margin. Therefore, advanced algorithms need to be deployed for finding the best solution. Evolutionary algorithm based methods have proved to be superior for solving most of the common practical issues with restructured power systems as it is evident from the reported literatures. The proposed congestion management problem is also a non-linear optimization problem with objective function and binding constraints. Soft computing techniques are applied to various power system problems like economic dispatch [15–18] and optimal power flow [19,20]. In [21], a review on various conventional methods of CM is done by listing various optimization techniques and expert systems, and the different measures adopted in various countries. An attempt has been made to mitigate congestion by using Standard PSO (S-PSO) where results have been compared with mathematically derived optimization methods in [22]. PSO with time-varying acceleration coefficients (PSO-TVAC) is performed in [23] where minimum congestion cost is obtained when compared with S-PSO and time-varying inertia weight (PSO-TVIW). By fuzzy adaptive bacterial foraging, CM is proposed in [24] where sensitivity based optimal active power re-scheduling of generators is done. Here, fuzzy system is introduced in various swarm optimization technique, where fuzzy system is used to tune the run length vector. A multi-agent based electric vehicle is discussed for distribution grid CM problem [25].Though evolutionary computation involves no mathematical model, it adopts certain parameters which need to be updated in each step to have exploration and exploitation searches. As the search process is non-linear and linear variation of parameter will not truly reflect the optimum search process, a fuzzy system is proposed to dynamically adapt inertia weight based on the current best performance evaluation [26]. The fuzzy system is used in gravitational search algorithm [27] to update the gravitational constant to solve optimal bidding problem. The fuzzy PSO with cross-mutated operation is adopted to improve the quality and robustness for real world industrial systems [28].Another search method for minimization was proposed by Nelder and Mead called simplex amoeba method based on reflection, expansion, contraction and shrinkage of vertices when moving toward optimum point [29]. It is the popular direct search method with its (n+1) vertices and the corresponding fitness function values. The hybrid bacterial foraging and Nelder–Mead algorithm has been applied to economic load dispatch problem [30,31]. The same algorithm has been applied to generator rescheduling based CM problem [32] and for the placement of FACTS devices based CM problem [33].The hybrid NM simplex search and PSO has been applied to economic load dispatch problem in [34] and to solve OPF in [35]. In this hybrid algorithm, initial populations are simultaneously given to NM and PSO and best results are obtained among these two outputs. However, to date, the Hybrid Nelder–Mead – Fuzzy Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization is not attempted in the area of congestion management. The approach of doing Nelder–Mead algorithm to explore local search and giving the output of Nelder–Mead as the entire population for initializing PSO is a novel implementation in this research paper. This improves the search space direction as well as the search speed. PSO, SBF and GA need more computation time and thus, the convergence characteristics drops. The involvement of fuzzy system improves both the disadvantages of PSO, SBF and GA. However, the main objective of getting minimum congestion cost is still not on par by using FAPSO and GA.The novel approach of MLCM problem by using HNM-FAPSO is discussed in this paper. It is necessary to solve OPF in order to get the generation values for minimum generation cost while satisfying security constraints. The first step in this work is to run OPF and the OPF result obtained by HNM-FAPSO is compared with GA, PSO, SBF and ABFNM algorithms. Next, the deregulated environment is created and congestion case is observed. In a large power system, rescheduling all generators is unnecessary. Therefore, selection of generators is done by calculating APSF for the congested Multi-lines (MLs). The sensitive generators are rescheduled by using HNM-FAPSO algorithm to obtain minimal congestion cost for MLCM problem. This research paper explores the feasibility and performance of the HNM-FAPSO algorithm on standard IEEE 30-bus system and IEEE 118-bus system. A comparison of simulation results of the HNM-FAPSO algorithm reveals optimization efficacy and better convergence over NM, FAPSO, GA, S-PSO, SBF and ABFNM algorithms available in literature. The statistical significance of the proposed method is addressed by the average rankings from three tests such as Friedman, Aligned Friedman and Quade [36], and the p value obtained from tests such as Holm, Hommel and Holland [37].In deregulated power system, OPF is emphasized during normal operation and is practiced in United Kingdom, some states of United States, and in Australia and New Zealand [2]. OPF aims to reduce the operating cost of generators subjected to various equality and inequality constraints. Initially, ISO performs OPF to get the optimal real power generation of generators and voltage settings and approve the generation and then when congestion happen, ISO reschedules generator output to get minimized congestion cost.The generator cost is modeled by quadratic fuel cost equation and the objective function and constraints are formulated [32]. They are given as(1)MinimizeFg=∑i=1NgFi(Pi)($/hr)(2)Fi(Pi)=aiPgi2+biPgi+ci;i=1,2,3,…,NgThe variables of this objective function are explained as follows: ai, biand ciare the cost coefficients of ith generator, Pgiis the real power output of ith generator. Ngis the number of generators.This objective function is constrained to(a)Generator constraints: Each generator output is bound to a lower and upper generation limit in the design stage which are represented by inequality constraints as follows:(3)Pgmin≤Pg≤Pgmax(4)Qgmin≤Qg≤QgmaxwherePgminandPgmaxare the minimum and maximum real power generation of each generator andQgminandQgmaxare the minimum and maximum reactive power generation of each generator.Bus voltage constraints: The bus voltage expressed in per unit has a significant importance in the stability aspect and the lower and upper voltage limits of buses have to be strictly verified when solving OPF.(5)Vmin≤V≤Vmaxwhere Vmin and Vmax are the minimum and maximum voltage limits of buses. This is usually taken as 0.95 and 1.05 per unit respectively.Power balance constraints: Based on the principle of equilibrium, the total system generation must be equal to the total system load and that is written as an equality constraint as follows:(6)PGi−PDi−|Vi|∑j=1nbus{(Gijcosδij+Bijsinδij)|Vj|}=0(7)QGi−QDi+|Vi|2Bii−|Vi|∑j=1nbus{(Gijsinδij−Bijcosδij)|Vj|}=0where Gijand Bijare the conductance and susceptance of line i–j respectively, PGiand PDiare the active power generation and demand at bus i respectively, QGiand QDiare the reactive power generation and demand at bus i respectively.Transmission line MVA constraints: The transmission lines are limited with their MVA ratings depending upon the conductors used and the line flow in a transmission line should be within their MVA limit which is the main deciding factor of congestion occurrence.(8)Sl≤SlmaxwhereSlmaxis the maximum permissible MVA line flow in line l.In a large system having more number of generators, it is time consuming and inefficient to reschedule all generators. The right way to start is to find the sensitive generators to the congested line. The sensitiveness of a line to the real power generation of a generator can be derived as follows:The real and reactive power flow in a transmission line connected between bus ‘i’ and bus ‘j’ are,(9)Pij=−Vi2Gij+ViVjGijcosδij+ViVjBijsinδij(10)Qij=−Vi2Bij−Vi2Bi−ViVjGijsinδij+ViVjBijcosδijwhere Pijand Qijare the real power and reactive power in line i–j respectively, Viand Vjare the voltage magnitude at bus i and bus j respectively, δijis the phase angle between bus i and j, Gijand Bijare the conductance and susceptance of line i–j respectively.From these basic equations, apparent power can be written as,(11)|Sij|=(Vi4(Gij2+Bij2)+Vi4Vj2(Gij2+Bij2)−2Vi3Vjcosδij(Gij2+Bij2)+2Vi4BijBi+2Vi3VjBi(Gijsinδij−Bijcosδij)+Vi4Bi2)1/2where Sijis the apparent power in line i–j and Biis the susceptance at bus i.The new sensitivity factor has been defined as APSF. The APSF for a line k can be calculated by change in apparent power flow ΔSkin a transmission line k with respect to the active power ΔPginjection at a particular generator bus g and is written as,(12)APSFk,g=ΔSkΔPgThe change in apparent power flow incorporating APSF can be written as(13)ΔSk=(APSFk,g×ΔPg)By using Taylor series approximation and neglecting P–V coupling and Q–θ coupling, Eq. (12) can be written as(14)APSFk,g=∂Sk∂θi⋅∂θi∂Pg+∂Sk∂θj⋅∂θj∂PgBy partial differentiating Eq. (11) with respect to phasor angle, the following equations are obtained:(15)∂Sij∂θi=(|Sij|2)−1/2×[2Vi3Vjsinδij(Gij2+Bij2)+Vi3VjBi(Gijcosδij+Bijsinδij)](16)∂Sij∂θj=(|Sij|2)−1/2×[−2Vi3Vjsinδij(Gij2+Bij2)−Vi3VjBi(Gijcosδij+Bijsinδij)]The derivatives∂θi∂Pg,∂θj∂Pg,∂|Vi|∂Qg,∂|Vj|∂Qgare obtained from the Jacobian matrix of Newton–Raphson method.In deregulated environment, bilateral and multilateral transactions are of particular interest as generators and consumers can get into direct contract or through power brokers. The quantity of power and the electricity price are decided between them. The bilateral transaction can be modeled as(17)Pgi−Pdj=0wherePgiis the power generation from bus i andPdjis the contracted power demand at bus j.Independent System Operator (ISO) checks the possibility of the transacted power without violating transmission line constraints. If there is no violation, ISO approves the transaction and if not, ISO reschedules generators and the obtained rescheduling cost is called congestion cost.The objective of MLCM is to minimize congestion cost when rescheduling generator output by considering incremental and decremental bids submitted by generators and is written as:(18)Minimize∑i=1nsgCiincΔPiinc+∑i=1nsgCidecΔPidec($/h)whereCiincandCidecare the incremental and decremental price bids of a generator i andΔPiincandΔPidecare the incremental and decremental active power generation adjustment. nsg is the number of selected generators based on APSF.This objective function is subjected to two new operating constraints in addition to the constraints listed for OPF.(19)(a)Sl+∑g=1nsgAPSFk,g×ΔPg≤Slmax,l∈Nlwhere APSFk,gis the sensitivity factor of generator g to the congested line k, ΔPgis the rescheduled active power generation of generator g and Slis the apparent power flow in line l.(20)(b)ΔPgmin≤ΔPg≤ΔPgmaxwhereΔPgminandΔPgmaxare the minimum down ramp and maximum up ramp of generator g respectively.This section explains the HNM-FAPSO algorithm and its implementation for MLCM problem. A brief overview of S-PSO, FAPSO and NM algorithm is provided followed by the merging of all three different algorithms to manage congestion.It is a simplex method based on numerical methods for minimizing an objective function without constraints [29]. Each vertex is replaced by a new vertex by using one among the four operations as shown in Fig. 1: reflection, contraction, expansion, and shrinkage.The current fitness value is compared with the previous fitness solution and one among the above four operations is carried out based on the obtained minimized fitness value. The simple explanation of the NM algorithm is as follows:Assume a two dimension search space and let Z=f(x) is the objective function to be minimized. Generate n+1 vertex points and calculate the function value at each vertex and arrange the vertices in ascending order such that Z1<Z2<… Zn+1.The vertices Xlow and Xhigh are recorded with their function values Zlow and Zhigh. The centroid Xcent of the points is calculated by averaging the vertices without Xhigh by using(21)Xcent=1N∑j=1Xj≠XhighN+1XjA new vertex is created by using refection process by the following equation(22)Xrefl=(1+α)Xcent−αXhighwhere α is the reflection coefficient greater than zero. If Zlow≤Zrefl≤Zhigh, then it means the simplex search has progressed toward the minimum and complete the iteration. If Zrefl≤Zlow, proceed to Expansion and replace Xhigh with Xrefl and if not, proceed with contraction.The reflection is expanded to continue the reflection in the same direction in the search space by using the following equation(23)Xexp=γXrefl+(1−γ)Xcentwhere γ is the expansion coefficient greater than 1. If Zexp<Zlow, the expansion is progressing in the right direction. Replace Xhigh with Xexp. If not, Replace Xexp with Xhigh. If Zexp<Zrefl, terminate the iteration.After reflection, if Zrefl≥Zlow, the contraction process is carried out by using(24)Xcont=βXhigh+(1−β)Xcentwhere β is the contraction coefficient between 0 and 1. If Zcont<Zlow, then the contraction is progressing in the right direction and replace Xhigh with Xcont. If not, proceed with shrinkage. If Zcont<Zrefl, terminate the iteration.Shrinkage is performed by using(25)Xi=δXi+(1−δ)Xlowwhere δ is the shrinkage coefficient between 0 and 1. The algorithm is terminated if the stopping criteria reached. Else, the entire process is repeated from Section 3.1.2.PSO is motivated by the social behavior of bird flocking and fish schooling [38]. The birds are represented as ‘particles’, which navigate through the search space in search of global optimum. The particles use the global best position and the local best position to update their next position and velocity by using the defined equations:(26)Vid+1=ωVid+c1×r1×(Pid−Xid)+c2×r2×(Pgd−Xid)(27)Xid+1=Xid+Vidwhere ω is the inertia weight taken between 0.4 and 0.9;Vidrepresents the present velocity position; C1 and C2 are constants; r1 and r2 are two random functions generated between 0 and 1;Pidis the previous best position;Pgdis the global best position;Xidrepresents the ith particle position;Vid+1represents the next velocity position;Xid+1represents the updated particle position; d is the current iteration number.The exploration and exploitation search process largely depends on the inertia weight. The inertia weight is reduced from 0.9 to 0.4 as the global search is performed initially and local search is done in the promising area to find the global optimum.As PSO is a non-linear search process, linear variation of inertia weight does not exactly reflect the actual search process [26]. The dynamic adjusting of inertia weight is possible by using fuzzy system. The fuzzy system used in this paper is represented in Fig. 2.Fuzzification of input and output variable is done by using triangle membership functions as shown in Fig. 3. To represent the input membership functions, three linguistic variables are used: S-small, M-medium, L-large. The output variable is represented in three linguistic variables as ZE-Zero; NE-Negative; PE-Positive.The Mamdani-type fuzzy inference model is used to design the fuzzy rules to get the corrected inertia weight. The nine possible fuzzy IF and THEN rules are used to adjust the inertia weight as given in Table 1. The surface view of rules is shown in Fig. 4. For example, rule 1 is written asIf (NFIT is S) and (ω is S) THEN (Δω is ZE)Fitness value is the best solution found in each step and the fitness value is normalized in between 0 and 1. The normalized fitness value is achieved by using the formula:(28)nfit=fit−fitminfitmax−fitminWhere fitmax and fitmin are the maximum and minimum fitness value obtained in successive iterations. The bound value for inertia weight is 0.4 to 1 and for corrected inertia weight is −0.1 to 0.1. Normalized fitness and inertia weight are given as input variables to the fuzzy system and corrected inertia weight is the output variable.To suit the real world problem, the fuzzy output from fuzzy inference system needs to be converted to a crisp output. The crisp value of the corrected inertia weight is obtained by defuzzification through centroid method.The objective function of OPF in Eq. (1) is solved by using HNM-FAPSO algorithm in order to get the generation values to achieve minimum generating cost. Initialize the parameters of HNM-FAPSO algorithm as given in Table 2. The input data including maximum and minimum generation constraints as well as the generation cost coefficients are read. The vertices are the random values selected in between the maximum and minimum generation output of each generator and the constraints are from (3) to (8). The optimized real power generation and voltage settings of each bus are obtained.To implement the HNM-FAPSO algorithm for solving MLCM, the following steps are carried out:Step 1:Consider bilateral and multilateral transactions and run Newton–Raphson to get line flow and check congestion.Step 2:If congestion occurs, then APSF for the congested lines is calculated by using Eq. (12).Step 3:Identify the sensitive generators to participate for rescheduling. The initial search space is selected based on their generation up ramp and down ramp as well as their maximum and minimum generation limits. The pseudo code for this step is as follows:If the difference of minimum and actual generation is greater than down ramp limit,minimum search space limit is taken as difference of minimum generation and actual generationelse,minimum search space is taken as down ramp limitIf the difference of maximum and actual generation is greater than up ramp limit,maximum search space limit is taken as difference of maximum generation and actual generationelsemaximum search space is taken as up ramp limitStep 4:NM subroutine is called where the initial population is randomly selected in the search space as found in Step 3 and the four operations are carried out to get the promising area based on the objective function Eq. (18).Step 5:Initial population for PSO is selected from NM updated population value.Step 6:PSO subroutine is called and the initial objective fitness value is calculated based on Eq. (18).Step 7:Fuzzy inference system is used to get the corrected inertia weight while executing PSO subroutine.Step 8:The velocity and position of the particle are updated based on their global and local best values by using Eqs. (26) and (27).Step 9:If the maximum number of iteration is reached, exit and get the optimized rescheduled values as well as the congestion cost. Otherwise, go to step 7.The Fig. 5illustrates the flowchart of the HNM-FAPSO algorithm to solve the congestion management problem.The HNM-FAPSO is applied for MLCM problem with the objective of minimizing congestion cost. This method is applied to the standard IEEE 30-bus system and IEEE 118-bus system. The algorithm is implemented in Matlab 7.8.0 programming language and the code is executed on 2.93GHz, 2 GB RAM, Intel Core 2 Duo HP desktop.The IEEE 30-bus system has 6 generators, 19 loads and 41 transmission lines. Bus 1 is considered as slack bus. The test system bus and line data can be obtained from [39]. The one line diagram of IEEE 30-bus system is shown in Fig. 6. This test system is intentionally chosen in order to compare the effectiveness of the proposed method with the algorithms presented by [32]. The parameters of generators are given in Table A1. The optimal generation schedule for the pool market is obtained by running OPF to get minimized generation cost and is given in Table 3. The initial population is created for 5 generators within its maximum and minimum generation limits and HNM-FAPSO gives the minimum generation cost values of 802.72$/h.The deregulation scenario is established in the test system by introducing bilateral and multilateral transactions. The transaction details are given in Table 4. After adding these transactions to the optimal schedule, the power flow in two transmission lines have exceeded their maximum MVA limit. The apparent power flow in line 10 which is connected between bus 6 and bus 8 and the apparent power flow in line 23 which is connected between bus 18 and bus 19 are 38.49MVA and 18.5665MVA against their MVA limit of 36.8MVA and 18.4MVA respectively.The generator sensitivity to the apparent power flow in the line is calculated by using Eq. (12) and is shown in Fig. 7. By analyzing Fig. 7, it is very clear that three generators at bus 8, 11 and 13 have more sensitive values for the two congested lines. Hence, these three generators are selected for rescheduling by using the proposed HNM-FAPSO algorithm. As bus 1 is slack bus, it is chosen for rescheduling to account for system losses. Thus, among the total six generators in IEEE 30-bus system, four generators are chosen for rescheduling. The rescheduled values are given in Table 5.The decrement cost of generator 13 is 25$/hr which is the lowest among all other generator buses. The HNM-FAPSO algorithm decrement the generation of bus 13 to 10.39MW whereas the other algorithms used in [32] has yielded the generation rescheduled value to 12MW. This accounts for the major reduction in congestion cost to 135.384$/hr. Also, results of various algorithms like NM, FAPSO and S-PSO are compared and it is shown that the proposed HNM-FAPSO is giving the superior result under this condition. The congestion cost obtained by various algorithms is depicted in Fig. 8. In [32], all generators are rescheduled and the lowest congestion cost is reported as 154.5486$/h whereas the proposed HNM-FAPSO method gives the least cost of 135.384$/h by rescheduling only four generators which is 12.4% less cost than the congestion cost obtained by ABFNM.Tables 6 and 7give the comparative results. From the results, system line losses are reduced to 11.811MW and Line Overload Factor (LOF) depicts better congestion management.The convergence graph of various algorithms is shown in Fig. 9. It is apparent that HNM-FAPSO converges in 35 iterations and gives the better solution when compared with other algorithms under this scenario.The performance of HNM-FAPSO algorithm with other algorithms such as NM, S-PSO and FAPSO is studied individually. Average rankings of the four algorithms are obtained from three tests such as Friedman, Aligned Friedman and Quade, and given in Table 8. The ranking shows that statistical performance of proposed HNM-FAPSO algorithm is better than other algorithms. The p values generated from Holm, Hommel and Holland tests with a level of significance α=0.05 for different algorithms are compared with HNM-FAPSO. The statistical tests reject the hypothesis that has a p value≤0.05. Table 9clearly gives that the proposed HNM-FAPSO is significantly far better than the existing algorithms.Due to the stochastic nature of these algorithms, 40 trials have been carried out and the result of critical performance indexes such as best, worst and mean congestion cost, standard deviation, simulation time as well as the percent saving of power is presented in Table 10and it is pictorially portrayed in Fig. 10.In the algorithm, the initial rescheduled generation values are taken in a stochastic way and the algorithm converges based on the previous best fitness solution. In order to attribute the robustness of the proposed algorithm, 40 trials are performed for each algorithm and the best and worst fitness values are identified and the effectiveness of the algorithm is justified by its low mean fitness value and minimum standard deviation.The proposed algorithm gives a reasonable performance level with reliable results. The standard deviation is less for HNM-FAPSO and is 0.373. The power loss by using the proposed algorithm is 11.811MW whereas before rescheduling, the power loss is 12.257MW. Thus, there is a power saving of 4.589%. The percent of congestion cost saving by HNM-FAPSO when compared with other algorithms is given in Table 11.The IEEE 118-bus system is taken to test the adaptability of the proposed algorithm in a large power system. It represents a portion of American Electric Power System. The line details and bus details are obtained from [39]. It consists of 54 generators, 99 loads and 186 transmission lines. A total load demand of 4242MW is dispatched in pool market. Here, the slack bus is given as bus number 69. The parameters of generators are given in Table A2.OPF is executed and the optimum settings of real power generation are obtained. The total generation cost is given in Table 12. Here, bilateral and multilateral transactions are scheduled as listed in Table 13. A total of 348MW is scheduled for a particular hour.The ISO perform load flow for the hour after incorporating the transactions submitted by GENCO and congestion occur in transmission line connected between buses 8 and 5 named as C1 and between buses 26 and 30 named as C2. Therefore, congestion has to be prevented by active power rescheduling. APSF is computed for the congested lines by using Eq. (12) and they are plotted in Fig. 11.From Fig. 11, generators at bus 1, 4, 6 and 12 show more sensitive to C1 whereas generators at 24, 25 and 26 show strong sensitive for C2. Therefore, seven generators are chosen based on their more sensitive values for both lines. MLCM is crucial when compared to single line CM as more analysis is required when selecting generators. Bus 69 is a slack bus and it is chosen to manage losses. Among the total number of 54 generators in this system, only eight generators are chosen for MLCM. Thus, ISO has easy way of mitigating congestion by proper selection of generators as well as their bids.Various algorithms are employed to reschedule those generators to relieve congestion so as to get minimum congestion cost. The rescheduled generation by using the proposed HNM-FAPSO method is depicted in Table 14along with their best and worst cost and it is pictorially portrayed in Fig. 12. It is obvious that the rescheduled real power required by the proposed algorithm is 104.827MW, which is the lowest one among other algorithms. In addition, the congestion cost by HNM-FAPSO is 4504.9$/hr.The average rankings of the proposed HNM-FAPSO, NM, S-PSO, FAPSO are highlighted in Table 15and is obvious that the proposed HNM-FAPSO scored first rank among its competitors. Apart from their rankings, the significance of the algorithm is compared by obtaining p-value by considering level of significance α=0.05 in Holm, Hommel and Holland tests. These results are tabulated in Table 16.All the other algorithms are rejected as these tests reject the hypothesis that has p value≤0.05. HNM-FAPSO is significantly better than the other algorithms.After MLCM, the line flow is within their permissible MVA limit as given in Table 17. The total system line loss was 87.620MW after implementing scheduled transactions whereas after MLCM, line losses are reduced to 83.940MW as tabulated in Table 18. The line overload factor is improved by utilizing the line to its maximum extent. The reduction of congestion cost and power savings comparison is given in Table 19.The convergence characteristic of MLCM for IEEE 118-bus system is shown in Fig. 13. The HNM-FAPSO algorithm is converged in 300 iterations as IEEE 118-bus system is a larger system compared to IEEE 30-bus system.The computation time taken for MLCM is very important as extended time is very critic which may lead to cascaded outages or even blackouts. Table 20shows the computation time required in seconds for both the test systems considered. It is very apparent that HNM-FAPSO method computes faster than other methods. Even though MLCM is an offline process, it needs very less time to avoid failure. Thus, the computation time required to solve congestion by HNM-FAPSO is acceptable for ISO to reschedule generators.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
