@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhanced parallel Differential Evolution algorithm for problems in computational systems biology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider global optimization problems in computational systems biology.We propose an asynchronous parallel implementation of Differential Evolution (DE).The new algorithm also incorporates improved heuristics to exploit the specific structure of the systems biology problems.Tested with benchmarks problems, including the calibration of non-linear dynamic models of biological systems.Excellent results both in terms of quality of the solution and regarding speedup and scalability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computational systems biology,Parallel metaheuristics,Distributed differential evolution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many key problems in computational systems biology and bioinformatics can be formulated and solved using a global optimization framework. The complexity of the underlying mathematical models require the use of efficient solvers in order to obtain satisfactory results in reasonable computation times. Metaheuristics are gaining recognition in this context, with Differential Evolution (DE) as one of the most popular methods. However, for most realistic applications, like those considering parameter estimation in dynamic models, DE still requires excessive computation times.Here we consider this latter class of problems and present several enhancements to DE based on the introduction of additional algorithmic steps and the exploitation of parallelism. In particular, we propose an asynchronous parallel implementation of DE which has been extended with improved heuristics to exploit the specific structure of parameter estimation problems in computational systems biology. The proposed method is evaluated with different types of benchmarks problems: (i) black-box global optimization problems and (ii) calibration of non-linear dynamic models of biological systems, obtaining excellent results both in terms of quality of the solution and regarding speedup and scalability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Global optimization methods are playing an increasingly important role in computational biology [1], bioinformatics [2] and systems biology [3]. In the case of the field of systems biology, the aim is to understand complex biological systems by combining experimental data with mathematical modelling and computational methods.Building these mathematical models is an iterative process which starts with the definition of the purpose of the model and the selection of a model framework. Then, a mathematical structure is proposed with a set of non-measurable parameters. After that, these parameters are estimated in order to obtain quantitative predictions. Finally, the model is (in)validated with new experiments, obtaining feedback which can be subsequently used in a refinement process.The parameter estimation step is key in this iterative model building process and can be formulated as a mathematical optimization problem subject to the dynamic constraints which describe the time-dependent behaviour of the system. Most biological models are highly non-linear dynamical systems, resulting in challenging multi-modal problems which are very difficult to solve, as described in [4].Global optimization methods are robust alternatives to solve these complex optimization problems. They can be roughly classified in two classes, deterministic methods and stochastic (including heuristic) methods. In the first type, the solution retrieved will be the global optimum, though the computational effort to ensure global optimality might be extremely large, making them impractical. Stochastic and other heuristic methods do not guarantee convergence to the global optimum, but they usually provide near-global solutions in reasonable computation times.In the case of stochastic methods, many research efforts have focused on developing metaheuristic (i.e. guided heuristic) methods which are able to locate the vicinity of the global solution in reasonable computation. In order to reduce further the computational cost of these methods, a number of researchers have studied parallel strategies for metaheuristics [5,6]. In the area of computational systems biology, parallel methods have already shown promising results [7–9].Differential Evolution (DE) [10] is one of the most popular heuristics for global optimization, and it has been successfully used in many different areas [11–13]. In particular, DE remains as a widely used method for parametric identification of complex models [14–16]. However, in most realistic applications, this population-based method requires a very large number of evaluations (and therefore, large computation time) to obtain an acceptable result. Thus, in order to improve the runtime of the classical DE algorithm, two main strategies have been preliminary explored by us in [17]. First, including a selected local search and other algorithmic improvements in order to enhance the classical DE through intensification, drastically reducing the number of evaluations required. Second, exploiting parallelism at different levels, so as to reduce the computational time needed. In this paper, we extend significantly our previous work to include: (i) further description of the asynchronous parallel strategy and its improvement in the global search through the enhancement in diversification due to a cooperative scheme, (ii) an additional extensive experimental analysis both in black-box global optimization problems and in calibration of non-linear dynamic models of biological systems. Regarding experimental results, both vertical and horizontal views [18] are analyzed in this paper. A vertical approach assesses the performance of a fix number of evaluations, i.e., a predefined effort; while an horizontal view assesses the performance by measuring the time needed to reach a given target value. Our main goal is to improve the horizontal approach, however, the vertical approach will also benefit from the proposed solution, which is interesting for many real world applications where the total number of evaluations is limited.The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 covers the related work, while Section 3 presents a brief overview of the DE algorithm. Section 4 describes the asynchronous strategy proposed to parallelize an island-based DE algorithm. Section 5 describes the new heuristics for parameter estimation that have been added to improve local search. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated in Section 6, demonstrating its good efficiency and scalability. Finally, Section 7 summarizes the main conclusions of our study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented an improved Differential Evolution algorithm designed to solve complex problems in computational systems biology. The key idea is to achieve a proper balance of the exploration abilities of DE and the exploitation abilities of efficient local search. The method improves global search through an asynchronous parallel implementation based on a cooperative island-model. The improved local search is implemented by means of several heuristics (efficient local solver, tabu list, logarithmic search) which exploit the structure of parameter estimation problems in systems biology, the main application area considered here.It should be noted that, although the method presented here is based on a parsimonious hybrid (global–local) design, the three heuristic enhancements introduced in the local search are fundamental to successfully exploit the special characteristics of these systems biology problems, which are typically very ill-conditioned and highly multimodal, as reviewed in [4]. The results obtained show that this improved local search mechanism, combined with the parallel cooperation scheme, allow an adequate balance between exploration and exploitation for the class of problems considered.The experimental results show that (i) convergence time can be reduced by several orders of magnitude when the local search heuristics are included in the DE algorithm, and (ii) the asynchronous parallel strategy proposed attains a further reduction in the convergence time through collaboration of the parallel processes, demonstrating also a competitive speedup against the synchronous approaches.As an example of the practical significance of this work, one of the systems biology benchmarks considered, the 3-steps pathway problem, typically requires more than 3 days of computation time using the classical version of DE executed in one of the cores of our test machine, but it can be solved in less than 1min with the novel asynchronous parallel method presented.Although the improved DE was designed and tested with focus on the field of parameter estimation problems in computational systems biology, it can also be directly applied to solve arbitrary global optimization problems.