@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hesitant fuzzy model of computational trust considering hesitancy, vagueness and uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A trust model based on hesitant fuzzy multi-criteria decision making is proposed.It is capable of taking into account the fundamental building blocks of trust.It considers the hesitancy and vagueness of trust decision making process.It considers the subjectivity and uncertainty of trust decision making process.Its effectiveness is demonstrated by providing several evaluation scenarios.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Trust modeling,Hesitant fuzzy sets (HFS),Comparative linguistic expressions,Vagueness,Uncertainty,Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this work is to introduce a trust model, which is highly consistent with the social nature of trust in computational domains. To this end, we propose a hesitant fuzzy multi-criteria decision making based computational trust model capable of taking into account the fundamental building blocks corresponding to the concept of trust. The proposed model is capable of considering the contextuality property of trust and the subjective priorities of the trustor regarding the chosen goal. This is due to viewing trust not as a single label or an integrated concept, but as a collection of trustworthiness facets that may form the trust decision in various contexts and toward different goals. The main benefit of the proposed model is the consideration of the hesitancy of recommenders and the trustor in the process of trust decision making which can create a more flexible mapping between the social and computational requirements of trust. This type of formulation also allows for taking into account the vagueness of the provided opinions. In addition to the vagueness of the provided opinions, the model is capable of considering the certainty of recommendations and its effect on the aggregation process of gathered opinions. In the proposed model, the taste of the recommenders and the similarity of opinions are also considered. This will allow the model to assign more weight to recommendations that have a similar taste compared to the trustor. Finally, taking into consideration the attitudes of the trustors toward change of personality that may occur for various entities in the environment is another advantage of the proposed model. A step-by-step illustrative example and the results of several experimental evaluations, which demonstrate the benefits of the proposed model, are also presented in this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Similar to the social domain where trust is considered as the glue of the society[1], computational trust is becoming more and more important in various domains of virtual and multi-agent environments. Over the past years, computational trust has found its place in multiple fields such as decision support systems, recommender systems, wireless sensor networks, service oriented environments and social networks.Without trust, we need lots of control [2,3]. This is the main reason behind the recently developed holistic security approaches with the aim of minimizing the use of classical security control mechanisms and maximizing the use of trust-based relationships and transactions [4,5].To this end, a wide range of approaches for computational trust modeling have been introduced so far. Fuzzy models, probabilistic-based approaches, logic-driven approaches and statistical models are some of the more commonly used techniques to model the social concept of trust in computational domains. Although all these approaches provide their own unique benefits, some shortcomings can still be identified.Most of the proposed computational trust models consider the concept of trust as a whole. In other words, trust is considered as a single quantitative or qualitative value. Based on this single value, the trustor tries to decide about the trustworthiness of an entity. The biggest problem with such an assumption is that different people (or any kind of cognitive decision maker) have their own subjective opinion about success. A criterion which is important for the trustor to consider an interaction satisfactory, may not be of much importance to a recommender or another type of trustor. This is a limitation for trust models because they cannot properly take the goal of the trustor and context of application into account.Another shortcoming is the type of trust metrics that are used in trust models. Trust metric defines the trust values that can be used to express trust-related opinions about the existing entities. In computational trust models, this metric can be considered as crisp quantitative numbers, labels or qualitative linguistic variables. Quantitative trust metrics are not compatible with the nature of human relations. People prefer to express their opinions by using linguistic terms such as good, bad and so on. On the other hand, qualitative trust metrics commonly used by fuzzy trust models in the literature lack the flexibility to allow the entities to express their opinions in a comparative manner. Also, the hesitancy of humans in expressing their opinions is not considered in these models. In addition, most of the trust models are not aware of the uncertainty or vagueness of the entities when they express their trust-related opinions or they incorrectly consider both of these concepts as confidence. Certainty denotes how sure an entity is about her/his provided opinion whereas vagueness denotes how vague and unclear the provided opinion is. Therefore, a trust model should be capable of considering both these concepts and their effects on the trust decision making process.The final identified shortcoming is the consideration of taste or similarity between opinions. A recommender may have a different viewpoint or taste compared to the trustor. This cannot be considered as malicious behavior but should be taken into account when a trustor is aggregating the opinions received from recommenders. A recommender with similar taste to the trustor should have a higher weight compared to a recommender with different taste.Based on these shortcomings we aim to propose a novel computational trust model capable of taking into account the hesitancy, vagueness, taste and uncertainty of entities in calculating the trustworthiness values.Recently, the use of hesitant fuzzy linguistic term sets (HFLTS) has gained attention [6–11]. It is shown that by using HFLTS one can flexibly account for the case where decision makers hesitate amongst different values due to thinking of several linguistic terms to express their opinions. Hesitant fuzzy set (HFS) was first introduced by Torra [12].There are other choices such as interval-valued fuzzy sets (IVFS) or intuitionistic fuzzy sets (IFS) and its extensions such as temporal IFS introduced by Atanassov et al., [13,14] but in our opinion using HFS provide a more natural modeling infrastructure for the unique characteristics of trust decision making. The benefits of using HFS for modeling the trust decision making process are as follows:1.HFSs allow the membership degrees of an element to be a set of several possible values between 0 and 1. Hence, they are highly beneficial in modeling situations where people have hesitancy in providing their preferences over the existing alternatives in the decision making process [15]. In the context of trust decision making, being hesitant about the trustworthiness of a trustee candidate is an inherent characteristic. Trust means nothing if we are certain about a trustee candidate and we have no hesitancy about its trustworthiness.HFSs are able to describe the situations that allow the membership of an element corresponding to a given set having a few different values, which is a useful tool to describe and deal with uncertain information in multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) processes. Consider a situation in which several decision makers exist and they want to estimate the degree that an alternative should satisfy a criterion. Suppose that there are three cases, some decision makers provide 0.3, some provide 0.5 and the others provide 0.6 and these three decision makers groups cannot reach a definite conclusion or persuade each other. Hence, the degree that the alternative should satisfy the criterion can be represented by a hesitant fuzzy element {0.3,0.5,0.6}. It should be noted that the HFE {0.3,0.5,0.6} can describe the above situation more objectively compared to the interval-valued fuzzy set [0.3,0.6]. This is because the degrees that the alternative should satisfy the criterion are not a convex combination of 0.3 and 0.6 or the interval between 0.3 and 0.6 but just three possible values [16,17].If we use any of the extended fuzzy sets such as IFSs or IVFSs to represent the decision given by these three decision makers groups, much useful information may be lost, which may lead to an inconsistent or unreasonable decision. Therefore, it is more suitable and flexible to describe the uncertain evaluation information by using HFS [18,19].The use of hesitant fuzzy linguistic term sets (as an extension of HFSs) improves the previous linguistic approaches. This is due to providing experts a greater flexibility in eliciting linguistic preferences through the use of context-free grammars that fix the rules to build flexible linguistic expressions to express preferences. In particular it allows the use of comparative linguistic expressions [20,21].The process of modeling is very close to the humans’ cognitive process when using HFSs. It should be noted that the modeling of fuzzy information by other extended forms such as IFSs or IVFSs is based on the elicitation of single or interval values that should encompass and express the information provided by the decision makers when determining the membership of an element to a given set. Nevertheless, in some cases, the decision makers (or experts) involved in the problem may have a set of possible values, and thus, they cannot provide a single term or an interval value to express their preferences or assessments because they are thinking of several possible values at the same time. In such a case, the HFS, whose membership is represented by a set of possible values, can solve this problem perfectly, while the above mentioned extensions are either invalid or unsuitable [18].The proposition of HFS is motivated for the common difficulty that often appears when the membership degree of an element must be established and the difficulty is not because of an error margin (as in IFS) or due to some possibility distribution (as in T2FS), but rather because there are some possible values that make to hesitate about which one would be the right one [22]. This situation is very common in trust decision making when a trustor might consider different degrees of membership such as {0.67,0.72,0.74}.The general scheme of our proposed trust decision making model is based on the introduced hesitant decision making approach by Rodriguez et al. [11,20,23], which is a well-established model of decision making based on HFLTS. In the proposed approach, we only use hesitant fuzzy sets where all the memberships are finite sets. Such sets correspond to the so-called typical hesitant fuzzy sets, which were introduced by Bedregal et al. [24,25].In our formulation, we consider each trustworthiness facets such as competence, motivation, availability, willingness and so on as a criterion in a multi-criteria decision making scheme. This will allow our model to take into account the context and goal of the trustor. As an example, in one context, availability and motivation may be of importance, whereas in another context, competence and willingness may have the highest priority. Recommenders can express their opinion in a hesitant and comparative manner. Also, by using a separate hesitant linguistic term set, the certainty of recommenders about their opinions can be considered. In addition, smaller weights are assigned to vague opinions whereas larger weights are given to opinions with definite and clear values.By using the hesitant normalized Hamming distance measure [26,27], we take into account the similarity of evaluations between the recommenders and the trustor. This will allow the model to increase (or decrease) the weights of recommenders with similar (or dissimilar) tastes. In addition, the model is capable of taking into account various attitudes of the trustor toward change of personality. Change of personality refers to the situation where an entity starts its life cycle by acting honestly and later on changes its behavior to a malicious type (or the entity changes its taste compared to the trustor's evaluation). The model is capable of adapting itself with the change of personality with various speeds which denotes the various attitudes of the trustor toward this phenomenon.The summary of the main contributions of the proposed approach are as follows:1.The proposition of a computational trust model that can take into account the hesitancy of entities in providing their opinion.The consideration of context by dividing the concept of trust to various trustworthiness criteria and formulate the trust decision making process as a multi-criteria decision making problem.The consideration of the vagueness and uncertainty of recommenders when they provide a recommendation.Taking into account the taste of recommenders in their expressed opinions.Accounting for the various attitudes of the trustors toward change of personality.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the required background knowledge for hesitant fuzzy sets and the foundational concepts of trust are introduced. In Section 3, the related work of this research is reviewed. In Section 4, the general scheme and details of the proposed model is introduced. In Section 5, an illustrative example is provided to describe the step-by-step procedure of the proposed approach. In Section 6, experimental evaluations are given. In this section, a set of simulation scenarios are devised in order to demonstrate the behavior and the effectiveness of the proposed model. Finally, the paper reaches a conclusion in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a computational trust model based on hesitant fuzzy linguistic term sets. We have shown that by using this formulation, the hesitancy of the recommenders and the trustor in expressing their evaluations can be considered. The comparative linguistic structure used by the model enables the recommenders to provide a more accurate opinion in a more flexible manner.In addition, by taking into account the vagueness of the provided opinions, the model is capable of increasing the weights of definite and clear opinions and decreasing the weights of unclear and vague evaluations. By using an additional linguistic terms set, the certainty of recommenders when they provide a recommendation is also considered. This will allow the recommender to give her/his opinion in the form of a two tuple construct such as (evaluation, certainty)=(atleasthigh, betweensureandverysure). The consideration of both the vagueness and certainty parameters instead of assuming them as a single construct (i.e. confidence) is a distinct feature of the proposed model compared to the commonly used computational trust models. Another beneficial aspect of the proposed model is the consideration of opinions’ similarity between recommenders and trustor. The similarity of opinions can be regarded as taste. For example, a recommender may have a different perspective or taste compared to the trustor and deems an entity highly trustworthy whereas the trustor her/himself assumes little trust for that entity. By updating the weights of the recommenders based on the hesitant normalized Hamming distance of the direct evaluations and the provided opinions, the model can take the similarity of the provided opinions into account. A problem that many computational trust models face is the change of personality. This problem refers to the situation where an entity such as a recommender starts behaving honestly and then changes her/his behavior to malicious or vice versa. It is shown that not only the model is capable of taking the change of personality into account it can also consider the attitude of the trustor toward the adaptability to change of personality. In other words, some people will rapidly change their mind about an entity that was behaving honestly in its past and is now acting maliciously, whereas others will change their mind very slowly.We also plan to extend this model in order to make it more capable and flexible. The developments and extensions we intend to perform as the future work of this research are as follows:1.Using other extensions that combine the benefits of hesitant fuzzy sets with interval-valued fuzzy sets [71] or intuitionistic fuzzy sets [72].Considering the element of risk in the model. Risk and regret play an important role in trust-based relationships. Thus, to be truly close to its social counterpart, a computational trust model should be able to consider these parameters.Applying the proposed general trust decision making scheme to a specific application context such as social networks. Many parameters are specific to different application contexts. For example, role impact factor and social intimacy degree are two of the most important factors in trust-based relations in social networks [73,74].Considering a re-formulation of the proposed model to more closely follow the Z-number [75] approach and CWW paradigm [76] for expressing the opinions’ certainty.