@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient heuristic to obtain a better initial feasible solution to the transportation problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a better heuristic to obtain a better IFS to the transportation problem.We find that 88.9% of the solved problems by JHM led to the optimal solution.We demonstrated that the ZSM does not provide the optimal solution all the time.The developed JHM is coded using C++ programming language.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heuristic,Initial feasible solution,Transportation problem,Minimal total cost solution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Transportation of products from sources to destinations with minimal total cost plays an important role in logistics and supply chain management. All algorithms start with an initial feasible solution in obtaining the minimal total cost solution to this problem. Generally, better is the initial feasible solution lesser is the number of iterations of obtaining the minimal total cost solution. Here, first we demonstrate a deficiency of a recently developed method in obtaining the minimal total cost solution to this problem. Then we develop a better polynomial time (O(N3) (N, higher of the numbers of source and destination nodes)) heuristic solution technique to obtain a better initial feasible solution to the transportation problem. Because of the intractability of carrying out enormous calculations in this heuristic technique without a soft computing program, this technique is coded using C++ programming language. Comparative studies of this heuristic with the best available ones in the literature on results of some numerical problems are carried out to show better performance of the current one. Our heuristic is found to lead to the minimal total cost solution in most cases (88.89%) of the studied numerical problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The transportation problem deals with transporting a homogeneous product from multi-source to multi-destination with the minimal total cost subject to satisfaction of the supply and the demand constrains. The network diagram of this problem is depicted in Fig. 1. It is a special case of Linear Programming Problem (LPP). The application of the transportation model can be extended to other areas of operation, including inventory control, employment scheduling, and personnel assignment (Taha [46]).In order to proceed with a minimal total cost solution technique to the transportation problem, it is necessary to start with an initial feasible solution (IFS). Thus IFS acts as a foundation to a minimal total cost solution technique to this problem. In obtaining an IFS to the transportation problem many heuristics solution techniques have been presented in the literature. VAM - Vogel's Approximation Method (Reinfeld and Vogel [36]), GVAM – Goyal's version of VAM (Goyal [14]), TOM – Total opportunity-cost method (Kirca and Şatir [22]), Northwest Corner Method (Taha [46]), Minimum Cost Method (Taha [46]) are familiar ones. Besides, Sharma and Sharma [41] proposed a new solution procedure to solve the dual of the incapacitated transportation problem. Sharma and Prasad [40] presented a heuristic that obtained a very good starting solution to the transportation problem in O(N3) time. Mathirajan and Meenakshi [30] claimed that their proposed VAM-TOC approach provided a very efficient initial feasible solution. They supported their claim by highlighting the solutions to numerical problems where 20% of them led to the minimal total cost solution, and the rest of them led to the near minimal total cost solution. Because of the intractability of carrying out enormous calculations in northwest corner method, minimum cost method, row minimum cost method, column minimum cost method and VAM for finding an IFS to the transportation problem, they were implemented in C++ by Imam et al. [16] and Sen et al. [39]. Kulkarni and Datar [26] developed a heuristic based algorithm to attain an initial feasible solution in obtaining the minimal total cost solution to the modified unbalanced transportation problem. Vasko and Storozhyshina [48] examined the importance of processing the dummy column (row) in the VAM, the Greedy heuristic (Winston [49]), Northwest Corner method, the maximum demand method (Pargar et al., [33]) and Russell's method (Hillier and Lieberman [15]) for solving unbalanced transportation problem. Shimshak et al. [42] and Balakrishnan [5] proposed certain modifications to VAM for obtaining initial solutions to the unbalanced transportation problem. Schrenk et al. [38] analyzed degeneracy characterizations for two classical problems: the transportation paradox in linear transportation problems and the pure constant fixed charge (there is no variable cost and the fixed charge is the same on all routes) transportation problems. Juman et al. [20] performed a sensitivity analysis on VAM procedure to see the effect of balancing and unbalancing issues on the initial cost of VAM. Liu [27] studied the transportation problem with varying demands and supplies within their respective ranges. Following these variations the minimal total cost were also varied within an interval. So, he constructed a pair of mathematical programs where at least one of the supply or the demand was varying, to calculate the lower and the upper bounds of the total transportation cost. Juman and Hoque [21] demonstrated the failure of Liu [27]’s approach in providing the correct upper minimal total cost bound solution at all the time. Besides, Juman and Hoque [21] extended the Liu's [27] model to include the inventory costs during transportation and at destinations, as they are interrelated factors. Then they developed heuristic techniques to find the lower and the upper minimal total cost bounds to this extended model. Korukoğlu and Balli [24] proposed an improvement to the well-known VAM by taking the total opportunity cost into account. They claimed through computational experiments that this improved VAM provided more efficient initial feasible solution to a large scale transportation problem. VAM was also improved by using total opportunity and allocation costs by Singh et al. [43]. Deshmukh [11] proposed a new method called an innovative method (NMD) to provide an initial feasible solution to the transportation problem. However, among the existing heuristics in obtaining an IFS, VAM is one of the most efficient heuristics to the transportation problems as it facilitates a very good IFS (often an optimal solution). Moreover, very recently, a new approach called “Zero Suffix Method” (ZSM) was proposed by Sudhakar et al. [45] in obtaining a minimal total cost solution to the transportation problem. But, we demonstrate here that the ZSM does not provide the minimal total cost solution always. Instead, it has been found to provide a very good initial feasible solution. Hence, VAM and ZSM can be considered as the best available methods in obtaining an IFS in the literature. General understanding is that better is an IFS lesser is the number of iterations in obtaining the minimal total cost solution to the transportation problem. This notion has motivated us to develop a better method of obtaining an efficient IFS to the transportation problem, so that starting with the obtained IFS the minimal total cost solution to the problem can easily be obtained by a well-known technique.Here we also survey some papers which are concerned with the development of the minimal total cost solution technique to the transportation problem. Various minimal total cost solution techniques to the transportation problem have been developed. Charnes and Cooper [8] developed the Stepping Stone Method, Dantzig [9] proposed the Modified Distribution Method, Srinivasan and Thompson [44] described two new primal basic methods – the cell and area cost operator algorithms for solving the transportation problem. Adlakha and Kowalski [1] proposed an alternative algorithm to reach to the minimal total cost solution. Pandian and Natarajan [31] presented a new method called “fuzzy zero point method” in obtaining the minimal total cost solution to the transportation problem where the transportation cost, supply and demand are trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. This zero point method was improved by Samuel [37] for solving both crisp and fuzzy based transportation problems. Ramadan and Ramadan [34] developed a hybrid two-stage algorithm (GA-RSM) to find the minimal total cost solution to this problem. The first stage uses genetic algorithm (GA) to find an improved initial basic solution and the second stage utilizes this solution as a starting point in the revised simplex method (RSM) to get the minimal total cost solution to the problem.Further, we also, survey some variant of the transportation problems such as Solid Transportation Problems, Fixed charge transportation problems, Fuzzy transportation Problems, etc. Adlakha and Kowalski [2] presented a simple heuristic algorithm for the solution of small fixed-charge transportation problems (the extension of the transportation problem in which a fixed cost is incurred). Liu and Kao [28] studied a fuzzy transportation problem, in which the cost coefficients and the supplies and the demands are fuzzy numbers. They formulated a pair of mathematical programs to calculate the bounds of the fuzzy total transportation cost. Li et al. [29] proposed a neural network approach for multi-criteria solid transportation problem (a generalization of traditional transportation problem in which the different modes of transports called conveyances are available for shipment of products). Jimenez and Verdegay [18] studied both Interval solid transportation problem (ISTP is a generalization of the STP in which input data are expressed as intervals instead of point values) and the fuzzy solid transportation problem (FSTP is a generalization of the STP in which supplies, demands and conveyance capacities are trapezoidal fuzzy numbers). Jimenez and Verdegay [19] proposed a solution procedure for uncertain solid transportation problem (a generalized transportation problem in which the conveyance are available and the inputs of the problems are not the point values). Jimenez and Verdegay [17] proposed an evolutionary algorithm based solution approach for solving fuzzy solid transportation problems. Das et al. [10] discussed the limitation of Vogel's Approximation Method (VAM) and developed an improved algorithm after resolving this limitation for solving transportation problem. Pandian and Natarajan [32] proposed a new method for finding a minimal solution to bottleneck transportation problems (a special case of a transportation problem in which a time is associated with each shipping route). Ramadoss et al. [35] presented an innovative implementation of evolutionary heuristic algorithm to solve the assignment problem (a special type of transportation problem). Kowalski et al. [25] developed a simple algorithm to attain the global solution to a small sized fixed charge transportation problem. Bielefeld [7] studied the transportation problem with mixed constraints (a standard transportation problem with two additional constraints on supplier's and buyer's ends) and propped a method of its solution. Evans et al. [12] established a necessary and sufficient condition for unimodularity in the multi-commodity transportation problem along with a constructive proof. Gen et al. [13] proposed the genetic algorithm solution approach to the generalized transportation problem (GTP) and to GTP with a fixed charge (fc-GTP). Bertsekas and Castanon [6] generalized the auction algorithm to solve linear transportation problems, and showed that this generalized version is very efficient for certain types of transportation problems. Kleinschmidt and Schannath [23] described a strongly polynomial algorithm for the transportation problem. Vancroonenburg et al. [47] studied the Red-Blue Transportation Problem, a generalization of the transportation problem in which supply points are partitioned into two sets. Here, two integer programming formulations of this problem have been provided and shown that one of them is strictly stronger than the other. Zangiabadi and Rabie [50] presented a multi-objective transportation model with consideration of qualitative and quantitative data. They used a fuzzy goal programming technique to obtain the solution to this model. Adlakha and Kowalski [3] developed an alternative solution algorithm for solving certain transportation problems. Aizemberg et al. [4] presented a modeling study for the oil transportation problem.Here we present a better efficient heuristic solution technique denoted by JHM (Juman & Hoque Method) to obtain better IFS to the transportation problem. Unlike the existing heuristic techniques in the literature, JHM starts with an infeasible solution and leads to an efficient IFS. Benefits of JHM over VAM can be expressed as follows:1.For unbalanced transportation problem where the total supply>the total demand, VAM needs balancing by adding a dummy destination whereas the proposed JHM does not need such a balancing. In JHM Dummy allocations are only needed when the minimal total cost solution technique starts with an initial feasible solution. However, when the total supply is less than the total demand, VAM and JHM follow the same way of balancing for finding an initial solution.Unlike VAM, the tie-breaking feature is incorporated in JHM.Only column penalties are calculated in JHM whereas both row and column penalties are calculated in VAM. In the former, in each of the iterations column penalties are calculated for the columns with allocations only whereas in the latter column penalties are calculated for all columns.Because of the intractability of carrying out huge calculations in JHM without a soft computing program, the JHM technique is coded using C++ programming language.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 deals with the formulation of the transportation problem. VAM is summarized in Section 3. ZSM, its deficiency and few errors from the previous articles are summarized in Section 4. In Section 5 JHM is proposed and illustrated with a numerical example. Then the comparative studies of JHM with VAM and ZSM on the results of numerical examples are carried out to show the promising performance of the proposed technique JHM in Section 6. Conclusion by highlighting the limitations of the current research and indicating the future research scope on the topic is drawn in Section 7.Assumptions(i)Both the supply and the demand quantities are deterministic.Multi-buyer sourcing a single product from multi-supplier.NotationmTotal number of supply nodes (suppliers)Total number of demand nodes (buyers)Supply quantity (in units) from ith supply nodeDemand in units of the jth buyerUnit transportation cost from ith supply node to jth demand nodeNumber of units to be transported from node i to node j in attaining the minimal total costThe transportation problem is to transport a homogenous product from multi-source to multi-destination to meet demand of each destination with minimum total transportation cost. The transportation problem considered here can be formulated as follows:(1)Min∑i=1m∑j=1ncijxijSubject to∑j=1nxij≤Si,i=1,2,…,m∑i=1mxij=Dj,j=1,2,…,nwherexij≥0∀i,j.The steps involved in attaining an IFS by VAM can be described as follows:Step 1 If the total supply is not equal to the total demand then make them equal by setting a dummy row or a dummy column.Step 2 For each row and each column of the transportation table, find the difference between the least and the next least shipping costs.Step 3 Select a row or a column with the largest difference (select arbitrarily in case of tie).Step 4 Assign the highest possible amount to the least cost cell of the selected row or column to satisfy demand.Step 5 Eliminate a row or a column in which no supply quantity is available or the demand is completely satisfied by the assignment made in step 4.Step 6 Recalculate the cost differences in rows and columns without considering the eliminated row/rows and column/columns.Step 7 Move to step 3 and repeat the steps 3–6 until an initial feasible solution has been reached.Without providing any theoretical proof, Sudhakar et al. [45] proposed a new method called Zero Suffix Method (ZSM) for finding a minimal total cost solution to the transportation problem. By comparing the results of only two numerical problems, they claimed that the ZSM was unique, and it provided always a minimal total cost solution without creating degeneracy. They described the ZSM algorithm as follows:Step 1 Construct the transportation table for the given transportation problem.Step 2 Subtract each row entries of the transportation table from the row minimum and then subtract each column entries of the resulting transportation table (after using the step 1) from the column minimum and obtain the reduced cost matrix.Step 3 In the reduced cost matrix there will be at least one zero in each row and in each column. Find the suffix value denoted by S of all the zeros in the reduced cost matrix, where S={Add the costs of nearest adjacent sides of zeros/No. of costs added}.Step 4 Choose the maximum of all S. If there is only one maximum value, first satisfy the demand to the cell corresponding to that maximum. If it has multiple maximum values, then select {ai, bj} and supply to that demand maximum possible (then satisfy all the demands to the cells corresponding to those maximum).Step 5 Eliminate a row or a column in which no supply quantity is available or the demand is completely satisfied by the assignment made in step 4. If there is at least one zero in each row and in each column then go to step 6. Else go to step 2.Step 6 Repeat step 3 to step 5 until the minimal total cost is obtained.ZSM proposed by Sudhakar et al. [45] does not provide the minimal total cost solution all the time. This is demonstrated by comparative solutions of four numerical problems in Table 1.For the studied numerical examples in Table 1 ZSM fails to provide the minimal total cost solution to any of them, and hence these results clearly demonstrate the deficiency of ZSM in obtaining the minimal total cost solution to the transportation problem.Here we point out some erroneous results of numerical problems provided in the literature.(i)For the numerical example problem 1 in Sudhakar et al. [45], the authors found the minimal total cost as 75 with values of the variables asx12=1,x15=2,x21=1,x23=1,x26=2,x34=3,x42=2,x43=1But, this solution is not feasible as the equality constraints are not satisfied (i.e. x12(=1)+x42(=2)≠D2(=2) and x23(=1)+x43(=1)≠D3(=3). However, by correctly using the ZSM, we obtained the minimal total cost of this problem 1 as 75 with values of the variables asx12=1,x15=2,x21=1,x22=1,x26=2,x34=3,x43=3.Similarly, for the numerical example problem 2 in Sudhakar et al. [45], the authors found the minimal total cost as 93 with values of the variables asx11=1,x15=2,x21=1,x26=3,x33=1,x34=3,x42=3,x43=1.Actual minimal total cost can be found from this solution as 83.Sen et al. [39] coded VAM in C++ and found initial feasible solution for one numerical problem. But, we found that this coding of VAM worked for none of the problem solved. They obtained the total cost for the initial feasible solution for the data given in Tables 2–4in their paper as 1273000, which is incorrect. The corrected one is 2164000.Singh et al. [43] assigned 82, 13, 7 to C53, C54, C55 respectively in Table 1 and 24, 7, 82 to C53, C54, C55 respectively in Table 4, and the former set of values is found to be the correct one. For the numerical example 1 in Singh et al. [43], the authors found the initial total cost by improved Vogel's Approximation Method (IVAM)) as 2247 with the values of the variables asx13=18,x21=3,x25=14,x31=2,x32=13,x34=4,x41=11,x43=2,x52=5,x54=10.However, actual initial total cost for this solution with correct values of C53,C54, C55 is found as 2337.It has been proved in Appendix A that if there exists an unmet row (sum of allocations in a row exceeds the given supply quantity at the respective source), then transferring the maximum possible excess supply quantity from the least unit cost cell to the next least unit cost cell in a column with the smallest of the differences of the least and the next least unit costs of columns (associated with allocations in that row), leads to the smallest penalty cost (cost increment in the total cost). Further, it has been proved in Appendix B that if c>d; where c is a unit cost at Kth source row and d is a unit cost at the same row, then moving the excess supply (x+y−Sk) (as shown in Fig. A.6) from the cell of unit cost c leads to the smallest cost increase to the total cost. In addition, let there exists a cell (or cells) in an unmet row not containing the second least unit cost corresponding to the smallest of the differences between the second least and the least unit costs in a column for each of the allocations in an another unmet row. In this case it has been proved in Appendix C that by transferring the maximum possible amount of the excess supply quantity from the least unit cost cell to the next least unit cost cell in a column, corresponding to the smallest of the differences between the second least and the least unit costs in a column for each of the allocations in the former unmet row, leads to the same or least cost increase to the total cost. Now, if such an unmet row does not exist then pick up any two unmet rows. For each of them, find differences between the 2nd least and the least unit costs in a column containing an allocation at this least unit cost of that unmet row. Let the smallest of the differences for an unmet row corresponds to the least unit cost c1, and the smallest of the differences for the other unmet row corresponds to the smallest unit cost e1. Let c1, c2 and c3 be the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd least unit costs in a column and e1, e2 and e3 be the 1st, 2nd and 3rd least unit costs in an another column. If (c3−c1)>(e3−e2) (or (e3−e1)>(c3−c2)) then by identifying the unmet row containing the least unit cost ‘c1’ (or containing the least unit cost ‘e1’) and transferring its (identified unmet row's) excess supply quantity will lead to the same or the smallest cost increase to the total cost. The proof is provided in Appendix D. The JHM algorithm for obtaining an IFS to the transportation problem is given below:JHM Solution Algorithm:Step 1 Set up the initial transportation matrix m×n with costs Cij, supplies Siand demands Djfor i=1, 2, ..., mandj=1, 2, ..., n.Step 2 For each column of the transportation matrix, identify the least cost cell. Assign the respective demand quantities (Dj;j=1, 2, ..., n) there.Step 3 For assigned allocation/allocations in each of the rows (without taking into account any crossed row, if exists), check whether the row sum is less than or equal to the respective supply quantity. If so, go to step 9.Step 4 For each of the allocations in an unmet row, considering the column containing that allocation determine the difference between the second least and the least unit costs, and identify the smallest of them (in case of tie, identify the smallest with the largest unit cost). If there exists only one unmet row, go to step 7, else identify the smallest difference for each of them separately and go to Step 5.Step 5 Check whether there exists a cell (or cells) in an unmet row not containing the second least unit cost corresponding to the smallest of the differences between the second least and the least unit costs in a column for each of the allocations in an another unmet row. If such a row exists, identify the former unmet row and go to step 7.Step 6 Pick up any two unmet rows. For each of them, find differences between the 2nd least and the least unit costs in a column containing an allocation at this least unit cost of that unmet row. Let the smallest of the differences for an unmet row corresponds to the least unit cost c1, and the smallest of the differences for the other unmet row corresponds to the smallest unit cost e1. Let c1, c2 and c3 be the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd least unit costs in a column and e1, e2 and e3 be the 1st, 2nd and 3rd least unit costs in an another column. If (c3−c1)>(e3−e2), then identify the unmet row containing the least unit cost ‘c1’. Else, identify the other unmet row (containing the least unit cost ‘e1’).Step 7 Considering the identified unmet row in step 5 (or step 4 or step 6) transfer the maximum possible amount of the excess supply quantity from the least unit cost cell to the next least unit cost cell in a column, corresponding to the smallest of the differences between the second least and the least unit costs in a column for each of the allocations in this row. If there remains more excess supply, do the same for the next smallest difference of the second least and the least unit costs, and continue this transferring process until no excess supply exists.Step 8 Cross off the row that has completely been satisfied by the removal of the excess supply quantity just made, and go to step 3.Step 9 Stop, and take the current solution as the initial feasible solution.The following 4×3 numerical example from Kulkarni and Datar [26] is used to illustrate JHM solution algorithm.Step 1: Set up the initial table as shown in Table 2.Step 2: Identify the least cost cell for each of the columns and assign the respective demand there as shown in Table 3.Step 3: Identify row 1 and row 2 in Table 3 as unmet rows.Step 4: The smallest difference for the row 1 unmet row is “(6-3)”. The smallest difference for the row 2 unmet row is “(4-3)”.Step 5: The row 2 unmet row of Table 3 does not contain the second least unit cost, 6 corresponding to the smallest difference of this (6) and the associated least unit cost, 3 to a row 1 unmet row. So, row 2 unmet row is identified.Step 7: Transfer excess 30 units from 110 units (in the least unit cost cell) of the row 2 unmet row to the next least unit cost cell to obtain Table 4 as shown below.Step 8: The second unmet row of Table 4 has been crossed off and go to the step 3.Step 3: Row 1 unmet row is the only unmet row.Step 4: The smallest difference is 6 – 3=3.Step 4: As only one unmet row, go to step 7.Step 7: Transfer the excess supply of 10 units from 110 units (in the cell with unit cost 3) of the row 1 unmet row to the second least unit cost (6), and obtain Table 5.Step 8: The 1st unmet row of the Table 5 has been crossed off and go to step 3.Step 3: All the rows of the Table 5 are met and hence Table 5 gives an IFS.Hence, the initial feasible solution to this numerical problem found following JHM algorithm is given from Table 5 as x11=100, x22=80, x31=10x32=30, x43=60, along with the associated total cost 840, which is the minimal total cost solution to this problem. Note that the initial feasible solution to this problem found by VAM is different and the associated total cost is 880, which is not the minimal total cost. The different initial feasible solution to this problem along with the associated total cost 1200 can be found by ZSM, which is also not the minimal total cost solution.Both the JHM and the VAM have been coded in C++ and verified with the aid of solutions to many numerical problem instances. Both of them are run successfully for solutions of randomly generated transportation problems. This section provides performance comparisons among the developed JHM, ZSM and VAM via solutions of numerical example problems. Here we solve 11 numerical example problems selected from the literature, and also 7 randomly generated transportation problems. The detail data of the 7 randomly generated problems is given in the Appendix F.The performance of JHM is measured using percentage decrease in the total cost associated with an IFS of a numerical problem obtained by JHM over the corresponding one obtained by VAM and ZSM. Also the performance of JHM is measured by comparing the percentage increases of each of the total costs associated with the IFSs (obtained by these methods) from the minimal total cost. These performance measures are shown in Table 6(for the chosen 11 numerical problems from the literature), and in Table 7(for the 7 randomly generated problems).It can easily be observed from Table 6 and Table 7 that the JHM leads to better IFS over VAM for 13 out of 18 problems considered. For the remaining 5 problems, both JHM and VAM lead to an initial feasible solution with the same total cost. Also, JHM leads to better IFS over ZSM for 11 out of 18 problems considered. For the remaining 7 problems, both JHM and ZSM lead to an initial feasible solution with the same total cost. Besides, from the results in Tables 6 and 7, it can easily be observed that JHM led to the minimal total cost solution in 16 out of 18 considered problems, whereas each of VAM and ZSM led to the minimal total cost solutions to 5 out of 18. In the remaining two, the percentage increases in the total cost from the minimal total cost in cases of JHM is the least. Comparative efficiencies of JHM over VAM and ZSM in respect of percentage decrease in the total cost for an IFS and percentage increase of the total cost for an IFS from the minimal total cost, for each category of the considered problems are depicted by bar-charts in Figs. 2–5.The bar-charts in the Figs. 2 and 3 clearly show the significant percentage decrease in the total cost by JHM over ZSM and VAM in most of the cases. Similarly, the bar-charts in the Figs. 4 and 5 clearly show the effectiveness of the smallest percentage increase in the total cost (by JHM) from the minimal total cost in most of the cases. We find that 88.9% of the solved problems by JHM led to the minimal total cost solution. Besides, we compute the time complexities of obtaining an initial feasible solution to the transportation problem by JHM, ZSM and VAM algorithms, and found the same polynomial time complexity of O(N3) for all of them. The proofs are given in Appendix E.For 18 numerical problems studied, a comparative study of iterations taken by Stepping Stone Method (SSM) in reaching the minimal total cost solution (MTCS) by starting with an IFS obtained by JHM, VAM and ZSM is also carried out. The comparative results are given in Tables 8 and 9.It can easily be observed from Table 8 and Table 9 that JHM leads to the minimal total cost solutions to the numerical problems except for Goyal [14] and Imam et al. [16] in Table 8. For each of the exceptional cases the number of iterations taken to obtain the minimal total cost solution by SSM starting with an IFS found by different methods are the same. Thus JHM developed in this study performs promisingly in finding an initial feasible solution to the transportation problem in comparison with other best available methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
