@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of parents versus peers on Generation Y Internet ethical attitudes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the parents versus peer influence on children’s online ethical attitudes.Protective parental style has the greatest impact on children.Strict discipline style has no significant influence on children.Peers are more influential if agreement between parents and children is lacking.We stress the methodological necessity to measure perceptions in family dyads.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Family dyads,Online ethics,Survey,Regression,Austria,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We examine the role of parental style versus peer influence on Generation Y’s attitudes towards online unethical activities using a survey of a matched parent–child sample. Results suggest that a protective parental style has the greatest impact on Generation Y’s online ethical attitudes, while a strict discipline style has no significant influence. Peers are more influential, but not as influential as when there is agreement between parents and their children on a specific activity. Methodologically, the research highlights the necessity to measure family dyads and assess whether or not parents and their children’s perceptions are the same.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Generation Ys (those born between 1980 and 20004See e.g. Bhave et al. (2013), Bristow et al. (2011), Weingarten (2009), or Sayers (2007).4) are the first generation to have grown-up with the Internet which has made it easier for them to engage in unethical activities such as; online pornography, hate-sites, bomb/drug making websites, copyright violation (Hope 2006) and pirating software (Aleassa et al. 2011, Liao et al. 2010, Phau and Ng 2010, Global Software Piracy Study 2009, IFPI Digital Music Report 2010). This is partly because of the Internet’s separate culture or “Netiquette” (Johnston and Johal 1999) which; enhances a false sense of reality, lowers potential levels of detection, lessens punishment for potential miscreants, allows the adoption of a virtual persona (Freestone and Mitchell 2004) and results in Internet risk perceptions being non-existent (Hope 2006). These behaviors have an ethical dimension and while web research on young people has looked at; concerns over commercial intrusion online (Grant 2005); use as a shopping medium (Thomson and Laing 2003); emotional responses (Page and Mapstone 2010) and pester power (Lawlor and Prothero 2011), relatively little research has explored Generation Y’s online ethical attitudes which we define as ’how right or wrong consumers feel an online activity is’. Of the few which have, they have examined; the role of technology in teenage moral development (Subrahmanyam and Šmahel, 2009), the ethical awareness of technology-related issues (McMahon and Cohen 2009), how ethical illegal acts are seen (Freestone and Mitchell 2004), and differences in downloaders and non-downloaders (Robertson et al. 2012). However, while technological factors have been highlighted as causes for the changing nature of Generation Y’s online ethical attitudes (Subrahmanyam and Šmahel, 2009, McMahon and Cohen 2009, Freestone and Mitchell 2004, Robertson et al. 2012), work in this area has neglected the role of social factors.Social learning theory suggests that understanding social conditioning is more important than rational consideration in explaining morality (Foo Nin et al. 1997, Fukukawa 2003). While social learning comes from numerous sources in a child’s upbringing, such as peers, school, religion and culture, one of the most dominant sources of moral guidance is parents. Parents are in fact a child’s “first and enduring teachers” (Department for Education and Employment 1997) who shape developing norms, values and motivation among young people (Moore and Moschis 1981, Moschis 1985) and there is anecdotal evidence showing that parental interaction is an important tool for protecting teens’ online safety (e.g. Privacy Rights Clearinghouse 2009). However, young people also learn from direct and indirect interaction with peers through discussions, rulemaking, reinforcement and modeling (Koesten and Anderson 2004, Mangleburg et al. 1997, Moore et al. 2002). In particular, ‘digital natives’5Helsper and Eynon (2010) define digital natives as “someone who comes from a media-rich household, who uses the Internet as a first port of call for information, multi-tasks using ICTs and uses the Internet to carry out a range of activities particularly those with a focus on learning” (p. 515).5have an inclination to trust peer opinion and public consensus rather than established data sources (Hershatter and Epstein 2010) and have in some cases entirely integrated their social lives and their electronic gadgets (Wells et al. 2012) using their smartphones to gather information and to connect with friends (Bhave et al. 2013). Despite the importance of parents in influencing ethical considerations of children (Bakir and Vitell 2010), we know little about how much they can influence ethical attitudes towards questionable online activities. Nor do we know how strong peer influence is in comparison to parenting style in determining online ethical attitudes.This raises several questions such as; which is more important in shaping young people’s online ethics, parenting style or peer influence? And if there is an effect, how big is it and is any particular parenting style more effective than another? A better understanding of the social influences at work in influencing the online ethical attitudes of Generation Y would be useful for knowing where and how to intervene. Thus, the research aims to investigate the influence of parenting style versus peer group on Generation Y’s attitude towards unethical online activities. By using the relatively unique research approach of parent–child dyads in our data collection, we provide important insights regarding dyadic ethical attitudes which previous research has not been able to identify (Schlegelmilch and Öberseder 2010). We begin by anchoring our conceptual model in the literature and by developing several hypotheses. Next, we explain how these were tested with a sample of paired parents and their children using a survey methodology. After discussing the results, we conclude with some implications for organizations and parents concerned about young people’s online activities.Socialization is the process by which “young people” acquire skills, knowledge, and attitudes relevant to their functioning as consumers in the marketplace (Ward 1974). Here, we identify parents and peers as key agents of socialization and consider how different parental styles might affect a young person’s online ethical attitudes. Despite parental styles not being uniformly defined in the academic literature, and notwithstanding numerous conceptualizations (Baumrind 1991, Baumrind 1978, Baumrind 1971, Eastin et al. 2006, Rose et al. 2002), we consider them to be a steady composite of beliefs and attitudes that provide context for parental behavior (Darling and Steinberg 1993). Our model and hypotheses highlight the three most commonly discussed parental styles as presented in the “parenting styles” literature.This style is closely related to the “Permissive” parental style which Baumrind (1971) describes as warm and nonrestrictive. These parents promote independence in their children and place few controls on their children’s media use (Rose et al. 2002), which is likely to lead to greater exposure to unethical online activities. They are also least likely to exclude outside influences, such as the Internet, from their children’s environment (Carlson and Grossbart 1988), take few steps to orchestrate the content or monitor the motives of their children’s computer activity and rarely become directly involved in that activity themselves (Kerawalla and Crook 2002). The fact that they give their children adult rights without concomitant responsibilities and communicate openly with them (Carlson et al. 2001) suggests that children will be left to their own devices on the Internet to develop their own way of behaving or netiquette.Such a permissive parenting style is also characterized by low levels of demand, in terms of standards and behaviors and relatively high levels of responsiveness (Eastin et al. 2006). Since these parents; are nontraditional and lenient, do not require mature behavior, allow considerable self-regulation, and avoid confrontation (Baumrind 1991), they are less likely to demand high ethical standards. Their influence on children’s moral development is likely to be weak, since they seldom use overt control and encourage their children to develop an internally defined set of standards and perspectives (Rose 1999).However, the encouraging verbalizing parental style helps children to talk about anxieties, conflicts, hostilities, and disagreements with parental policies (Schaefer and Bell 1957). This is similar to concept-oriented communications (Moore and Moschis 1981, Moschis 1985), where debate through open discussion of ethical issues is encouraged and furthers children’s own critical thinking about online issues (Carlson et al. 1990, Laczniak et al. 1995). For example, research has shown that teens’ discussion with their parents leads to higher levels of privacy concern (Youn 2008). In such a permissive and encouraging environment, children are likely to explore the Internet more and be exposed to more unethical activities as they develop their own sense of what is right and wrong in discussion with their parents. Thus, we hypothesize that.H1Encouraging verbalization parenting is positively related to Generation Y’s attitudes towards online unethical activities.Protective, or fostering dependency, parents, are actively involved in monitoring and controlling their children’s environment and place a high degree of control on their children’s media exposure (Rose et al. 2002) which is likely to reduce their exposure to unethical online activities. They also have the most defined expectations for children’s development (Carlson and Grossbart 1988) and are likely to balance children’s rights and responsibilities (Gardner 1982) which will have the effect of heightening expectations of ethical behavior. They encourage self-expression, but expect children to act maturely and in accordance with family rules (Carlson et al. 2001) which provide high levels of demand and warmth (Eastin et al. 2006) similar to authoritative parents who monitor and impart clear standards for their children’s conduct (Baumrind 1991). This is likely to have a positive impact on their online ethics. Because these parents tend to emphasize vertical relationships, obedience, and social harmony, and limit their children’s exposure to outside information such as television advertising (Rose et al. 1998), they have a socio-oriented family communication style, which emphasizes obedience to parental authority and conformity to family values (Carlson et al. 1992, Laczniak et al. 1995). This makes them prone to limit their children’s access to outside influences, such as media and the Internet, because they can consider these external influences as threats to parental authority (Fujioka and Weintraub Austin 2002, Rose et al. 1998). Indeed, teens with socio-oriented communication are more likely to have family rules and surf the Internet with parents (Youn 2008). Fostering dependency parents want their children to be assertive, socially responsible, self-regulated as well as cooperative (Baumrind 1991) and exert family rules to protect children from controversial media messages (Moschis 1985). With such protection, clear and consistent standards, communication about and around those standards and the expectation of self-regulation within a warm environment, children are more likely to be ethical. Thus, we hypothesize that.H2A protective parenting style is positively related to Generation Y’s attitudes towards online unethical activities.Strict parenting is the degree to which the mother feels punishment is an effective method of influencing and controlling children (Schaefer and Bell 1957) and has been labeled as “authoritarian”, since it is characterized by the enforcement of rules in a strict and limiting manner (Carlson and Grossbart 1988). This parenting style is also called the ‘because I said so’ approach. Authoritarian parenting is based on family rules, but they are only enforced irregularly, depending on the parents’ mood. In addition, it is characterized by high levels of demand, but low levels of warmth and psychological autonomy (Eastin et al. 2006). While authoritarian parents place relatively few restrictions on their children’s media exposure (Rose et al. 2002), they are obedience- and status-oriented, and expect their orders to be obeyed without explanation (Baumrind 1991), which is likely to cause children to fear parental reaction to online unethical activity. This authoritarian parental style can also be characterized by hostile and restrictive tendencies (Carlson et al. 2001) which is likely to make children wary of being unethical. Since such parents try to control their children, endorse adult supremacy, and discourage verbal interactions with children (Carlson and Grossbart 1988), children are more likely to fear what parents might think or do with regard to them being unethical online. With a strict, if inconsistent family environment, children are more likely to be concerned about parental disapproval and repercussions of any unethical activity; thus they are more likely to maintain ethical standards on the Internet and we hypothesize that.H3A strict discipline parenting style is positively to Generation Y’s attitudes towards online unethical activities.Strict parents expect their children to accept their judgments, values, and goals even if applied inconsistently and ad hoc (Eastin et al. 2006). This inconsistent approach to rule enforcement and lack of explanation can lead to unethical online behavior sometimes being criticized, while other times it is allowed. Importantly, there is likely to be a lack of consistency with regard to individual types of unethical activities. For example, if the parents are keen film watchers, they might condone downloading films illegally, but condemn downloading music in which they have no interest. Indeed only 60% of parents and teens agree with each other about whether there are or are not any rules for the Internet (Wang et al. 2005).Other studies have found that parent–child agreement can be seen as one of the variables that characterize effective parenting (Tein et al. 1994). For example, work on the effectiveness of parental mediation in reducing the effect of advertising exposure and materialistic attitudes shows that this is greater when parent–child agreement about mediation is high (Buijzen et al. 2008). This suggests an interesting hypothesis relating to one determinant of childreńs perception of the ethicality of specific online activities, which is their parentś perception of that activity.One way of understanding this is seeing the formation of a parent–child relationship concerning a specific online activity as similar to a psychological contract. A main feature of such contracts is the individual’s belief that an agreement is mutual, that is, a common understanding exists that binds the parties involved to a particular course of action (Rousseau 2001). Such contracts are not static (Millward and Cropley 2003, Tornow and De Meuse 1994) and their dynamics can be described as an interplay of implicit expectations (wants and offers) between parent and child built on tacit acceptance of each other’s interdependency (cf. Levinson et al. 1962). This interdependency is particularly relevant in an online context where some unethical behaviors are only really understood by the technologically-savvy child who then guides their less-informed parents into what is and what is not acceptable or done in Internet environments. We suggest that the agreement between Generation Ys and their parents about the ethicality of an individual online activity will influence their final judgment and propose that.H4The agreement between parents and their children on the ethics of a specific online activity will have a positive impact on Generation Y’s attitudes towards online unethical activities.Apart from parents, one key group in the socialization process that is likely to affect Generation Y’s attitudes toward online behavior is peers, partly because children’s perceptions of their own identities are related to their friendship groups (e.g. Moschis 1978, 1985, Pollard 1985, Sluckin 1981). Peer influence is defined as the influence from an actual or imaginary individual or group conceived of having significant relevance upon an individual’s evaluations, aspirations, or behavior (Park and Lessig 1977). Previous studies have shown that parental influence sharply decreases during adolescence due to the rising counter influence of peers (e.g. Besag 1989, Gecas and Seff 1990, O’Brien and Bierman 1988).Peers contribute to young people’s acquisition of marketplace knowledge and are important reference sources for teens in selecting products (e.g. Gilkison 1973, Mascarenhas and Higby 1993, Saunders et al. 1973). In addition, frequency of communication with peers is related positively to adolescents’ attitudes toward such things as advertising (Moschis 1978) and their skepticism toward advertising is related to their susceptibility to being influenced by peers (Boush et al. 1994, Mangleburg and Bristol 1998). In particular, reference groups supply needed information in ambiguous consumption situations, such as unethical online activities and, therefore, young people may be susceptible to being influenced by such information (Mangleburg and Bristol 1998).Compared to the level of their parents’ moral development (Kohlberg 1984), peers are less morally developed and therefore more likely to have a negative influence on young people’s ethical attitudes towards online activities. For example, youths aged 19years significantly report more negative emotions and less positive web emotions than 13–15year olds (Page and Mapstone 2010). This is especially problematic in the absence of positive family relationships when adolescents may depend more on peers for support and thus run a greater risk of identifying with negative behavior (Feldman and Wentzel 1990); something, which is an important factor in the deviant behavior of young offenders (Cullingford and Morrison 1997). Finally, we argue that unlike their parents, peers have grown up in online environments where the level of surveillance, detection and deterrence of unethical behavior is very limited, which will also have a negative effect on their moral development. This means we hypothesize that.H5Peer influence is negatively linked to Generation Y’s attitudes towards online unethical activities.Fig. 1draws together the hypotheses derived from the literature and depicts the conceptual model of the relationships between Generation Y’s online ethical attitudes, parental styles and peer influence.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
