@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bacterial foraging optimization and adaptive version for economically optimum sitting, sizing and harmonic tuning orders setting of LC harmonic passive power filters in radial distribution systems with linear and nonlinear loads

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents the optimizing location, size and harmonic tuning orders of passive filters in distribution system in presence of linear and nonlinear load.The objective is to reach standard levels of harmonic distortion with applying minimum cost of passive filters.The bacterial foraging optimization (BFO) algorithm is used for optimization procedure in this research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nonlinear load,Passive harmonic filters (PHFs),Harmonic distortion,Distribution feeders,Bacterial foraging optimization (BFO),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents bacterial foraging optimization (BFO) algorithm and its adaptive version to optimize the planning of passive harmonic filters (PHFs).The important problem of using PHFs is determining location, size and harmonic tuning orders of them, which is reach standard levels of harmonic distortion with applying minimum cost of passive filters.In this study to optimize the PHFs location, size and setting the harmonic tuning orders in the distribution system, considered objective function includes the reduction of power loss and investment cost of PHFs. At the same time, constraints include voltage limits, number/size of installed PHFs, limit candidate buses for PHFs installation and the voltage total harmonic distortion (THDv) in all buses. The harmonic levels of system are obtained by current injections method and the load flow is solved by the iterative method of power sum, which is suitable for the accuracy requirements of this type of study. It is shown that through an economical placement and sizing of PHFs the total voltage harmonic distortion and active power loss could be minimized simultaneously.The considered objective function is of highly non-convex manner, and also has several constraints. On the other hand due to significant computational time reduction and faster convergence of BFO in comparison with other intelligent optimization approach such as genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO) and artificial bee colony (ABC) the simple version of BFO has been implemented. Of course other versions of BFO such as Adaptive BFO and combination of BFO with other method due to complexity of harmonic optimization problem have not considered in this research.The simulation results for small scale test system with 10 buses, showed the significant computational time reduction and faster convergence of BFO in comparison with GA, PSO and ABC. Therefore in large scale radial system with 34 buses, the proposed method is solved using BFO.The simulation results for a 10-bus system as a small scale and 34-bus radial system as a large scale show that the proposed method is efficient for solving the presented problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The harmonic problems are mainly due to the substantial increase of nonlinear loads due to technological advances, such as the use of power electronic circuits and devices, in ac/dc transmission links, or loads in the control of power systems using power electronic or microprocessor controllers. In general, sources of harmonics are divided into: (1) domestic loads, (2) industrial loads and (3) control devices [1].Increases in harmonic distortion will result in additional heating losses, shorter insulation lifetime, higher temperature and insulation stress, reduced power factor, lower productivity, efficiency, capacity and lack of system performance of the plant [2].Between the different technical options available to reduce harmonic distortions and improve power quality, due to implementation of shunt capacitors to compensate the load power factor; it seems the passive power filters have proved to be an important method to compensate current and voltage disturbances in power distribution system [3].The results of related investigations show that the most of voltage and current distortions in distribution networks are arose to harmonics of third, fifth and seventh orders [4]. Due to that, in this case the implantation of three single tuned passive filters could solve this problem and therefore the sitting and sizing of filters is quite simple. However, because of distributed linear and nonlinear loads in distribution system, the passive filter planning is much difficult [5]. In Ref. [6] the genetic-algorithm-based design of passive filters for offshore application is presented and discussed. In Ref. [7] a new genetic algorithm based approach to design a passive LC filter for a full-bridge rectifier with aim of finding maximum power factor of the ac mains is presented. In Ref. [8] the calculation of the R–L–C parameters for a typical passive harmonic filter used in the customers’ house is analyzed. In Ref. [9], the harmonic passive filter planning in radial distribution systems using microgenetic algorithms with aim of voltage harmonic reduction is addressed. In this reference, the input parameters of programmed software include the number and the relevant order of these filters. Optimum sitting and sizing a passive harmonic filter, whose harmonic tuning orders are 5 and 7 in distribution networks using neural-network is analyzed by [10]. Power loss reduction and minimization of total voltage harmonic distortion are considered as objective function in this reference.In another research by Juan et al. [11] the optimal design of passive power filters of an asymmetrical system based on genetic algorithm is discussed. The problem which analyzed in [11] is focused on optimal design of a typical passive filter for a specific nonlinear load and it is supposed that the location of passive filter is constant and only the sizing of passive filter is objective.Optimized passive filter design using particle swarm optimization algorithm (PSO) for a 12-pulse converter-fed LCI-synchronous motor drive was investigated by [12]. They present a simplified optimization algorithm based on a particle swarm optimization method for the selection of passive filter components. This algorithm is used to design passive filters for three types of loads on an LCI-SM drive, i.e., constant-torque-variable-speed loads, constant-speed-variable-torque loads, and variable-speed-variable-torque loads, to meet the requirements of a wide range of applications.Optimal filter design using an improved artificial bee colony algorithm (ABC) for optimization of a passive filter in a specific location which is responsible for reduction in the total harmonic distortion in the current and voltage at ac mains, reduced supply current, and improved PF was analyzed [13].As mentioned above many researches have addressed the optimization of passive filter design. However pervious researches have been focused on passive filter design from point of view the optimal sizing of a passive filter in a specific location which is installed close a typical nonlinear load. Of course few researches such as Refs. [9,10] addressed the optimal sitting of passive filters in radial distribution system but optimal placement of passive filters in a radial distribution system under dispersed heavy nonlinear loads considering optimal harmonic tuning orders setting is not analyzed so far. Considering optimal harmonic tuning orders setting at first is addressed in current paper and so is one of the main idea and in BFO algorithm as discussed further in Section 7, the second dimension of the search space in PHFs design to minimize the objective function is harmonic tuning orders. Economic analysis while multi objective optimization passive filter design is another considerable point in this research.Due to reported researches, the three intelligent methods which previously applied to passive filter design, i.e. GA, PSO and ABC are first analyzed in a small scale system with 10 buses, and then the results of these methods are compared with BFO method. Simulation results vertified that the best results obtained by BFO approach. Finally the BFO and its adaptive version are applied to a large scale system with 34 buses.The important problem of using passive filters are determining location and sizing of them, which is reach standard levels of harmonic distortion with applying minimum cost of passive filters.In this research, sitting and sizing of harmonic passive filters in 10-bus and 34-bus test distribution systems using bacterial foraging optimization (BFO) algorithm is presented. In this work, the objective function to be minimized is value of investment cost of filters and active power loss. Voltage total harmonic distortion is considered as a constraint in optimization problem. In this research, the problem consists of planning passive filters in distribution system with distributed linear and nonlinear loads. In this work for each candidate buses for installing passive filter, the between one to three filter branches whose harmonic tuning orders are 4.7 (for 5th harmonic), 6.7 (for 7th harmonic) and 10.7 (for 11th harmonic), are considered. Locating, sizing of filter capacity in terms of kvar and detection of harmonic tuning orders with aim of minimizing power loss and investment cost is addressed in this paper.Once the harmonic sources are clearly defined, they must be interpreted in terms of their effects on the rest of the system and on personnel and equipment external to the power system. Each element of the power system must be examined for its sensitivity to harmonics as a basis for recommendations on the allowable levels. The main effects of voltage and current harmonics within the power system are [14,15]:•Amplification of harmonic levels resulting from series and parallel resonances.Reduction in the efficiency of the generation, transmission and utilization of electrical energy.Aging of the insulation of electrical plant components with consequent shortening of their useful life.Thermal stress.Insulation stress.Load disruption.Harmonics increase the equipment losses and thus the thermal stress. Triplen harmonics result in the neutral carrying a current which might equal or exceed the phase currents even if the loads are balanced. This dictates the derating or over sizing of neutral wires. Moreover, harmonics caused resonance might damage the equipment. Harmonics further interfere with protective relays, metering devices, control and communication circuits, and customer electronic equipment. Sensitive equipment would experience mal operation or component failure [16].Precautionary solutions are not generally sufficient to eliminate the harmonics in power system, so we should use harmonic filters to eliminate or to reduce the effects of one or more orders of harmonic components. In a general context, we can refer to harmonic filters as passive and active filters.Passive filters are inductance, capacitance, and resistance elements configured and tuned to control harmonics and can be classified into tuned filters and high-pass filters [17]. They are connected in parallel with nonlinear loads such as diode/thyristor rectifiers, ac electric arc furnaces, and so in. Figs. 1 and 2show circuit configurations of the passive filters on a per phase base. Among them, the combination of two or three single-tuned filters to the 5th, 7th, 11th has been used in a high-power three-phase thyristor rectifiers in a nonlinear distribution system. Passive filter is a series combination of an inductance and a capacitance. In reality, in the absence of a physically designed resistor, there will always be a series resistance, which is the intrinsic resistance of the series reactor sometimes used as a means to avoid filter overheating. All harmonic currents whose frequency coincides with that of the tuned filter will find a low impedance path through the filter. Passive filter design must take into account expected growth in harmonic current sources or load reconfiguration because it can otherwise be exposed to overloading, which can rapidly develop into extreme overheating and thermal breakdown. The design of a passive filter requires a precise knowledge of the harmonic-producing load and of the power system.(1)C=∑n=1NCF(QFil,i)+(Ce×Ploss×T)where first term is investment cost of passive filter installation and second term is the cost of energy lost in distribution feeders.CF(QFil,i) is cost of each passive filter installed at location i and is determined as follows:(2)CF(QFil)=KF×QFilwhereKFis cost per unit of filter for 1kvar installed filter and QFil,iis the reactive power capacity of filters versus KVA and it is more than reactive power capacity of a single capacitor and for one passive filter is calculated as follows [18]:(3)QFil=∑k=1hk2hk2−1QCThis equation indicates the reactive power capacity of passive filter versus reactive power capacity of capacitor bank and the orders of compensated harmonics.Ceis the cost of energy per unit and Ploss is active power loss and for duration T is calculated as follows [19]:(4)Ploss=∑k=1LPloss(k)=∑k=1L∑j=1n∑m=1m>jnVj(k)Vm(k)Yjm(k)cos(δj(k)−δm(k)−ϕjm(k))whereVj(k)andδj(k)are magnitude and phase of kth harmonic voltage at bus j, respectively.Yjm(k)andϕjm(k)are also magnitude and phase of kth harmonic line admittance between buses j and m, respectively.Voltage constraints will be taken into account by specifying lower (e.g., Vmin=0.9p.u.) and upper (e.g., Vmax=1.1p.u.) bounds of effective voltage (e.g., V) as below:(5)Vmin≤Vi≤Vmaxwhere rms magnitude voltage is:(6)Virms=∑k=1(Vi(k))2So that i and k, are the bus number and harmonic order, respectively.Stability limits, which are dominant for lines between bus n and m, are expressed as follows,(7)δmin≤δi≤δmaxThe maximum capacity and number of LC passive filters constraints is formulated as:(8)NFil≤NMax_FilQFil,i≤QFil,maxThe distortion of voltage is considered to be bounded by maximum total harmonic distortion of voltages (THDV):(9)THDV≤THDVmaxwhere(10)THDV=∑k≠1(Vi(k))2Vi(1)×100andTHDVmax(=5%)is the standard value of THD. Bounds in Eqs. (5) and (9) are according to IEEE-519 standard [20].The most of the distribution feeders are radial. As shown in Fig. 3the details of one section of this feeder is illustrated. Generically, each bus can have linear and nonlinear loads, and shunt capacitor banks.To determine the harmonic flow in a radial distribution feeder, the current injection method can be used [21]. The advantages of this method are that solution can be obtained directly, it is able to handle several harmonic sources simultaneously, and it is computationally efficient. In this method, the network harmonic voltages are calculated by frequency-domain matrix:(11)YhVh=IhwhereIhis the harmonic current injection vector.Vhis the harmonic voltage vector to be calculated, andYhis the admittance matrix of the system. In the adopted notation, the superscript b assumes all values of harmonic orders of interest. The superscript 1 (h=1) corresponds to parameters in fundamental frequency.The elements of admittance matrix should use models whose parameters are frequency dependent. However, there is some disagreement regarding which harmonic models are best for each component of system [22].The admittances of each line feeder section and capacitor banks in end of each section are:(12)yih=1Ri+jhXiand(13)yCih=hyCi1whereRiandXiare the resistance and the inductive reactance of feeder section i andyCi1, it is the shunt admittance of the capacitor bank in the bus i, in the fundamental frequency.The linear loads are represented by a parallel combination of resistance and inductive reactance. These parameters are obtained through the load data in fundamental frequency. The harmonic admittance of these loads is given by the expression:(14)yLih=P¯iVi12−jQ¯ihVi12In thatP¯iandQ¯ithey are the active and reactive powers of the linear loads in the bus i.The nonlinear loads are represented by harmonic currents sources whose nominal values to the fundamental frequency are:(15)I¯i1=P˜i+jQ˜iVi1*whereP˜iandQ˜iare the active and reactive power of the nonlinear load in the ith bus. In harmonic frequencies, the current source has nominal values:(16)I¯ih=ChI¯i1whereChthe percentile value of the current, in the hth harmonic order.Assuming that the resistance of the harmonic filter is despicable, the admittance of jth harmonic filter, installed in bus i, is given for:(17)yFjh=−jh(hrj2−1)(h2−hrj2)kjQCVi12In that,hrjis the absolute value of tuning frequency of jth harmonic filter installed in bus i;kjis the number of capacitive modules of jth filter, andQCthe size of the capacitive modules available for installation.The reactivate power supplied by jth harmonic filter it is expressed for:(18)QFjh=hrj2(hrj2−1)kjQCThe BFO algorithm was first presented by Pasino in 2002. The idea in this optimizing technique is adopted from biological and physical living behavior bacteria existing in human intestine. This algorithm introduced in this section [23].Suppose that we need to find the minimum of a function J(θ), θ∈RP, when we do not have a deterministic description of J(θ) or gradient. This problem becomes nongradient optimization problem, where the ideas from bacteria foraging can be used. Suppose that θ is the position of the bacteria and J(θ) represents the environment conditions, with J(θ)<0, J(θ)=0 and J(θ)>0 represents that the bacteria location is a nutrient rich, neutral, or noxious environment, respectively. The chemotaxis is a foraging behavior where bacteria attempts to increase the nutrient concentration, avoid noxious substances and search for ways out of neutral media by random walk.Then we can define chemotactic step j as tumble followed by a number or a run, a reproductive step k as the selection of the fittest in the population and its splitting, and an elimination-dispersal event l as the selection of random individuals and its relocation on new random positions. Then, P(j, k, l)=θi(j, k, l)||i=1, 2, …, S are the positions of each number of the S bacteria population at jth chemotactic step, kth reproductive step and lth elimination and dispersion event. Then J(i, j, k, l) is the location cost of the ith bacteria θi(j, k, l)∈RPand Ncis bacteria's life time in the chemotactic steps. The bacteria move following (l) where C(i) is size of the step at the direction of Δ(i). If in θi(j+1, k, l), the value of J(i, j+1, k, l) is less than in θi(j, k, l), then a new step is taken in the same direction until a maximum of Ns, making this cycle a chemotactic step.(19)θi(j+1,k,l)=θi(j,k,l)+C(i)Δ(i)ΔT(i)Δ(i)During its movement, the bacteria communicate among one another using chemical substances known as attractants and repellents, which deform the search space, making those locations where more individuals are located more attractive, but at the same time, avoids that bacteria get on top of one another. To calculate this effect (20) is used, where mar is the magnitude of the attractant/repellent, wat and wre are the width of the attractant and repellent respectively.(20)Jcc(θ,P)=∑i=1Smare−wre∑m=1P(θm−θmi)2−e−wat∑m=1P(θm−θmi)2After Ncchemotactic steps, a reproduction step is taken. For the reproduction, the healthiest bacteria are split and the others are eliminated, maintaining a constant population. The individuals to be reproduced are selected by using a health metric which is the cumulative sum of the cost value on each position visited by the bacterium. After Nre reproduction steps, a dispersion and elimination event is made, where each bacterium is subject to relocation with a probability Ped. After Ned dispersion and elimination, the algorithm ends. The population size S is restricted to an even number, so the population can be easily kept constant.The flowchart of BFO process is presented in Fig. 4.We aim to simplify the algorithm while maintaining its core elements. This include the simplification of the algorithm architecture, elimination of the Ns parameter, a clear adaptation rule for step size C(i), the use of an uniform distribution the position initialization in the movement equation and removal of the cell-to-cell communication [24]. The first issue to resolve is the algorithm structure. Since the reproduction and elimination/dispersal events occur after the chemotactic steps are exhausted, it is possible to replace the loops for iteration counters which trigger the event when a number of iterations have been made. For example when Ns=200, Nc=16, Nre=8 and Ned=8, it is possible to replace the counter for Nre for an event every 500 iterations, and Ned for an event every 1000 iterations. Since it is possible to eliminate the loops, so the bacteria will either tumble or run once each iteration. It is possible also to remove the step counter Ns and the bacteria can swim in one direction while it is a good direction.The second issue is to develop an adaption scheme for C(i) which could improve the search and convergence. First, it must remember that the step size is multiplied by a unit direction vector. Using testing the several step sizes it could be included that C(i, 0)=0.01d, where d is the diagonal of the search space. As adaption technique is use of a modification the 1/5th rule extracted from the evolution strategies (ES) [25]. It is assumed that C(i, j+1)=C(i, j)+σi(j)·R, where σiis the mutation strength for the bacteria i, and R is a random number from a Gaussian distribution. For different values of this parameter the simulation is carried out and it is concluded that σi(0)=0.0001d gives good results. For the adaption of the step size it include a rule to control the size of σi(j)depending on the cost value found by the bacteria. If the cost value decreased or has sustained, then σi(j)=0.8σi(j−1), otherwise σi(j)=1.2σi(j−1).The next modification proposed is the use of a different metric for the health measurement. It is more inte\AQRESTING the bacteria that were able to descend more in the gradient, than those that got stagnated. For this it is possible to replace the health measurement from the sum of the cost functions to the sum of change between two steps ΔJ. If a bacterium has not moved, then ΔJ=0, and if it has descended the gradient then ΔJ<0.Similar to Korani's work [26], which presents the combination of BFOA and PSO to enhance the optimization characteristics, it is suggested to use the best known individual to guide the search. First, it is assumed that the bacteria will not move from its location if the next step will take it to a worst position, then the bacteria are always at their personal best. Then, to add the best known individual information to the movement of the bacteria, it is suggested to replace (19) by (21) as follows:(21)θi(j)=θi(j)+C(i,j)Δ(i)ΔT(i)Δ(i)+K(i)KT(i)K(i)where K is calculated by (22) andθgbestis the best position found so far by the swarm. Because the bacteria are always at their personal best, then there is going to be a bacterium that is located in the global best, then in this case, when we calculate the unit vector for K in (21), this term becomes ∞. For this bacterium it is replaced with 0.(22)K(i)=θgbest(j)−θi(j).The flowchart of ABFOA process is presented in Fig. 5.The prime steps of BFOA applied to minimize the objective function are as follows.Step 1: Initialization of BFOA parameters•Let j be the index for the chemotactic step. Let k be the index for the reproduction step. Let l be the index of the elimination-dispersal event. Let q be the index for the iteration loop, and alsop: dimension of the search space, number of PHFs and it is harmonic tuning orders to be determined to minimize the objective function. The loss sensitivity factors are calculated from the load flows and sorted in descending orders. First part of the dimension signifies a PHF size for 5 candidate buses, so the first part of the dimension is (p=5) and the second part signifies the harmonic tuning orders at the selected candidate buses, harmonic tuning orders are 4.7 (for 5th harmonic), 6.7 (for 7th harmonic) and 10.7 (for 11th harmonic), so the second part of the dimension is (p=3).p1, p2, p3, p4, p5: PHFs size in kvar at candidate buses. p6, p7, p8: harmonic tuning orders for 5th, 7th, 11th harmonic at candidate buses.The base power loss, total harmonic distortions and voltages at all nodes without PHFs is calculated from the power flow.Step 2: Iteration loop: q=q+1Step 3: Elimination-dispersal loop: l=l+1Step 4: Reproduction loop: k=k+1Step 5: Chemotaxis loop: j=j+1i.For i=1, 2, …, S take a chemotactic step for bacterium i as follows.Compute the objective function, J(i, j, k, l).Let J(i, j, k, l)=J(i, j, k, l)+Jcc(θi(j, k, l), P(j, k, l)Let Jlast=J(i, j, k, l) to save this value since we may find a better cost via a swim.Tumble: generate a random vector Δ(i) with each element Δm(i), m=1, 2, …, p, is a random number in the range of [−1, 1].Move θi(j+1, k, l) using the Eq. (19).Compute J(i, j+1, k, l).Swima.Let m=0 (counter for swim length).While m<Ns(if have not climbed down too long).•Let m=m+1.If J(i, j+1, k, l)>Jlast (if doing better), let Jlast=J(i, j+1, k, l) and move θi(j+1, k, l) using Eq. (19) and use this θito compute the new J(i, j+1, k, l) as did in (vi).Else, let m=Ns. This is the end of the while statement.Go to next bacterium (i+1) if i≠S (i.e., go to (ii) to process the next bacterium).Step 6: If j<Nc, go to step 5. In this case continue chemotaxis since the life of the bacteria is not over.Step 7: Reproduction•The Sr/2 bacteria with the lowest J values die and the remaining Sr/2 bacteria with the best values split. This process is performed by the copies that are made and placed at the same location as their parent.Step 8: If k<Nre, go to step 4.Step 9: Elimination and dispersal: For i=1, 2, …, S with probability Ped, eliminate and disperse each bacterium so that the number of bacterium in the population remains constant. The dispersed bacteria's gives the brand new PHF sizes at candidate buses.Step 10: If l<Ned, then go to step 3.Step 11: If q<N, then go to step 2, otherwise end. Evaluate the objective function for the final bacterium population.Determine the bacterium which gives the minimum J and this bacterium give the optimal sizes of PHFs and harmonic tuning orders at candidate buses. Run the load flows with the obtained PHFs and calculate voltages at all nodes, THD, harmonic power loss and display the results.These are the prime steps of BFO implemented to minimize the objective function (J).In practice, the available values of capacitance for filters design are discrete, because they correspond to commercially standardized values of capacitive modules available. As described in Section 4.3, L and C values of passive filters are mutually dependent, so the size of filter is discrete in the same way as the capacitors. These values also depend on the localization of filter on feeder. On the other hand, the points of possible installation are the buses of the feeder and therefore, they can also be considered as a discrete variable and form a finite group. In that way, the problem is especially of combinatory optimization. This problem should also take in consideration the distributed nature and variable of linear loads and harmonic sources of system.In this example, the problem consists of planning three passive harmonic filters, whose harmonic tuning orders are 4.7 (for 5th harmonic), 6.7 (for 7th harmonic) and 10.7 (for 11th harmonic), respectively.As presented in Eqs. (17) and (18), the reactive power capacity of passive filter is a function of harmonic tuning orders and the reactive capacity of pre-installed fixed shunt capacitors in busses of system. On the other hand the investment cost of filter is related to filter capacity, so the proposed algorithm must calculate the optimum harmonic tuning orders until the objective function is minimized. At the same time, constraints include voltage limits, number/size of installed LC passive filters, limit candidate buses for LC installation and the minimum harmonic voltage distortion must satisfied by this procedure.At first, in order to select a suitable searching method, a small scale system with 10 buses has been considered and harmonic passive filter panning using four intelligent methods including GA, PSO, ABC and BFO is analyzed.The reason of considering GA, PSO and ABC for optimization this problem and their comparison with BFO and finally selecting the BFO and its adaptive version as optimization tool for large scale system is due to its precedence for implementation in passive filter design as mentioned in studies references [6–13].The simulation results of this analysis showed the significant computational time reduction and faster convergence of BFO in comparison with GA, PSO and ABC. Therefore in large scale radial system with 34 buses, the proposed method is solved using BFO.The flowchart of optimization procedure using BFO based approach for passive power filter design is shown in Fig. 6.The proposed method for LC passive filter sizing and sitting in the presence of linear and nonlinear loads has been applied on a 23kV, 10-bus radial distribution test system (Fig. 7).Line data and Load data in 10-bus test system is given in Tables 1 and 2respectively [25]. The load data includes the active and reactive power of linear and nonlinear loads of system, as well as the nonlinear load type. Table 3lists the harmonic current spectrum data in 10-bus test system.The GA, PSO, ABC and the BFO algorithms were applied to obtain optimal solution of harmonic passive filter design problem.The computational time using ABC and BFO is approximately 400ms and using GA and PSO it is 800ms. The time is system dependent, in our case Intel Core 2 duo, T5800 @ 2GHz. The convergence of the solutions to optimal cost is shown in Fig. 8.Optimal results of LC passive filter sitting and sizing in 10-bus test system are shown in Table 4. In this table the results of passive filters locations, harmonic tuning orders, filter capacity, fundamental component of voltages, rms voltages and total harmonic distortion of voltages in all buses, have been listed.In Table 5the comparison results of proposed method based on power loss, maximum total harmonic distortion, maximum and minimum bus voltage using mentioned intelligent methods are shown.One of the conventional methods of solving this problem is lambda-iteration method but owing to tedious calculations and its inability to solve multi-modal and discontinuous problems, novel techniques have replaced it. The optimal cost of small scale problem was found out to be 123,185$ using lambda iteration method, while as shown in Table 6the optimal cost is calculated as 128,911$, 125,216$, 123,859$ and 123,423$ using GA, PSO, ABC and BFO respectively.As listed in Table 6, the BFO result for optimize the total cost is closer to result of lambda iteration method. As shown in Table 6, a total of 350, 380, 150 and 200 iterations respectively were required to converge to the optimal solution for the problem using GA, PSO, ABC and BFO respectively. It is to be noted that the number of iterations for BFO is actually the number of chemo-tactic steps and cannot be directly compared with the number of iterations for GA, PSO and ABC. The final computational time has been obtained by averaging the times for 1000 runs.The test results show that BFO algorithm converges to optimal cost with reduced computational time when compared to GA, PSO and ABC. This is primarily due to the dispersal feature in BFO that introduce randomness during the optimization process resulting in significant computational time reduction.In Table 7, the comparison of four mentioned optimization approach for passive filter design problem from point of views accuracy, computational time and convergency speed are analyzed.This table showed that the BFO with 2 Good and 1 Med score in comparison with ABC with 1 Good and 2 Med score is the most suitable method to search the optimum solution. Therefore the analysis of large scale system with 34 buses has been addressed using BFO method. Parameters of BFO used in small scale test system simulation are listed in Table 8.Simulation results of small scale system with 10 buses showed that BFO is suitable research method for passive filter design respect to other intelligent methods such GA, PSO and ABC from point of views accuracy, computational time and convergency speed. Therefore BFO and adaptive version of it are applied to large scale system with 34 buses and the results of these simulations are compared in Tables 13–15.In this section the BFO based proposed method for LC passive filter sizing and sitting in the presence of linear and nonlinear loads has been applied on the 11kV, 34-bus radial distribution test system (Fig. 9).Specification of this system is given in Tables 9 and 10[27]. Table 11lists the harmonic current spectrum data in 34-bus test system.Simulation results are shown in Table 12. Passive filters locations, harmonic tuning orders, filter capacity, fundamental harmonic voltages, rms voltages and total harmonic distortion of voltages in all buses, have been listed in this table.In Table 13the comparison results of proposed method based on power loss, maximum total harmonic distortion, minimum bus voltage and system cost is shown.Comparison results of sizing and harmonic tuning order setting of BFO and Adaptive BFO are presented in Table 13.Comparison results of proposed method for 34-bus test system of power loss, maximum total harmonic distortion and maximum and minimum voltages are listed in Table 14.Table 15lists the comparison results of voltage profile of system using BFO and Adaptive BFO.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
