@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Incorporating biological knowledge for construction of fuzzy networks of gene associations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel fuzzy-based approach to generate gene association networks is developed.It is able to deal with data noise by incorporating biological.Its performance was proved by means of four thorough experiments.The method is able is able to obtain a high number of edges with biological meaning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computational intelligence,Gene network,Fuzzy logic,Biological knowledge,Gene expression data analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gene association networks have become one of the most important approaches to modelling of biological processes by means of gene expression data. According to the literature, co-expression-based methods are the main approaches to identification of gene association networks because such methods can identify gene expression patterns in a dataset and can determine relations among genes. These methods usually have two fundamental drawbacks. Firstly, they are dependent on quality of the input dataset for construction of reliable models because of the sensitivity to data noise. Secondly, these methods require that the user select a threshold to determine whether a relation is biologically relevant. Due to these shortcomings, such methods may ignore some relevant information.We present a novel fuzzy approach named FyNE (Fuzzy NEtworks) for modelling of gene association networks. FyNE has two fundamental features. Firstly, it can deal with data noise using a fuzzy-set-based protocol. Secondly, the proposed approach can incorporate prior biological knowledge into the modelling phase, through a fuzzy aggregation function. These features help to gain some insights into doubtful gene relations.The performance of FyNE was tested in four different experiments. Firstly, the improvement offered by FyNE over the results of a co-expression-based method in terms of identification of gene networks was demonstrated on different datasets from different organisms. Secondly, the results produced by FyNE showed its low sensitivity to noise data in a randomness experiment. Additionally, FyNE could infer gene networks with a biological structure in a topological analysis. Finally, the validity of our proposed method was confirmed by comparing its performance with that of some representative methods for identification of gene networks

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The central goal of bioinformatics is to understand the gene-gene relations in any biological process. Gene networks (GNs) have attracted significant interest amongst researchers because GNs are a powerful tool for modelling of genes relations. Therefore, GNs have become one of the most important approaches to discovery of interactions among genes because GNs can point to possible gene-gene interactions and show them in a visual way. In general, GNs are modelled as graphs where nodes represent genes and edges show relations among the genes. GNs can be classified into different types depending on the methods used to carry out the reverse engineering of GNs via monitoring and analysis of gene expression data [1]: the linear-equation-based networks [2,3], logical networks [4–6], differential-equation-based networks and the Bayesian networks [7]. These approaches have been broadly used in the field of bioinformatics. For example, Rangel et al. [8] used linear modelling to infer T-cell activation from temporal gene expression data; in another study, Faith et al. [9]] proposed an adapted Correlation and Bayesian-network-based approach to develop a method for identification of regulatory interactions in Escherichia coli.The GNs obtained by these methods can model gene–gene relations at different levels of abstraction [1]. These levels may vary from a detailed regulatory process to a higher level of abstraction represented by association networks [10]. Particularly, association networks embody an abstraction level commonly used to construct GNs from gene expression data [10,11]. For instance, in a study presented by Nepomuceno et al. [11], an association network was inferred by a model tree-based method from gene expression data of patients with heart diseases.In this kind of networks, the edges representing gene–gene relations are undirected and simply represent the influence detected between a pair of genes [1]. The most representative gene association networks are the co-expression networks, which have proved useful for modelling of gene regulation, in particular, gene regulation of biological processes [12,13]. A common approach to identification of gene association networks is to compute some kind of indicator of correlation between gene expression data because these mathematical protocols can help to detect similar gene expression patterns. These approaches by themselves, however, are not always sufficient because they strongly rely on quality of the input data. Gene expression data can be compromised by significant noise levels, which result in models with poor biological significance [14].One way to overcome this problem with noise sensitivity is incorporation of existing biological knowledge as a quality filter. For instance, the approach proposed by Huang and Pan [15] includes a biological function of a gene in an indicator for identification of gene clusters. Another illustrative method is the one proposed by Pan et al. [16], where biological functions of genes are used as a priori probabilities for selection of cluster members. This way, existing biological knowledge can be used to infer a GN and to improve its accuracy and biological significance. There is a wide variety of biological repositories that provide prior biological knowledge; Gene Ontology (GO) [17] stands out among them. GO is a widely used biological database [18] because it can provide complete information on attributes across species and from different databases of genes and gene products.In addition to the aforementioned problem, there is a closely related and fundamental drawback of the co-expression-based methods: the difficulty with correct selection of the threshold to determine whether a gene-gene correlation is strong enough, and therefore whether to include it in the resulting GN. Setting too low a threshold may lead to inclusion of spurious gene relations into a GN (i.e. false positives (FPs) or, in order words, gene relations without a true biological meaning). On the other hand, setting too high a threshold would mean an information loss in the form of erroneous exclusion of genuine gene relations from the resulting GN. To overcome this problem, a soft threshold can be used (instead of a hard threshold); this approach is particularly useful with concepts derived from the fuzzy sets theory [19] and fuzzy logic [20], where an element can belong partially to a given fuzzy set or a logical sentence may be partially true, respectively. As a result, a gene relation could be partially accepted depending on the strength of the correlation within the pair of genes.We propose a new algorithm (named FyNE: Fuzzy NEtworks) for identification of association GNs, based on mixed measures of gene relations. This algorithm can not only detect gene relations by means of linear functions but also take into account the knowledge contained in a biological database, particularly GO, as a rationale for decisions during the GN inference process. For this purpose, FyNE takes advantage of the fuzzy sets theory to conveniently integrate existing biological knowledge and to overcome the inconveniences of hard-threshold settings (to reduce sensitivity of the algorithm to data noise), thus ensuring a reduction in the information loss.The remainder of this article is organised as follows. Next, in Section 2 the materials and methods presented of this study are described. In Section 3, the characteristics of our approach are detailed. The performance of FyNE is discussed in Section 4. Finally, the main conclusions of the study and future projects are summarised in Section 5.In this paper, we propose a novel approach to inference of gene co-expression networks, and the text below describes the basis of this category of algorithms. Next, we describe a GO-based measure used to incorporate the biological knowledge into the process of GN construction. Finally, the experimental datasets and the biological repositories used in the experiments are presented.Gene co-expression networks are usually used to identify relations among different expression levels of a set of genes. The relations are represented by an undirected graph. The process of construction of a co-expression network typically uses a gene expression dataset [21] as input.The network is generated via computation of correlations of expression levels in each pair of genes, where as a co-expression measure, a correlation coefficient is used most commonly (e.g. Pearson's, Kendall's, or Spearman's correlation coefficient) [22,23].Then, the network is built by setting an edge for each pair of strongly co-expressed genes; the latter term traditionally means that the correlation coefficient is above a given threshold. Even though the most common criterion for strength of a correlation is a classical threshold (i.e. a strict level), its usage causes several inconveniences in terms of information loss (when this threshold is too high) or in terms of an increasing number of spurious correlations (when the threshold is too low) [24]. This inconvenience makes the algorithm's results sensitive to the threshold.Moreover, some authors [25] believe that a binary relation between genes is not biologically meaningful and propose adding to each edge a weight to indicate the strength of the association between the genes in question. This approach is definitely useful for interpreting the resulting GN. Again, the way this weight is determined varies among different algorithms and is usually their key part.The different ontologies of GO offer a mechanism by which biological knowledge is represented in a form suitable for automatic processing. There are GO-based measures of semantic similarity that take advantage of this knowledge source and use it to provide a biological score of the studied genes. In the present study, a GO-based functional dissimilarity (GFD) measure [18] was used to analyse the biological meaning of a doubtful gene relation and to determine whether the relation is relevant. We selected GFD because it shows good performance in comparison with other indicators like Resnik [26] or Wang [27] measures [18].GFD is a method for rating dissimilarity in a gene set by weighting the most cohesive (common and specific) functions on the basis of the global behaviour of the whole set of input genes. GFD assigns a numerical value to a gene set for each of the three GO ontologies and extrapolates the dissimilarity measure of gene representation to evaluate homogeneity of the gene set. For this purpose, GFD does not select the best GO term for each gene individually; instead, it searches for the most common and specific function for the whole set of genes.In this section, the input datasets that we selected to perform the analysis are presented.FyNE was applied to the dataset proposed by Spellman et al. in [28] in relation to the cell cycle regulation. This is a Yeast Cell Cycle microarray, which describes the expression level of 5521 genes in samples from yeast cultures synchronised by three independent methods: α factor arrest, elutriation, and arrest of a cdc15 temperature-sensitive mutant. Particularly, we focus on the well-known cdc15 experiments to test the consistency of our results.We applied FyNE to an H. sapiens gene expression dataset. We selected the dataset presented by Alizadeh et al. [29], a dataset that contains an expression set on diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. It is composed of 3583 genes and 194 experiments and has been previously used in the literature to generate GNs [30].The performance of FyNE was tested by means of the results obtained with an M. musculus SNP. This SNP is associated with the NZB allele of the Cdkn2c promoter, with a significantly reduced Cdkn2c expression in splenic B cells. The dataset contains information about 45,000 genes.In order to prove the robustness of our proposed method, another SNP was also tested, particularly, the H. sapiens SNP that is presented in the work of Hodo et al. [31]. This SNP was designed to study associations of interleukin 28B with carcinoma recurrence in patients with chronic hepatitis C, and this dataset contains information about 54,616 genes.In order to assess the quality of the output GNs, we used as a gold standard two well-known biological knowledge repositories: GeneMANIA [32] and YeastNet (v2.0) [33].GeneMANIA is a web interface for generation of hypotheses about gene functions. The prediction server uses a large set of functional association data including protein and genetic interactions, pathways, co-expression, co-localisation, and protein domain similarities. This vast amount of information is commonly used to find new members of a pathway, to find additional genes that were missed during a screening, or to find new genes with a specific function. GeneMANIA data are stored in a network structure where genes (nodes) are related (gene–gene relation) if at least one piece of evidence of this relation exists in the literature.On the other hand, YeastNet comprises a probabilistic functional GN generated from 5794 verified protein-coding open reading frames (ORFs) of the yeast genome extracted from S. cerevisiae Genome Database (SGD) [34]. In particular, YeastNet combines protein–protein interactions, protein-dna interactions, co-expression, phylogenetic conservation and literature information, in total covering 102,803 linkages among 5483 yeast proteins (95% of the validated proteome).The algorithm proposed in this work, FyNE, makes extensive use of the fuzzy sets theory in order to improve the following aspects:•Improve the criteria used to determine the strength of the co-expression in a pair of genes: the proposed method applies a fuzzy threshold to the correlation coefficient and, when necessary, a fuzzy aggregation [35] of correlation information with existing biological knowledge. This approach can reduce the noise levels (due to spurious correlations) in the resulting GN and decrease the information loss (in terms of undetected correlations due to noise in the data) at the same time.Generate a fuzzy network of gene associations, in the form of a weighted graph, where each weight represents the degree of membership of each edge in the association network. This approach can help to interpret the network and the importance of each component, thus providing a way to order and filter out gene relations by their relevance.The following text describes the general scheme of FyNE, as depicted in Fig. 1, and details its different phases.FyNE processes each possible gene pair extracted from the input dataset to determine whether these genes are strongly co-expressed. The aim of FyNE is to reduce the impact of noise in the gene expression data, with the help of the fuzzy sets theory and existing biological information, along with other design choices in the method to achieve this goal. The text below describes the relevant steps of the FyNE method.Firstly, in order to determine whether a pair of genes is co-expressed, FyNE computes a coefficient of correlation between the two series of expression levels of these genes. FyNE can use any correlation analysis. Particularly, in this work, FyNE makes use of Kendall's rank correlation [36] because it is less sensitive to outliers in data (i.e. noise in the gene expression levels) than Pearson's correlation is [23], as proven by some preliminary testing, where we defined a worst-case scenario for the experiments. Kendall's analysis also has advantages over Spearman's in that the distribution approaches normality more rapidly [37].At the end of this phase, each pair of genes (g, g′) from the input dataset is assigned a correlation coefficient k(g, g′) indicating the strength of their co-expression relation.A co-expression GN should contain an edge within each pair of genes that are strongly co-expressed. Determining whether the co-expression is strong enough is a key process in the co-expression GN methodology, and in FyNE, it is a core part of the proposed method.Strong co-expression is commonly determined by means of a user-fixed threshold of the correlation coefficient for a pair of genes. Therefore, for a given threshold t, the co-expression in a pair of genes g and g′ is considered strong if k(g, g′)≥t (assuming in this equation, for the sake of simplicity, that the correlation coefficient is Kendall's rank Correlation Coefficient). As mentioned at the beginning of this section, this method, even though it is a generally used approach, means a hard cut-off, making it sensitive to data noise (meaning a possible information loss).The FyNE methodology does not apply hard cut-offs to the correlation coefficient. In contrast, it uses the fuzzy sets theory to implement a soft cut-off. In this work, the strength of a co-expression is defined as a linguistic variable, in the sense of Zadeh [38].This way, the possible values of the strength can be, for instance, “strong” or “weak”. These linguistic terms, in turn, represent fuzzy restrictions on the domain of a numerical variable, named base variable, that contains values in a crisp (i.e. non-fuzzy) domain. For instance, if the base variable domain of the linguistic variable strength is the interval [0, 1], then the linguistic term strong can be defined as a fuzzy restriction whose compatibility function is defined in Eq. (1), where k∈[0, 1] represents a correlation value and t and t′ represent two thresholds (selected by the user) that determine the interval where a correlation value is assumed to gradually represent a strong correlation. This notion is illustrated in Fig. 2, showing the compatibility with the term strong for every value of the domain of k, where a compatibility value of 1 means that the correlation value k is completely compatible with the term strong, 0 means absolute incompatibility with the term strong, and the rest of values mean partial compatibility.(1)μstrong(k)=1ifk≥t′k−tt′−tift<k<t′0otherwiseStarting from a set of gene pairs P2, defined from the input gene set G as shown in Eq. (2), FyNE determines the fuzzy subset of strongly co-expressed gene pairsPs2˜⊆P2consisting of those pairs of genes whose co-expression coefficient is compatible with the term strong as defined in Eq. (1). The characteristic function ofPs2˜,μPs2˜, is defined as shown in Eq. (3).(2)P2={(g,g′)|g,g′∈G}(3)μPs2˜(g,g′)=μstrong(k(g,g′))This way, a soft cut-off between t and t′ (shown in Fig. 2) is defined, creating a so-called grey zone in which the co-expression of a gene pair (g, g′) can be considered partially strong. As a result, the impact of data noise is less significant, reducing the information loss for borderline cases (this loss can occur in the case of a hard cut-off).For instance, in the case of Kendall's rank correlation this grey zone could be defined by setting t′ to 0.8, given that a correlation coefficient above 0.8 is usually defined as a strong correlation, and by setting t to 0.6, because a correlation coefficient between 0.6 and 0.8 is usually considered a doubtful correlation [39,40]. Finally, a correlation coefficient below 0.6 is not usually considered to represent a strong correlation and, therefore, the pairs are excluded fromPs2˜. This way, the correlation coefficient of a pair of genes of, for instance, 0.7 is compatible with the term “strong” defined as in Fig. 2 at the 0.5 compatibility level.In this phase, existing biological knowledge is used to analyse the gene pairs whose co-expression is partially strong. Genes of a pair belonging to the grey zone do not conclusively correlate. This correlation could be confirmed (if there is some existing biological knowledge pointing to some relation between these genes) or ignored (if there is biological information to the contrary) [1].In this sense, selection of reliable prior biological knowledge is crucial because the performance of the proposed method is strongly affected by these data. FyNE uses GFD's (see Section 2 for more details) measure to determine the biological relation in each doubtfully correlating pair of genes. Given two genes g and g′, GFD(g, g′)∈[0, 1] represents the strength of the dissimilarity of g and g′, with GFD(g, g′)=1 for a fully biologically dissimilar pair of genes and GFD(g, g′)=0 when g and g′ are biologically similar according to the GO database. In order to distinguish data with biological significance from the biologically non-significant data using GFD, the work [41] applied GFD values to data in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes’ (KEGG's) Pathway database [42] and to a control dataset of random data. The average GFD value for data with biological significance was reported to be ∼0.3 (after rounding out to one digit after the decimal point for the sake of simplicity). Using this value as a reference, we can derive from GFD a similarity measure and dissimilarity measure, respectively sim(g, g′)∈[0, 1] and dis(g, g′)∈[0, 1], as, Eqs. (4) and (5) show.(4)sim(g,g′)=(0.3−GFD(g,g′))/0.3ifGFD(g,g′)<0.30otherwise(5)dis(g,g′)=(GFD(g,g′)−0.3)/0.7ifGFD(g,g′)>0.30otherwiseThe existing biological knowledge, in the form of the GFD-derived similarity and dissimilarity degrees, is integrated into FyNE by means of a fuzzy aggregation f(g, g′), which is designed to partially aggregate this knowledge depending on how doubtful the correlation in each pair of genes is. This fuzzy aggregation is defined in Eq. (6) where r(g, g′) and c(g, g′) are defined as in Eqs. (7) and (8) respectively.(6)f(g,g′)=k(g,g′)+r(g,g′)−c(g,g′)if0<μPs2˜(g,g′)<1k(g,g′)otherwise(7)r(g,g′)=(t′−t)·(1−μPs2˜(g,g′))·sim(g,g′)(8)c(g,g′)=(t′−t)·μPs2˜(g,g′)·dis(g,g′)As one can see, when the correlation in a the pair of genes is considered “absolutely not strong” (i.e. the compatibility degree with the term “strong” is 0) or “absolutely strong” (i.e. the compatibility degree with the term “strong” is 1.0) the correlation information is the only factor considered to score this gene pair. Nevertheless, when the strength of the correlation is doubtful, i.e. the correlation is considered “partially strong” (a compatibility degree with the term “strong” in (0, 1)), the correlation and the biological knowledge are gradually aggregated.This gradual aggregation mechanism takes into account more of the existing positive biological knowledge when the strength of the correlation is more doubtful (i.e. the degree of compatibility of the correlation with the term “strong” is lower), thereby reducing the impact of data noise on correlation measures and, therefore, decreasing the information loss in terms of lost gene-gene relations. In contrast, the aggregation mechanism takes into account existing negative biological knowledge (i.e. dissimilarity) when the strength of the correlation is less doubtful, in order to reduce the impact of spurious correlations.An example of the inference process proposed is presented below.Example 1Let us consider an input set of genes G={g1, g2, g3, g4, g5}, k(g, g′) the correlation in each pair of the genes (g, g′) in P2, and their GFD biological dissimilarity measure, along with its derivatives, as Table 1shows. Additionally, let us assume that t=0.6 and t′=0.8.The fuzzy aggregation for each pair (g, g′), f(g, g′), results in the values shown in Table 1. Readers can see, as in the case of the pair of genes (g1, g2), when the correlation coefficient is fully compatible with the term strong (i.e. the compatibility degree,μPs2˜(g,g′), is 1.0), there is no aggregation of prior biological knowledge information because the correlation is clear. The same is true for the cases where the correlation is fully incompatible with the term strong (i.e. the compatibility degree,μPs2˜(g,g′)is 0), where the lack of correlation is clear too, as in the case of the pair of genes (g4, g5).However, when the correlation coefficient is partially compatible with the term strong (i.e.0<μPs2˜(g,g′)<1), the correlation between the pair of genes is doubtful. In this case, the correlation information is complemented by the prior biological knowledge offered by GFD. When GFD indicates that g and g′ are biologically similar (i.e. sim(g, g′) is over 0), then this information is used by the fuzzy aggregator to increase the score of the pair, as in the case of (g1, g3) and (g2, g4). Otherwise, when GFD indicates biological dissimilarity (i.e. dis(g,g’) is over 0), the score yielded by the fuzzy aggregator f(g, g′) is less than the correlation coefficient k(g, g′), as in the case of (g1, g5) and (g3, g4).It should be noted that the variation of the score made by the fuzzy aggregator is proportional to the level of biological similarity/dissimilarity in the pair of genes being considered (i.e. the differences of the cases of (g1, g3) and (g1, g4), or (g3, g4) and (g3, g5), and is proportional to the level of doubt about the strength of the correlation, resulting in a more important role of the prior biological information when the correlation is more doubtful and there is a strong positive biological evidence (i.e. (g2, g4) versus (g1, g3), or on the contrary, when the correlation level is stronger and there is strong negative biological evidence (i.e. (g1, g5) versus (g3, g4).This feature helps to reduce sensitivity of the method to noise in input data when the correlation is inconclusive; thus, this feature ensures more reliable results, as will be shown in the rest of the paper.FyNE produces as output a fuzzy GN. This is an undirected graph 〈N, E〉 where N⊆G and each edge is a triple set [g, g′, f(g, g′)] representing an edge between the nodes g and g′ with an associated label f(g, g′), the aggregation function defined above. An example of such a network based on the data from Table 1 is shown in Fig. 3.Given that the label associated with each edge represents aggregated strength of the co-expression of the linked genes and their biological significance, the output network is more interpretable for end users. It is also possible to set a threshold of the relevance (i.e. the weight), converting the fuzzy GN to a crisp (i.e. classical) one. This operation resembles an α-cut on a fuzzy set and is applied in the same way: excluding the edges with an associated label below the user defined threshold of relevance. An example of an α-cut (for α=0.7) of the fuzzy network shown in Fig. 3 is depicted in Fig. 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel fuzzy approach to modelling of gene association networks is presented here. The method, FyNE, is not only based on a mathematical algorithm (a correlation method) but also incorporates biological knowledge through a fuzzy aggregation function. The strength of the inferred gene-gene relations is modelled by a novel approach based on the fuzzy sets theory. For doubtful gene-gene relations, this approach takes into account existing biological knowledge in the form of a biological dissimilarity measure. This knowledge is partially and progressively considered to help deciding on these cases. This approach makes the proposed method less sensitive to data noise, thereby significantly reducing FPs in the inferred GN and decreasing the information loss.The performance of FyNE was tested in four different experiments. In the first experiment, the performance improvement achieved by FyNE over a pure correlation method was demonstrated by a comparative analysis in relation to four different datasets from different organisms. Secondly, the robustness of our approach vis-a-vis data noise was tested in a randomness experiment by comparing its behaviour with the behaviour of a pure correlation algorithm. In addition, the ability of FyNE to infer GNs with a biological structure was tested in an exhaustive topological experiment. Moreover, the centrality measures of the network were studied to confirm the biological value provided by the FyNE-generated network. Finally, the relevance of the method became more evident because FyNE performed well in comparison with some relevant methods for inference of GNs