@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A patent quality analysis and classification system using self-organizing maps with support vector machine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An automatic patent quality analysis and classification system is developed.The self-organizing map approach is used to cluster patents published before into different quality groups.The kernel principal component analysis is used to transform nonlinear feature space to improve classification performance.The support vector machine is used to build up the patent quality classification model.A series of experiments for patent data of the thin film solar cell are conducted, and the results are very encouraging.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Patent analysis,Patent quality,Data clustering,Patent quality classification,Machine learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A plethora of patents are approved by the patent officers each year and current patent systems face a solemn quandary of evaluating these patents’ qualities. Traditional researchers and analyzers have fixated on developing sundry patent quality indicators only, but these indicators do not have further prognosticating power on incipient patent applications or publications. Therefore, the data mining (DM) approaches are employed in this article to identify and to classify the new patent's quality in time. An automatic patent quality analysis and classification system, namely SOM-KPCA-SVM, is developed according to patent quality indicators and characteristics, respectively. First, the self-organizing map (SOM) approach is used to cluster patents published before into different quality groups according to the patent quality indicators and defines group quality type instead of via experts. The kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) approach is used to transform nonlinear feature space in order to improve classification performance. Finally, the support vector machine (SVM) is used to build up the patent quality classification model. The proposed SOM-KPCA-SVM is applied to classify patent quality automatically in patent data of the thin film solar cell. Experimental results show that our proposed system can capture the analysis effectively compared with traditional manpower approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, more and more investing companies are eager to know which patent to invest on for future products, since hot product technology are playing an important role in making profit. However, the number of patents filed every year is incrementing at an expeditious speed. Thus the patents examined and approved in patent systems have a crucial role in the industry over different countries, and the research on patent's quality is getting more attention from the academic researchers and industrial practitioners. Patent quality analysis provides an expedient way through which companies determine whether or not to modify and continue manufacturing innovative products, but the question of how to evaluate and predict the quality or value of a new patent presents a new challenge to the researchers and industrial practitioners. Nevertheless, the current technology in patent quality evaluation and classification is still in its primitive stage, and the patents’ qualities are still evaluated manually by the experts, leading to inaccuracies of all types.Currently, there are various tools that are being utilized by organizations for analyzing patents. However, an important issue of patent analysis is patent quality analysis. The high-quality patent information can ensure success for business decision-making process or product development [1,2]. This study reviewed the patent analysis approaches that can understand patent status like patent quality, novelty, litigation, trends and so on [3]. However, traditional patent analysis requires spending much time, cost and manpower. The potential patents for high-quality determining approach need to have shortened analysis at times. In general, the analysis approaches are statistical analysis or indicators computation. Recently, the clustering method is widely applied to cluster patents according to patent characteristics for patent trend [4]. The methods with statistical analysis can help analysts to understand patent situation or trend of this time, but if we want to know the potential quality of a newly applied patent, it does not provide effective rules or solutions to determination. The future patent evaluation is a key issue when a new patent is applied or published because patent has been producing impact on the industry according to the past industrial development such as patent litigation, specifically high-tech or information.The patent officers approve a large amount of patents each year and current patent systems face a serious problem of evaluating these patents’ qualities. Traditional researchers and analyzers have focused on developing various patent quality indicators. The patent indicators are collected from patent corpuses, including the number of patent citations and the number of International Patent Classifications (IPC). The primary patent quality indicators [5–7] are related to investment, maintenance, and litigation, which form a basis for assessing patent. But, these indicators do not have further predicting power on a new patent application or publication. Therefore, the data mining (DM) approaches are employed in this article to identify and classify the new patent's quality. Investors from venture capital companies can derive these patents’ qualities in time when making decisions regarding the development of new innovative products and discovering the trend of state-of-the-art technology. Thus, an automatic classification system to analyze and forecast the patent quality is needed in order to quickly respond important or emergency situations.In this study, we propose an automatic patent quality classification system named SOM-KPCA-SVM which combines three DM methods including self-organizing maps (SOM), kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) and support vector machine (SVM). The SOM is a two-dimensional (or multidimensional) network structure for multiple variables mapping and cluster sample to several groups [8]. Therefore, SOM in this article is used to cluster patents into several quality groups according to patent quality indicators. We will summarize these quality indicators in order to delimit different quality for each group. The result of quality analysis on patent data extends to a classification problem in order to early identify valuable patent as well as patent quality forecasting. In addition, the KPCA is based on kernel mapping with principal component analysis (PCA). KPCA is used to transform original feature space into a new nonlinear feature space through nonlinear kernel mapping and relationships among new feature that are independent variables [9]. Thus, we will apply KPCA to extract key characteristics of a patent from the patent document. In the classification problems, the SVM classification approach is a powerful tool for solving many kinds of problems such as stock trends [10] and patent classification [11]. In this article, the SVM is used to build patent quality classification model and it can automatically determine the patent quality and hence there is no need to hire an expert to rank or define patent quality. Therefore, a SOM-KPCA-SVM system can automatically analyze patent quality based on past patent applications and forecast an unknown patent's quality, better enabling engineers and product designers to forecast a patent's potential for product development or innovation.The inventors, attorneys, examiners, governments and companies need to reach a consensus on the quality of patents. Though the value can be estimated manually or by experts studying about the actual quality decisions, this is slow and expensive. In this study, we introduce an automatic analysis and classification system of patent quality named SOM-KPCA-SVM, which represents the quality in which the application will be classified. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:•The quality type is identified based on the clustering approach by self-organizing maps.New feature sets of nonlinear space are transformed by KPCA for improving the quality classification of patent applications.Quality classification system to classify the patent quality is obtained by using a support vector machine.The classification effectiveness of the model is shown by an evaluation using more than 18,000 applications around the world related to thin film solar cell.A new patent analysis system allows users to automatically analyze the quality of patent applications.A group of intellectual property experts who work with solar cell hi-tech companies obtained analysis results by classifying patent applications on the quality classification system.The overall structure of this article is as follows. Literature review is given in Section 2. The proposed patent quality analysis and classification system by SOM, KPCA and SVM is introduced in Section 3. Following the applications and results, discussions of the proposed system are shown in Section 4. Conclusions and future research directions are finally presented in Section 5.In this section, first we summarize the studies related to the patent analysis. Second, we focus the patent quality indicators that are used in this study for calculating patent quality. Third, literatures in SOM are reviewed for patent clustering analysis. Fourth, the concepts of feature extraction of KPCA are reviewed for capturing key features. Finally, we review literature in SVM for developing the patent classification system.The patent analysis is a set of techniques and visual tools that analyze the trend and patterns of technology innovation in a specific domain based on statistics of patents. The analysis objects on patent include [12–14]: (1) patent count analysis, it is counting the quantity of patents, including the technology life cycle chart and the patent quantity comparison chart; (2) country analysis, it is comparing the patents of various countries in a specific technology domain; (3) assignee analysis, it is comparing detailed data on R&D, citation ratio, cross-citation, event charts, ranking chart, and competitors; (4) citation rate analysis, it is comparing the number of citation made by other patents during its valid period; and (5) International Patent Classification (IPC) analysis, it is including IPC patent activity chart and number of IPC patent companies. There are various tools utilized by organizations for analyzing patents. These tools are capable of performing a wide range of tasks, such as forecasting future technological trends, detecting patent infringement and determining patent quality. Moreover, patent analysis tools can free patent experts from the laborious tasks of analyzing the patent documents manually and determining the quality of patents. The tools assist organizations in making decisions of whether or not to invest in manufacturing of the new products by analyzing the quality of the filed patents [2]. This eventually may result in imprecise recommendation of patents. Grimaldi et al. [15] proposed a patent portfolio value analysis that uses the leverage page patent information for strategic technology planning. They used five directions of patent quality such as claim, citation, market coverage, strategic relevance and economic relevance to analyze patent portfolio value. Another study [16] used renewal data to estimate the value of US patents. In their analysis results, they mentioned that the ratio of US patent value to R&D is only about 3% but these had a high value in terms of litigation.Usually the patent quality indicators are related to investment, maintenance, litigation and patent claims. The quality is used to evaluate the potential patents for a business or government policy [17,18]. For example, one kind of indicator of patent quality is legal status (LS), which means the technology's potential. In this movement, the competitors may litigate a claim in this patent. Therefore, the quality indicators can respond to the future value for business intelligence. Archontopoulos [19] mentioned that the legal status and search tools on the Internet are so sensitive that emphasis given to the issues related to the date of availability to the public has a wide Internet disclosure. Simmons and Spahl [20] mentioned that many changes in the legal status of US patents are hidden away in files at the United States Patent and Trademark Office USPTO and at the Courts of Appeal. Patent applications have “first to invent” concepts in US patent law; therefore, legal status of previous patent has been affecting other patent judgments. Hirschey and Richardson [21] mentioned that the scientific measures of patent quality have the potential to offer managers useful guidance concerning the quantity and quality of inventive output and the effectiveness of patent investments. The quality indicators are current impact index, total patent, science linkage and technology cycle time for patent quality valuation analysis for innovation level in a Chinese patent [22]. They merged the patent data with widely used industrial survey data by firm names which made it possible to investigate the relationship between financial performance and innovation activities. Chen and Chang studied [23] the relationship between a firm's patent quality and its market value. The relative patent position, revealed technology advantage, Herfindahl– Hirschman Index of patents, and patent citations are used to analyze their patent data. In their results, the pharmaceutical companies with high patent counts had higher marker value than those with low patent counts. Frietsch et al. [24] mention that the values of patents were estimated by export volume. Their results show that exports are a very useful way of placing a valuation on patents according to the patent applications, forward citations, in particular analysis. Another study [25] used the citations, family size, and opposition to estimates value of patent right. In their analysis result they mentioned that the number of citations a patent receives are positively related to its value. References to the non-patent literature are informative about the value of pharmaceutical and chemical patents, but not in other technical fields.The SOM is a two-layer neural network that maps multidimensional data on to a two-dimensional topological grid. The data are grouped according to the similarities and patterns found in the data set, using some form of distance measure approach such as the Euclidean distance. The results are displayed as nodes on the map, which can be divided into different clusters based upon the distances between the clusters. Since the SOM is unsupervised, no target outcomes are provided, and the SOM is allowed to freely organize itself. So the SOM is an ideal tool for exploratory data analysis. Segev and Kantola [8] used SOM to identify patent trends and analyzed patent knowledge to identify research trends. They tested on patents from the USPTO and provided an overview of the directions of the trends. Another one of SOM algorithm is called evolving self-organizing map (ESOM), it is an evolving network structure and has fast learning rate on-line. Their result shows that ESOM achieved better or comparable performance with a much shorter learning process [26]. Juntunen et al. [27] used the SOM combined with K-mean clustering to a model of water quality in a treatment process. They provided approach offers a straightforward clustering method for assessing the essential characteristics of the process. Their results show that modelling of water quality in treatment process has clearly demonstrated some challenges. Bouhouche et al. [28] combined PCA and SOM for condition monitoring in pickling process. In their research, the PCA method uses indexes to classify process variability and the SOM is used to replace the conventional indexes. Their result shows that the combined approach remains important comparatively to PCA but not more than SOM.Principal component analysis (PCA) is very useful to extract nonlinear features for many research applications. The PCA is widely used in many fields of research. Trappey et al. [1] tried to identify the key impact factors using PCA and the authors selected a lot of variables as indicated by the first five components. The PCA was also used to estimate global competition using patent statistics and analysis [29]. In the further research, the kernel principal component analysis is an extension from PCA that uses the kernel mapping process before the Eigen-problem. PCA is mathematically defined. The KPCA is used for critical feature extraction in stock trading model which they used Gaussian and Euclidean kernel function to feature space transformation [6]. In their experimental results, the KPCA has captured best performance compared to PCA, ICA and so on. Shao et al. [30] used the PCA and KPCA for fault feature extraction. Their study compared and analyzed the extraction effect for primary feature data and feature dimensionality reduction. The effect of feature extraction is KPCA approach which is caused by the kernel function.Support vector machine is a machine learning algorithm which is widely used for classification and regression problems. Vapnik [31], and Cortes and Vapink [32] developed the SVM that can solve multidimensional classification problems. This method aims to develop an optimal hyper-plane as a decision function using the maximum margin hyper-plane between class vectors on both sides of the hyper-plane in binary classification problem. SVM map inputs vectors into the high dimensional feature space via the linear or non-linear transformation. An effective decision hyper-plane is developed to distinguish the correct training data and it can determine class in testing data according to known hyper-plane. An approach is proposed integrated with a hybrid genetic-based support vector machine (HGA-SVM) model for developing a patent classification system [33]. But the target of classification must be definition by experts’ analysis and knowledge. The authors claim that they use these models in real-world cases of patent classification rather than using only for International Patent Classification (IPC). The study integrated the honeybee mating optimization algorithm with SVM (HBMOSVM) for patent document categorization. In their results they showed that the HBMOSVM could result in a better patent documentation accuracy and better F-measure performance as an evaluation index than GASVM model in patents document categorization [34]. On the other hand, SVM classifier is used to classify the topics of patents and their results are based on the text data to build classifier and data from USPTO [35].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study proposed three data mining approaches to patent analysis and patent quality forecasting. The SOM-KPCA-SVM patent quality system combined self-organizing maps, kernel principal component analysis and support vector machine to classify patent quality of a thin film solar cell in solar industry. The SOM has successful cluster patent into different quality groups and its result has statistically significant difference in the quality indicators between the quality groups. The KPCA has effectively transformed a nonlinear feature space from characteristics of a patent document and it can improve classification performance. The SVM has built a powerful classification model for patent quality problem. Therefore, our proposed SOM-KPCA-SVM automatic patent quality classification system has improved analysis time, cost and manpower by traditional patent analysis approaches. Thus, SOM-KPCA-SVM system can take a short time to determine patent quality. Through our automatic quality classifier, we can promote precision of decision-making for R&D of companies or industry. In addition, our analysis and classification used the larger patent data that avoid mark analysis mistake from less data for decision-making. In the future research work, we will consider the degree of patent quality. Each patent will assume a degree of quality instead of same quality type. The detailed quality level can provide more precise quality information for decision-making.