@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Soft computing techniques during drilling of bi-directional carbon fiber reinforced composite

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Measurement of output variables for process parameters obtained from Taguchi DOE.Development of RSM and GA-MLPNN models for predicting thrust force.Optimization of thrust force using RSM and GA.Comparison of performance of RSM and GA models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Drilling,Carbon fiber reinforced polymer composites,Response surface methodology,Artificial Neural Network,Genetic Algorithm,Multi-objective optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to the intricacy of machining processes and inconsistency in material properties, analytical models are often unable to describe the mechanics of machining of carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) composites. Recently, soft computing techniques are used as alternate modeling and analyzing methods, which are usually robust and capable of yielding comprehensive, precise, and unswerving solutions. In this paper, drilling experiments as per the Taguchi L27experimental layout are carried out on bi-directional carbon fiber reinforced polymer (BD CFRP) composite laminates using three types of drilling tools: high speed steel (HSS), uncoated solid carbide (USC) and titanium nitride coated SC (TiN-SC). The focus of this work is to determine the best drilling tool that produces good quality drilled holes in BD CFRP composite laminates. This paper proposes a novel prediction model ‘genetic algorithm optimised multi-layer perceptron neural network’ (GA-MLPNN) in which genetic algorithm (GA) is integrated with Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Network. The performance capability of response surface methodology (RSM) and GA-MLPNN in prediction of thrust force is investigated. RSM is also used to evaluate the influence of process parameters (spindle speed, feed rate, point angle and drill diameter) on thrust force. GA is used to optimize the thrust force and its optimization performance is compared with that of RSM. It is observed that the GA-MLPNN is better predicting tool than the RSM model. The investigation in this paper demonstrates that TiN-SC is the best tool for drilling BD CFRP composite laminates as minimum thrust force is developed during its use.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For periods, the aviation industry has utilized composite materials, especially carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) due to its attractive properties, such as strength-to-weight ratio, durability and extreme corrosion resistance in multiple applications, including flight surfaces and some internal cabin parts. Unfortunately, these materials are unique to each design in their fiber layering techniques, resins and machining processes, which creates great challenges with respect to consistency in manufacturing and assembly [1–3].Although CFRPs are usually fabricated to near net shapes by autoclave molding, compression molding or filament winding, a post machining operation, such as turning, milling or drilling is often necessary and must be performed to ensure that the composite parts encounter dimensional accuracy, surface finish and other functional necessities. However, machining of CFRPs is considerably difficult than machining of traditional metals/alloys due to the varying material properties. Drilling of CFRP composites using twist drills is the most frequently employed machining operation for generating holes required during structural assemblies. The drilling-induced delamination is recognized as one of the major defects occurring in composite structure. It drastically deteriorates surface finish and fatigue properties, degrading the life of composites [2,4,5]. The push-down delamination is more serious when compared to peel-up delamination while drilling of composites [3,6]. The thrust force and the torque generated during drilling operation are cited as the main causes of delamination and surface roughness [7]. Therefore, researchers have conducted studies for minimizing the cutting forces generated during drilling with the aim of reducing the delamination and the surface roughness for better quality of drilled hole [8–10].Soft computing techniques have emerged as a substitute to counterpart the statistical techniques adopted for analyzing the machining processes. Indeed, successful implementations of soft computing techniques for modeling of metal machining have been summarized in several review reports [11–14]. Soft computing, as the name suggests, refers to a collection of computational techniques developed from computer science research, with the major aim of being able to model and analyze complex, nonlinear, and vague phenomena that may exist in the process variables. Soft computing modeling is usually robust and capable of yielding complete, accurate and reliable solutions. Such examples of soft computing techniques frequently employed in machining research include design of experiments (DOE), response surface methodology (RSM), artificial neural network (ANN) and genetic algorithm (GA).Extensive and exclusive experimentations would typically be required to evaluate the machinability of a metals or materials. Hence, the experimental approach of machinability study can be well achieved through numerically or statistically designed tests or experiments, commonly known as design of experiments (DOE). It is a technique employed for designing the experimental layout as well as to analyze the influence of each process parameters and to minimize the number of experiments in order to reach optimum conditions. Hence, it has received a wide acceptance in manufacturing and scientific community [15].This paper proposes a new modeling approach for prediction, namely GA optimized MLPNN (GA-MLPNN) wherein the GA is integrated with the MLPNN to optimize the training parameters (number of hidden neurons, learning rate and momentum rate), so as to maximize the prediction accuracies on the training and the test data. This paper aims to achieve less than 5% deviation with respect to the experimentally measured thrust force. GA is also used to optimize the thrust force, torque, delamination factor and surface roughness and its performance is compared with optimization results obtained from RSM. The significant influence of process parameters (spindle speed, feed rate, point angle and drill diameter) on thrust force, is investigated. The organization of the remaining paper is: Section 2 describes the problem and its representation, Section 3 explains the materials and methods, Section 4 provides the results and discussion, followed by conclusions in Section 5.response surface methodology (RSM) is a tool used for modeling and analysing the problems wherein the response of interest is affected by several variables. In general, a second-order polynomial response surface mathematical model is most commonly used for analysing the parametric effect on the different response criteria. Jayabal and Natarajan [16] studied the influence of process parameters (drill diameter, spindle speed and feed rate) on thrust force, torque and tool wear during drilling of coir fiber reinforced composite materials. The optimum process parameters were obtained with the Box–Behnken design, Nelder–Mead, and GA techniques. The researchers concluded that the technique used was convenient to predict the main effects, interaction effects, drilling process output variables and to determine the optimum values of drilling parameters. Tsao [17] in his work on thrust force showed that the radial basis function network (RBFN) is a better predicting tool than multi-variable linear regression model. Petropoulos et al. [18] developed empirical models for predicting thrust force, torque, delamination and surface roughness through RSM and ANOVA.The biological neural networks have motivated the several advances that have been made in the development of intelligent systems. Various problems related to optimization, pattern recognition, associative memory, prediction and control are being designed using ANN [19]. ANN is considered a robust modeling tool that can perform non-linear mapping (transformation) from a multi-dimensional input space to a multi-dimensional output space. An ANN is a parallel and distributed processing network, which takes inspiration from the functioning of a human brain. The neural network stores information in the interconnections between the neurons. The interconnection strengths are adjusted in the event of new information received, without losing the old information [20,21]. Enemuoh et al. [22] have used a multi-layered perceptron neural network (MLPNN) model for predicting the delamination and the surface roughness during drilling of CFRP composite, and found that there was a good agreement between the experimental results and the predicted results of delamination and surface roughness. Dini [23] applied forward propagation neural network for predicting delamination during drilling of composite materials, and obtained effective results in terms of performances.The genetic algorithm (GA) is a global optimization tool which operates on the principles of biological processes like reproduction, cross over, mutation, survival of the fittest, etc. The unique feature of GA is that it does not require many mathematical considerations as required by traditional optimization techniques. It can handle linear or non-linear objective functions and constraints specified on discrete, continuous, or mixed search spaces [24]. Karthikayan et al. [25] made an attempt of applying fuzzy logic and GA for optimizing the drilling process output variables during drilling of Al/SiCp composite using SANDWICK solid carbide drill. The fuzzy logic was used for training and simulating the experimental data and the process parameters were optimized with help of GA model. Saravanan et al. [26] carried out multi objective optimization of drilling parameters using GA. They concluded that the variation of the parameters arrived by GA approach was about 10% which is appreciable comparing to the numerical method (Finite Element Method). Krishnaraj et al. [27] have employed the GA technique in the multi-objective optimization to determine the optimum cutting conditions for defect free drilling.Other than GA and ANN some other approaches like data mining, fuzzy axiomatic design principles and weighted aggregated sum product assessment (WASPAS) are used by researchers as optimization/multiple criteria decision making (MCDM) tools. Dey and Chakraborty [28] used data mining approach based on classification and regression tree algorithm to identify the prime parameters of non-traditional machining processes (NTMPs). Khandekar and Chakraborty [29] proposed the application of fuzzy axiomatic design principles for selecting the important NTMPs for generating cavities and micro holes on ceramics and hardened tool steel/titanium materials. Chakraborty and Antucheviciene [30] and Chakraborty et al. [31] in their articles emphasize the success of the WASPAS method as an optimization tool as well as a MCDM tool for analysing and solving complex real time problems.It is evident from the literature review that, the artificial neural networks (ANNs) are capable of providing a better fit than the other available regression models, with respect to studies related to drilling of composites. Further, the integration of GA and MLPNN is not much evident in the literature. The radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) prediction model developed by Tsao and Hocheng [32] achieved a deviation of less than 14%.The quality of drilled hole depends on spindle speed and feed rate of the drilling tool. Researchers have used high speed drilling with high feed rate for volume production of components. From literature, it is observed that the defects developed during drilling of composite laminates are associated with high spindle speeds and high feed rates. Hence in this study, low spindle speeds (1200–1800rpm) and low feed rates (10–20mm/min) are selected, which are suitable for critical structural applications in spacecraft, aircraft and automobile industries. Also, it is found that wings of aircraft, vertical and horizontal stabilizers, load bearing structures of space vehicles are joined by rivets of size approximately in the range of 4–10mm. From this point of view, in this study the drill diameter range of 4–8mm is selected. The point angle range of the drill bits is chosen as 90°–118°, which is selected based on the usage of various researchers. It is evident from the literature that the quality of the drilled holes is dependent on the thrust force taken up by the drilling tool. Optimization of the drilling process parameters (speed, feed rate, drill diameter and the point angle) so as to minimize the thrust force leads to better quality of drilled holes (good surface finish and minimum delemination). Hence, thrust force, torque, delamination and surface roughness are selected as the drilling process output variables in this work. Further, it is evident from the literature that the drilling tool material influences the chemistry of the interface of tool and composite during the drilling process. Hence the influence of three types of drilling tool materials (HSS, USC and TiN-SC) are investigated in this study. The study in this paper involves the simultaneous optimization of thrust force, torque, delamination and surface roughness. The number of output responses used in this work is 4 viz., thrust force, torque, delamination and surface roughness. However, in this paper the results and discussion pertaining to only thrust force are presented. Hence, the RSM and GA are used as optimzation tools and their performances are compared. Fig. 1gives the schematic of the work carried out in this paper.The BD [0/90]12 CFRP composite specimens of 300mm×300mm×4mm are fabricated by the hand lay-up process followed by compression molding technique at room temperature. Fig. 2shows the SEM image of bi-directional carbon fiber reinforced polymer (BD CFRP) composite.The drilling experiments on BD CFRP composite specimens are carried out using TRIAC vertical machining center as shown in Fig. 3. The HSS, USC and TiN-SC drills of 4, 6, and 8mm diameter are used to carry out the drilling experiments. Table 1shows the drilling process parameters and levels selected for the study. The Taguchi L27(3^4) orthogonal array (OA) is used for preparing the layout of experimentation (Table 2). Number of levels in this work is 3. Hence, degree of freedom (DOF) for each factor is 2 (level-1). Since for 4 factors, the total DOF is 8, and one more DOF is required for overall mean, making the total DOF as 9. But the interaction effects also need to be considered. Thus more than 9 DOFs are required. Therefore, L9(3^4) is insufficient, and L27(3^4) OA is used in this work. Thirty sets of experiments are sorted using the standard ordering according to experimental design matrix for RSM. The central composite design (CCD) of RSM is used for establishing the empirical relationship between the process parameters and the drilling process output variables of CFRP composites. The experimental design matrix chosen for four factors is shown in Table 3. The thrust force generated during drilling of BD CFRP composite laminates are measured by 9257BA KISTLER Dynamometer. A high resolution scanner (HP make, 4800dpi) is used for obtaining the scanned images of the drilled holes from which the delamination factor is determined. The surface roughness (Ra) of the drilled hole is measured by using Taylor-Hobson Surtronic +3 instrument.Using the RSM approach, a second degree polynomial regression equation is fit to the experimental data, to model the correlation between the thrust force and the drilling parameters. The MINITAB software is used to develop the model.If the number of experiments conducted is n, the output variable yifor the ith experiment can be expressed as [15]:(1)yi=βi0+∑j=1kβijxijwhere, i=1–n (n=30 experiments) and k=14.For j=1–4, xij=Ai, Bi, Ciand Di, respectively.For j=5–8, xij=Ai2, Bi2, Ci2 and Di2, respectively.For j=9–14, xij=AiBi, AiCi, AiDi, BiCi, BiDiand CiDi, respectively.The theory of regression analysis is used to correlate the process parameters and the thrust force.The successful implementation of the MLPNN training depends upon the proper selection of the MLPNN training parameters, viz., h (number of hidden neurons), α (learning rate) and μ (momentum rate). Conventionally, these parameters were set manually by trial and error method such that the selected parameters gave good prediction accuracies on both training and test data. Later, several approaches have been used for automatically choosing these training parameters. Genetic algorithm (GA) is a global optimization tool that can be used for automatically optimizing the parameters of a given system [24,33]. Hence, the GA is used in this work for automatically choosing the optimal training parameters, i.e., in this work an attempt has been made to integrate GA and MLPNN. The structure of the proposed GA-MLPNN prediction model is shown in Fig. 4. It consists of four neurons in the input layer corresponding to the four input process parameters (A: spindle speed, B: feed rate, C: point angle and D: drill diameter). The output layer consists of a single neuron corresponding to the process output variable (thrust force (TF) or torque (T) or delamination factor (Fd) or surface roughness (Ra)). A single hidden layer is used in this work. The hidden layer consists of h neurons. The activation functions in the hidden and the output layer are sigmoidal. The back-propagation (BP) algorithm is used for training the GA-MLPNN. The performance of the GA-MLPNN is measured in terms of its prediction accuracy on the training data and the test data. The expressions for computing the prediction accuracy on the training data and test data are given in Eqs. (2) and (3), respectively.(2)ηTrg=ncTrgnTrg×100(3)ηTst=ncTstnTst×100where, ηTrgand ηTstare the prediction accuracies on the training and the test data, respectively; ncTrgand ncTstare the number of correctly predicted output values in the training and the testing phases, respectively; nTrgand nTstare the total number of experiments (data) considered in training and testing, respectively. An output value given by the GA-MLPNN is considered to be correct, if its value is within ±5% (i.e., 0.95–1.05 times) the desired value, otherwise it is considered as incorrect. This value is chosen based on the general perception that the experimentally measured or predicted values could suffer a deviation of ±5%.The effectiveness and convergence of the BP algorithm depends significantly on the value of the learning rate α and momentum rate μ, which are used to compute the weight modification Δw. A real valued chromosome of length 3 is used to represent the number of hidden neurons (h), learning rate (α) and momentum rate (μ). A schematic of the chromosome and the range of its bits are shown in Fig. 5. The range of h, α & μ are chosen based on a set of preliminary trial runs conducted. A population size of 10 is used. The cross-over and the mutation rates are selected to be 0.6 and 0.2 respectively. The multi-point cross-over is used for reproduction. The normalized geometrical ranking method is adopted for selecting the best chromosomes based on their fitness values. The GA-MLPNN is set to run for a maximum of 5000 epochs. The training goal considered here is the Mean Square Error (MSE) which is set to 1×10−4. A population size of ten is used. The GA is set to run for a maximum of 100 generations, based on a set of preliminary trial runs conducted. The fitness function equation used is(4)fit1=ηTrg+ηTst2where, ηTrgand ηTstare given by Eqs. (2) and (3).In this study it is required to simultaneously optimize four objectives, viz., minimize thrust force, delamination factor and surface roughness. Thus it is a multi-objective optimization problem. The RSM uses the desirability function approach for solving multi-objective optimization problem. The desirability function approach for the optimization of the multi-output variable problems was originally introduced by Harrington [34]. Another approach was developed by Derringer and Suich [35] which has been widely used by several researchers. In their study, the overall desirability function, computed as the geometric mean of the linear individual desirability functions. Therefore, the desirability function approach is commonly preferred, because it easily converts a multi-output variable problem into a single output variable. It transforms the output variables into dimensionless variables called desirability index di. The range of a desirability index falls in the closed interval [0,1]. For minimization of the output variable, dican be defined as [34](5)di=y−yminytarget−yminq;ymin<y<ytargetwhere, y is the output variable, ymin and ytarget are, respectively, the lowest and the target values, and q is the weight. The overall assessment of the drilling process performance is accomplished by considering the geometric mean of all the desirability indices to yield an aggregate (global or composite) desirability index DG. That is,(6)DG=d1×d2×d3…….dm1mwhere, m is the number of output variables (m=4 in this work).Finally, DGis optimized by a univariate search technique. Thus the desirability function approach does not use any derivative information of the function.In this work, GA is used also for optimization of the drilling process output variables. The output variable ‘y’ is related to the process parameters (A, B, C and D) as follows:That is,(7)y=β0+β1A+β2B+β3C+β4D+β5A2+β6B2+β7C2+β8D2+β9AB+β10AC+β11AD+β12BC+β13BD+β14CDy in Eq. (7) represents any one of the output variables: thrust force, torque, delamination factor and surface roughness. The linear second degree form of the equation is used to define the fitness function of the GA. Knowing the maximum and the minimum experimental values of the output variable (ymax and ymin), the normalized output variable is used as the fitness function, as given in Eq. (8)[36].(8)fit2=y−yminymax−yminSince the objective is to minimize output variable y, then as per Eq. (8), the fitness function fit2 needs to be minimized. Therefore, the task of GA, is to discover values of the fifteen coefficients β0–β14 so as to minimize the output variable ‘y’. Therefore, the chromosome length is set to fifteen. A schematic of the real valued chromosome used in GA is shown in Fig. 6. The ranges of β0–β14 are chosen based on a set of preliminary trial runs conducted.In this work, real valued chromosomes with a population size of twenty, crossover and the mutation rates of 0.6 and 0.2, respectively, are used. The multi-point crossover and normalized geometrical ranking method of parent selection are used to run the GA for optimizing the output variables. The maximum number of generations are set to 100,000, based on a set of preliminary trial runs conducted. The GA is run separately for each output variable. Once the coefficients of the output variable equations are obtained, the output variable for any given values of the process parameters within the experimental range can be obtained. The structure of the GA implementation is shown in Fig. 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, drilling experiments are carried out as per the L27orthogonal array, on BD CFRP composite laminates using HSS, USC and TiN-SC drilling tools. A new prediction model, viz., GA-MLPNN is proposed, and the thrust force predicted by it is compared with that of the RSM model. In this paper, the GA-MLPNN outperforms the RSM model by achieving lesser average percentage error. The values of the thrust force measured in the validation test experiment closely match with those predicted by RSM and GA-MLPNN models, showing the correctness of the developed models. The deviation of the thrust force values predicted by GA-MLPNN is significantly lesser than those predicted by the RBFNN model proposed by Tsao and Hocheng [32]. The optimization of the thrust force is carried out using RSM and GA; it is found from the study that the optimum thrust force obtained from RSM and GA are close to each other with a deviation of less than 1% (average percentage error). The values of the thrust force measured in the confirmation test closely match with those obtained by RSM and GA optimization tools, and shows that RSM and GA can be effectively used as optimization tools in composite drilling studies. This paper recommends the use of TiN-SC drilling tool as an alternative to HSS and USC drilling tools, as it generates the least thrust force causing minimum delamination and surface roughness of the drilled hole. In other words, good quality holes can be drilled on BD CFRP composite laminates by using TiN-SC drilling tool. There is scope for future work with regard to the study conducted in this paper. The temperature at the contact surfaces of the drill and the hole is likely to vary with respect to change in tool and composite type in case of high speed drilling of composites. This temperature could be used as a process output variable in addition to those used in the current work, if the glass transition temperature is exceeded. The challenge of precisely measuring the temperature variation in real time itself calls for future research.