@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Location based treatment activities for end of life products network design under uncertainty by a robust multi-objective memetic-based heuristic approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We integrate decisions about the locations of reverse logistics activities with network design.We consider demand uncertainty due to the inherit uncertainty in terms of quantity and quality of the return products.We consider another objective to minimize the variance of extra imposed costs as well as the average.We develop a memetic-based heuristic approach to solve the problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-echelon multi-product reverse logistics,Robust network design,Treatment activities,Stochastic simulation,Demand uncertainty,Goal programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rapid growth in world population and recourse limitations necessitate remanufacturing of products and their parts/modules. Managing these processes requires special activities such as inspection, disassembly, and sorting activities known as treatment activities. This paper proposes a capacitated multi-echelon, multi-product reverse logistic network design with fuzzy returned products in which both locations of the treatment activities and facilities are decision variables. As the obtained nonlinear mixed integer programming model is a combinatorial problem, a memetic-based heuristic approach is presented to solve the resulted model. To validate the proposed memetic-based heuristic method, the obtained results are compared with the results of the linear approximation of the model, which is obtained by a commercial optimization package. Moreover, due to inherent uncertainty in return products, demands of these products are considered as uncertain parameters and therefore a fuzzy approach is employed to tackle this matter. In order to deal with the uncertainty, a stochastic simulation approach is employed to defuzzify the demands, where extra costs due to opening new centers or extra transportation costs may be imposed to the system. These costs are considered as penalty in the objective function. To minimize the resulting penalties during simulation's iterations, the average of penalties is added to the objective function of the deterministic model considered as the primary objective function and variance of penalties are considered as the secondary objective function to make a robust solution. The resulted bi-objective model is solved through goal programming method to minimizing the objectives, simultaneously.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Logistic network design is considered as a strategic plan for supply chain systems, and is mainly classified as forward logistic and reverse logistic. The role of reverse logistic becomes more important in a competitive environment when resource constraint arises or governmental legislations on environment exist that would lead to sustainable development [1]. Hence, companies tend to take advantage of returned products by repairing defected ones, refurbishing used products, disassembling and remanufacturing returned products, recovering usable modules of second-hand products and selling those in a secondary market and so forth. The mentioned operations are supported by specific treatment activities such as inspection, disassembly, refurbishing, and remanufacturing, and facilities such as collection centers, disposal centers, recovery centers, and remanufacturing centers. Because of the inherent uncertainty in quality and quantity of returned products [2], the location of treatment activities is important as it has some effects on the transportation cost and fixed cost as well as environmental factors such as CO2 emission. In general, the structure of the reverse network design that is determined based on the location of facilities and treatment activities impresses the cost and the environmental impact of managing return products [3].There are many cases in which used products or at least some parts of them can be recovered and returned back to the supply chain as new products. Applications for reverse logistic can be found in industries such as electronics, chemical materials, medical materials and so forth. In general, after entering returned products to the reverse logistics canals, separation and sorting operations are performed to separate recoverable and unrecoverable products or their modules. Then, regarding to the type and quality of returned products, one of the treatment activities like refurbishing, reassembling or reusing is applied to capture the value of these products [4]. As an example, we can refer to widely used computers or cell phones, which are demanded trendily. Furthermore, throwing out the end of life cell phones’ batteries have destructive influences on the environment. In the UK, there were 81.4 million active mobile connections in 2011 [5]. Due to the short life cycle of cell phones, yearly a large number of cell phones are disposed. In the UK, these amounts are nearly expected to be 18 million per year [6]. Treatment activities for capturing the value of returned cell phones involve reusing, module retrieving, and material recycling [7]. Therefore, challenging issues are how to collect, reuse, recycle, and recover end of life cell phone handsets and consequently to conserve natural resources [6]. Sorting operation at collection centers before sending the returned products to recovery facilities would lead to fewer amounts as well as less range of cell phones [7]. However, in this case more investment is needed. Thus, it would be a challenging issue to consider where to locate the treatment activities to make a balance between transportation costs and the cost of fixed investment on the facilities (i.e. collection centers, recovery centers or both).The process of the reverse logistic from consumers to recovery centers is very expensive and companies need to design a suitable network system to manage this process efficiently so that the benefit gained from this process outperforms the expenditures. Hence, the location of treatment activities has significant effect on the reverse network design and must be considered in the network design.There are many works in the literature studied the reverse logistic. The interested readers are referred to the articles [8–19]. In the following, related works to the present paper are mentioned. Amongst reverse logistic models, multi-echelon network has gained increasing attention among researchers owing to the large amount of returned products [e.g. 20–22]. Since in reality more than one product type flow in the network, some researchers studied multi-product configurations of returned products [see for example 23, 24] or multi-period models [25].While in general, the amount of returned products is uncertain in terms of quality, quantity and time, for the sake of simplicity most researchers considered deterministic amount of returned products and just a few works looked for the uncertainty in the volume of returned products [see for example 2, 26–28]. In general, there are three approaches in the literature to tackle the uncertainty (i.e. stochastic programming, robust optimization, and fuzzy approach). Most of the papers in the related literature applied stochastic programming to handle the uncertainty in their model. However, due to the lack of historical data in most situations, using robust optimization and fuzzy approach can be very useful [2].For a network model, it is sensible to consider more than one objective. In the context of multi objective reverse logistic network design, Du and Evans [29] and Pishvaee et al. [30] have addressed minimization of the overall costs and minimization of the total tardiness of cycle time. Pati et al. [31] considered multiple objectives, namely, the reverse logistics cost, a non-relevant wastepaper target and a wastepaper recovery target. Fonseca et al. [32] proposed a model for reverse logistics planning and studied most of the abovementioned issues in which multi-echelon, multiple commodities, choice of technology, stochastic transportation cost and waste generations are considered in a bi-objective model including minimization of the cost of building, operating the network and minimization of the obnoxious effect caused by the reverse network facilities.As the returned products may contain usable modules, recovery of modules has attracted some researchers. In the context of module recovery, Sharma and Singh [14] and Franke et al. [33] studied remanufacturing of the returned products in modular architecture. Fernandez and Kekale [34] studied the implications of modular product architecture on reverse logistic strategies. Franke et al. [33] considered remanufacturing of new products based on new module suppliers. Mutha and Pokharel [24] considered modular product structure with different disposal and recycling fractions for each module of each product. Krikke et al. [35] also studied the modular nature of computer monitors.Regarding recovery of modules, most of the models consider predetermined place(s) for disassembly of products. However, when the disassembly centers are far from collection centers, the transportation cost due to transporting unusable modules or products increases. Therefore, it is useful to separate unrecoverable products or modules from the recoverable ones at early stages. Tagaras and Zikopoulos [36] considered a model consisting of a central remanufacturing center and a number of collection centers and examined whether it is economical to do sorting activities and identify suitable products for remanufacturing before disassembly. Guide et al. [37] evaluated the potential savings from product sorting at early stages. El korchi and Dominique [3] considered a generic logistics network and a generic treatment process including sorting, disassembly, cleaning, etc. In other words, in this work, each part of the logistics network is involved in a part or all of the treatment process, but no location decision is made.Because of the complexity of reverse logistic network models, heuristic, meta-heuristic, or Lagrangian relaxation based methods for models in forms of one objective [38,39], multi-objective [29,30], deterministic [20,21] or in uncertain environment [40,41] have been presented to cope with the complexity of the resulted models. To the best of author's knowledge, a solution method, which concurrently can deal with multi-objective and uncertain nature of the problem, has not yet been developed in the literature of the reverse logistics.In this paper, a generic model for network design is proposed. The model is a capacitated multi-echelon network consisting of collection centers, centralized collection centers, disposal centers and recovery centers, with multi product and uncertain volume of returned products. When a product is delivered to customers, it may be defected and needed to be returned back to the chain to be repaired. In most cases, the volume of defected products is not specific. For the relatively new products, enough historical data on the amount of returned products is not available and therefore the fuzzy approach is employed to tackle this uncertain parameter. In this paper, to cope with fuzzy returned products, the stochastic simulation approach, proposed in [42,43] at routine problems, is employed for the first time in the context of network design. The model is converted into a bi-objective model with primary objective of minimizing the sum of the objective value of the deterministic problem and the mean of the penalties resulted from additional transportation costs and opened centers. The secondary objective minimizes the variance of the penalties to make much more robust solutions. This paper takes advantage of the goal programming method to deal with the obtained bi-objective model. In the proposed reverse logistic model, products and their components or modules are inspected in some locations and only the recoverable modules are carried to the recovery centers to be recovered. In other words, the locations of installing the inspection and disassembly equipment are determined simultaneously with the locations of network facilities such as collection and centralized collection centers. Because of the complexity of the resulted model, one may resort to the heuristic and meta-heuristic approaches to solve the model. In this paper, we develop a memetic algorithm to explore solution space and a heuristic approach to encode and decode the solution in which simultaneously opened centers for network facilities, flow between network facilities, locations of the treatment activities are determined considering fuzzy returned products.In general, the main contributions of the present paper are summarized in the following points:•We integrate decisions about the locations of treatment activities with reverse logistics network design.We consider demand uncertainty due to the inherit uncertainty in terms of quantity and quality of the return products.We consider another objective to minimize the variance of extra imposed costs as well as the average to make a robust solution.We develop a memetic-based heuristic approach to solve the problem.The rest of this paper is organized as follows:Problem statement is presented in Section 2. In Section 3 the solution approach is described. In Section 4 the computational results are presented. Finally, in Section 5 the paper is concluded to summarize our findings.The proposed reverse logistic model is a capacitated multi-echelon multi-product supply chain network in which defected, end of life or second hand products are flown backward from consumers to recovery centers through the appropriate collection, centralized collection and disposal centers. Fig. 1sketches the network under examination. At first, the returned products are collected from customers’ zones and separated in two steps: identifying the unrecoverable products from recoverable ones, then disassembling recoverable products and identifying repairable modules. As a matter of fact, after distinguishing recoverable products each recoverable product needs to be disassembled and its recoverable parts or modules are identified. In general, three possible choices for the treatment activities are possible in opened collection centers and the corresponding centralized collection centers:•Inspecting and identifying recoverable products in collection centers and then disassembling recoverable products and identifying recoverable modules in centralized collection centers.Inspecting and identifying recoverable products and then disassembling them and identifying recoverable modules in collection centers (i.e. all in collection centers).Inspecting and identifying recoverable products and then disassembling them and identifying recoverable modules in centralized collection centers (i.e. all in centralized collection centers).The abovementioned choices are summarized in Table 1.In recovery centers usable modules are recovered, refurbished or remanufactured and sold to a secondary market. The process of product handling and opening centers is very expensive. Therefore, it would be beneficial to separate unrecoverable products or modules at early stages of the reverse logistic network. However, it accompanies with installation cost of the inspection and disassembly equipment. To decide where these equipment need to be installed, a tradeoff between the reduction in transportation cost of unusable products/modules along with cost of opened centers to deal with these products, and additional cost resulted from installing these equipment should be carried out. For this purpose, treatment activities including sorting, inspection and disassembly are decided to be located in suitable locations so that the total cost of the network is minimized.Assumptions:•The network is a multi-echelon network which includes collection centers, disposal centers, centralized collection centers and recovery centers.The centers are capacitated.Multiple products and modules are considered.The volumes of the returned products are considered as uncertain parameters in fuzzy environment.Returned products are separated in two steps: identifying the unrecoverable products from recoverable ones and disassembling recoverable products and identifying repairable modules.In each opened collection center one of the following actions can be done: product inspection, product disassembly and module inspection, no product inspection.Three possible choices exist for locating treatment activities: some activities in collection centers and some activities in centralized collection centers, all in collection centers and finally, all in centralized collection centers.Indices:cCustomer set, c∈CiCollection centers set, i∈IjCentralized Collection centers set, j∈JkRecovery set, k∈KlDisposal set, i∈IpProduct type set, p∈PmModule type set, m∈MParameters:d˜pcFuzzy volume of returned product p from consumer cfiFixed cost of opening collection center igjFixed cost of opening centralized collection center jCdiInstallation cost of product inspection and product disassembly and module inspection equipments in collection center iCeiInstallation cost of product inspection equipments in collection center iDdjInstallation cost of product inspection and product disassembly and module inspection equipments in centralized center jDejInstallation cost of product disassembly and module inspection equipments in centralized center jciciTransportation cost of one unit of each returned product from customer c to collection center icpjijTransportation cost of one unit of each recoverable returned product from collection center i to centralized center jcmjijTransportation cost of one unit of each recoverable module from collection center i to centralized center jcljilTransportation cost of one unit of each unrecoverable module from collection center i to disposal center lcplilTransportation cost of one unit of each unrecoverable product from collection center i to disposal center lckjkTransportation cost of one unit of each recoverable module from centralized center j to recovery center kclmjlTransportation cost of one unit of each unrecoverable module from centralized center j to disposal center lcpljlTransportation cost of one unit of each unrecoverable product from centralized center j to disposal center lαpPercentage of product p that can be recoveredβmpNumber of modules of type m in product p which can be recoveredumpNumber of modules of type m in product ppvpOccupied space of each unit of products (m3)mvmOccupied space of each unit of modules (m3)CAPIiCapacity of collection center i in terms of space (m3)CAPJjCapacity of centralized center j in terms of space (m3)CAPKkCapacity of recovery center k in terms of space (m3)Binary variables:CiIndicating that collection center i is open (one) or not (zero)CCjIndicating that both product inspection and disassembly equipments are installed (one) in collection center i or not (zero) to inspect both products and modules and separate disposable onesheiIndicating that product inspection equipments are installed (one) in collection center i or not (zero) to inspect and separate unrecoverable productshfiIndicating that none of product inspection or disassembly equipments are installed in collection center ildjVariable indicating that both product inspection and disassembly equipments are installed (one) in centralized center j or not (zero) to inspect both products and modules and separate disposable oneslejIndicating that disassembly equipments are installed (one) in centralized center j or not (zero) to inspect and separate disposable moduleslfjIndicating that none of product inspection or disassembly equipments are installed in centralized center jContinuous variables:xcipThe number of returned products of type p flown from customer c to collection center iyijpThe number of recoverable products of type p flown from collection center i to centralized center jtijpThe number of returned products of type p flown from collection center i to centralized center jsijmThe number of recoverable modules of type m flown from collection center i to centralized center juilmThe number of unrecoverable modules of type m flown from collection center i to disposal center lvilpThe number of unrecoverable products of type p flown from collection center i to disposal center lzjkmThe number of recoverable modules of type m flown from centralized center j to recovery center krjlmThe number of unrecoverable modules of type m flown from centralized center j to disposal center lwjlpThe number of unrecoverable product of type p flown from centralized center j to disposal center lMathematical model:(1)minz=∑i∈IfiCi+∑j∈JgjCCj+∑i∈ICdihdi+∑i∈ICeihei+∑j∈JDdjldj+∑j∈JDejlej+∑c∈C∑i∈I∑p∈Pcicixcip+∑i∈I∑j∈J∑p∈Pcpjijyijp+∑i∈I∑j∈J∑p∈Pcpjijtijp+∑i∈I∑j∈J∑m∈Mcmjijsijm+∑i∈I∑l∈L∑m∈Mcmliluilm+∑i∈I∑l∈L∑P∈Pcplilvilp+∑j∈J∑k∈K∑m∈Mckjkzjkm+∑j∈J∑l∈L∑m∈Mclmjlrjlm+∑j∈J∑l∈L∑p∈Pclpjlwjlp(2)∑i∈Ixcip=d˜pc∀c,p(3)∑j∈Jyijp=αp∑c∈Cxciphei∀i,p(4)∑j∈Jsijm=∑p∈P∑c∈Cβmpαpxciphdi∀i,m(5)∑j∈Jtijp=∑c∈Cxciphfi∀i,p(6)∑kzjkm=∑i∈Isijmhdilfj+∑p∈P∑i∈Iαpβmptijphfildj+∑p∈P∑i∈Iβmpyijpheilej∀j,m(7)hdi+hei+hfi=Ci∀i(8)ldj+lej+lfj=CCj∀j(9)hdilfj+heilej+hfildj=CiCCj∀i,j(10)∑p∈P∑c∈Cxcippvp≤CAPIiCi∀i(11)∑p∈P∑i∈Iyijppvp+∑p∈P∑i∈Itijppvp+∑m∈M∑i∈Isijmmvm≤CAPJjCCj∀j(12)∑m∈M∑j∈Jzjkmmvm≤CAPKk∀k(13)∑l∈Luilm=∑c∈C∑p∈Pxcimump−∑jsijm−∑p∈P∑j∈Jyijpump−∑p∈P∑j∈Jtijpump∀i,m(14)∑l∈Lvilp=∑c∈Cxcip−∑j∈Jyijp−∑j∈Jtijp−∑c∈Cαpxciphdi∀i,p(15)∑l∈Lwjlp=∑i∈Itijp(1−αp)∀j,p(16)∑l∈Lrjlm=∑p∈P∑i∈Iyijpump+∑p∈P∑i∈Itijpumpαp+∑i∈Isijm−∑k∈Kzjkm∀j,m(17)ci,hdi,hei,hfj∈{0,1}∀i(18)ccj,ldj,lej,lfj∈{0,1}∀j(19)xcip≥0,yijp≥0,vilp≥0,tijp≥0,wjlp≥0uilm≥0,sijm≥0,rjlm≥0,zjkm≥0Objective function (1) consists of three main terms as follows:•Fixed costs of opening collection centers and centralized centers;Transportation cost of products and modules in the network;Installation cost of equipment for identifying recoverable and unrecoverable products, for disassembling recoverable products, for identifying recoverable and unrecoverable modules in both collection and centralized collection centers.Constraint set (2) ensures that returned products from a specific consumer are assigned to collection centers.Constraint set (3) allocates the recoverable products of collection center i (where product inspection equipment is installed) to the centralized centers (where disassembly and module inspection equipment is installed).Constraint set (4) allocates the recoverable modules of collection center i (where product inspection equipment and product disassembly and module inspection equipment are installed) to the centralized centers (where no specific equipment is needed to be installed).Constraint set (5) allocates the products of collection center i (where no specific equipment is installed to detect recoverable products or modules) to the centralized centers (where product inspection equipment and product disassembly and module inspection equipment are installed).Constraint set (6) assigns the recoverable modules of centralized center j to recovery centers.Constraint set (7) dictates that in each opened collection center i one of the following actions can be done: product inspection, product disassembly and module inspection, no product inspection.Constraint set (8) forces a condition on centralized center j to have one of the following operations: product disassembly and module inspection, module inspection, no inspection.Constraint set (9) ensures that on each returned product the product inspection, product disassembly and module inspection should be carried out once in collection center, centralized center or both.Constraint set (10) imposes a constraint on available space of collection centers.Constraint set (11) enforces a constraint on available space of centralized centers.Constraint set (12) entails a physical constraint on the capacity of recovery centers.Constraint set (13) assigns the unrecoverable modules detected in collection center i to disposal centers.Constraint set (14) assigns the unrecoverable products detected in collection center i to disposal centers.Constraint set (15) assigns the unrecoverable products detected in centralized center j to disposal centers.Constraint set (16) assigns the unrecoverable modules detected in centralized center j to disposal centers.Constraint sets (17) and (18) show the binary variables of the model.Constraint set (19) shows the continuous variables of the model.Linear approximationThe proposed mathematical model described in the previous section is a nonlinear mixed integer model. One possible approach to solve the model is to employ a commercial optimization package. However, it is not possible to obtain the global solution of the nonlinear model. To overcome this deficiency, the nonlinear model is converted into the corresponding linear model.Constraint set (9) is a nonlinear constraint consisting of four terms with nonlinear binary variables. To form linear constraints, a binary variable is defined for each term. Consider the following surrogates for the terms of constraint set (9).(20)nij=hdilfj,oij=heilej,qij=hfildj,Bij=CiCCjRegarding each substitution, two constraints are added to the model. For example, for the first term, constraints (20-1-a) and (20-1-b) are added. Constraints set (20-1-a) states variable nijis one only when both hdiand lfjare one. Constraints set (20-1-b) indicate that if at least one of hdior lfjis zero, variable nijis zero too. And if both of them are one, variable nijis also one. Other terms are defined by the same token.(20-1-a)2nij≤hdi+lfj∀i,j(20-1-b)1+nij≥hdi+lfj∀i,j(20-2-a)2oij≤hei+lej∀i,j(20-2-b)1+oij≥hei+lej∀i,j(20-3-a)2qij≤hfi+ldj∀i,j(20-3-b)1+qij≥hfi+ldj∀i,j(20-4-a)2Bij≤Ci+CCj∀i,j(20-4-b)1+Bij≥Ci+CCj∀i,jThere are also nonlinear variables in constraint sets (3), (4), (5), (6) and (14). For the nonlinear constraint set (3), the following linear constraint is substituted.(21)∑j∈Jyijp=αp∑c∈Cδcip∀i,p(22)δcip≥xcip−M(1−hei)∀c,i,p(23)δcip≤xcip+M(1−hei)∀c,i,pThe following linear constraints are replaced with the nonlinear constraint set (4).(24)∑j∈Jsijm=∑p∈P∑c∈Cβmpαpφcip∀i,m(25)φcip≥xcip−M(1−hdi)∀c,i,p(26)φcip≤xcip+M(1−hdi)∀c,i,pThe following linear constraints are substituted for the nonlinear constraint set (5).(27)∑j∈Jtijp=∑c∈Cγcip∀i,p(28)γcip≥xcip−M(1−hfi)∀c,i,p(29)γcip≤xcip+M(1−hfi)∀c,i,pThe following linear constraints are substituted for the nonlinear constraint set (6).(30)∑kzjkm=∑i∈Iηijm+∑p∈P∑i∈Iαpβmpμijp+∑p∈P∑i∈Iβmpϑijp∀j,m(31)ηijm≥sijm−M(1−nij)∀i,j,m(32)ηijm≤sijm+M(1−nij)∀i,j,m(33)μijp≥tijp−M(1−qij)∀i,j,p(34)μijp≤tijp+M(1−qij)∀i,j,p(35)ϑijp≥yijp−M(1−oij)∀i,j,p(36)ϑijp≤yijp+M(1−oij)∀i,j,pThe nonlinear constraint (14) is converted into the following linear constraints.(37)∑l∈Lvilp=∑c∈Cxcip−∑j∈Jyijp−∑j∈Jtijp−∑c∈Cαpχcip∀i,p(38)χcip≥xcip−M(1−hdi)∀c,i,p(39)χcip≤xcip+M(1−hdi)∀c,i,pOther constraints remain intact.As the number of network facilities increases it is not economical to solve the model exactly. Besides, locating treatment activities adds the complexity of the model. Therefore, using heuristic or meta-heuristic approaches is inevitable. The efficiency of memetic algorithm in network design problems is proved by some papers [30,44]. Hence, in this paper, a memetic-based heuristic method summarized in procedure0 is proposed. Steps of the proposed memetic-based solution procedure are presented in the subsequent procedure0. A solution is represented by opened collection centers, treatment activities inside collection centers and opened centralized collection centers as presented in Fig. 2. For treatment activities inside collection centers, 1 means product inspection operation, 2 denotes product disassembly and module inspection and finally 3 means no operation happens.The initial population is generated by applying procedure 1 (see Appendix) during which five more sub-procedures are called. At the outset, sub-procedure 1 is called to determine the opened collection centers, the flow amongst customers and opened collection centers and the treatment activities inside the collection center. Then for each opened collection center, the total amount of returned products is calculated and according to their decided treatment activities, other sub-procedures are called. For treatment operations 1 and 2 in which products are inspected, unrecoverable products are sent to a suitable disposal center with respect to the transportation costs. In case that the treatment activity equals 1, sub-procedure 2 is called to obtain the flow of recoverable products between that collection center and suitable centralized centers. In other words, if open centralized centers with enough capacity and right equipment, i.e. disassembly equipment, exist the product of the current collection center is assigned to the existing centralized center(s). Otherwise, a new centralized center is opened and accordingly disassembly equipment is installed in that center. In case that the treatment activity equals 2, first unrecoverable modules are sent to the suitable disposal centers. Then sub-procedure 3 is called to determine the opened centralized centers with no operation inside and the flow of recoverable modules amongst that collection center and the corresponding centralized centers. In case that no treatment activity happens in the collection center, sub-procedure 4 is applied to determine the opened centralized centers and the flow of products amongst collection and centralized centers and the corresponding inspection and disassembly equipment is installed. Then the flow of unrecoverable products between centralized centers and disposal centers are determined. Afterward, the recoverable products are disassembled and the flow of unrecoverable modules between centralized center and disposal centers is determined. Next, procedure 5 is applied to determine the flow of recoverable modules between opened centralized centers and recovery centers.After each generated solution, the hill climbing local search in implemented to exploit around the solution. To overcome the uncertainty, a stochastic simulation approach is employed after each deterministic solution to generate fuzzy volume of returned products and assign them to the suitable centers opened in the deterministic step. Since the number of returned products is not certain, sometimes it is needed to open more centers and extra transportation costs arise. These additional costs are considered as a penalty for the deterministic objective function. The role of goal programming is to minimize the sum of deviation of the penalized objective function from its goal and deviation of variance of penalties from its goal. The procedure is repeated until a predetermined number of generations is fulfilled.Procedure0 Memetic-based _program ()Begin1Define a goal, G1, for the first objective function (i.e. average of penalties added by objective value obtained by deterministic demands);2Define a goal, G2, for the second objective function (i.e. variance of penalties);3fori=1 to Popsize4Apply procedure 1 by considering deterministic demands to specify open collections, flow of products and modules, operations inside collection and centralized centers. Consider the resulted solution as member i of population, POP[i];5Hill climbing local search();6end(for)7foriteration=1 to maxgeneration%stopping criterion8fori=1 to Popsize9calculate det_objective[i];10forj=1: to fuzzyiteration%stochastic simulation-start11Generate fuzzy demands in a way that a random number is generated between lower and upper bounds of triangular fuzzy numbers which are considered for demands. Calculate the membership function of each generated fuzzy demand. Generate a random number from the interval [0,1]. Accept the generated fuzzy demand as long as the random number is less than or equal to the membership function.12Apply procedure 1 considering collection and centralized centers opened in the previous step. Open more centers if needed. Consider extra costs of transportations and opened centers as penalty and add it to the deterministic objective value.13calculate fuzzy_objective[i];14calculate DISC[j]=fuzzy_objective[i]−det_objective[i];15end(for)%stochastic simulation-end16calculate OBJ1[i]=det_objective[i]+Mean(DISC);17calculate OBJ2[i]=Variance (DISC);18calculate DEV[i]=(OBJ1[i]−G1)+(OBJ2[i]−G2);19calculate fitness[i]=(DEV[i])−1;20end(for)21for each solution i calculate its probability in the population based on its fitness value asprob[i]=(DEV[i])−1/∑i=1Popsize(DEV[i])−1;22Select a number of high probable solutions and transfer them to the next generation;23forj=1 to crossize step 224Apply roulette wheel selection and select two solutions to be crossed over;25apply uniform crossover and generate two new solutions;26Hill climbing local search();27end(for)28for j=1 to mutsize29Pick up a random solution and apply pairwise mutation operator.30Hill climbing local search();31end(for)32end(for)%Stopping criterion-end33Print min(DEV);End.A computational experiment is carried out to test the performance of the proposed model and the corresponding solution procedure. The pattern of data generation used in our experiment is presented in the following section.There are 3 product types in the network each with 5 module types. For each product type the utilization and disposal factor of each module is presented in Table 1. Each product and module occupy pvp=0.3 and mvm=0.05 of space, respectively.Table 2shows the cost distribution of the network facilities. The distribution of the capacities is also presented in Table 3. Number of returned products in deterministic case is drawn from the interval [100,200] and in fuzzy case is a triangular fuzzy number with the following membership function (Table 4):μD(x)=0;x≤100(x−100)(150−100);100<x≤150(200−x)(200−150);150<x≤2000;x>200The proposed solution procedure was coded in C++ language and run on a laptop with 3GHz processor and 2GB of RAM. Table 5shows the results of running the mathematical model by LINGO and the proposed memetic-based heuristic. The last column shows the relative percentage deviation (RPD) calculated by formula (40).(40)RPD=OBJheuristic−OBJLINGOOBJLINGO×100As can be observed, all RPD values considering the corresponding problem sizes are relatively small leading to this conclusion that the proposed memetic-based heuristic can efficiently compete with typical optimization packages in a reasonable amount of time.After confirming the efficiency of the proposed heuristic in deterministic case, the proposed heuristic is run with fuzzy volume of returned products. The results are shown in Table 6. OBJECTIVE 1 is the sum of the deterministic objective function and average of penalties. OBJECTIVE 2 shows the variance of penalties. Column DEVIATION calculates the sum of the difference between OBJECTIVE 1 and its goal and the difference between OBJECTIVE 2 and its goal. Fig. 2 illustrates the deterministic and nondeterministic objective values against different problem sizes. As can be observed, uncertainty causes extra costs which, by applying goal programming, are minimized as far as possible (Fig. 3and Table 7).In this paper, a model has been proposed to design a capacitated multi-echelon multi-product reverse logistic network in which defected, end of life or used products are returned to the chain and sent back to recovery centers to be recovered or remanufactured. Between these processes, products and modules are inspected and the unrecoverable ones are sent to disposal centers. In this paper, the installation locations of inspection and disassembly equipment have been determined concurrent with the locations of collection centers and centralized collection centers which to the best of our knowledge so far no study has been made in this context. Since in reality the volumes of returned products are not specified, we have considered them as fuzzy numbers. To solve the resulted nonlinear mixed integer programming model a memetic-based heuristic method is developed. After comparing the results of running the proposed method with LINGO solution in deterministic case and confirming the efficiency of the proposed method, the fuzzy model was run by the proposed memetic-based heuristic. The customized stochastic simulation method is also applied to handle the uncertainty in returned products.Such a network has a great impact on decreasing costs of the large companies. However, the essential limitation of the current work is that most small companies do not invest on their reverse logistic due to the high initial investment needed for designing the network and the lack of enough economic benefits in their reverse logistics operations. Furthermore, in under developed countries, it is difficult to convince the companies to implement the proposed reverse logistic network design and in most cases it is not economical to devote centers merely for collected products without doing any treatment activities. Another limitation is that, this research allows selecting centers for disposal or disassembly of products. However, for some products such as chemical and medical materials because of safety issues especial places should be considered for disposal or disassembly of these products. As a matter of fact, many internal and external factors influence the decision about designing a reverse logistic network. However, the proposed network design helps the companies to have a sense about the estimation of costs to do a cost–benefit analysis and know about the number of centers and the locations of the treatment activities to be whether at the early stages of the chain or not.As mentioned, uncertainty is an intrinsic feature of reverse logistic networks. In this study the uncertain returned products have been assumed to follow fuzzy uncertainty. However, sometimes it is required to use a combination of both randomness and fuzziness or intuitionistic fuzzy numbers for the quantity of returned products. Furthermore, the percentage of product that can be recovered and number of modules which can be recovered are assumed to be fix parameters. However, in reality they may be uncertain parameters due to having difficulty with anticipating the quality of return products. We postpone these research lines to future works. For further work on this study, one can also develop another solution procedure to solve the model. Adding more real world assumptions to the model is also possible. Moreover, considering other real world objective functions to form a multi-objective problem is proposed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
