@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid genetic and linear programming algorithm for two-agent order acceptance and scheduling problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integrating orders acceptance and scheduling problem and two-agent scheduling one.Main idea: manufacturers deal with different customers with different requests.For the problem an efficient hybrid meta-heuristic algorithm was proposed.Contribution: hybridizing linear programming and genetic algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Order acceptance,Two-agent scheduling,Hybrid meta-heuristic,Genetic algorithm,Linear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the simultaneous order acceptance and scheduling problem is developed by considering the variety of customers’ requests. To that end, two agents with different scheduling criteria including the total weighted lateness for the first and the weighted number of tardy orders for the second agent are considered. The objective is to maximize the sum of the total profit of the first and the total revenue of the second agents’ orders when the weighted number of tardy orders of the second agent is bounded by an upper bound value. In this study, it is shown that this problem is NP-hard in the strong sense, and then to optimally solve it, an integer linear programming model is proposed based on the properties of optimal solution. This model is capable of solving problem instances up to 60 orders in size. Also, the LP-relaxation of this model was used to propose a hybrid meta-heuristic algorithm which was developed by employing genetic algorithm and linear programming. Computational results reveal that the proposed meta-heuristic can achieve near optimal solutions so efficiently that for the instances up to 60 orders in size, the average deviation of the model from the optimal solution is lower than 0.2% and for the instances up to 150 orders in size, the average deviation from the problem upper bound is lower than 1.5%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many markets, the increasing number of manufacturers and the variety of their products have intensified competitions among them to such an extent that attracting and maintaining customers is more vital now than ever before. Therefore, this competitive situation has stimulated the manufacturers to work out new ways of satisfying their customers for the simple reason that they need to keep their income and thus improve their position in the market. One of the factors which affect the customer satisfaction is on-time delivery of goods or services. In recent years, many researchers have studied the problems related to this case, the most important among them being “simultaneous order acceptance and scheduling” or “Order Acceptance and Scheduling (OAS)” in short. In this problem, decisions about acceptance/rejection and scheduling of the orders are made simultaneously based on logical reasons such as considering production capacity before promising to the customers. Generally, this problem has been studied in the literature based on two approaches: (1) maximizing the total profit of accepting the orders and scheduling them; and (2) minimizing the total costs of rejections and scheduling the accepted orders. Studies on the former approach published before 2011 are extensively reviewed by Slotnick [1] and the investigations on the latter published before 2013 are presented by Shabty et al. [2].Parallel to the studies on it, the OAS problem has also been extended and generalized for different applications as shown in the literature on the scheduling problem. One of these applications in the past decade was concerned with the conception of “multi-agent” or “competing agents” added to the classical scheduling; which resulted in presenting the “Multi-Agent Scheduling (MAS)” problem or “scheduling with competing agents” problem. In the MAS problem, the objective is scheduling some different sets of jobs, with each set having its own specific scheduling criterion. Considering different criteria for the job sets, which is not common in the classical scheduling, originates from the variety of customers and the orders which are referred to the manufacturers. More recently, Perez-Gonzalez and Framinan [3] have reviewed and classified the studies on the MAS problem in their survey paper. It is important to say that most of the studies have dealt with the two-agent cases because increasing the number of agents increases the complexity of such problems.According to the points reviewed above and also due to the importance of considering different requests of customers in accepting and scheduling their orders, in this paper the two above-described problems are integrated and studied as “two-agent order acceptance and scheduling” problem. To elaborate, this study involves two agents, each with some orders, but their scheduling criteria (penalty functions) will be different. It seems that the idea of integrating the order acceptance scheduling problem and the multi-agent one was presented by Reisi-Nafchi and Moslehi [4,5] for the first time. In their studies, the objective is maximizing the total revenue of accepted orders by bounding each agent penalty function. In both of their studies the total lateness and the number of tardy jobs were considered as penalty functions of agents and the second agent accepted orders does not allow being a tardy one. In addition, in one of their study they assumed that the second agent orders have a common due date and in another one they considered that all the first agent orders have equal processing times. They showed that these problems are ordinary NP-hard and therefore they proposed a pseudo-polynomial dynamic programming for each of them. In Section 3, the differences of their problems and this paper one are described.Due to the complexity of the studied problem in this paper, the main focus of this paper will be proposing an efficient meta-heuristic algorithm to solve the problem. Therefore, this meta-heuristic algorithm is proposed by hybridizing the genetic algorithm and the LP-relaxation of the integer programming of the problem.In the rest of the paper, after reviewing the literature of the OAS and MAS problems, the definition of the studied problem and its complexity is described in Section 3, and some lemmas about the properties of optimal solution for the problem are presented in Section 4. Based on these properties, an integer programming model is proposed in Section 5 to optimally solve the problem. In Section 6, using the LP-relaxation of the proposed model a hybrid meta-heuristic algorithm with underlying genetic algorithm and linear programming is developed. The performance of the proposed methods is studied in Section 7 by solving some random instances, and at last conclusions are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the two-agent order acceptance and scheduling problem was studied with the total weighted lateness and the weighted number of tardy orders as penalty function of the first and second agent. The objective of this problem is to find a subset of orders and schedule them in such a way that the sum of total profit of agent 1 orders and total revenue of agent 2 orders is maximized. But, a constraint is considered for the second agent penalty value. To solve this problem, an integer linear programming model was proposed based on the properties of optimal solution, which can solve the instances up to 60 orders in size. Since the problem is very complex, it does not look very promising to optimally solve it in large sizes. Hence, in this paper an efficient hybrid meta-heuristic algorithm was proposed based on the genetic algorithm and linear programming of the problem. This algorithm is capable of solving instances up to 150 orders in size with the average deviation of 1.5% from the upper bound of the problem in reasonable times. The proposed algorithm can be used as a sample framework for developing similar ones to solve the order acceptance and scheduling problems. In addition, considering some other scheduling criteria like total weighted tardiness can provide an interesting direction for future studies.