@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Accurately predicting building energy performance using evolutionary multivariate adaptive regression splines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose EMARS by fusing multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) and artificial bee colony (ABC).We investigate EMARS performance in predicting cooling load (CL) and heating load (HL) of buildings.We use EMARS to find mapping functions of HL and CL with their input variables.Surface area and roof area are identified as the critical factors influencing HL of buildings.Statistical results found EMARS to provide significant prediction accuracy compared to other methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multivariate adaptive regression splines,Artificial intelligence,Artificial bee colony,Energy performance of buildings,Heating load,Cooling load,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes using evolutionary multivariate adaptive regression splines (EMARS), an artificial intelligence (AI) model, to efficiently predict the energy performance of buildings (EPB). EMARS is a hybrid of multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) and artificial bee colony (ABC). In EMARS, MARS addresses learning and curve fitting and ABC carries out optimization to determine the fittest parameter settings with minimal prediction error. The proposed model was constructed using 768 experimental datasets from the literature, with eight input parameters and two output parameters (cooling load (CL) and heating load (HL)). EMARS performance was compared against five other AI models, including MARS, back-propagation neural network (BPNN), radial basis function neural network (RBFNN), classification and regression tree (CART), and support vector machine (SVM). A 10-fold cross-validation approach found EMARS to be the best model for predicting CL and HL with 65% and 45% deduction in terms of RMSE, respectively, compared to other methods. Furthermore, EMARS is able to operate autonomously without human intervention or domain knowledge; represent derived relationship between response (HL and CL) with predictor variables associated with their relative importance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The high energy consumption and long-term, adverse impact on the environment of the building sector [1] has encouraged growing research interest in the energy performance of buildings (EPB). Building energy consumption has increased rapidly over past decades, in line with rising living standards. In the European Community, for example, the building sector accounts for 40% of total energy use and 36% of total CO2 emissions [2]. Designing more energy-efficient, enhanced energy performance buildings is thus important to mitigating further growth in energy demand and CO2 emissions.Accurate cooling load (CL) and heating load (HL) estimations and correct identification of parameters that significantly affect building energy demand are necessary to set appropriate equipment specifications, install systems properly, and optimize building designs. However, interrelationships between parameters such as relative compactness [3], climate [4], surface area, wall area, roof area [5], and orientation [6] complicate their respective relationships with EPB and make accurate HL and CL estimation a challenging task for architects.Although building simulation tools are currently used widely to predict and analyze building energy consumption, these tools have several important drawbacks: (1) they are suboptimal for predicting energy use in occupied buildings; (2) different simulation tools can generate significantly different prediction values [7]; (3) their multidisciplinary nature makes these tools very complicated and time-consuming to use; and (4) identifying and comparing the impact of variables on observed quantities of interest is very difficult [8].Artificial intelligence (AI) inference models are increasingly viewed as a viable alternative approach to predicting EPB. AI used in models that simulate the human inference processes can infer new facts from previously acquired information and change adaptively in response to changes in the historical data. Tsanas [8] stated that AI is not only extremely fast at obtaining answers, but also assists architects to analyze the relative impact of significant parameters of interest.Many studies have explored the ability of various AI models to predict various quantities of interest in the context of EPB. Most have focused on models based on slightly modified artificial neural network (ANN) [9–12] and support vector machine (SVM) [13–16] integrated with traditional techniques such as classification and regression tree (CART) [7]. This relatively narrow application of AI to EPB leads the authors to question whether these models adequately address the problem of EPB prediction.ANNs are the most widely used AI models in the application of building energy prediction. A major disadvantage of ANN is the large number of controlling parameters required to construct the network [17], including the number of hidden layers and neurons in hidden layers, learning rate, and momentum. Moreover, the ANN training process must be obtained via a gradient descent algorithm on the error space, which can be very complex and may contain many local solutions that prevent an ANN model from converging on an optimal solution [18]. It is relatively difficult to attain maximum success using ANN for predicting EPB.SVM using radial basis function kernel (RBF-SVM) is perceived as highly effective model in a line of improving predictive accuracy of EPB and has been demonstrated in quantitative studies [19]. It is noticing that using SVM is expert-dependent, thus requires expertise to select appropriate penalty parameter C and kernel function parameter γ values. Additionally, similar to ANN, the results provided by SVM are not easy to be interpreted because it does not provide explanatory insight into derived relationship between response and input variables. Thus, the two models are merely more appropriate for the prediction problem. As for CART, this method does not generate stable predictions, has difficulty modeling additive structures [20].Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) [21] is an AI technique of potential help to architects. In addition to its ability to handle prediction problems, MARS is able to determine the input parameters that significantly impact output parameters and even explore the complex nonlinear relationships between a response variable and various predictor variables, which is essential in analyzing and designing energy-efficient buildings. These advantages underline MARS’ successful deployment in various problem areas such as credit scoring [22], computer wholesaling [23], paper manufacturing [24], public water supply [25], transportation [26], geological engineering [27] and engineering software [28]. Despite its success elsewhere, MARS has seen surprisingly little application in building-related studies to date.Building a MARS model requires that users select three tuning parameters, including maximum number of basis functions (Mmax), penalty (i.e., smooth parameter) (d), and maximum interaction between variables (Imax). These parameters were cited by Andalib and Atry [29] as important features in MARS model construction due to their control of model complexity and generalization [29]. The quality of the selected MARS parameters thus significantly affects MARS prediction accuracy. Friedman's prior parameter selection suggestions all have large value ranges, with actual selected values dependent on the dataset at hand [21]. Optimal values may remain outside the suggested ranges.In machine learning, identifying optimal parameter values is a challenging task and considered as an optimization problem. This paper thus uses the ABC [30] algorithm as a search engine to determine optimal MARS parameter values. ABC was introduced by Karaboga in 2005 and is a swarm intelligence-based optimization algorithm inspired by honeybee foraging behavior. Its relatively small number of control parameters makes ABC flexible and easy to execute for novice users [31]. Researchers have demonstrated that ABC is superior to other algorithms in identifying optimal solutions [32,33]. ABC is also a reliable tool when paired with other data mining techniques [34]. ABC is thus a potentially useful search engine for identifying useful MARS parameters such as Mmax, Imax and d.The objective of this research was to develop and test the evolutionary multivariate adaptive regression splines (EMARS). The authors created EMARS by fusing MARS and ABC to incorporate the strengths and eliminate the weaknesses of each technique. This newly proposed model operates automatically without human intervention and accurately estimates building CL and HL values under various parameter settings. This study then compared EMARS performance against five other AI techniques, including MARS, BPNN, RBFNN, CART, and SVM.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the second section reviews related research works; the third introduces the EMARS model; the fourth describes the data collection process; the fifth validates and analyzes EMARS performance and compares simulation results; and the last presents conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
EMARS is a new prediction model currently used in the energy sector that fuses an ABC algorithm with MARS. The model autonomously determines optimal Mmax, Imax and d parameters in the prediction process, thus reduces the need for human intervention and domain knowledge; and facilitates real-world application due to its simple, easy-to-use design.To assess the relative performance of EMARS in predicting residential building CL and HL, this study employed the four evaluation criteria RMSE, MAPE, MAE, and R2 to compare EMARS against five other techniques, including MARS, BPNN, RBFNN, CART, and SVM. 10-fold cross validation approach showed that the EMARS has obtained more than 65% and 45% deduction in terms of RMSE for predicting CL and HL, respectively, compared to other methods. The results have convincingly demonstrated that EMARS predicts the CL and HL of residential buildings significantly better in terms of both assessment accuracy and implementation efficiency.In the parameter analysis, surface area and roof area were identified as the most important factors influencing the HL of buildings. Meanwhile, the CL of buildings is governed equally by 6 out of 7 factors involved in the mapping function. The correlations between relative compactness (X1) and the two outputs (CL and HL) were found to be fairly weak. The analytical results indicated that the CL process is more complicated than the HL process, by requiring more input variables and basis functions for mapping function. Overall, due to contributing many benefits, EMARS should be regarded as an effective tool for addressing CL and HL problems.Although the data used in the current study is taken from a regression problem, this data may be treated as a multi-class classification problem when the output variables (cooling load (CL), heating load (HL)) are rounded to the nearest integer, with 38 and 37 classes for CL and HL, respectively. Designers can use the classification problem to select the suitable building type from the group with the same CL or HL. However, using this approach may generate an error in the process of rounding the output variables.In the present study, being constructed using simulation data is a major limitation of EMARS. EMARS thus should be tested more widely using actual datasets and other real problems in the field of building energy performance. Nevertheless, the collecting and processing data newly actual datasets are of great efforts and time-consuming. We would like to consider this to be promising future research directions.