@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid Improved Quantum-behaved Particle Swarm Optimization–Simplex method (IQPSOS) to solve power system load flow problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents a new algorithm based on combining of the improved QPSO-NM algorithms for solving load flow problem.The modification of both improved QPSO-NM method intends to obtain more accurate convergence and good search performance.The proposed algorithm is tested on different IEEE test systems for a set of normal and critical operating conditions.The test results are compared to the conventional NR algorithm, PSO and different versions of QPSO.The numerical results reveal the superiority of the proposed approach for solving LF problems under different situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Load flow,Ill-conditioned systems,Loadability limits,Quantum-behaved Particle Swarm Optimization,Simplex method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study proposes a new approach, based on a hybrid algorithm combining of Improved Quantum-behaved Particle Swarm Optimization (IQPSO) and simplex algorithms. The Quantum-behaved Particle Swarm Optimization (QPSO) algorithm is the main optimizer of algorithm, which can give a good direction to the optimal global region and Nelder Mead Simplex method (NM) which is used as a local search to fine tune the obtained solution from QPSO. The proposed improved hybrid QPSO algorithm is tested on several benchmark functions and performed better than particle swarm optimization (PSO), QPSO and weighted QPSO (WQPSO). To assess the effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed method on real problems, it is used for solving the power system load flow problems and demonstrated by different standard and ill-conditioned test systems including IEEE 14, 30 and 57 buses test systems, and compared with the conventional Newton–Raphson (NR) method, PSO and some versions of QPSO algorithms. Furthermore, the proposed hybrid algorithm is proposed for solving load flow problems with considering the reactive limits at generation buses. Simulation results prove the robustness and better convergence of IQPSOS under normal and critical conditions, when conventional load flow methods fail.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Load flow is the solution for the power system under static conditions of operation [1]. The requirements for load flow calculations vary over a wide spectrum, from small industrial systems to large automated systems for planning, security, reactive power compensation, control and on-line management [2].Since the load flow equations are algebric nonlinear and complex, many numerical methods have been developed for finding its desired normal solutions. Among these, the Gauss–Seidel [2,3], Newton–Raphson [4] or its decoupled versions [5,6] have very fast convergence characteristics so, they have been widely used in the last decades in the study of load flow in power systems during their planning and operation [7]. Usually, the system's operating point is obtained after some iteration. However, there are critical situations where the conventional methods like Newton–Raphson fail to converge even though a feasible operating point does exist. For example, if the load of power system increases extremely, sometimes the conventional methods cannot provide a feasible solution because, in this case, the system is ill-conditioned.In recent years, for overcoming the deficiencies of conventional methods, modern heuristic techniques such as genetic algorithm (GA) [8,9], particle swarm optimization [10,11] and group search optimizer (GSO) [12] have been applied.Yin and Germay suggested the application of simple GA-search procedures to the load flow problem in the power electric systems. Numerical experiments on small size networks show that the simple GA quickly finds an abnormal solution [9], but in that genetic-based method, there is no way to handle the constraints in load flow problem. Wong et al. presented constrained GA (CGA) [13] and advanced constrained GA (ACGA) [7] methods to solve the load flow problem. These methods contain several constraint enforcement techniques that involve complex and lengthy equations. The results of testing these methodologies on Klos–Kerner 11-busbar system and IEEE 30 bus test system under heavy-load conditions are better than Newton–Raphson method [14].Müller et al. proposed multilayer perceptron-artificial neural network (MLP-ANN) based methodology for solving different scenarios of load flow problem [15]. Acharjee and Goswami developed an algorithm based on particle swarm optimization technique with adaptive PSO parameters for power flow analysis. The simulation results show that the PSO method is indeed capable of obtaining higher quality solutions in load flow problems compared with the conventional methods [14].The particle swarm optimization method is a member of a wider class of swarm intelligence methods used for solving global optimization problems. The method was originally proposed by Kennedy as a simulation of social behavior of bird flock and was first introduced as an optimization method in 1995 [16]. Instead of using evolutionary operators to manipulate the individuals as in other evolutionary algorithms, PSO relies on the exchange of information between individuals. Each particle in PSO flies in search space with a velocity, which is dynamically adjusted according to its own former information.Since 1995, many attempts have been made to improve the performance of the PSO [6,7]. As far as the PSO itself concerned, however, it is not a global optimization algorithm, as has been demonstrated by Van den Bergh [17]. In [18,19], Sun et al. introduce quantum theory into PSO and propose a Quantum-behaved PSO (QPSO) algorithm, which is related with artificial life, and specifically to swarm theories, and also with evolutionary. The QPSO algorithm guaranteed theoretically to find good optimal solutions in search space. The experiment results on some widely used benchmark functions and a variety of power system problems [20–22] show that the QPSO works better than standard PSO and has strong search ability than PSO. Hence in the current work, we propose to employ a novel hybrid strategy based on combining of the improved QPSO algorithm and Nelder Mead Simplex algorithm [23], referred as the IQPSOS method, in the context of power system load flow problems.Nelder Mead Simplex algorithm is a particular family of global optimization methods, known as Direct Search methods, originally introduced and developed by researchers in 1960s, has recently received some attention. The Direct Search methods are simply structured to explore a set of points, in the vicinity of the current position, looking for a smaller objective function value than the current one. This family includes Pattern Search algorithms, Simplex Methods (different from the simplex used in linear programming), Powell Optimization and others. Direct Search methods, in contrast to more standard optimization methods, are often called derivative-free as they do not require any information about the gradient (or higher derivative) of the objective function when searching for an optimal solution. Therefore, direct search methods are particularly appropriate for solving non-continuous, non-differentiable and multimodal (i.e. multiple local optima) optimization problems [24]. The proposed method is applied to solve load flow problem with three test systems. Simulation results demonstrate the feasibility and the effectiveness of the proposed IQPSOS method in terms of solution quality compared with NR and various PSO algorithms.The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (i) present a new approach for solving the basic load flow problem, (ii) develop a hybrid evolutionary optimization, based on the combination of IQPSO and NM for dealing with generator reactive power limits, (iii) present an efficient optimization approach for solving load flow problems under critical conditions.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the formulation of load flow problem. Section 3 explains the basic principles of the solution methods and the application of IQPSOS algorithm in load flow problem. In Section 4, the feasibility of the IQPSOS algorithm on five benchmark functions and different load flow problems are demonstrated and compared with the results obtained by other methods. Finally, Section 5 outlines the conclusions.Consider a power system with N buses, where there are NPVvoltage-controlled buses (PV buses) and NPQload buses (PQ buses).The following equations define the load flow problem on the basis of admittance matrix for a typical bus i in a power system:(1)Pi=∑j=1NViVj[Gijcos(θi−θj)+Bijsin(θi−θj)](2)Qi=∑j=1NViVj[Gijsin(θi−θj)−Bijcos(θi−θj)]where Piand Qiare the active and reactive powers of ith bus, respectively. The Vi, Vjare the voltage magnitude of ith and jth bus, respectively and θi, θjare the voltage phase angles of ith and jth buses, respectively. Also, Gij, Bijare the (i, j)th element of bus admittance matrix.The main concern of a load flow problem is to achieve the predetermined power mismatches subjected to the operating constraints of a power system. Therefore, it can be considered as an optimization problem, in which an objective function f(V,θ) has to be minimized. Sum of squares of the mismatches can be set as objective function and formulated as follows:(3)minf(V,θ)=∑i=1NPV+NPQ|ΔPi|2+∑i=1NPQ|ΔQi|2subject to(4)Vimin≤Vi≤Vimaxandθimin≤θi≤θimaxwhere(5)ΔPi=Psp−Pi,i∈NPV+NPQand(6)ΔQi=Qsp−Qi,i∈NPQIn which ΔPiand ΔQiare the active and reactive power mismatches at node i, respectively. The Pspand Qsppresent the specified active and reactive powers at node i, respectively. Inequality constraint in Eq. (4) requires that the voltage magnitudes of PQ buses and phase angles of both PV and PQ buses should be between its minimum(Vimin,θimin)and maximum(Vimax,θimax)limits.When the load flow problem is solvable, the value of f is zero or in the vicinity of zero at the end of the optimization process. In cases the system is within the unfeasible region and there is no solution, the power mismatches will not be zero in the proposed method but the objective function will be a minimum. In this situations, the obtained solution point contains useful information about the state of the network (the obtained solution can be used to detect weaknesses in networks where the load flow does not converge and the root of objective function f can be used to quantify its minimum distance to the boundary of the solvable region), even though the solution point is not the load flow solution.The particle swarm optimization (PSO) method is a member of a wider class of swarm intelligence methods used for solving global optimization problems. The method was originally proposed by Kennedy as a simulation of social behavior of bird flock and was first introduced as an optimization method in 1995 [25]. In a physical d dimensional search space, each particle i has its own position, xi=[xi,1, xi,2, …, xi,d] and flight velocity,vi=[vi,1,vi,2,…,vi,d]which keeps being adjusted during the optimization process. At each iteration, the modified velocity and position of each particle can be calculated using the current velocity and the distance from personal best (pbest) and global best (gbest) as follows:(7)vi,j(t+1)=ωvi,j(t)+c1r1(pbesti,j(t)−xi,j(t))+c2r2(gbestj(t)−xi,j(t))(8)xi,j(t+1)=xi,j(t)+vi,j(t+1)where r1 and r2 are independent random numbers (with uniform probability) between 0 and 1. ω is the inertia factor (or inertia weight) that controls the impact of the previous particle velocity on the current particle velocity. c1 and c2 are cognitive and social coefficients. pbesti,jrepresents the best ever position of particle i and gbestjis the best position in the swarm (global best position).The main disadvantage of PSO algorithm may be is that, it does not guarantee to be global convergent [17], and is prone to trap into local optima although it converges fast. Inspired by trajectory analysis of the PSO [26] and quantum mechanics, Sun et al. [18,19] developed and proposed the Quantum-behaved Particle Swarm Optimization (QPSO) algorithm.Assume that the PSO system is a quantum-like system, each single particle of which is spinless and has quantum behavior formulated by the wave function without regard to the interference from other particles. Inspired by the analysis of convergence of the original PSO, each individual particle is assumed to move in a delta potential well of the search space, of which the center is the point pi=(pi,1, pi,2, …, pi,d). Let the local attractor be defined at the coordinates:(9)pi,j(t)=c1⋅pbesti,j(t)+c2⋅gbestj(t)c1+c2,j=1,2,…,dor(10)pi,j(t)=φ⋅pbesti,j(t)+(1−φ)⋅gbestj(t)where φ=c1r1/(c1r1+c2r2). The parameter L depends on energy intension of the potential well specifies the search scope of a particle and is called creativity or imagination of the particle.In Quantum-behaved PSO, search space and solution space of the problem are two spaces of different quality. Wave function or probability function of position depicts the state of the particle in quantized search space, not informing us of any certain information about the position of a particle that is vital to evaluate the fitness of a particle. Therefore, state transformation between two spaces is absolutely necessary. In terms of quantum mechanics, the transformation from quantum state to classical state is called collapse, which in nature is the measurement of a particles position [19]. The difference in state transformation between QPSO and traditional PSO are shown in Fig. 1.In QPSO, employing the Monte Carlo method, the particles position can be given by Eq. (11):(11)xi,j(t+1)=pi,j(t)±Li,j(t)2ln1uwhere u is a random number uniformly distributed in (0,1). The global point called Mainstream Thought or Mean Best (mbest) of the population is defined as the mean of the pbest positions of all particles and it is given by:(12)mbest(t)=1M∑i=1Mpbesti,j(t)=1M∑i=1Mpbesti,1(t),1M∑i=1Mpbesti,2(t),…,1M∑i=1Mpbesti,d(t),where M is the population size. The value of Li,j(t) and rewritten of Eq. (11) are as follows:(13)Li,j(t)=2β⋅|mbestj(t)−xi,j(t)|(14)xi,j(t+1)=pi,j(t)±β⋅|mbestj(t)−xi,j(t)|⋅ln1uwhere β is called creativity coefficient. Eq. (14) is the iterative equation of position in the QPSO algorithm.In this section, in order to better balance between the global and local searching of the QPSO algorithm, a new coefficient is introduced. The main idea is behind the weighted QPSO (WQPSO) [27] method that it uses a linearly decreasing weight parameter to render the importance of particles in population when they are evolving. The novel parameter control is depended on the best solution (gbest), worst solution (global worst (gworst)) and the pbest solution. The new improved QPSO has stronger local search ability than PSO and QPSO and can make the convergence speed of QPSO faster. The new introduced coefficient is expressed as:(15)λi,j(t)=f(pbesti(t))−f(gworst(t))f(gbest(t))−f(gworst(t))So, by exerting the new parameter control, the mean best position (mbest) is rewritten as follows:(16)mbest(t)=1M∑i=1Mλi,j(t)⋅pbesti,j(t)=1M∑i=1Mλi,1pbesti,1(t),1M∑i=1Mλi,2pbesti,2(t),…,1M∑i=1Mλi,dpbesti,d(t),The Nelder–Mead [23] simplex search method is proposed by Nelder and Mead (1965), which is a simple method for finding a local minimum of a function of several variables and is a close relative of particle swarm optimization algorithm. This method iteratively generates a sequence of simplexes to approximate an optimal point. The simplex method uses n+1 points in Rn. These points form a type of n-dimensional polygon, a simplex, which has n+1 points as vertices. Let X1, X2, …, Xddenote these vertices. The simplex ordering relabels the vertices according to the objective function values as follows:(17)f(X1)≤F(X2)≤⋯≤f(Xn+1)where X1 and Xn+1 are referred as the best vertex and the worst vertex, respectively.The algorithm uses four possible operations: reflection, expansion, contraction and shrinkage, each being associated with a scalar parameter: σ (reflection), γ (expansion), ρ (contraction), and δ (shrinkage). LetX¯be the centroid of the n best vertices, (all vertices except for Xn+1) is determined.At first, all of vertices are evaluated according to Eq. (15). Then, the worst candidate solution is reflected through the centroid and the new point Xris as follows:(18)Xr=X¯+σ(X¯−Xn+1)If f(X1)≤f(Xr)<f(Xn), Xn+1 is replaced with Xr. If f(Xr)<f(X1) then the expansion point Xeis computed from Eq. (19).(19)Xe=X¯+γ(Xr−X¯)If f(Xe)<f(Xr), Xn+1 is replaced with Xe; otherwise Xn+1 is replace with Xr. If f(Xn)≤f(Xr)<f(Xn+1), the outside contraction point is computed as follows:(20)Xoc=X¯+ρ(Xr−X¯)If f(Xoc)≤f(Xr), Xocis accepted; otherwise a shrinkage step is performed (see Eq. (20)). If f(Xr)≥f(Xn+1) the inside contraction point Xicis given by:(21)Xic=X¯−ρ(Xr−X¯)Then, f(Xic) is evaluated. If f(Xic)<f(Xn+1), Xn+1 is replaced with Xic; otherwise a shrinkage is carried out. Shrinkage the simplex is defined Eq. (22):(22)Xi=X1+δ(Xi−X1),i=2,…,n+1The objective function is evaluated at the simplex vertices upon which iterations of algorithm are repeated until some stopping condition is satisfied.While combining stochastic and deterministic methods to form a hybrid algorithm, generally stochastic methods are used as a base level search and deterministic methods as a local level search. In this way, QPSO is used as a base level search and simplex method as a local search to fine-tune the solution to reach global optimum or near global optimum.The load flow problem based on hybrid algorithm is described as follows:•Step 1: Get the system data. In this step, the input data including the system data, the specified loads, generation, voltage specifications at the regulated buses and necessary parameters for IQPSO and simplex method are defined.Step 2: Form the system admittance matrix from the system data.Step 3: Set the counter of iteration (t=0).Step 4: Initialize a population (array) of particles with random positions in the specified problem space. The constraints of the load flow problem (Eq. (4)) are used as the specific intervals. Thus, the constraints will never be violated. Initial population is as Eq. (25):(23)Vi,jinitial=Vimin+rand(0,1)⋅(Vimax−Vimin),j=1,2,…,NPQ(24)θi,jinitial=θimin+rand(0,1)⋅(θimax−θimin),j=1,2,…,N−1(25)xi,jinitial=[Vi,jinitialθi,jinitial]where rand(0,1) is a random generated number between 0 and 1, which obeys uniform distribution.Step 5: Compute objective function of initial particles(f(xi,jinitial))using Eq. (3). If the effects of the generator reactive power limits are considered into IQPSOS, we should use Eq. (34) instead of Eq. (3) for calculate the objective function in all steps.Step 6: Indicate pbest (the best position of the particle in the current iteration) and gbest (the best position of the particle up to the present iteration) positions using the results of step 5. Set pbest position of each particle aspbesti,jinitial=xi,jinitialand obtain best solution of the current position as gbest.Step 7: Increment run iteration (t=t+1).Step 8: Calculate the mean best of the population (mbest) among the particles by Eq. (16).Step 9: Get the stochastic attractor of each particle. Using Eq. (9) or Eq. (10), local attractor of each individual achieves.Step 10: Update the particle position. The position of the particles i.e. voltage magnitudes and phase angles are updated using Eq. (14).Step 11: Update pbest and gbest. The values of the evaluation function are calculated for the updated positions of the particles. If the new value is better than the previous pbest then set the pbest value equal to the current, otherwise, keep the pbest in the memory. Similarly, value of gbest is also updated as the pbest position.Step 12: Input the best solution (gbest) obtained from the above IQPSO steps as an initial condition to simplex method. Then apply Simplex method steps (as mentioned in Section 3.4), for the new gbest position to obtain a new position (or may not get new position). Next go to step 13.Step 13: Update gbest position. If the objective function of the new gbest solution is better than the previous gbest, then move the previous gbest position to new gbest, otherwise gbest solution remains unchanged.Step 14: Check the convergence criterion. Obtain maximum active and reactive powers mismatches (maxmismatch) of the gbest position according to the following equation:(26)maxmismatch=max([|ΔPi|,|ΔQj|])where i=1, …, NPV+NPQand j=1, …, NPQ. In order to considering the reactive power limitations in load flow calculations, Eq. (26) is changed to Eq. (35) in all iterations. If the maxmismatchof the last gbest is less than the threshold or the maximum number of iteration (max_t) is reached, interrupt iteration then display the gbest position as a final result for the problem, otherwise return to step 7.In order to evaluate the performance of the IQPSOS procedure against well known optimization algorithms PSO, QPSO and WQPSO, five well-known benchmark functions were used, as shown in Table 1. These functions had local optima and/or saddles in their solution spaces where the number of local minima increases exponentially with the problem dimension. The formulation of each function, feasible solution space, and fmin are listed in Table 1.All of simulations in this paper are executed on a PC with a 2.66-GHz Intel Processor and 4.0-GB RAM. All of programs are written and executed in MATLAB 7.6.0. For all these algorithms, a population of 40 individuals corresponding to the dimensions 30 is used and a constant number of maximum generations 1000 is used. Also, as in most exiting literature on PSO, acceleration constants c1 and c2 are set to 2 and the inertia weight ω decreases linearly from 0.9 to 0.4.Table 2gives the comparison of the processes of IQPSOS, PSO, QPSO and WQPSO in well-known five benchmark functions averaged on 100 trial runs. The mean and standard deviation of solutions found by these algorithms are also listed in Table 2.Sphere function is a continuous, convex, symmetrical and unimodal function. It is mainly used employed to test the local search ability of the algorithm. IQPSOS could find global optimum successfully and exhibited its great search ability in comparison to the other methods.The IQPSOS also, showed better performance while handling those mono-modal function functions, which are too hard to be solved for many optimization problems, e.g. Rosenbrock function.The Rastrigrin and Griewank functions are both multi-modal and usually tested for comparing the global search ability of the algorithm. Multimodal functions have many local minima and almost are most difficult to optimize. For multimodal functions, the final results are more important since they reflect the ability of the algorithm in escaping from poor local optima and locating a near-global optimum.The results generated from PSO, QPSO, WQPSO and the proposed IQPSOS are tabulated in Table 2 in comparison with the results generated by IQPSOS algorithm. Table 2 shows that the IQPSOS generated better results than other methods on multi-modal functions. Also, on De Jong's function, IQAPSOS performs much better solution than the others.As a result, IQPSOS is a perfectly good performer in optimizing complex high-dimensional functions and due to strong local search ability as well as global search ability, has high stability and confidence. So, it will be useful in solving real problems. In the following section, IQPSOS is employed for solving the load flow problems.To validate the proposed hybrid method based load flow problem, the algorithm is applied to study IEEE 14, 30 and 57-bus systems under normal operating conditions and several critical situations. The results are compared with conventional Newton–Raphson, standard PSO, QPSO and WQPSO algorithms.To obtain normal load flow solution, voltage magnitude range is [0.8–1.1]p.u.(per unit) and the initial range of voltage phase angle is considered as [−30°, 0°] (deg.). In order to study the critical loading conditions of the power system (loadability limit), the voltage magnitude range and phase angles are changed to [0.5–1.1]p.u. and [−180°, 0°], respectively. The parameter configurations of all approaches are used as follows:The PSO parameters used for the examples are, the acceleration coefficient which are set as c1=c2=2, the inertia weight ω decreases linearly from 0.9 to 0.4. In QPSO, weighted QPSO (WQPSO) and IQPSOS, the coefficient β decreases from 1.0 to 0.5 linearly when the algorithm is running as in [22]. The standard coefficients used for the Nelder Mead Simplex method are σ=1, γ=2, ρ=0.5 and δ=0.5. Different sets of Nelder–Mead coefficients were tested, but significant changes were not observed, so, the values of these parameters have not much importance on the proposed convergence. In all simulations, for normal and critical condition a tolerance of 0.001p.u. and 0.01p.u. is adopted, respectively.With mentioned chosen parameters, we run the proposed IQPSOS method to solve the different load flow problems. In meantime, to validate the results obtained with the proposed IQPSOS method, the same problem was solved by standard PSO, QPSO, WQPSO and conventional Newton–Raphson load flow method.This case is studied to directly compare the results and performances of proposed hybrid method with those of PSO, QPSO and WQPSO. The above producers are tested with the first test system (14 IEEE bus system) under normal condition and the result is shown in Fig. 2.This figure shows sum of squares of the mismatches and maximum of the power mismatches of the IEEE 14 bus system. From the convergence characteristics of these figures can be concluded that the IQPSOS proposed algorithm is converged to the desire tolerance in initial iterations (8th iterations) but, the performance of the other methods is not satisfactory and in spite of the population size increment, no accurate operable solution was found for the specified mismatch tolerance by these methods after 100 iterations.To compare clearly, the results of mentioned evolutionary methods for 14 IEEE system are compared in a same interval time (4s). Table 3provides the average and standard deviation of the results (in 50 runs) obtained by the proposed IQPSOS, PSO, QPSO and WQPSO methods. It is clear from Table 3 that the proposed IQPSOS method has better convergence characteristic and superior to other mentioned methods. All tests are carried out on a common personal computer using the MATLAB7 software package.It is obvious from Table 3 and Fig. 2 that with increase in the number of iteration or population, convergence is not guaranteed by PSO, QPSO and WQPSO methods, so, these methods are not employed in the other simulations and the proposed IQPSOS algorithm is only compared with Newton–Raphson load flow.Table 4lists the best and average test results (50 runs) for different population size (40, 80 and 100). These results are consistence for different standard as well as ill conditioned systems. From Table 4, it is seen that the number of generations for convergence are more for the larger network size but the proposed IQPSOS algorithm can also provide acceptable convergence for the lower population size as well as more.Power system analyst is always worried to know whether non-convergence of a power flow is due to failure of a power flow method or due to infeasible operating point. Conventional power flow methods are known to have difficulties in solving heavy loaded or ill-conditioned systems. The ill conditioning can be due to special features of the network such as high R/X ratios of lines and connections of very low and very high impedance lines at a bus.Recently, various studies for detecting loadability limits of power systems have been proposed in relation to voltage stability and security monitoring. A simple method to find the loadability limits is to repeatedly use conventional load flow under increase in loading conditions until convergence is no longer obtained [28]. It is also well known that as the system loading approaches critical loading, the Jacobian tends to become singular [29], so depending on the system characteristics, conventional load flow methods like Newton–Raphson and decoupled Newton–Raphson, may fail, even if there is a feasible operating point in ill-conditioned systems. In these cases, the iterative process does not converge or may diverge.Therefore, alternative methods are necessary in order to: (a) present better convergence characteristics in case the system is ill-conditioned but it is within the feasible region and (b) provide some information about the iterative process in case the system is within the unfeasible region.Table 5compares the maximum loadability limits without considering reactive power limit at PV buses for the NR and the proposed methods. Simulation results of the proposed IQPSOS methodology for all of critical load flow conditions (with and without Q-limit) are best solutions after 50 runs for 80 population sizes.In this case, all the active and reactive power loads of PQ buses increase at a given constant ratio LoadFactor as Eqs. (27) and (28) until the NR and IQPSOS methods no longer converged.(27)P→P×LoadFactor(28)Q→Q×LoadFactorIn order to investigate the performance of the IQPSOS algorithm, the other critical condition is also considered. These situations consist of increasing line resistance whereas line reactance is fixed and vice versa when line reactance is changed with assumption that line resistance is fixed, according to the following Eqs. (29) and (30):(29)R→R×RFactor(30)X→X×XFactorComparisons results between conventional method and proposed method as for these cases are summarized in Table 6.As indicated in Table 6, when the R/X ratio is increased too much, the IQPSOS method has better performance compared to the conventional Newton–Raphson method. Also, in this case, the hybrid proposed based method is able to provide solution after critical loading where, the normal method fails to converge.Fig. 3shows Newton–Raphson and proposed algorithm performance for a loading near critical loading (3 times base case loading) without incorporating reactive power limit, for 30 bus test system. It can clearly be seen that Newton–Raphson method diverges after some iterations. It is due to the singularity of the Jacobian matrix so, at the maximum loading and its vicinity fails to find the solution. But the proposed methodology based IQPSOS is particularly useful for determining the load flow solutions of highly stressed systems.It is well known that the convergence of the power flow methods is significantly affected by adjustment of solutions due to reactive limit violations at PV buses.For a PV bus, the upper and lower limits of VAR generation to hold the bus voltage constant, are also given. The calculated reactive power for generator buses is checked for the specified limits as follows:(31)Qgmin≤Qg≤Qgmax,g=1,2,…,NPVIn conventional NR load flow method, if the calculated reactive power is outside the specified limits, then, we have:(32)IfQg>QgmaxthenQg=Qgmax(33)IfQg<QgminthenQg=QgminThis means that the specified limits are not exceeded and beyond the reactive power bounds, the PV bus is treated like a PQ bus.In order to considering the Q-limit at PV buses, in proposed method, voltage magnitudes of PV buses are regarded as variables and change like PQ buses. The effects of the generator reactive power limits are included into IQPSOS by introducing a term of reactive power limit violation into the objective function, f and maximum power of mismatches, maxmismatch. So, Eq. (3) changes to Eq. (34) and Eq. (26) changes to Eq. (35) as follows, respectively:(34)minf(V,θ)=∑i=1NPV+NPQ|ΔPi|2+∑j=1NPQ|ΔQj|2+I∑g=1NPV|ΔQg|(35)maxmismatch=max([||ΔPi,|ΔQj|,|I⋅ΔQg|])here ΔQg=Qg−Qmand according to the reactive power value, Qmand I are defined as follows:(36)IfQgmin<Qg<QgmaxthenI=0(37)OtherwiseIfQg>QgmaxthenQm=QgmaxandI=1(38)ElseIfQg<QgmaxthenQm=QgminandI=1Table 7gives the load flow solutions of IEEE 14 bus test system at loadability conditions, with and without incorporating reactive power limit at generation buses. From this table, it is clear that owing to the violations of the generator reactive power limits, the values of the PV buses are less than the defined value and these buses have been switched to the PQ bus. Obtained results also illustrate that the proposed IQPSOS method is able to solve the load flow problem by considering the reactive power limits. Due to the space limitations, the detailed results of the 30 and 57 bus systems are not presented in the paper.The comparison of results of conventional NR method and the proposed evolutionary algorithm for determining their maximum loadability by considering the Q-limit is shown in Table 8. Also, in this case, the hybrid proposed method is able to provide solution under the critical loading where the normal method fails to converge.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
