@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
BLDC motor speed control system fault diagnosis based on LRGF neural network and adaptive lifting scheme

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An LRGF neural network with pole assignment technique is proposed to model the dynamic system.An adaptive lifting scheme is used for the improvement of the mechanical fault detection.An adaptive threshold scheme is proposed for the detection of several kinds of faults.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fault diagnosis,Brushless DC motor,LRGF neural network,Adaptive lifting scheme,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Brushless DC (BLDC) machines are found increasing use in applications that demand high and rugged performance. In some critical circumstance, such as aerospace, the motor must be highly reliable. In this context, a novel model-based fault diagnosis system is developed for brushless DC motor speed control system. Under the consideration of the complexity of characterizing the dynamic of BLDC motor control system with analytic expression, a LRGF neural network (LRGFNN) with pole assignment technique is carried out for modeling the system. During the diagnosis process, fault signal of the motor is isolated with LRGFNN online. Meanwhile, adaptive lifting scheme and adaptive threshold method are presented for detecting the faults from the isolated fault signal under the existence of mechanical error and electrical error. The effectiveness of the diagnosis system is demonstrated in the simulation of electrical and mechanical fault in the motor. The detection of the incipient fault is also given.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brushless DC (BLDC) machines are found increasing use in applications that demand high and rugged performance. Automotive and aerospace [1] are some such areas where these machines may be used. Brushless DC motor has many advantages over brushed DC motor and induction motor [2]. A few of these are: better speed versus torque characteristics, high dynamic response, high efficiency, etc. However, in some critical circumstance, such as aerospace, the motor must be highly reliable. If the fault happens, it should be detected and located, so that some strategy can be employed to avoid the failure happen [3].Recently, artificial intelligence (AI) tool for fault diagnosis of electrical machines and drive systems is an interesting research topic that has received increasing attention. Usually, AI based fault diagnosis system is trained by learning algorithms, where some data measured form the machines is employed. So this is also called data-driven scheme [4,5]. Because of the application of the machine learning algorithms, the automate fault diagnosis approaches do not need the physical model or empirical knowledge. With the development of the AI technology, the AI based fault diagnosis approaches are practical [6–8].In the AI methods for fault diagnosis, redundancy model technique is frequently used. In previous work [9], global feedback neural network (GFNN) combined with wavelet packet decomposition approach is proposed to detect the fault of the motor. The computer redundancy model of the motor is constructed by neural training without knowledge of the motor. However, in the training of the neural network, the convergence of the neural network must be guaranteed, which is complicated. In addition, traditional wavelet in the fault diagnosis system cannot adapt the fault signals of all faults. In [10], the rotor fault of the BLDC motor is detected by estimating the strength of the rotor magnets, the effect of load unbalances and misalignments. Varied load torques on the diagnosis of such machines are also investigated. While, by this approach, it is hard to detect the dynamic fault in the control loop, because it is a condition-monitoring scheme and the dynamic of the system is not considered. Except model based approach, signal based approach is another main way to detect faults. In [11], Rajagopalan uses analytical wavelet transform of the stator-current signal to detect dynamic eccentricity in brushless direct current (BLDC) motors under rapidly varied speed and load conditions. In [12], Pineda-Sanchez adopts Motor current signature analysis (MCSA) approach to diagnose the motor. It is based on the analysis of the spectral content of a motor current, which is sampled while a motor runs in steady state, to detect the harmonic components that characterize each type of fault. Besides that, identification of the brushless direct-current motor drive is also a frequently used method. In Park's work [13], a simple fault diagnosis scheme is proposed, this scheme includes a simple algorithm where the measured phase current information is employed, the operating characteristic of motor signal is utilized to detect open-circuit fault. However, the drawback of above signal analysis technique based approaches is that it is hard to detect the incipient fault under the varied control signal.Even though considerable researches in the fault diagnosis of BLDC motor have been reported, few researches have addressed attention to both electrical and mechanical fault, which are not only represented in the form of abrupt fault, but also in the form of incipient fault in the BLDC motor. This issue is focused in this paper. However in the BLDC motor, some dynamic behaviors are unable to be characterized by analytical or statistical expressions, and it is hard to directly detect the mechanic fault from the fault signal. Therefore, In order to overcome these drawbacks, signal processing approach combined with the dynamic neural network is carried out here.In this paper, a model-based approach is proposed to diagnose the fault of the BLDC motor speed control system. The fault diagnosis system can be divide into two part. The first part is LRGF neural network, which is used to modeling the system. The second part is lifting scheme algorithm, it is employed to process the fault signals. With this system, both mechanical fault or electrical fault which are in the form of abrupt fault can be detected, furthermore the incipient fault are also considered.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the architecture of the fault diagnosis system. Section 3 gives a brief description about the LRGF neural network and the training of the neural network. Section 4 introduces the lifting scheme which is used in the fault diagnosis system. Section 5 describes the fault decision and diagnosis solution of the proposed fault diagnosis system. Section 6 discusses the diagnosis result of the BLDC motor. And the last part – Section 7 is the conclusion.In this section, the architecture of the fault diagnosis scheme is briefly presented. An overall description of the fault detection process in the proposed fault diagnosis system is given.BLDC motor speed control system consists of speed controller, reference voltage comparator, PWM current controller, position sensor, motor and IGBT Bridge. The switching logic of IGBT Bridge is included in the speed controller, is set up by a controller circuitry following the 120° classical conduction. The feedback control signals of the rotor-position sensors and instantaneous motor dc-link current are fed into the controller along with a user-defined speed control input.In the control loop, the speed of the motor is compared with its reference value, then the speed error is processed in proportional – integral – differential (PID) speed controller. The load of the motor is a mechanical device with spring connection to rotor. The control system is shown in Fig. 1.The control system can be treated as a non-linear dynamic system. In form of state space, it isdx=f(x,u,t0,t),y=g(x,t),where x is the state of the dynamic system, y is the speed output, and u is the speed input.Fault detection is a binary decision of whether or not a condition which is out of the scope of normal system exists. The decision should not be a false alarm or a fail to report alarm. In model-based fault diagnosis technique, a redundancy computational model is constructed to isolate the fault signal and present the dynamic behavior of the original system, so that if a fault occurs, it can be detected from the fault signal. The redundancy computational model sometimes is constructed by mathematical equations which is analytical express of the original system, or constructed by some empirical knowledge, such as expert system. But if the original system is very complex, it is hard to construct by those methods. Thus, computational intelligence approach is employed here, the approach in our fault diagnosis system is also called data-driven scheme in which the redundancy model is generated from historical data of the original system. Especially, in our scheme, the historical data is applied in a dynamic neural network training for modeling the dynamic process of the BLDC motor speed control system.In the computational approaches, for locally recurrent global forward (LRGF) neural network has the advantage of high accuracy and fast convergence speed in learning, we adopt LRGF neural network to identify the dynamic character of the original control system. The LRGF neural network we employed will be elaborated in the following section. With the application of the LRGF neural network model, the fault signal is obtained by substracting the LRGF neural network output with the output of the BLDC motor speed control system.After the fault signal is obtained, while, if the feature of the faults are implicit in the fault signal, signal processing technique are needed to extract the faults. So adaptive lifting wavelet decomposition is employed to decompose the fault signal to detail signal and approximation signal. If it is necessary, the approximation signal can be decomposed to detail signal and approximation signal on multi-resolution levels by adaptive lifting wavelet. Those signals are processed by indicators. At the last stage of the fault diagnosis processing, decisions are made by the indicators.An overall diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 2. The system have two mode: training mode and fault diagnosing mode. In the training mode, the data acquisition device obtains the speed signal of the motor y0 and the control input of the system ui. The signals are processed to satisfy the requirement of the sampling rate and magnitude range for the developed LRGF neural network. After several times of training sweep in neural network and adaptive lifting algorithms, the system will be switch to the fault diagnosis mode. The control input is respectively processed by the BLDC motor speed control system and the LRGF neural network to generate fault signal r. Then, the fault signal is processed by adaptive lifting wavelet to obtain detail signals and approximation signals I1…I2nfor the indicators.LRGF neural network is employed to model the BLDC motor speed control system for the advantages of high accuracy and fast convergence speed in learning [14]. As a dynamic neural network, it introduces dynamic behavior into the net, so that it enable to characterize the dynamic of the original system. In this section, the proposed LRGF neural network with pole assignment technique is elaborated.Assuming there are n inputs, v hidden neurons and m outputs in the LRGF neural network. The dynamic behavior is introduced in the hidden neurons. The structure of LRGF neural network is shown in Fig. 3.The input vector and output vector of the neural network at time k are u(k)=[u1(k), u2(k),…,un(k)]Tandy(k)=[y1(k), y2(k),…,ym(k)]Trespectively, W is weight matrix of input layer, C is the weight matrix of output layer. Assuming the function about the hidden layer is g. Hence, the expression of the LRGF neural network is(1)y(k)=Cg(Wu(k))Fig. 4is the structure of hidden neuron, whereσ(·) is a hyperbolic tangent function, which is chosen as activation function of the neural network. The equation of the hidden neuron is(2)z(k)=∑i=0rbi∑i=jnwjuj(k−j)−∑j=1rajz(k−j)y(k)=σ(g1(z(k)−g2))Obviously, the first equation in (2) is a IIR filter and its output is z(k). The order of the IIR filter is r, y(k) is the output of the neural network, g1 is slope of the input variable of the activation function, g2 is offset of the input variable of activation function. The neural network approximates the original control system by adjusting the coefficients of the IIR filters and the weights.While, in neural network training, stabilization of the dynamic neural network is crucial. If the numerical computation of the neural network diverges, the training of the neural network may fall into crush. Therefore, the dynamic stabilization of the LRGF neural network should be considered in the training process. From literature [15] we know that, the stabilization of LRGF neural network depends on the stabilization of IIR filter in each hidden neuron. Usually, the parameters in LRGF network are directly estimated by training algorithms and stability projection approach is adopted to ensure the stability of IIR filters. However, the conventional stability projection method [14], to some degrees, is complex and computational costs. Therefore, another LRGF neural network is proposed to deal with this problem.Assuming the input dimension of the neural network is n, the output dimension of the neural network is m, the number of hidden neuron is v and the order of IIR filter in hidden neuron is 2. The equation of the hidden neuron is(3)zi(k)=bi0∑l=1nwliui(k)+bi1∑l=1nwliui(k−1)+bi2∑l=1nwliui(k−2)−ai1zi(k−1)−ai2zi(k−2)yi(k)=σ(gi1(zi(k)−gi2))where wliis the weight of the input layer, uiis the ith input variable of the neural network,ai1,ai2andbi0,bi1,bi2are the coefficients of the IIR filters, σ(·) is the activation function of the neural network,gi1andgi2are the slope and offset of the input variables of the activation function respectively. yiis the output of the neural network. Rewriting Eq. (3) in the form of transfer function we obtain(4)zi(k)=bi0+bi1q−1+bi2q−21+ai1q−1+ai2q−2∑l=0nwliul(k)In this transfer function, q−1 is time delay. The stability of the IIR filter depends on the poles of the transfer function, which can be derived by solving Eq. (5).(5)z2+ai1z+ai2=0Assuming the poles of the IIR filter are on the real axis, denoted byci1andci2respectively. The coefficients in IIR filter are(6)ai1=−ci1−ci2ai2=ci1ci2If the poles of the IIR filter are on the complex plane, assuming the poles are di+hij and di−hij respectively. Then the coefficients in the IIR filter are(7)ai1=−2diai2=(di2)+(hi2)Usually, we can estimate the coefficients aand aby training algorithms. However, under the consideration of the stability of the dynamic neural network, it is complex in stability analysis. So another technique are used to avoid the complexity of stability projection operation [15], in which the poles of the IIR filter are estimated during the training process, we call it pole assignment technique. What should be noticed is that when the poles are on complex plane, it appears in pair, which is real axis of symmetry. Therefore, only two parameters are needed to be estimated for each IIR filter. In order to present the dynamic character of the two category poles mentioned in (6) and (7), mixed pole scheme is applied in the LRGF neural network, in which the dynamic of the neuron is switched by weight function f1(β) and f2(β).(8)si1=f1(β)=11+e−βisi2=f2(β)=11+eβiThe hidden neuron structure is shown in Fig. 5The mathematical expression of the hidden neuron is(9)u′i(k)=∑l=1nwliui(k)zi1(k)=bi0u′i(k)+bi1u′i(k−1)+bi2u′i(k−2)+(ci1+ci2)zi1(k−1)−(ci1ci2)zi1(k−2)zi2(k)=b0iuini(k)+b1iuini(k−1)+b2iuini(k−2)+2dizi2(k−1)−((di2)+(hi2))zi2(k−2)yi(k)=11+e−βif(zi1(k),gi11,gi12)+11+eβif(zi2(k),gi11,gi21)whereZi1(k)is the output of IIR filter of which poles are on real axis,Zi2(k)is the output of IIR filter and its poles are in the complex plane. f is activation function of neuron. If the poles of the neuron are on real axis,si1equals to 1 andsi2is 0. Conversely, if the poles of the neuron are in the complex plane,si1equals to 0 andsi2is 1. As the poles of the neuron are directly estimated to ensure the stability of the LRGF neural network, the complexity of the stability projection can be avoided with this structure. While, the poles should be in the unit circle of the complex plane.The training of this neural network is divided into two phrases. In the first phase the LRGF neural network is developed by teacher forcing (TF). In the second phrase, the estimated poles in the hidden neurons are projected to a stability field.In the first phase, the objective function is given by(10)J=12L∑k−1Ly(k)−yˆ(k)2+λ1WF+λ2CFwherey(k) is the output of the original system andyˆ(k)is the output of the LRGF neural network, L samples are used in the training.WandCare the input weight matrix and output weight matrix respectively in the LRGF neural network. F-norm (||W||F=tr(WTW), ||C||F=tr(CTC)) is employed to estimate the magnitude of the entities in weight matrix, so that the entities of the weight matrix would not be too large, which may result in numeric problem in the training process.Under the guidance of TF, the error gradient of the LRGF neural network can be obtained by using chain rule. The details of the gradient computation involved in TF learning algorithm can be found in many neural network references [16,17]. In the training process, in order to accelerating the learning speed and avoiding the numeric problems, adaptive learning step size approach [18] is employed. The updating equation of the parameters in the training is(11)Δp(t+1)=γΔp(t)−α(1−γ)∂J∂pwhere p is the parameter in the LRGF neural network, α is the learning step, γ is the coefficient of the momentum (0<γ<1), t is the sweep time in the learning process.In the second phase of the training process, the parameters are projected into a stable field. It is obviously that the poles in the IIR filter must be in the unit circle of the complex plane, and allowance should be kept in the unit circle as Fig. 6shows.The shadow in Fig. 6 is the stable region where the pole is projected into, and ψ is radius of the region (0<ψ<1). What should be noticed is thatcj1may equal tocj2in the training process, which would lead tocj1≡cj2for that the partial derivation of J respect tocj1andcj2is equal. In order to overcome this drawback, another projection operation is given by(12)|cj1−cj2|>ηjAbove all, the projection operations in the training process are.(13)c=j1ψsgn(cj1)cj1>ψcj2=ψsgn(cj2)cj2>ψdj=ψdj+hjidjdj+hji>ψhj=ψdj+hjihjdj+hji>ψ(14)cj1=cj2−ηj|cj1−cj2|<ηjcj2=cj1−ηj|cj1−cj2|<ηjWavelet technique is effective for the detection of mechanical fault, especially for the detection of vibration fault. A lot of conventional fault detection methods taken by the wavelet techniques [19,20] are presented. However, in the standard wavelets, the wavelet functions are selected from a library of previously designed wavelet functions, and the selected wavelet functions are independent to the given signal. In practice, it is difficult to choosing a best wavelet function from the standard library. Moreover, an inappropriate wavelet function will reduce the accuracy of the fault detection. To overcome this drawback, a adaptive lifting scheme is proposed, which has capability of adapting to the fault signal.The lifting scheme is a spatial domain construction of biorthogonal wavelets, a technique for both designing wavelets and performing the discrete wavelet transform. The lifting scheme can be divided into three steps.The first step is to split the original signal into odd and even samples. Assuming the original signal isx=(xi)i∈z,the even sample iss(0)=(si(0))i∈zand the odd sample isd(0)=(di(0))i∈z. Thus(15)Si(0)=x2i,di(0)=x2i+1In the prediction step, an operatorPonsi(0)is applied to predict d(0). The prediction errord=(di)i∈zis considered as the detail signal of x with(16)di=di(0)−∑r=−N/2+1N/2prsi+r(0)where prare the coefficients of the predictorP, N is the length of the predictor.The last step is to reconstruct the signalxby an update operatorU, the detail signaldand the even samples. The updating of even samplessi(0)is accomplished by using the update operatorU, thes=(si)i∈zcan be regarded as the approximation signal ofx, and(17)si=si(0)+∑j=−M/2+1M/2ujdi+j−1where uj are the coefficients of the update operatorU. M is the number of the coefficients of the update operatorU. Moreover, the predictorPand the update operatorUcan be applied to extract the detail signal and the approximation signal fromsat a lower resolution level.In this subsection, the predictorPand the update operatorUis designed to adaptively extracting the detail signaldand the approximating signalsfrom the signalx.Typically, the prediction operatorPis a linear shift-invariant filter with z transform P(z). In order to optimize the prediction operator, Gouze et al. [21] introduced a condition for operator P which makes the operatorPsymmetry. The predictor is expressed in a vector form as(18)P=p−N/2+1…∞N/2−1pN/2T,pr=p−r+1,r=1,2,…,N/2.The limitation of the magnitude of the vectorPshould be considered. So the norm constraint is used in the operatorP, which is presented by(19)∑r=1N/2pr=12In the design of the prediction operatorP, the goal of the prediction is to extract the detail signal ofxand eliminate all low-order polynomial fromx. In order to guarantee the effectiveness of this algorithm in mechanical fault or abrupt fault detection, a predictor which can amplify the sharp signal is employed. Its criterion is based on the principal of Kurtosis, which is defined as follow:(20)Jp=LL−1∑i=1L(di−d¯)2∑i=1L(di−d¯)42where L is the length of the detail signal d, andd¯is mean of d. The objective is to search an optimal operatorPopt that minimize Jp and satisfy the constraints (18) and (19).Many optimization methods can be used to find the optimal operatorPopt, Each one has its own advantages and limitations. While, In order to avoid the complexity in computing, particle swarm optimization approach is employed here. One of the main advantages of PSO is that it does not have analytical mathematical requirements on the optimization .The objective function with constraints we used in the PSO is(21)Jp=Jp+λc1∑r=1N/2pr−12where λc1 is the coefficient on the constraint (19), it should be positive and large enough to hold the constraint (19) in the searching result. In the initialization of the particles, the predictor is randomly chosen under the constraints (18) and (19), and the searching hyper surface ought to be covered as large as possible.The constraint of the update operator is similar to the constraint of the predictor. The coefficients in the update operator are symmetrical, and the magnitudes of the coefficients are confined by a sum equation. Writing the operator by the form of vector, we obtain(22)U=u−M/2+1…uM/2−1uM/2T,uj=u−j+1,j=1,2,…,M/2.And the constraint of the coefficients is(23)∑j=1M/2uj=14In the update computing, the objective of the update operation is to reconstruct the original signalxwithout usingd. Therefore, the objective function about the update operator is(24)Ju=∑i=1L(dˆi−d0,i)2+∑i=1L(sˆi−s0,i)2+λu∑j=1M/2uj−14where d0,iand s0,iis the sample ofd0 and the sample ofs0. λuis the coefficient of the constraint (23).dˆiandsˆiis the estimation of d0,iand s0,i, which are(25)dˆi=∑r=−N/2+1N/2prsi+rsˆi=siThe update operator can be obtained by minimize the objective function (24). Since the partial derivation of function (24) aboutUis linear, the minimal point of function (24) is the roots of Eq. (26).(26)∂Ju∂U=0∂Ju∂λu=0After solving Eq. (26) we obtain(27)U=A−1(2CDTd0−2CDTCsP−λ1)λ=0.5−1TA−12CDT+1TA−12CDTCsP1TA−11A=2CDTCD+2DMDMTwhere 1 in (27) is a N×1 column vector, and is composed by unit scalar, that is 1=[1,1,1,...,1,1]T. MatrixCDis obtained by using detail signal and the prediction vectorP.Csis consisted bys0. The matrixCDis(28)CD=d1,x−M/2⋯d1,x+M/2⋮⋱⋮dL,x−M/2⋯dL,x+M/2where di,j=PT(di−N/2+jdi−N/2+j+1…di+N/2+j)T, andCs is(29)CS=S0,1−N/2⋯S0,1+N/2⋮⋱⋮S0,L−N/2⋯S0,L+N/2in which s0,jis the jth element ofs0. If the index ofdors0 exceed the length of the array, we set the value of the element to be zero, it is formulated as(30)di=0i<0ori>Ld0,i=0i<0ori>Ldi,j=0j<−M/2orj>M/2S0,i=0i<−N/2orj>M/2For the fault diagnosis indicator, a simple way to detect the fault is to set a threshold T. If the amplitude of the signal is larger than T, then the fault is considered to happen. Due to the error of computer model and the noise induced by the measurement or other factors, the threshold should be large enough to avoid false alarms. However, the larger the threshold is, the less detection sensitivity is. A trade-off should be made between the false alarm and the detection sensitivity. Therefore, adaptive threshold method is applied.The advantage of the adaptive threshold method is that it is effective under varied signal disturbance or uncontrolled effects in time sequence. Based on statistical principle, the adaptive threshold is derived from a segment of the fault signal. Assuming the fault signal is an approximation of the normal distribution. In the segment of the fault signal, the mean of the n samples is(31)m(k)=1n∑i=k−nkr(i)and the variance is(32)v(k)=1n−1∑i=k−nkr(i)−m(k)2where 0<n<k, r(i) denotes the signal. Under the assumption of the statistical model of the signal, a threshold can be calculated by using m(k) and v(k), according to the formula:(33)T(k)=tβv(k)+m(k)T(k) is the threshold and tβis the quantile of t-distribution with probability β. What should be noticed is that the size of the time window n should be chosen properly. If n is too large, the threshold would almost become a constant. If n is too small, the threshold would be very sensitive to any changes in the fault signal. In order to avoid this, a momentum is induced. The threshold is obtained by the following equations.(34)T(k)=tβv¯(k)+m¯(k)v¯(k)=ζv(k)+(1−ζ)v(k−1)m¯(k)=ζm(k)+(1−ζ)m(k−1)Usually, the adaptive threshold is used to detect abrupt faults or mechanical faults which are performed as a fast changing signal. However, if an incipient fault which is presented as a slow changing signal happened in the original system, it is hard to detect with a fast adaptive threshold. So another threshold is required. It can be also formulated with Eq. (34), where ζ is very small. While, in order to avoiding false alarm, abrupt disturbances should not be considered as an incipient fault. Therefore, in our scheme, the decision of the fault happening is not only depend on the threshold, but also rely on the time during when the signal beyond the threshold. Assuming the constant upper bound and lower bound of the threshold is Tcu and Tcl. The decision of the incipient fault happening is the signal satisfy r>Tcu or r<Tcl for longer than toc. Where toc is called tolerate time as Fig. 7shows.If an incipient fault happens, the dynamic of the system changes slowly, then it is presented in a form of slow deviation of fault signal. However, if the derivation is result from noise or other disturbance, the duration time of the derivation should not be longer than toleration time toc, so that the false alarm can be avoided. In another hand, if the duration time of the deviation is longer than toc, then an incipient fault is considered to happened.Above all, the detection is divided into two parts. First, the fault signals is obtained from the substraction between the neural network output and the original system output, and it is processed by an incipient fault indicators. If an incipient fault happens, it would result in variations in dynamic of the original system, then the fault signal should be out of the threshold bound for longer than the tolerance time, an incipient fault is considered to happened. Second, the detail signals on multi-levels are extracted from the fault signal by adaptive lifting scheme, and they are detected by abrupt fault indicators in which adaptive threshold approach is employed, if the detail signal is out of the bound of the threshold, an abrupt fault is considered to happened.Several experiments were conducted to examine three properties of the proposed approach in this paper: (1) the effectiveness of the proposed methods which essentially deals with electrical fault in BLDC motor speed control system. (2) The effectiveness of the proposed method which essentially deals with mechanical fault in BLDC motor speed control system. (3) The effectiveness of the proposed method which essentially deals with incipient fault in BLDC motor speed control system. In order to show the benefit of the proposed approach, other two fault diagnosis algorithms are used to compare with the proposed method, one is based on a lifting scheme [22], and another one is based on a dynamic neural network [23].In the algorithm of this fault diagnosis scheme, the algorithm is divided into two parts, the first part is the training of LRGF neural network, and the second part is the algorithm of the on-line processing for fault diagnosis.Assuming there are v hidden neurons in the neural network and 4000 samples in the learning period. The process of training the neural network and searching the lift scheme parameters are off-line. The program of the algorithm is(a)Input new sample data to the neural network.Estimate the error of the neural network.Calculate the gradient decent vector of the parameters in the neural network.Update the parameters in the neural network by the gradient vector obtained in the previous step.Check whether the sum squared error is permissible, if it is not permissible, return to step a.Search the parameter of lifting scheme by PSO algorithm until the error of the reconstruct signal is permissible.The algorithm of the on-line processing includes decomposition of the fault signal and detection of the fault from the extracted signals. The program of this algorithm is(a)Obtain the fault signal from the substraction between LRGF neural network and the BLDC motor speed control system.Decompose the fault signal into detail signal and approximation signal by lifting scheme.Detect the incipient fault from the approximate signal obtained in step b according to the incipient fault threshold and the tolerance time.Calculate the upper-bound and the lower-bound of the threshold for abrupt fault detection.Detect the mechanical fault and electrical fault from the detail signal extracted in step b according to the threshold obtained from step d.In our simulation, the control input is given by(35)u=15sin(3.4πt)+15sin2.2πt−π7+30sin0.6πt+π3In this subsection, two types of faults have been simulated. The first type is the voltage leak in the driver of BLDC motor, the second type is the phrase fault in the BLDC motor. The BLDC motor speed control system is simulated by MATLAB Simulink.In the industrial environment, some factors may lead to short circuit after the using of motor for a long time. So the voltage leak may happen in the driver circuit of BLDC motor. In this simulation, the fault happens at 10s, the sample rate is 400Hz. 8000 samples are in the simulation, the simulation results are illustrated in Figs. 8–10.From Fig. 8, the curve vibrates in a small scale, and no obvious features of fault are in the curve. However, there are some variations in the detail signal. After the detail signal is extracted from the fault signal, the sample rate become half of the sample rate of the fault signal, that is 200Hz. Therefore, the variation in the detail signal is at 10s when the fault happens. The detection result from the detail signal is illustrated in Fig. 10, where a the alarm curve is shown. In the alarm curve, value 1 represent a fault happen and value 0 denote that the system in normal, the first alarm is at 11s which is very close to the time of fault happening. And plenty of alarms emerge after the first alarm has arisen. Hence, our method for dealing with the detection of voltage leak problem is effective.Sometimes, error in the detection of the phrase of the BLDC motor is existed, and the phrase error may depress the performance of the BLDC motor speed control system. Hence, another simulation is made to demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithm in dealing with the detection of phrase error in the BLDC motor. In this simulation the fault happens at 10s and the sample rate is 400Hz. The simulation results are illustrated in Figs. 11–13.As shown in Fig. 11, after the fault has occurred, the fault signal vibrates slightly, then the value of the signal increases, and an arc is emerged in the fault signal at 12.5s, which will lead to a fault alarm. While, contrast to the fault signal, the fault alarm from the detail signal is earlier as shown in Figs. 12 and 13. It is detected at 11s after the fault happens. However, there is a false alarm from the detail signal before 10s. Above all, the fault of phrase error can be detected effectively by this approach and the performance is satisfied.In this subsection, two mechanical faults are simulated respectively as the mechanical faults are very common in the industrial application. The first type is load error in the BLDC motor speed control system, and the second type is shake error in the rotor. The BLDC motor speed control system is simulated by MATLAB Simulink. In the fault diagnosis algorithm we set L=100 tβ=0.45.In this simulation, the sample rate is 50Hz, 1000 samples are generated from the BLDC motor speed control system. We assume that the fault happens at 10s, and the load changes rapidly which is result from some factors such as the variation of the fraction or the damage of the mechanical structure. The simulation results are illustrated in Figs. 14–16.From Fig. 14, it is obvious that a disturbance is on the fault signal curve when the fault happens, but the disturbance is very small until 12s. From Fig. 15, we can see the detail signal oscillated at 10s, and the scale of the oscillation enlarges with the time after the fault happens. Meanwhile, some pulses which represent the fault alarms are in Fig. 16. The algorithm detects the load fault after the fault happens, and four fault alarm pulses emerge after the first alarm has arisen. It demonstrates that this algorithm can detect the load error under such circumstance.Vibration in a rotating machine is troublesome, may be an omen of more serious problem. Low frequency vibrations often emit audible sounds. But the vibrations most associated with machinery problems are seldom in the audible range. Therefore, we cannot hear trouble coming. Vibration fault in the rotor decreases the efficiency of the motor. In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of this algorithm in detection of mechanic fault, a simulation is taken. In the simulation, the sample rate is 400Hz, and a periodic disturbance is added to the rotor to simulate the vibration fault in the BLDC motor speed control system. We set the fault happens at 10s, the parameter of the fault indicator is set as the previous Section 3.1. The simulation results are illustrated in Figs. 17–19.Because of some structure damage or crack in the rotator, dynamic character would be changed in the motor. According to Fig. 17, we can see some low frequency disturbances are in the fault signal curve, and the magnitude of those disturbances are very small, so that it is hard to be figured out. However, in this algorithm, the disturbances in the detail signal are amplified by using adaptive lifting scheme as Fig. 18 shows. It is obvious that, in the curve, the fluctuates are presented in a form of a period signal, and the fluctuate magnitude is much larger than that in the fault signal. From Fig. 19, the alarm is clear enough to indicate the fault happens. So the algorithm is effective in the detection of the vibration fault.In the application of industry, many faults are not explicit. And the faults are developed in a slow rate, so that many signal processing methods are unable to detect it. In the early stage of the fault, the output of the system deviates from the normal output slightly, then the deviation increased. We assume the state transfer function of the system is dx=f(x0,x,u), under the consideration of the incipient fault, the system state transfer function can be written asdx=f(x0,x,u)+faΩfa.where fa is the incipient fault factor. In mathematics, the incipient fault factor can be characterized by a factor which is multiplied on the fault term.(36)Ωfa(k−Ts)=0k<Ts1−e−r(k−Ts)k≥Tswhere r is the developing rate of the fault, and Tsis the time when the fault happens.Usually, error may be in the sensors. To demonstrate the effectiveness of this algorithm in detecting the incipient electrical fault, we assume that the incipient fault is in the phrase detection sensor. We set the Tsto be 10s, toc to be 0.1s, and the sample rate is 200Hz. The simulation results are shown in Figs. 20–23.From Fig. 21, we can see that the fault is detected at about 12.5s. The alarm curve in Fig. 21 is derived from the detail signal in Fig. 20. For comparison, another alarm curve is derived from the fault signal as Fig. 23 shows. In the incipient fault, as the fault is evolved in a slow rate, so the signal processing method such as lifting scheme can hardly detect the incipient fault at the beginning stage of the fault. By contrast, from the fault signal, the fault is detected at about 11s which is earlier than that from the detail signal. Above all, the employment of constant threshold method which is applied in the detection of the incipient fault from the fault signal combine with adaptive threshold method which is used to detect the abrupt fault from the detail signal is a solution in this situation.In the simulation of incipient fault of load error, the parameter set of Section 4.1 is used here, and the simulation results are illustrated in Figs. 24–27.The results are similar with the results in Section 4.1. It is obvious that the detection result of the fault from the fault signal is earlier than that from the detail signal. In Fig. 27, the fault is detected at 11.5s, by contrast, the fault is detected at 12.25s in Fig. 25. Therefore, the detection of fault from fault signal is crucial. However, in some situation such as vibration fault, the deviation is very small and changes fast, the detection of fault from detail signal is necessary. So the combination of signal processing method and the intelligence modeling method for the dynamic system is an effective way to solve the fault detection problem.In order to demonstrate the benefits of this fault diagnosis algorithm, three fault detection algorithms are illustrated in this part, and the three algorithms are employed to detect three types of fault. The first type is the fault of voltage leak in BLDC motor, the second type is the fault of phrase error in BLDC motor, the last type is the fault of vibration in the rotor of BLDC motor. The fault happens at 10s. In order to make comparison, a recurrent neural network [23] is used here to model the system and detect the fault from the fault signal. Meanwhile, another algorithm which use adaptive lifting scheme [22] to detect fault is also deployed here. The simulation period is 20s, and the parameter set in this simulation is the same as in Section 3. The simulation results are shown in Figs. 28–30.From Fig. 28, we can see that all three algorithms have detected the fault of voltage leak in BLDC motor. The RNN scheme raises false alarm at about 8.2s. While, the adaptive lifting scheme detects the fault at about 17.5s, which is too late for the fault detection. By contrast, the LRGFNN-Lifting Scheme detects the fault at 11s, it is earlier than the adaptive lifting scheme and more accurate than the RNN scheme.In the experiment of the phrase error fault, LRGFNN-lifting scheme and RNN scheme detect the fault at 10s respectively. However, some false alarms are raised before 10s, the RNN scheme raises the false alarm at about 5.5s. While, the adaptive lifting scheme works well in this fault detection, it detects the fault at 11.5s, and then a alarm is raised by LRGFNN-lifting scheme.In the simulation for the rotor vibration fault, the first alarm is raised by RNN scheme at about 8s, but this is a false alarm. The LRGFNN-lifting scheme alarm at 10.5s, then an alarm is raised by adaptive lifting scheme. Obviously, The performances of the LRGFNN-lifting scheme and adaptive lifting scheme are better than RNN scheme, because the feature of the vibration fault in the signal is easy to be figured out by the signal processing method.Above all, in the three types of fault detection, the LRGFNN-lifting scheme performs better than other two algorithms under this situation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
