@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing the visual quality of sanitary ware by fuzzy logic

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An example of fuzzy logic application is studied first in the field of product auditing.This paper gives a unique application of visual quality assessment of vitreous china ceramic sanitary wares by using fuzzy logic method.The fuzzy model developed in the study was quite satisfactory to make a clear quality distinction among the product lots.It performed better than the ongoing approach with respect to the measurements of coefficient of variation and confidence level.Besides finished products, the method can be used for visual quality assessment of parts, subassemblies, and materials as well.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quality control,Product audit,Visual inspection,Quality assessment,Fuzzy logic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Quality control systems focus on maintaining standards in manufactured products. To improve the homogeneity of batches received by final users and to detect manufacturing defaults, a visual control stage is integrated into production line before the packing operation. At this stage, the products are inspected, mostly by human eye, for their obvious external defects; e.g., chips, cracks, scratches, holes and pitting, lumps, spots, notches, and glazing. This task is often referred to as visual inspection which is important to categorize the final products into quality-constant batches. Prototypes are of invaluable help while inspecting the visual attributes of products. Visual quality of products is assessed with respect to these standard units and some quality ratings are made there on the results. However, assessing visual quality is somewhat an ambiguous and troublesome work. Therefore, it will be helpful to utilize a decision making technique, such as fuzzy logic, to facilitate and improve the process. This paper addresses first to the significance of visual inspection and assessment of visual quality of industrial products, and second, gives a unique application of visual quality assessment of vitreous china ceramic sanitary wares by using fuzzy logic method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In today's market, quality is a minimal requirement to staying in business. Customers have no tolerance for products that are built outside of specifications. In efforts to maintain a highly satisfied customer base, manufacturers are implementing systems that ensure products of highest quality. As recognized by well accredited international institutions, standards and regulations on the quality of products have imposed more accurate controls on final products and on all phases of production [24].The product audit is one of the oldest methods, which gives a statement on the quality of products prior to their delivery to the customer. It assesses the effectiveness of quality assurance through the examination of a small number of products and/confirms the quality capability of the production process based on the quality of these products. Thereby, it is verified whether the product complies with the given specifications and/or special customer/supplier agreements. The results of product audit appear in the form of the presence or absence of defects, failures, etc. A continuing score or “rating” of quality is then prepared based on the audit results.Many manufacturers utilize a quality rating system for their products. This rating system can give the customers a gauge for products’ quality and also a better understanding of reasons for product cost. This is very important when comparing similar products from various sources. There is not a standard rating system in place and the manufacturer typically determines what qualifies a product for each level. Some of the differences between ratings involve levels of material and esthetic (appearance) qualities, life of the product, number of uses, thickness of coatings/finishes, and quality of components. Many times the manufacturer can mix components from different grades to match the requirements of the market, consumer, or grade [4].Looking at the number of functions a product is expected to fulfill, it is possible to discern a varying amount of sub-qualities which can be divided into functional and psychological qualities. The functional qualities consist of properties of the material, workmanship and of the technical and economic nature. These are called the “objective” characteristics of the product. The psychological qualities, such as beauty, sportsmanship, prestige, are formed by the symbolic meaning the consumer associates with the product. These are “subjective” characteristics [6], and the subjective characteristics play a considerable role in the perception of visual quality of the product. This is true for ceramic products too.Some of the manufacturing companies develop their own quality rating systems. Vitrified ceramic product manufacturers, for example in Turkey, use a quality grading system which designates distinct visual qualities for acceptable quality products as extra, first class, second class, and ordinary. Visual quality levels of these products substantially dominate the overall product quality levels. Of course, these different quality levels correspond to different prices in the market. This necessitates making quality rating decisions as correct as possible. Whereas, due to the subjective characteristic of visual attributes, distinguishing the visual quality levels of the products by precise (classical) reasoning may lead to incorrect separation of product quality. To avoid this, the fuzzy logic using approximate reasoning will be useful when applied properly.Product audit programs often make use of seriousness classification of defects. Defects are classified in terms such as critical, major, minor A, minor B, each with some “weight” in the form of demerits [15], or in some other format such as functional, dimensional, and visual (esthetic). Functional and dimensional defects of products are of variable type and can be detected by laboratory tests and technical measurements. Visual defects of products, however, are of attribute type and can be detected mostly by human eye and interpreted linguistically. Therefore, functional and dimensional quality characteristics are easier to assess when compared to visual quality characteristic of a product.Assessing visual quality is somewhat an ambiguous and troublesome work. Determination of defects varies depending on the inspectors’ knowledge and experience, which results in a large variance and inconsistency in defect reporting. Visual inspectors normally do their product quality classifications using two-valued logic (the product is either separated to any one of the quality classes or not). In-between cases are not principally taken into account. They are implicitly resolved in favor of the nearest category. This practice leads to negative concerns and lack of accuracy in the classification of product quality. That is why, it would be helpful to utilize fuzzy logic to facilitate and improve the process. Fuzzy logic could be used during the product auditing process in order to include (assess) in-between cases into the quality classification of products in a correct manner. It could offer a more realistic framework for human reasoning than the traditional two-valued logic. This was the motivation behind this paper. The purpose is to demonstrate how to utilize the fuzzy logic method in visual quality assessment of an industrial product, uniquely for the case of ceramic sanitary ware production.In the subsequent sections, visual quality inspection is emphasized thoroughly along with a short introduction to fuzzy logic concept, and an original application of visual quality assessment of vitreous china ceramic sanitary wares by fuzzy logic method is explained.Visual quality is the degree to which the visual attributes of a product join together to form a coherent, harmonious level of quality. Visual quality is inherently subjective; therefore objective evaluations are used to quantify the visual assessment of any product quality. Rapid prototypes are of invaluable help in testing the visual (esthetic) attributes of a product during its development cycle.Lots of criteria are used to perform the operative assessment of the visual quality of an industrial product. Depending on the type of the product, physical/external defects (corrosion, burrs, handling damage, cracks, scratches, etc.), chemical/surface appearance defects (opaqueness, roughness, spots, etc.), and plating/coating heterogeneity (poor/insufficient plating – if plating applied) are checked in visual quality assessments.Visual inspection is to identify non-conformity on a surface of an object, in particular assess one or more quantitative or qualitative parameters on a surface. Advantageously, the assessment comprises the determination of at least one parameter and evaluation of this parameter against a pre-determined standard. Many humans are engaged in visual inspection tasks but due to factors such as tiredness and boredom, their performance is often less than satisfactory and sometimes inconsistent. Inspection of surface defects by human eye is quite difficult because wrong judgments are easily made due to human subjectivity and eye fatigues. In some cases, human inspection is not even possible when the part to be inspected is very small or the production rates are very high. Therefore, automated inspection is required and it is inherently more reliable than human inspection. As a result of upgraded and more automated technology, manufacturing processes increasingly use automation to reduce labor requirements and costs, reduce factitious error and raise production capacity. Surface defects of modern frangible or small products can be identified using automated inspection technology [35,37]. Automated system determines the properties of products using visual information and is most often automated by employing machine vision techniques [31].Automated visual inspection (AVI) is the automation of the quality control of manufactured products, normally achieved using a camera connected to a computer. AVI system involves the construction of explicit and meaningful descriptions of physical objects based on images. The technology aims to duplicate human vision by electronically perceiving and understanding an image [27]. AVI techniques for defects principally fall into two categories. Approaches of the first category try to detect defects by comparing the testing image with a pre-stored faultless item through a pixel-to-pixel or template-to-template matching process. Approaches of the second category, however, select and compute a set of textural features in a sub-image, and then compare the feature values with those of the faultless image to find significant differences [8]. Both approaches have their own disadvantages [40,41,38,39].Visual inspection technologies have successful application fields ranging from the electronics devices inspection to the power plants monitoring, from the modern industrial products inspection to the fruits and vegetable classification. With recent advances in computer technology, modern manufacturers have turned their attention to machine-vision inspection systems, and these modern devices now inspect metal products, textile fabrics, nuclear power fuel elements, trash separation processes, and coal, etc., even while these products are on conveyors. To meet with these wide fields of applications, many progresses (wide dynamic range TV cameras, sophisticated optical-electronical large scale integration to get 3-D shapes of components, new kinds of image processing systems, new software technologies, etc.) have been introduced into the practical visual inspection technologies [17].A visual inspection task typically consists of visual search and decision making functions which are essentially cognitive activities and have been shown to be the most important determinants of inspection performance [22]. If inspection is to be successful, it is critical that these functions be performed effectively and efficiently. For this purpose, automated inspection is considered the solution to remove any possible errors from the system. Designers have automated the functions of the inspection task but have overlooked the innate abilities of humans. In spite of the advantages of automation, these inspection systems often fail to meet expectations primarily for the reason that they ignore humans’ ability in pattern recognition, as rational decision makers and their flexibility to adapt to new situations. Jiang et al. [22] described a system that facilitates the conducting of controlled studies to address issues related to human machine system design and function allocation in visual inspection. It is known that humans are intelligent and flexible to adapt to changing situations, and at least for simple tasks, they behave as rational decision makers who take into account probabilities and cost/value structure. Moreover, human information processing is automated and quick. Humans are good at detecting signals in noise and can make inductive decisions in new situations. However, they are limited in computational ability and short-term memory. On the other side, computers are good at computation, memory storage and retrieving, but are poor at detecting signals in noise and have very little capacity for creative or inductive functions. Therefore, neither an entirely human nor a purely automated system may fully achieve the desired performance in an inspection task. Given this situation, it is logical to explore the potential benefits of the pairing of human and machine-vision inspectors. It is possible to achieve superior performance by a system in which certain machine characteristics are dependent on tasks humans are better at executing [22]. The machine vision system is used to inspect a large number of products rapidly. The human inspector can then perform slower but more detailed inspection on objects that the machine vision system considers to be borderline cases.It is seen that when we compare human inspection with automated inspection using machine vision, machine vision generally comes out on top in reliability and repeatability. People win at tolerating variations in what constitutes a good or a bad image. Until now, there has not been any machine vision system that could replace human completely. However, there have been systems which were quite good approximation of them, and could be good enough to do the job with more or less success. Most manufacturers choose between the techniques by translating those specific advantages into economic terms. Depending on the case, human inspection may still be favorable against automated inspection, as was in the ceramic sanitary ware industry, or they may be used conjunctively.Even with precisely defined visual quality standards, a certain degree of subjective judgment by the person making the inspection is unavoidable. It will therefore be beneficial to use a tool/prototype that minimize the subjectivity of the judgment.To meet consumer expectation, products should possess trustworthy appearance properties; maintaining sufficient color uniformity, unevenness, and assuring the reproducibility of precision. Several measurement equipments and approaches have been utilized for non-uniformity defects. Jiang et al. [23] used luminance measurement equipment to collect data of non-uniformity defects on LCD panels and applied analysis of variance and exponentially weighted moving average techniques to develop an automatic inspection procedure. Lu and Tsai [26] proposed a global approach for AVI of micro defects (pinholes, scratches, particles and fingerprints) on TFT panel surfaces using the Singular Value Decomposition. Lin utilized discrete cosine transform decomposition and cumulative sum techniques to inspect tiny surface defect of electronic passive components. Chiu and Lin [8] suggested a global approach for AVI of tiny surface defects in surface barrier layer chips, whose random surface texture contains no repetitions of basic texture primitives. Bračun et al. [7] demonstrated identification of the typical surface defects on the transmission belts using laser profilometry. In their research, Kung et al. [21] combined the artificial neural network perceptrons and structure similarity characteristics to create different types of images. Moorthy and Bovik [30] discussed their vision for the future of visual quality assessment research.Regarding the ceramic industry there are two main groups of methods developed in the literature for machine vision based ceramic tile quality inspection systems. These are reference product comparison methods and self-learning methods [18]. Referenced product comparison methods are based on comparison of the reference ceramic product with the analyzed one. This is often used where the texture is the same on every tile. Other methods do not regard the reference product and are based on learning algorithms and tile feature analysis. Digital image processing is done by computers automatically without or with little human intervention. One of the most important operations on digital image is to identify and classify various kinds of defects. To detect the defects from any image some methods were established and placed at different levels [33].In the previous years, some defect detection methods have been proposed to find out the image defects on ceramic tiles. Those of prominent ones can be described briefly as follows: Gonzales et al. [14] developed an accurate automatic system to inspect and classify ceramic tiles according to the integrity defects at the tile corners. In order to do this a general segmentation methodology and a geometric classifier has been developed. In their study, Elbehiery et al. [11] dealt with the visual inspection of ceramic tiles’ surfaces for the purpose of detecting flaws using a wavelet approach and introduced a hierarchical wavelet-based (wave-like oscillation-based) framework for modeling patterns in digital images. Hocenski et al. [18] presented a method for failure detection in ceramic tile production using computer visual diagnostic. They used Canny edge detector to detect edges and faults on ceramic tiles. Boukouvalas et al. [5] concerned about the problem of automatic inspection of ceramic tiles using computer vision. They applied techniques for pinhole and crack detectors for plane tiles based on a set of separable line filters. Rahaman and Hossain [33] proposed an efficient defect detection and classification technique which is able to find out image defects at a high rate within a very short time. Ahmadyfard et al. [2] developed a novel approach for detecting defects of random textured tiles using Gabor wavelet.To the best of our knowledge, machine vision-based quality inspection systems have not been used in sanitary ware production. Final inspection of finished sanitary ware products have been performed only by inspectors using their inspection criteria that require full visual and an occasional physical touch by hands to determine the quality of finish. These products are large and heavy and require full concentration of the inspector(s) to evaluate their condition. This process is slow due to the high data collection requirements. Voice inspection systems (VIS) have been integrated to this stage. Before voice, the data from inspection was not available real-time or sometimes even the same day due to data entry requirements. Keypunch data entry added delays and keypunch errors to the data entry process. VIS improves the inspection process, allowing the inspector to focus, eyes and hands, on the product being inspected.Using voice, the inspector(s) wearing a headset(s) and portable data collection terminal(s) “speaks-in” the inspection data into VIS. This allows them to more accurately and completely inspect the products while freeing the keyboard resources currently used to enter the same data in the computer. Additionally, the data will be immediately available for others to review and take actions.In this paper, the fuzzy logic is first to be used in product auditing. Based on the demeriting concept, sanitary ware products are qualified through visual assessment by human inspectors using fuzzy logic approach in decision making.Fuzzy logic is a form of multi-valued logic derived from fuzzy set theory to deal with reasoning that is approximate rather than precise. The fuzzy logic variables may have a membership value of not only 0 or 1, but a value inclusively between 0 and 1. In fuzzy logic the degree of truth of a statement can range between 0 and 1 and is not constrained to the two truth values {true (1), false (0)} as in classic propositional logic [19]. Thus, the fuzzy logic provides a basis for approximate reasoning, that is, a mode of reasoning which is not exact nor very inexact. It offers a more realistic framework for human reasoning than the traditional two-valued logic.The term “fuzzy logic” emerged as a consequence of the development of the theory of fuzzy sets by Lotfi Zadeh. In 1965, Zadeh proposed fuzzy set theory [42], and later established fuzzy logic based on fuzzy sets. The process of fuzzy logic is given in Fig. 1.Fuzzy logic has an algorithm that is described in the following steps [1]:1.Define the linguistic variables and terms (initialization).Construct the membership functions (initialization).Construct the rule base (initialization).Convert crisp input data to fuzzy values using the membership functions (fuzzification).Evaluate the rules in the rule base (inference).Combine the results of each rule (inference).Convert the output data to non-fuzzy values (defuzzification).Linguistic variables are the input or output variables of the system whose values are words or sentences from a natural language, instead of numerical values. A linguistic variable is generally decomposed into a set of linguistic terms.Membership functions are used in the fuzzification and defuzzification steps of a fuzzy logic system (FLS), to map the non-fuzzy input values to fuzzy linguistic terms and vice versa. A membership function is used to quantify a linguistic term. There are different forms of membership functions such as triangular, trapezoidal, piecewise linear, Gaussian, or singleton.Fuzzy logic concept can be expressed mathematically as follows. Let X be a nonempty set. A fuzzy set A in X is characterized by its membership function μA: X→[0, 1] and μA(x) is interpreted as the degree of membership of element x in fuzzy set A for each x∈X. It is clear that A is completely determined by the set of tuples A=((u, μA(u))/u∈X). Frequently A(x) is used instead of μA(x). The family of all fuzzy sets in X is denoted by F(X).If X=(x1, …, xn) is a finite set and A is a fuzzy set in X then the following notation is often used.(1)A=μ1x1+⋯+μnxn.where the term μi/xi, i=1, …, n signifies that μiis the grade of membership of xiin A and the plus sign represents the union.From among various membership functions the triangular one is to be exemplified below.A fuzzy set A is called triangular fuzzy number with peak (or center) a, left width α>0 and right width β>0 if its membership function has the following(2)A(t)=1−(a−t)/αifa−α≤t≤a1−(t−a)/βifa≤t≤a+β0otherwiseand we use the notation A=(a, α, β). A triangular fuzzy membership function is depicted in Fig. 2.A triangular fuzzy number with center a may be seen as a fuzzy quantity “x is approximately equal to a”.In a FLS, a rule base is constructed to control the output variable. A fuzzy rule is a simple IF–THEN rule with a condition and a conclusion. After evaluating the result of each rule, these results should be combined to obtain a final result. This process is called (fuzzy) inference. The results of individual rules can be combined in different ways (maximum, bounded sum, normalized sum). Depending on the form of the consequent, two main types of rule-based fuzzy models are distinguished [3]:1.Mamdani linguistic fuzzy model: Both the antecedent and the consequent are fuzzy propositions.Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy model: The antecedent is a fuzzy proposition; the consequent is a crisp function.The most commonly used fuzzy inference technique is the so-called Mamdani method [28].After the inference step, the overall result is a fuzzy value. This result should be defuzzified to obtain a final crisp output. This is the purpose of the defuzzifier component of a FLS. Defuzzification is performed according to the membership function of the output variable. There are different algorithms for defuzzification as well. These are center of gravity, center of gravity for singletons, center of area, left most maximum, and right most maximum (see [29,43]). Among these algorithms the most popular one is the center of gravity (centroid) technique. It finds the point where a vertical line would slice the aggregate set into two equal masses. Mathematically this center of gravity (COG) can be expressed as:(3)COG=∫abμA(X)xdx∫abμA(X)dxCentroid defuzzification method finds a point representing the center of gravity of the fuzzy set, A, on the interval, ab.Fuzzy logic has been applied to diverse fields, from control theory to artificial intelligence. It has a wide range of application areas. However, the number of applications in quality control is limited. Regarding the fuzzy logic applications in quality control, some exemplary studies can be given here. There have been applications in statistical process control [34,44,12,9,36,16], in sampling [13], in QFD [25]. It has been also used for quality-team formation [10]. Perrot et al. [32] gave a review about fuzzy logic application for food quality control. Without going further on fuzzy logic method at this stage, the reader is supposed to have a basic understanding thereon. For further reading see [20] and [43].To the best of our knowledge, no research has been conducted for its application in product auditing in general, and specifically for visual inspection. Therefore, this study is the first one on this issue. In the proposed approach, a fuzzy rule base is used to rank the visual quality attributes of the sanitary ware products. The approach then extends the analysis to the quality assessment of the products using defuzzified linguistic terms.Serel Ceramic Company is one of the Turkey's leading manufacturing companies famous with its high quality vitreous china sanitary ware products (wash basin, pedestal wash basin, water closet, urinal, bidet, squatting pan WC, shower tray, kitchen sink, and bathroom accessories). To meet a variety of consumers’ needs, sanitary wares come in a wide range of styles. Most of the products are glazed in different colors.The production process of sanitary ware includes milling and slip preparation section, casting section, green ware section, glazing section, kiln section, and final inspection and packing section. The shape and the color of the ceramic products affect the manufacturing process. The finished sanitary wares are sorted in prescribed grades and checked for any damages before packing. Today, in the plant, almost all production stages are more or less automated.The final inspection stage in the production chain involves the activities of final product quality control and classification. This stage includes visual inspection of sanitary ware surface defects for integrity in chromatic abnormality, edge and corner defects, cracks and scratches presence, dot shaped and blob defects, glazing defects and printed texture anomaly. This stage is still least automated in the whole production chain. Human resources are used here because of the complexity of the quality control process, and the demand for changeability in quality classification during the production.Final product audits are applied for each lot ready to deliver, during which overall visual inspections are carried out by humans.Surface defects in the ceramic wares are viewed as in-homogeneities in regularity and orientation fields. To improve the homogeneity of batches received by final users and to detect manufacturing defaults, the company has integrated into the production line a visual control stage before the packing operation. It is an important stage to categorize the ceramic wares after production based on surface defects. The goal of the inspection is not to give a statistical analysis of the production, but to classify every product into quality-constant batches. These tasks are referred to as visual inspection where several visually identifiable failures on product are tried to be distinguished and evaluated regarding the exemplary specimens.After coming out of the kiln, the finished ware is inspected. The inspector records a number of parameters, including the model (plate) number, the date the piece was cast, the person who cast, sprayed and finished the piece, and the final grade evaluation (good, scrap or rework).Vitreous china sanitary ware surface failures can be of structural or external type. Structural types of failures mainly refer to the material of the product and cover the defects of cracks, flaws, chips, scratches, and deformity. External type of failures can be divided into two parts. Those related with the glazing operation (such as glaze flow, unglazed region, blob, and blur) and the other surface defects (such as spots/blemishes, holes/pitting, pinholes, and blisters). Among these defect types, the spotted defects are quite widespread, and can be defined as relatively high contrasted groups of pixels against to intensity of their surroundings. This kind of defects appear during ceramic ware baking process (dark spots), irregularity during casting (lumped piles, bumps), or because of dust presence on product surface during its glazing (light or dark spots). The most common defect types are defined shortly below.CrackBreak down of the corner, edge, or any part of the wareScratchGenerally scratch on surfaceChipsIrregularity on edges and cornersPinholeScattered isolated black–white pinpoint spotBlobWater drop spot on ware surfaceSpotDiscontinuity of color on surface, kiln/firing/baking spots/blemishesGlazeBlurred surface on ware, glaze flow, unglazed regionHoles/pittingSlight/small lumps and notches on the surfaceDeformityIrregular shape of any part of the ware, especially around holes and edgesExemplary prototypes with distinct defect magnitudes corresponding to different quality levels are used during visual inspections in the factory. Visual quality of products is assessed by the inspectors with respect to these standard units and some quality ratings (superior quality, first quality, second quality, third quality, and scrap) are made there on the results. Visual inspectors rate each defect as low or average quality and give demerit points of −1 for each of the low quality level defects and −0.5 for each of the average quality level defects, and then, sum up all these points and assess the visual quality level of the product with respect to the following demerit classification: from 0 up to −5 points→super quality; from −5.5. up to −10 points→first quality; from −10.5 up to −15 points→second quality; from −15.5 up to −20 points→third quality; and for ≤−20.5 points→scrap. Classical reasoning is used during assessments, and the inspectors’ skills and experiences have a direct impact on the quality classification of the products. Time by time, inconsistencies occur in decision making which leads to the search for improvements in assessment process. Accuracy in quality ratings is very important because different prices are imposed by the company for the distinct quality products in the market.The standard operation process for visual inspection and rating scale of the sanitary ware is given below.1.Take a unit of ceramic product from the final stage of operation process.By thoroughly handling the product, visually inspect it according to the quality attributes, defects and rating standard.Classify the defects with respect to their sizes as low, medium, and high.Give demerit points (−1) for each of the low size of defects and (−0.5) for each of the medium size of defects.Enter the total demerit points as to each attribute/defect group.Find the corresponding composite score.Determine the quality level of the product/lot according to the composite score.Inspectors fill in a standard form during the visual inspection process (Fig. 3). This form involves sufficient places to record in and also the instructions necessary to guide inspectors during the process.In the next section, as an improvement to current quality assessment method, visual quality of a selected product (ceramic bidet) is to be assessed as an experiment by using fuzzy logic method.While visually inspecting the ceramic products, it is very difficult to take into account all of the above defects one by one and make a decision thereabout. To simplify the quality assessment process, it was decided to classify the foregoing defects as in the following way.Surface defects: Spots/blemishes, holes/pitting, and pinholes.Glazing defects: Glaze flow, unglazed region, blob, and blur.Material defects: Crack, scratch, chip, and deformity.The severity of these three groups of visual defects was identified with respect to their positioning on the product and their magnitude as well. Surface and glazing defects were classified as to their size (cm2) while materialistic defects were classified as to their size (cm2) and length (cm). Thus, low, medium, and high quality product classes were determined and their exemplary specimens were prepared to be used during the visual inspection.The three criteria used in the factory to perform the operative appraisal of the visual (esthetic) quality of the products were those attributes of surface, glazing, and material. Expert evaluation based on these three criteria has been proven to be good predictors of visual quality which consisted of the average performance of these three criteria. Each of the three criteria is assumed to be independent and is intended to evaluate one aspect of visual quality as defined before.The experimental analysis has been performed on five sets of ceramic bidets, different in size and surface morphology. The fuzzy logic method was applied on the data retrieved from random sampling results of 50 bidets taken from 5 different lots (10 units from each lot) produced in the 48th week of the year 2010. Sampled units were assessed by visual inspectors as low, medium, and high quality with respect to the associated quality attributes of surface, glazing, and material. The results of sampling inspection are given in Table 1.Matlab 6.5 software was used in the study to analyze visual inspection results by fuzzy logic method. Triangular membership functions were employed for the fuzzy subsets. The Mamdani fuzzy rules relating the input variables to the output variable were created. The rating scale for input variables (surface, glazing, and material) was three-level as of high (10), medium (5), and low (0). The rating scale for output variable (quality) was, however, five-level as of super quality (10), first quality (7), second quality (5), third quality (3), and scrap (0). The model was run based on the 27 decision rules created during the application (Appendix 1). The fuzzy logic model, the membership function of input variables, and the membership function of output variable are displayed in Figs. 4–6.The surface, glazing and material values (weights) of the failures were identified with the help of expert opinions and by using a database of 27 decision rules (see Appendix) determined specifically. The rules were designed to take into account all possible situations. The membership function was also viewed as an expert's opinion. Mamdani min/max method of inference mechanism (input method: min; aggregate method: max) was used and the results were defuzzified by center of gravity method.Visual quality assessments were derived from the analysis and consequently visual quality levels of the lots were determined (Table 2). The results are discussed below.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
