@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Carefully choose your (payment) partner: How payment provider reputation influences m-commerce transactions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigated the impact of online vendor and mobile payment provider reputation.Consumers attribute distinct trusting beliefs towards both market players.Reputable vendors do not benefit from embedding reputable mobile payment providers.Less reputable vendors benefit from embedding reputable mobile payment providers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile payment provider,Online vendor,M-commerce,Reputation,Transaction intention,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to the fragmentation of the mobile payment market, vendors have a plurality of mobile payment providers they can choose to execute payment processes in the mobile versions of their shops. Besides differences in transaction fees, mobile payment providers can also differ in respect of their reputation. However, it remains unclear how the reputation of mobile payment providers and online vendors interact and affect consumers’ risk perception and transaction intention. Therefore, our study analyses different combinations of mobile payment provider and online vendor reputations and finds that consumers attribute distinct trusting beliefs towards these two types of market players and that these substantially affect consumers’ intentions to transact. While online vendors with low reputation can profit from embedding reputable mobile payment providers, reputable online vendors do not increase transaction likelihood by integrating reputable mobile payment providers compared with less reputable payment providers. For research, the results provide a novel understanding of the interaction of two market players in the m-commerce value chain subject to varying degrees of reputation. For online vendors, our results give direct guidance in the process of selecting external payment entities to establish consumer trust and facilitate transactions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Given the increasing use of mobile devices and consumers’ needs for convenient payment methods, mobile payment is becoming an important channel for payments on the Internet (Au and Kauffman 2008, Slade et al. 2013). Although most online shops nowadays offer mobile versions of their websites, abandonment rates at the checkout are about 85 percent for mobile consumers and 70 percent for “desktop” users (eMarketer 2015). Although both rates are undesirably high for online vendors, the higher abandonment rate for mobile transactions might be caused by the circumstance that a part of an m-commerce transaction is handled by a third-party when online vendors use an external mobile payment provider to fulfil the transaction. Consequently, consumers have to rely on two different parties to complete the transaction: the online vendor and the mobile payment provider.The impact of third-parties has received considerable attention in the IS literature and in e-commerce, but usually focusing on trusted third-parties, such as BuySafe, that evaluate online vendors and serve as a signal for their trustworthiness (Clemons 2007, Kim and Kim 2011). In addition, prior research has examined the influence of affiliated trusted entities, such as the Yahoo portal, on the trustworthiness of online vendors (Lim et al. 2006, Stewart 2006). Trusted third-parties are used as a signal to increase trust in an online vendor and can be particularly helpful for online vendors without a strong reputation. The difference in m-commerce is, however, that many mobile payment providers are relatively small startups with a non-established reputation and thus their reputation might be less established than that of the online vendor. As a result, instead of an external positive signal, the less reputable mobile payment provider might even have a negative effect on consumers’ perceived risk and their transaction intentions. On the other hand, less reputable mobile payment providers might offer lower transaction fees to online vendors than players with a higher reputation. Hence, given this potential trade-off, it has yet to be understood how different combinations of online vendor and mobile payment providers with varying degrees of reputation interact and what the effects on consumers are.Our review of the extant literature indicates that no former studies in IS research have quantitatively assessed these types of interactions between different market players that jointly process a transaction. Therefore, empirical evidence is essential, since online vendors with different levels of reputation might be able to pursue different strategies when embedding external payment providers at the checkout. For example, less reputable online vendors could embed reputable mobile payment providers on their websites to provide additional confidence for consumers at the checkout (Chandra et al. 2010, Mallat 2007), whereas reputable online vendors might not profit from reputable (and potentially more expensive) mobile payment providers. Hence, they could choose to integrate less established mobile payment providers to save on transaction fees. These scenarios illustrate how important it is to understand the interactions between the reputations of online vendors and payment providers from consumer’s point of view. It is therefore not sufficient to focus solely on the online vendor’s reputation in m-commerce. Instead, we expect that the reputation of mobile payment providers and online vendors jointly affect consumers’ behavior. Hence, we pose the following research question:-What effect do the reputations of online vendors and payment providers have on consumers’ perceived risk and transaction likelihood?Given that relatively new and less reputable online vendors encounter considerable difficulties in persuading consumers to engage in online transactions, we account for individual differences and incorporate – in line with previous research – the role of consumers’ disposition to trust (Grabner-Kräuter and Kaluscha 2003). Disposition to trust is especially relevant for initial trust building. Accordingly we analyze whether relatively unknown vendors compared with reputable vendors may be able to overcome these difficulties in order to attract consumers by persuading especially trusting consumers through reputable mobile payment providers to perceive less risk in the transaction and to engage in a transaction. An understanding of how to increase m-commerce transactions by decreasing risk perceptions both fills an important research gap, and provides practitioners with valuable insights into the selection of external partners.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: The next section outlines the theoretical background of this study. Following this, we present our hypotheses. We then describe the research method, after which we report and discuss our results. Finally, we outline theoretical and practical implications, the limitations of this research, and directions for future research.Mobile payment refers to payments for products, services, and bills via mobile devices using wireless or other communication technologies (Au and Kauffman 2008, Dahlberg et al. 2008). Mobile payment applications can be classified into two types: proximity payment and remote payment (Chandra et al. 2010). Proximity payment means that consumers conduct payment transactions while the mobile device communicates through technologies such as near field communication with the vendors’ contactless payment-capable point-of-sale terminals. Remote payment means that consumers can conduct transactions independent of their location. Examples include mobile banking and mobile internet payment services.We focus on remote payment and view perceived risk in the transaction as consumers’ fear that the transaction partner behave opportunistically (transaction-specific uncertainty). In the case of m-commerce transactions, this can be the online vendor and mobile payment provider. Following Grabner-Kräuter and Kaluscha (2003), this study distinguishes transaction-specific risk from the risk associated with the underlying technological infrastructure (system-dependent uncertainty), which refers to security or privacy concerns associated with the mobile Internet connection (Li and Yeh 2010, Lu et al. 2011). Specifically, Zhou (2013) states that, compared to offline and online payment, mobile payment may also involve greater uncertainty and risk because of vulnerable mobile networks. In addition, users’ experiences may be negatively affected due to the constraints of mobile devices such as small screens and inconvenient input options. Therefore, risk assessment and trust building are important factors, when consumers conduct mobile transactions (Chandra et al. 2010, Zhou 2013).Previous research has predominantly focused on trust in a dyadic relationship between consumers and specific online vendors. Trust in a dyadic sense has been described as the belief that the online vendor behaves in accordance with the consumer’s expectations (Jarvenpaa et al. 2000, Mayer et al. 1995). Pavlou and Gefen (2004) expanded this view by examining trust in online vendors as a group. In m-commerce, however, the consumer has to deal not only with the online vendor, but also with the payment provider. As shown in Fig. 1, consumers are the trustors and both the online vendors and mobile payment providers are the trustees (Mayer et al. 1995). Consumers order products and services at the online vendor and provide personal information such as financial data to the mobile payment provider. Accordingly, the payment provider as additional transaction partner might also influence consumer perceptions and behavior. We do not intend to discount the importance of dyadic trust, when a consumer visits a website, but we believe that the nature of m-commerce makes this triadic relationship deserving of attention, especially when the consumer enters the checkout process. Therefore, this paper deals with online vendor reputation and payment provider reputation, as opposed to taking into account only the online vendor’s reputation.The previous literature has identified several factors that consumers use to assess the relative trustworthiness of different online vendors, including reputation (Jarvenpaa et al. 2000), online vendor guarantees and promises (Clemons et al. 2013), a trusted third-party’s evaluation (Clemons 2007, Utz et al. 2012), an associated physical store (Lee et al. 2007), online ratings and online testimonials (Pavlou and Gefen 2004) and website design (Li and Yeh 2010). Pavlou and Gefen (2004) note that reputation as a key antecedent of a company’s trustworthiness may be more effective than perceptions of legally binding structures, such as guarantees, to boost the trust of consumers and facilitate transactions. Reputation is a valuable asset and companies need to invest resources and make sustained, long-term efforts to build reputation successfully (Jarvenpaa et al. 2000). These companies are expected to be reluctant to put their reputational assets at risk by exploiting the consumer’s vulnerabilities for short-term gains (Chiles and McMackin 1996, De Ruyter et al. 2001, Smith and Barclay 1997). In general, online vendors might strive to increase their own reputation by themselves, but they might also cooperate with third-parties.We propose that the positive impact of reputation should also apply to mobile payment providers. To our knowledge, no previous study has directly measured trusting beliefs in the mobile payment provider based on different reputation levels. Exploratory results suggest that consumers are more willing to conduct payments with trustworthy transaction parties and perceive established financial institutions and telecom operators as reliable mobile payment providers (Mallat 2007). Specifically, reliable and well-established mobile payment providers are better appreciated and trusted than unestablished and smaller mobile payment providers. In the present study, we consider the reputation of the mobile payment provider, in addition to the online vendor’s reputation, and compare reputable mobile payment providers with unknown mobile payment providers. We expect that the payment provider’s reputation may also influence consumers’ perceived risks in the transaction and transaction likelihood.Perceived risk is defined as consumers’ perception about the uncertain negative consequences of a transaction (Kim et al. 2008, Koufaris and Hampton-Sosa 2004). Research supports that perceived risk has a negative influence on transaction intentions (Jarvenpaa et al. 2000, Pavlou 2003). Transaction-specific risk is triggered by the behavior of actors who are involved in the transaction. The difficulty in identifying and authenticating online vendors or payment providers on the Internet makes it easy to conduct fraudulent activities. In fact, research shows that consumers are more concerned about privacy and security issues associated with disclosing their personal and payment information, than about costs and convenience (Jiang et al. 2008). Furthermore, the purchased product or service could be of low quality and the online vendor might refuse to replace it. Therefore, consumers’ perceived risks involved in transacting with the payment provider embedded at the online vendor negatively affect consumers’ decisions to transact (Kim et al. 2008). Prior studies demonstrate that online vendors with a good reputation are perceived to be rather reluctant to jeopardize their reputation by acting opportunistically (Chandra et al. 2010, Jarvenpaa et al. 2000). Accordingly, Mallat (2007) indicates that mobile payment providers with an established reputation might reduce the perceived risks of transactions. Therefore, we expect that a reputable online vendor or a reputable mobile payment provider can decrease consumers’ perceived risk.Hypothesis 1aConsumers will perceive less risk in transactions with reputable online vendors.Consumers will perceive less risk in transactions with reputable mobile payment providers.We focus on the differential effects of online vendor’s reputation and their mobile payment provider’s reputation on transaction intention in m-commerce. Perceived reputation is expected to indirectly affect online transactions, or the intention to use a service, through trusting beliefs (Jarvenpaa et al. 2000, Pavlou 2003). McKnight et al. (1998) differentiate between trusting beliefs and trusting intention, defined as the extent to which an individual is willing to depend on the other person in a given situation. The theory of reasoned action (Fishbein and Ajzen 1975) supports the proposition that beliefs correspond to intentions (Davis et al. 1989). Research findings suggest that trusting beliefs affect both the likelihood that consumers will continue a relationship with an online vendor (Fang et al. 2014), and their intention to purchase from this online vendor (Doney and Cannon 1997, Jarvenpaa et al. 2000). By engaging in such transactions consumers make themselves vulnerable to an actor’s behavior. Moreover, studies have pointed out that consumers’ trusting beliefs in an online vendor affect both their online intentions (Fang et al. 2014, Gefen and Heart 2006, Schlosser et al. 2006), and their willingness to provide personal information during online transactions (McKnight et al. 2002a) because such beliefs reduce consumers’ perceived risks (Pavlou 2003). Both trust and perceived risk can be seen as beliefs that lead to behavioral intentions (Gefen and Pavlou 2012). Moreover, intention to use a technology has been found to be a strong predictor of actual behavior in the IS field (Chau and Hu 2001, Venkatesh et al. 2003). Therefore, we propose that transaction intention will vary according to the perceived reputation of each trustee.Hypothesis 2aConsumers are more likely to engage in transactions with reputable online vendors.Consumers are more likely to engage in transactions with reputable mobile payment providers.Disposition to trust is the tendency to believe in the positive attributes of others (McKnight et al. 1998). Several authors have identified disposition to trust as a significant indicator of overall trust in e-commerce (McKnight et al. 2004, Ribbink et al. 2004). Disposition to trust is a relatively stable personality characteristic that online vendors cannot control. By nature, some consumers will be more reluctant to transact than others. McKnight et al. (2002a) note that trust-building strategies may be different for consumers with low versus high disposition to trust. Consumers who have a higher disposition to trust are more likely to place higher initial trust in an unfamiliar online vendor than those with lower levels of dispositional trust (Kim and Kim 2011). The affiliation with a well-known and reputable payment provider might have a stronger effect on transaction intention and perceived risk, because trusting consumers will perceive higher relatedness of the online vendor and payment provider based on their perceived similarity to one another (Campbell 1958, Stewart 2006). Since consumers with lower levels of disposition to trust have the tendency to show lower initial trust in an unfamiliar online vendor, they might be less easily persuaded (McKnight et al. 2002a). Thus, trust transference induced by reputable mobile payment providers might be greater for very trusting consumers, compared with less trusting consumers. Yamagishi (2001) argues that very trusting consumers engage in trusting behavior if they encounter trust cues. Dispositional trust is especially important in initial trust formation, when only few trust building cues or direct experiences are available (McKnight et al. 2004). This describes the situation when a consumer visits an unfamiliar website. Therefore, we propose that consumers with a higher disposition to trust might be more easily persuaded by reputable payment providers at less reputable online stores. We posit the following hypotheses:Hypothesis 3aConsumers with a high disposition to trust will perceive less risk in transactions with less reputable online vendors if a reputable mobile payment provider is used.Consumers with a high disposition to trust are more likely to transact with less reputable online vendors if a reputable mobile payment provider is used.The research model was tested using a 2×2 between-subjects design experiment. We applied different scenarios to manipulate level of online vendor reputation (high, low) and level of mobile payment provider reputation (high, low). This research design enabled us to examine the main effects of online vendors’ and mobile payment providers’ reputation and their influences on the dependent variables. Table 1depicts the experimental design and sample sizes in each treatment group.Amazon.de was chosen for the high reputation condition, because it is a leading e-commerce retailer. We chose Hitmeister.de, a relatively unestablished online store, for the low reputation condition. We used existing online stores to provide a consistent degree of situational normality (Pennington et al. 2003). Moreover, both companies have only an online store and no offline stores in Germany. Thus, we eliminated the possible effects that the presence of physical stores might have on trust (Lee et al. 2007). Furthermore, we manipulated the reputation of the mobile payment provider by presenting participants with either a reputable company in the financial service industry (MasterCard) or a rather unestablished payment provider (Mopay). Each participant was randomly assigned to one of four treatment groups. We reduced a possible social desirability bias by not allowing subjects to choose their preferred online vendors.The experiment was conducted in two stages. In stage 1, a brief introduction explained to participants that the study was designed to evaluate their experience during a shopping exercise. In particular, they were asked to imagine that they wanted to purchase earphones as a gift for a friend and that they had come across an online store through an internet search. We chose this product category for two main reasons: (1) earphones are nonessential and appeal to both female and male consumers and (2) trust is expected to be important because the quality is difficult to ascertain before consumption. Moreover, we used an unbranded product to exclude the effect of brand equity on trust formation and kept the product list and price the same among all participants (Lowry et al. 2008). Participants were then directed to either the reputable or less reputable online vendor. After seeing the product in the shopping cart, they were guided to the checkout point where either the reputable or less reputable mobile payment provider was displayed. In stage 2, participants were asked to answer questions about their shopping experience, in order to capture their levels of trust in each party, their perceived risk, and transaction intention. Moreover, we included manipulation checks, a consistency check and demographic measures. The questionnaire required participants to answer all questions, eliminating any potential missing values. Furthermore, no time limit was imposed for task completion. A flowchart of the experimental procedure and experiment materials are presented in Appendix A and B.Online surveys have emerged as an effective means of collecting data for academic research (Corbitt et al. 2003, Hsu and Lin 2015). The empirical data for the study was collected through an online survey with four experimental conditions. During the time when the study was conducted, participants could respond to the online questionnaire by clicking on the survey URL provided in the invitation. Duplicate responses were eliminated by filtering out multiple uses of a single IP address. We distributed our survey in social networking site groups for students and over a student mailing list to obtain respondents from several universities. Participation was voluntary and anonymous. Voluntary participation might introduce a self-selection bias whereby some results may be affected because certain characteristics that relate to the respondents’ willingness to participate are over-represented in the data. To further prevent biased answers and to minimize non-response prior to the survey we applied several techniques suggested by Lynn (2008). We provided a short introduction and instructions to respondents and ensured a respondent-friendly questionnaire design and wording by conducting a pretest. In addition, we asked as few questions as were necessary to answer our research questions in order to avoid fatigue effects (Tarran 2010). Moreover, respondents were entered into a random drawing for four 25€ gift cards to reduce non-response (Kim et al. 2012).The survey instrument was based on validated constructs, to which we applied minor wording changes to tailor them to the specific experimental context, and two self-developed constructs. All the questionnaire items were measured on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7), with (4) as a neutral response. Measures for reputation were adapted from Kim et al. (2009) and measures for transaction intention were adapted from Lim et al. (2006). Perceived risk with the online transaction was adapted from Pavlou and Gefen (2004). Consistent with prior empirical studies, we assessed trusting beliefs as an unidimensional construct, because the differential effects of trust’s underlying dimensions are beyond the scope of our study (Benlian et al. 2012, Doney and Cannon 1997). Moreover, McKnight et al. (2002b) note very high correlations between these dimensions, ranging from 0.77 to 0.90, which indicates that different types of trusting beliefs might have comparable effects. Moreover, we included items to assess online consumers’ product purchase intention, mobile internet usage and online shopping frequency, adapted from Benlian et al. (2012). Two binary variables were constructed (i.e., mobile payment provider reputation=1 for high reputation,=0 for low reputation; online vendor reputation=1 for high reputation,=0 for low reputation) to capture the four experimental group conditions. Pretests were conducted to refine scale items and to assess the appropriateness of the treatment conditions (Podsakoff et al. 2003). The pretests enabled us to determine highly reputable and less reputable payment providers and online vendors with sufficient face validity. The measurement scales are presented in Table 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
