@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The three-state test for chaos detection in discrete maps

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new technique (3ST) for chaos detection in discrete map is defined.The detection of periods of stable cycles is automated, thus improving the interpretation of the bifurcation diagram.The test can be implemented in real-time.The test is easily realizable and computationally low cost.3ST allows clear discernment of periodic, quasi-periodic and chaotic behaviors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chaos detection,Chaotic map,Data series analysis,3ST,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The three-state test (3ST) – a new approach for chaos detection in discrete chaotic maps is presented. The scheme is based on statistical analyses of patterns obtained from ascending sorting of the system states. In addition to its ability for clear discernment between chaotic, quasi-periodic and periodic dynamical systems, the detection of periods of stable cycles is also automated with 3ST. The method is directly applied on data series generated by chaotic maps and does not require a priori knowledge of the equations of the underlying system. It also presents the advantage of not having to depend on the nature of the vector field as well as its dimensionality and is computationally low cost. The effectiveness of the 3ST is confirmed using two well known and widely studied chaotic maps: the logistic map and the Henon 2D map.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The characterization of chaotic regimes has attracted much attention since the discovery of chaos by Edward Lorenz in 1963 [1]. Scientists are particularly interested by chaotic maps as they present many fundamental properties such as: ergodicity, sensitivity to initial condition(s) and system parameter(s) and mixing property, etc. [2,3]. Nowadays, the mathematical phenomenon of chaos is studied in sciences as diverse as astronomy, meteorology, population biology, economics and social psychology. While there are few causal mechanisms such diverse disciplines have in common, the phenomenological behavior of chaos (sensitivity to the tiniest changes in initial conditions or seemingly random and unpredictable behavior that nevertheless follows precise rules) appears in many of the models in these disciplines. Observing similar chaotic behavior in such diverse fields certainly presents a challenge to our understanding of chaos as a phenomenon. According to this importance of chaos as a phenomenon, developing efficient chaos detection techniques becomes crucial.Theorists of chaos currently lay out several tools for describing chaotic behavior [4–8]. One can quote: the phase portrait, the largest Lyapunov exponent (λLyap), the Poincaré map, the bifurcation diagram, the 0–1 test and so on. However, amongst the above listed tools, only the largest Lyapunov exponent and the 0–1 test [9] allows us the ability to measure chaos with any degree of certainty. The others allow us to have a certain idea on the nature of the system dynamics.The largest Lyapunov exponent approach is not directly applicable when the equations of the system are not known or when one wishes to examine experimental data [9]. In these two cases, the Lyapunov exponents may be estimated by any one of these three methods: using the phase space reconstruction method [4]; by approximating the linearization of the evolution operator; or by the “direct method” [4,10,11]. Nevertheless, the computation of the largest Lyapunov exponent is greatly facilitated when the underlying equations are known and are low-dimensional [9].Recently the 0–1 test was introduced for the analyses of deterministic dynamical systems [9,12]. The test is able to distinguish between regular and chaotic dynamics by using only the data series generated by dynamical systems. It also presents the advantages to be binary, to not depend on the nature of the vector fields as well as its dimensionality and it does not require the phase space reconstruction. The 0–1 test was successfully applied in many types of dynamical systems. However, the 0–1 test by itself does not make any difference between quasi-periodic and periodic orbits.In [13], due to the fact that the 0–1 test and other well known chaos detection techniques could not provide instantaneous quantification of the chaoticity of the system as needed, J.F. Gemmeke et al. presented a qualitative diagnosis based on the continuous wavelet transform, for the detection of irregular behavior in the time series of particle simulations. This method is successfully applicable to very chaotic systems and is less suited for the discrimination between ordered and weak chaotic motions.The bifurcation diagram is an important graphical tool as it allows detecting the system cycles starting from periodic to chaotic orbits as a function of the system parameters. The idea is to count the number of states for any given values of the system parameters: an orbit is said to be periodic when its number of states is finite and chaotic when it has an infinite number of states. The bifurcation diagram is useful for the detection of the period doubling route to chaos. However, its exploitation remains difficult as it is made graphically, so it depends on the acuity of human vision.In this paper, a novel technique is proposed for chaos detection in discrete maps, the so-called 3ST. The scheme is based on the morphological analysis of a given data series. Besides all the advantages already presented by the 0–1 test compared to the largest Lyapunov exponent, the 3ST is developed for making in real-time, clear discernment between chaotic, quasi-periodic and periodic behaviors; and also for automating the detection of the period doubling route to chaos (automation of the bifurcation diagram). The validation of the 3ST is made by using two deterministic chaotic maps widely studied in the literature. The outline of the paper is as follows: the scheme is presented in Section 2; the results and discussion are presented in Section 3 while the conclusion is summarized in Section 4.The 3ST is based on the pattern analysis of data series. The scheme considers periodic and quasi-periodic signal properties for determining whether the dynamics is regular or chaotic. The 3ST studies the distribution of the system states in a data series as a function of time.A periodic signal is characterized by its period and the period itself is characterized by a basic shape (pattern) so that it can be defined as a periodic recurrence of the basic pattern. At the same time, a quasi-periodic signal presents a basic pattern which tends to be periodically repeated after a long observational duration. In the case of non-regular dynamics, the detection of the basic pattern is not obvious and the period also cannot be properly determined. The 3ST considers as pattern the distribution of states of the data series derived from a discrete chaotic map.Given that the topological space is bounded, the number of states can also be limited but the number of basic patterns can infinitely increase with the observational time. This means that it is not possible to predict chaos only from the detection of the number of states; it is also necessary to know whether their distribution is regular or not.Letxj(k)=Φ(x(k)),k∈ℕbe an observable event, with x(k)=(x1,x2, ⋯,xj, ⋯xM)(k) the state vector and M its dimensionality.xjis the data series to be characterized, 1≤j≤M. For determining its patterns, let us define g as a function such thatuj=g(xj) is the data series sorted by ascending order; and also define q as a function such thatvj=q(uj)is the distribution of indices outputting the initial positions (indices) of the values ofujinxj.For example, ifxj=(xj(1),xj(2), ⋯,xj(l), ⋯xj(N)) where N is the length ofxj, withxj(2)<xj(N)<⋯<xj(l)<⋯<xj(1), thenuj=g(xj)=(xj(2),xj(N), ⋯,xj(l), ⋯,xj(1)) andvj=q(uj)=(2,N,⋯,l,⋯,1).PropositionIf the distribution of statesxjis periodic, then the corresponding distribution of indicesvj=q(g(xj))is a piece-wise linear function where all its linear functions present the same slope and this slope is equal to the cycle of the observable function.Let Φ(x) be an L-periodic observable function and considered on P periods, the length of the data seriesxj=Φ(x) is equal to N=L×P and the number of distinct states is equal to L. So,uj=g(xj) is a stair function presenting L stairs of length P each being one, which can be expressed as follows:(1)uj(k)=xj(L⋅i+b),wherek=0,1,⋯,L×P−1i=kmod(P)b=floor(k/P)Applying the q function touj=g(xj) leads to:(2)vj(k)=L⋅i+b,withk=0,1,⋯,L×P−1i=kmod(P)b=floor(k/P)Eq. (2) shows thatvjis a piece-wise linear function presenting L slopes which are all equal to L. According to (2), the pattern of a periodic signal is characterized by a constant slope. As L is equivalent to the number of distinct states of Φ(x), it is considered to be the period of the data series.In the case of quasi-periodic signals, the distribution of indicesvj(k) remains a piece-wise linear function. According to the definition, the period of quasi-periodic signals cannot be rigorously determined; the basic patterns are not periodically repeated and the slopes in thevj(k) distribution depends on each state in Φ(x), while the number of states itself depends on the observational time (the length N of the data series), hence:(3)vj(k,N)=L(b)⋅i+b(N)However, even if the distributionvj(k) does not correspond to periodic signals pattern, it presents a limit so that the quasi-periodic signal can be characterized by one of its slopes. In order to take into account the time dependence ofvj(k,N), let us consider as pattern characteristic the largest slope (LS) defined as follows:(4)LS(N)=max1≤k≤N−1(vj(k+1,N)−vj(k,N))The pattern of quasi-periodic data in this case is characterized by:(5)L=limN→∞LS(N)Although LS depends on the duration of the data series, it remains bounded in the case of periodic and quasi-periodic signal [9]. Assuming that LS is not bounded in the case of Brownian data, it is possible to use its mean square error (σLS(N)) for chaos detection in time series data.(6)σLS(N,n)=1N∑j=0p(LS(jN0+n)−LS¯)2with:(7)LS¯=1N∑j=0pLS(jN0+n)N=pN0+n is the length of the data series, N0 is the integration step and p is a natural number different from zero. σLS(N, n) measures the ability of a dynamical system to generate new patterns as the time is increasing. n is the smallest observation duration for the largest slope to be well evaluated and should verify the relation n≪N. Let us assume that σLS(N, n) varies as a power of the data length N, σLS(N, n) is bounded if the underlying dynamics is nonchaotic, according to the behavior of LS. For this purpose, let us also define(8)μ(N,n)=log(1+σLS(N,n))logNthen:(9)K(n)=limN→+∞μ(N,n)represents the asymptotic growth rate of the mean square error of the LS. K should be equal to zero in the case of periodic and quasi-periodic signals and greater than zero in the case of chaotic behaviors. So, K can be used as in the case of the 0–1 test by assuming its output is binary: K=0 for regular dynamics and K>0 for chaotic dynamics.In order to distinguish between periodic and quasi-periodic behaviors, the global variation of μ(N, n) is considered. It is obvious that σLS(N, n)=0 for periodic signals, consequently μ(N, n)=0; for quasi-periodic signals, σLS(N, n) is bounded, so μ(N, n) is decreasing until zero while it is globally increasing for chaotic dynamics. The sign of the global derivative of μ(N, n) can then allow separating periodic and quasi-periodic dynamics. Such a global derivative is defined as follows:(10)λ(n)=limN1→∞∑k=1m−1(μ(Nk+1,n)−μ(Nk,n)),N1≪NmN1 is the smallest integration duration and Nmis the greatest one. Choosing the time delay such that n≤(N1/2) yields to good results in practice. λ(n) is the index of periodicity and allows characterizing regular and chaotic dynamics. The 3ST is based on its sign: for quasi-periodic signals, λ(n)<0; for periodic signals, λ(n)=0 and for chaotic signals, λ(n)>0. The 3ST then outputs two main results: the cycle of periodic orbits L and the periodicity index, hence:(11)3ST(Φ(x))=Lλ(n)In this section, dynamics of some well known discrete chaotic maps are characterized with the proposed scheme. Results of chaos detection are compared with those of the largest Lyapunov exponent and 0–1 test while results of limit-cycles detection are compared with those of the bifurcation diagram.The logistic map is a simple example of 1-D map. It is defined by the following equation:(12)x(k+1)=r⋅x(k)(1−x(k))where r is the control parameter.The largest Lyapunov exponent in the case of the logistic map is determined from the derivative [14] of expression (12). The spectra of the asymptotic growth rate by 3ST, the asymptotic growth rate by 0–1 test and the largest Lyapunov exponent are compared in Fig. 1. According to this figure, results provided by the three tests are consistent. In the view of K, the 3ST behaves like the 0–1 test, if the asymptotic growth rate K is assumed to be a binary variable. However, interpreting the spectrum of K is quite difficult as K is not really a binary variable: it is not easy to make a decision when K takes values between 0 and its maximum value in the spectrum. In order to overcome this difficulty, the number of samples should be increased, but this solution is irrelevant as in some cases, the set of data could be limited. By considering the periodicity index, the 3ST can give more information on the dynamics of such orbits without the need for increasing the data length.Fig. 2shows the spectrum of the periodicity index corresponding to the experiment described in Fig. 1.It appears from this figure that some of the motions which are not well described by the asymptotic growth rate K in Fig. 1 are detected as quasi-periodic, according to the negative sign of the corresponding periodicity index. An example is given for r=3.602 where it is difficult to determine with accuracy the corresponding dynamics, according to the asymptotic growth rate by 3ST K=0.4277 and that by 0–1 test K0–1=0.3375. The Lyapunov exponent for this value of the control parameter is equal to λLyap=−0.0159; which corresponds to periodic dynamics. Considering the periodicity index also allows detecting this dynamics as regular, according to its value λ(n)=−0.1285, where n=50. By increasing the time delay n (n=100 for example) the dynamics detected as quasi-periodic in Fig. 2 becomes periodic, according to the asymptotic growth rate and the periodicity index which all turn into zero.The bifurcation diagram is typically obtained by representing the number of states in terms of the control parameter. At the same time, the cycle diagram is obtained by representing the behavior of the largest slope L over the control parameter. Bifurcation and cycle diagrams are compared in Fig. 3. The consistence of these two methods in the detection of the period doubling route can then be verified. However, the cycle diagram allows making with accuracy a decision in the determination of limits between cycles and is less memory space consuming than the bifurcation diagram. Moreover, the method allows the easy detection of narrow interval of regular orbits included within the wide ranges of chaos. An example is given for r=3.906 where the system exhibits a small range period-5 cycle.The 3ST is sensitive to weak chaos. This sensitivity to weak chaos is verified by setting the control parameter to r∞=3.569945672, corresponding to the edge of chaos in the logistic map [15]. Fig. 4shows the behavior of the periodicity index, the asymptotic growth rate K0–1 of 0–1 test and the Lyapunov exponent in terms of the number of samples, for r=3.569945671 and r=r∞. According to 3ST and Lyapunov exponent, it appears from this figure that the system exhibits a weak chaotic behavior for r=r∞ and a regular dynamics for r=3.569945671; while 0–1 test fails to distinguish between the two motions as all the values of K0–1 are nearby zero [15]. It can be noticed that both the algorithms 3ST and Lyapunov exponent require a large amount of data for the transition to be well detected: when the number of samples is not sufficiently representative, the 3ST tends to confuse quasi-periodic motions to weak chaos while the Lyapunov exponent tends to confuse weak chaos to quasi-periodic motions. The same observation is made with the 0–1 test for which the orbit is detected as exhibiting a regular dynamics for r=r∞[15]. This observation shows that there is a coexistence of quasi-periodicity and “weak chaos” motions in the transition areas.Unlike the 0–1 test for which the range of the asymptotic growth rate requires thresholds for determining whether a dynamics is chaotic or not, only the sign of the periodicity index is exploited in the 3ST algorithm. Practical tests show that the largest integration duration should be chosen such that Nm≥(2m−1)·N1, m>2 for convergence problems to be avoided in transition ranges, N1 being larger as possible. An example is given in Fig. 5where m=5, N1=800, Nm=7200 and n=400. It appears from this figure that the automation of the detection of cycles and the chaos detection in time series data are well performed by the pattern analysis. According to its mathematical description, 3ST can be implemented for real-time applications as it can be easily continuously applied on data series. A real-time analysis of dynamical systems can thus be envisaged.The Henon 2D map is defined as follows:(13)x(k+1)=1+y(k)−r⋅(x(k))2y(k+1)=β⋅x(k)where r≥0 and |β|<1. The dynamics of this system was analytically studied in [16] for various values of the control parameters r and β.Fig. 6presents the bifurcation diagram, the cycle diagram and the spectrum of the periodicity index for β=0.3 and r ranges from 0 to 1.4. According to this figure, the detection of the period doubling route is well automated by the 3ST. Table 1makes a comparison between theoretical limits between cycles in the detection of the period doubling route to chaos of the period-1 cycle presented in [16] and those of the 3ST. Depending on the number of samples considered in transient die out, beginnings and ends of stable cycles can be slightly different. In the present example, for the theoretical limits between period-1 and period-2 and period-2 and period-3 cycles to be numerically verified, the number of samples considered for transient die out was 200,000; the rest of the limits were computed by considering 30,000 samples for transient die out. Nevertheless, results obtained with the Henon 2D map confirm that the cycle diagram behaves like a digitized bifurcation diagram.3ST does not require any prior knowledge of the equations of the underlying system. As it is defined for real-time applications, 3ST should be robust to the presence of noise. However, like any method defined for distinguishing regular from chaotic dynamics, 3ST is highly sensitive to small change in the input sequence and can succeed only if the noise-level is sufficiently small [17]. Thus, the test itself may be modified so as to make it more robust to the presence of noise. In order to study the influence of measurement noise on the 3ST test, we choose the noisy sequence like in [17,18] as follows:(14)x˜(n)=x(n)1+ε100η(n)wherex˜(n)is the logistic map contaminated with measurement noise, η(n) are random numbers drawn from a uniform distribution on [−1,1] and ɛ is the noise-level in percent. The robustness of the test was proven for ɛ=10%. Considering the same conditions, 3ST can also be made robust to the presence of noise by introducing an absolute threshold α=ɛ/100 on the states of the input time series such that two statesx˜(k)andx˜(j)are assumed to be different if and only if|x˜(k)−x˜(j)|≥α.Fig. 7shows the result of chaos detection by 3ST in the case of noise contaminated logistic map. Comparing this figure with Figs. 1 and 2, it appears that the 3ST test performs well in a noisy environment. We have shown summarily that 3ST is robust against noise. An issue which will be pursued in further work is the detailed study of the effect of noise on the 3ST algorithm.Real-time application of 3ST to time series data also requires that the algorithm be computationally low cost. As compared to 3ST 0–1 test algorithm obviously presents a high complexity due to the fact that it requires computing several integrals and multiplications, in addition to the transforms applied to the input time series sequence. In 3ST addition is the most used operator and information is directly extracted from the input sequence. The computational complexities of the algorithms are compared based on the approach [19]. The test code below was run for 100 iterations to get the average computation time T0. The average computing time of 0–1 test and 3ST are respectively T1 and T2, obtained by evaluating each algorithm for 100 iterations. The complexity R of the algorithm is theorized by:(15)Ri=TiT0where i=1 for 0–1 test and i=2 for 3ST.Test code:a=1:20000;b=1/sqrt(a);for k=1:20000c(k)=a(k)*b(k);endUsing this definition, complexities of 0–1 test and 3ST are respectively R1=540 (corresponding to 3.1064s average running time on our computer) and R2=3 (corresponding to 0.0171s average running time on our computer). The comparison of these values confirms that the 3ST is computationally low cost by a wide margin as compared to 0–1 test. The 0–1 test was implemented using Nc=100 values of frequency c[17]. We used an input sequence of length N=2000 for both algorithms. The average running time of the test code is about 0.0058s.Fig. 8gives further results of 3ST. The system used for this example is the Gaussian chaotic map as described by the following equation:(16)x(n+1)=r+exp(−a⋅(x(n))2)where a=8 and −1≤r≤1. As shown on this figure, chaotic motions are well detected by 3ST.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
