@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gift or threat? An examination of voice of the customer: The case of MyStarbucksIdea.com

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We classify the types of customer expectations in voice of customers (VOCs) based on Expectancy Disconfirmation Theory.VOC has different effect on brand community interaction and organizational innovation depending on its type.Opinion leader engagement affects positively the brand community interaction.Relationships between customer expectations and a brand community interaction are moderated by negative valence of VOC.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Voice of the customer (VOC),Expectancy Disconfirmation Theory,Online brand community,Open innovation,MyStarbucksIdea.com,Zero-inflated negative binomial model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In Web 2.0 environment, the influence of customers’ voices is increasing. Many companies have built their online brand communities for listening to the diverse voices of the customer (VOC) and promoting customer’s engagement. The information obtained from these brand communities is exploited for organizational innovation.However, the VOC with negative contents could possibly present threats to a firm in an online context. In this study, we develop a research model that includes the types of customer expectations, opinion leader engagement, negative valence of VOC, interaction, and innovation. Subsequently, we empirically validate the effects of customer expectations on the interactions among community members and organizational innovation by using a dataset from MyStarbucksIdea.com. The results show that the effects of VOC on the interaction within a brand community and organizational innovation are different depending on the types of expectation in the VOC. Opinion leaders’ engagement positively affects the interaction among community members.Moreover, the negative valence of VOC affects the relationships between customer expectations and interactions, and results in a possible threat within an online brand community.The research results give some insight into managing the brand community and analyzing the VOCs so as to achieve organizational innovation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In 2005, a customer requested Dell to fix a product-related problem. However, once Dell ignored the claim, the dissatisfied customer posted his experience on a blog. His post spread extensively throughout the Internet, and consequently the reputation of Dell suffered to such an extent to give birth to the expression, “Dell sucks” (Bernoff and Li 2008). Dell became to learn how to listen to customer voices at a great cost. The Dell example shows the importance of customer voice management and the influence of word-of-mouth (WOM) through the Internet.Traditionally, customer voices have been considered a critical resource for firms. This is because voice of the customer (VOC) naturally includes expectations related to customer needs and requirements, and these expectations can help firms improve their products or services. As the habitual use of Web 2.0 emerges, more VOC is being generated and shared easily through various online communities. Accordingly, it is prevalent for firms to manage online communities with the purpose of listening to diverse VOC and promoting customer engagement and loyalty (Gangi and Wasko 2009).As VOC is considered as a resource for innovation, firms such as Proctor & Gamble (P&G), and Starbucks are exploiting their online brand communities as conduits for collecting VOC (Gangi and Wasko 2009). The phenomenon of open innovation has recently enabled firms to achieve collective intelligence and to reduce the effort of developing new products or services (Lichtenthaler 2011). Online brand communities encourage customers to share their ideas, discuss and evaluate other customer ideas, and develop ideas into better ones through interaction (Teece and Pisano 1994, Gangi and Wasko 2009). Thus, encouraging customers to interact with other customers and extracting useful VOC, critical for brand communities, can help a firm innovate.A generally acceptable view point is that VOC should be considered as a gift to help firms develop new products or services that meets the needs of their customers (Barlow and Moller 2008, Denove and Power 2007). On the other hand, VOC is also perceived as a possible threat as we saw in the case of Dell. VOC with negative contents, whether it is true or not, can spread from customer to customer and give rise to negative WOM, which may result in customers’ switching of brands and stores, and the loss of firm’s reputation and brand image (Richins 1983). As WOM effect may be more powerful for an online community where members interact with each other easily and widely, VOC with negative contents can be more risky in an online context. Therefore, deepening the understanding of the characteristics and influences of such VOC for online communities can be critical for firms.Members within a community are affected by opinion leaders. Prior studies have investigated the roles and influences of opinion leaders (Katz and Lazarsfeld 1955, Rogers 1962). Opinion leaders exist in online brand communities and affect community members as in other ordinary communities. Understanding the influence of opinion leadership on organizational innovation and the interaction of the community members can be meaningful when an online brand community is considered as an innovation platform.We initiate our discussion on the influence of VOC in an online brand community. We suggest that the influence of each VOC on community promotion and organizational innovation can be different depending on the type of VOC. The types are classified according to customer expectations which a VOC contains. We assume that VOC with negative contents can be a seed of threat that may result in negative WOM in an online community. Additionally, we expect that opinion leaders influence the interaction among online community members and organizational innovation. Therefore, three research questions are investigated in this study:•Does the type of the VOC expectation have different effect on the interaction among the community members and organizational innovation?How does VOC with negative contents affect the interactions within an online brand community?What are opinion leader roles in an online brand community?These research questions can have practical importance for firms to achieve innovation and to manage online brand communities. The data is collected from MyStarbucksIdea.com (MSI) which was developed as an online brand community for customer-drive ideation where anyone can submit an opinion. This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review literature related to open innovation, VOC and online brand communities. Section 3 describes the research context. A research model and hypotheses are developed in Section 4. We describe the research methodology, analysis, and results in Section 5. In Section 6, we discuss findings of the study and conclude with study limitations and contributions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
There are a few limitations for this study. First, the dataset was collected from an online brand community that is created and supported by Starbucks. Further studies should try to validate and elaborate the findings by analyzing VOC in other online brand community types (e.g., communities supported by third parties such as professional bodies or customer associations). Second, we operationalized the variables using qualitative content analysis of customer postings. Although we applied great care to resolve all coding discrepancies, the possibility exists that certain customer voices could be omitted from our coding process. Such potential omissions can affect the overall validity and generalizability of the findings. Third, a number of customer-related variables in the proposed research model may not have been included. For example, customer product- or brand-related engagement may affect customer contributions to the brand community. For future research, customer-related variables and a new path from interaction to innovation can be added to our research model to examine the potential effect of interaction. Fourth, Starbucks’s adoption of VOC can be determined by customer voices and company factors such as internal resources and strategic goals. For future research, our research model can be extended to include specific company factors.This study offers several new insights that enhance our understanding of VOC within an online brand community. Companies can obtain advice on how to make use of VOC that demonstrate double-edged sword characteristics. This study provides several types of VOC based on the Expectancy Disconfirmation Theory. VOC shows different influences on the interaction within a brand community and organizational innovation depending on the contents. VOC claiming utilitarian, hedonic, ideal-based, and product-based expectations could affect organizational innovation and interaction among the community members. These expectations can be exploited as criteria for filtering and analyzing VOC. The negative valence of VOC is considered a potential threat and could arise from active community interaction. Thus, companies need to handle the negative valence of VOC carefully. Moreover, opinion leaders play an important role in boosting brand community interaction rather than leading to organizational innovation. Gaining clarity about the effect of VOC on an online brand community will be important to ensure if a VOC acts as a gift or threat to a company.