@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Virulence Optimization Algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel method of optimization inspired by optimal mechanism of viruses when infecting body cells.Simulates the recognition of fittest viruses, reproduction of cells to prompt “invasion” operation and escaping from infected region (to avoid immune reaction).It starts the optimization process with an initial population consisting of viruses and host cells. Then, the environment will be clustered to number of regions called Virus groups.Drifting (mutation) and shifting (recombination) and constitute an “invasion” force to invade host environment.The best viruses in each virus group undergoes a cloning operation to spread the Virulence in host environment and the escape mechanism enables the virus to avoid immune response.Comparing the result of this algorithm with other well-known optimization algorithms demonstrates the superiority of the proposed algorithm in terms of the global solution convergence and the convergence speed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimization,Virulence,Virus cloning,Host environment,Continuous and non-linear functions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a new optimization algorithm to solve continuous and non-linear optimization problems is introduced. This algorithm is inspired by the optimal mechanism of viruses when infecting body cells. Special mechanism and function of viruses which includes the recognition of fittest viruses to infect body cells, reproduction (cloning) of these cells to prompt “invasion” operation of ready-to-infect regions and then escaping from infected regions (to avoid immune reaction) is the basis of this evolutionary optimization algorithm. Like many evolutionary algorithms, the Virulence Optimization Algorithm (VOA) starts the optimization process with an initial population consisting of viruses and host cells. The host cell population represents the resources available in host environment or the region containing the global optimum solution. The virus population infiltrates the host environment and attempts to infect it. In the optimization procedure, at first the viruses reside in the constituted regions or clusters of the environment called virus groups (via K-means clustering). Then they scatter in host environment through mutation (Drifting) and recombination (Shifting) operators. Then among the virus groups, the group with highest mean fitness is chosen as escape destination. Before the escape operation commences, the best viruses in each virus group are recognized and undergoes a cloning operation to spread the Virulence in the host environment. This procedure continues until the majority of the virus population is gathered in the region containing the maximum resources or the global optimum solution. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is achieved by simulating three important and major mechanisms in the virus life, namely (1) the reproduction and mutation mechanism, (2) the cloning mechanism to generate the best viruses for rapid and excessive infection of the host environment and (3) the mechanism of escaping from the infected region. Simulating the first mechanism in the virus life enables the proposed algorithm to generate new and fittest virus varieties. The cloning mechanism facilitates the excessive spread of the fittest viruses in the host environment to infect the host environment more quickly. Also, to avoid the immune response, the fittest viruses (with a great chance of survival) are duplicated through the cloning process, and scattered according to the Vicinity Region Radius of each region. Then, the fittest viruses escape the infected region to reside in a region which possess the resources necessary to survive (global optimum). The evaluation of this algorithm on 11 benchmark test functions has proven its capability to deal with complex and difficult optimization problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In computer science, mathematical optimization is referred to a process in which the best option among a set of candidate options is chosen according to a specific criteria. In its simplest form, an optimization problem consists of minimizing or maximizing a real-valued function. In this process, input values are chosen from a set of allowed values for input values systematically and then the value of real-valued function is calculated [1].In other words, the optimization process can be regarded as improving a concept or an object in which the inputs or characteristics of a device, mathematical operation or a specific experiment is well-adjusted so the outputs or the results is minimized or maximized. The input of this process consists of variables, a process or function which is recognized as a cost (fitness) function and an output which displays the cost or fitness [2,3].Algorithms and methods of optimization are categorized under five different categories:1.Combinational optimization. It concerns with finding the optimal solution (object) among a finite set of solutions (objects). Exhaustive search will be avoided through a selection of finite set of feasible solutions or conversion of solution set to a discrete and finite solution set. Applications of this type of optimization methods include development of optimal airline networks, optimal postal delivery route [4,5].Dynamic Programming (DP). It is the process of breaking a complicated problem into a number of simpler sub-problems. In general, to solve a given problem using DP, all the sub-problems are solved. Then the solutions for these sub-problems are combined to obtain the final optimal solution. The DP method is one of the most popular optimization methods. This method is applicable to problems with overlapping sub-problem and optimal sub-structure feature. The DP method is also considered an “intelligence Brute-Force” method for finding optimal solutions [6,7].Gradient method. Very efficient type of optimization algorithm to solve a given problem in the form of “min(f(x))”. One of the most important gradient methods is “Gradient decent” which is a first-order optimization algorithm. To find the local minima or maxima of a given function, gradient descent method employs the negative or positive value of gradient at a certain point [8].Stochastic optimization. These methods are based on generating value for variables which appear in optimization equation and then using these generated values to solve a specified problem. Stochastic methods to solve optimization problems also comprise “random iteration” methods and a combination of “random Iteration” and “random objective function” methods [9,10].Evolutionary algorithms. Evolutionary algorithms are heuristic methods that employ organic evolution-inspired techniques such as mutation, recombination and natural selection to find the optimal state of a specific system under a specific set of constraints.The main idea and contribution of this paper can be described as follows: “introducing a novel evolutionary optimization algorithm inspired by the virus life mechanisms of infecting host environment and finding the most suitable residence to guarantee the growth and survival of the fittest viruses”. The main objective of this paper is to determine the performance and the efficiency of the proposed algorithm in solving the standard optimization problems. The performance and efficiency of the proposed algorithm are evaluated in terms of convergence speed and the required operational time to reach the optimal solution. The following mechanisms and processes are simulated in the proposed algorithm:1.Variation mechanisms. One of the most vital components of the proposed algorithm is the variation mechanism. Variation leads to the creation of new virus varieties and facilitates the virus adaptation to the ever-changing environment. To simulate this phenomenon, the viruses’ properties are combined or undergo mutation to create new virus types. Also, the implemented mutation mechanism employs a varying mutation step-size. The fittest viruses have a greater chance of survival and participate in spreading of virulence (Section 3.2).The cloning process. The excessive spread of viruses in host environment is achieved by the rapid cloning of viruses. This characteristic enables the viruses to search the host environment (candidate solution space) more thoroughly. The cloned viruses are scattered according to Vicinity Region Radius of each region (see Section 3.3). Also, the main requirement for the escape mechanism (see Section 3.4) is the cloning process.Escape mechanism. The viruses are always in search of location in candidate solution space which possess the maximum resources (global optimal solution). After rapid reproduction and cloning of the viruses, in order to avoid the immune response and search for a better suited living environment, the fittest viruses escape to a region containing the vital resources necessary to survive.The process of maintaining equilibrium. This process is done by eliminating the worst fitted viruses (see Section 3.5).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
