@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A PD-type Multi Input Single Output SSSC damping controller design employing hybrid improved differential evolution-pattern search approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel PD type MISO controller is proposed for SSSC based damping controller.Hybrid improved DE and PS approach is proposed to optimize the controller parameters.In improved DE, control parameters F and CR are varied during optimization runs.Both single machine infinite bus and multi-machine power systems are considered.Comparative results are provided to show the superiority of the proposed design approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Power system stability,Static Synchronous Series Compensator (SSSC),Improved differential evolution algorithm,Pattern search,Multi Input Single Output controller,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a Proportional Derivative (PD)-type Multi Input Single Output (MISO) damping controller is designed for Static Synchronous Series Compensator (SSSC) controller. Both local and remote signals with associated time delays are chosen as the input signal to the proposed MISO controller. The design problem is formulated as an optimization problem and a hybrid Improved Differential Evolution and Pattern Search (hIDEPS) technique is employed to optimize the controller parameters. The improvement in Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm is introduced by changing two of its most important control parameters i.e. Scaling Factor F and Crossover Constant CR with an objective of achieving improved performance of the algorithm. The superiority of proposed Improved DE (IDE) over original DE and hIDEPS over IDE has also been demonstrated. To show the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed design approach, simulation results are presented and compared with DE and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) optimized Single Input Single Output (SISO) SSSC based damping controllers for both Single Machine Infinite Bus (SMIB) power system and multi-machine power system. It is noticed that the proposed approach provides superior damping performance compared to some approaches available in literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Active power oscillations in power transmission systems may arise in corridors between interconnected areas as a result of poor damping of the interconnection [1]. Active power oscillation limits the power transmission capacity of interconnections between areas. Power System Stabilizers (PSS) are generally employed to damp these oscillations, but PSS are not effective in some cases, particularly when inter-area oscillations of typically 0.2–0.7Hz are present. Alternatively, Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTS) controllers can be employed to damp the power system oscillations [2]. Static Synchronous Series Compensator (SSSC) is one of the important members of series FACTS controller [3]. If a SSSC is installed in a power system to enhance the power transfer controllability, a supplementary damping controller could be designed for SSSC to damp the power system oscillations [4].Despite the availability of a variety of controller, the fixed gain, lead-lag compensation type of controller structure continues to be the most popular with the electrical utilities because of the ease of on-line tuning and also lack of assurance of the stability by some adaptive or variable structure techniques [5,6]. Most of the previous works on stability and damping improvement by SSSC are based on Single Input Single Output (SISO) based lead lag controllers using either local signal or remote signal [7–9]. To avoid additional costs associated with communication, input signal should preferably be locally measurable. However, local control signals, although easy to get, may not contain the desired oscillation modes. So, compared to wide-area signals, they are not as highly controllable and observable. Owing to the recent advances in optical fiber communication and global positioning systems, the wide-area measurement system can realize phasor measurement synchronously and deliver it to the control center even in real time. Hence both local and remote signals can be used reliably as control input signals. In this paper, a Multi Input Single Output (MISO) controller is proposed as SSSC based damping controller. While considerable work has been reported for the improvement of controller structure of a Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) controller, surprisingly, hardly any attempt has been made to improve the structure of a lead lag controller. The structure of a lead lag controller consists of a gain block which acts as a proportion gain and there is scope to add an additional gain term i.e. derivative term to improve the system response and the performance of the controller. In view of the above, a PD-type MISO controller for SSSC is proposed in the present work to damp power system oscillations.The problem of FACTS controller parameter tuning is a complex task. The conventional techniques that are reported in literature pertaining to the tuning of FACTS controller suffer from heavy computation burden and the search process is likely to be trapped in local minima as the optimal solution may not be obtained. The growth in size and complexity of electric power systems have necessitated the use of intelligent systems that combine knowledge, techniques and methodologies from various sources for the real-time control of power systems. In recent years, a lot of interest has been drawn to the applications of intelligent techniques to power system problems. Differential Evolution (DE) is a population-based direct search algorithm for global optimization capable of handling non-differentiable, non-linear and multi-modal objective functions, with few, easily chosen, control parameters [10]. DE uses a greedy selection procedure with inherent elitist features and has fewer control parameters, which can be tuned effectively [11]. But, the success of DE in solving a particular problem significantly depends on suitable choice of control parameter values namely the Scaling Factor (F) and Crossover Constant (CR) [12]. It is advantageous to use appropriate F and CR values at different stages of evolution/search process instead of using fixed F and CR values for the entire search process [13,14]. The key to achieving high performance for any meta-heuristic algorithm is to maintain a good balance between exploitation and exploration in the search process. DE being a global optimizing method is designed to explore the search space and most likely will give an optimal/near-optimal solution. On the other hand, local optimizing methods like Pattern Search (PS) are designed to exploit the local area, but they are usually not good at exploring wide search space and hence generally not applied alone for global optimization problems [15,16]. Due to their respective strength and weakness, there is motivation for the hybridization of DE and PS. In view of the above, an attempt has been made in this paper for the application of a hybrid improved DE and PS (hIDEPS) for the design of a SSSC based damping controller.In this paper, a Multi Input Single Output (MISO) controller is proposed for SSSC to damp power system oscillations following a disturbance. The MISO controller consists of two PD-type lead lag controllers with both remote signal (speed deviation signal) and local signal (tie-line power deviation signal). The design problem of proposed controller is formulated as an optimization problem and hIDEPS technique is employed to find the optimal controller parameters. The performance of the proposed controller is evaluated in two test systems subjected to different transient disturbances. To show the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed approach, simulation results are presented and compared with some SISO based damping controllers approaches reported in literature [7,8].A Single Machine Infinite Bus (SMIB) power system shown in Fig. 1is considered at the first instance to design the PD-type MISO damping controller for SSSC. The system consists of a synchronous generator connected to an infinite-bus through a step-up transformer and a SSSC through a double circuit transmission line. The generator is provided with Hydraulic Turbine and Governor (HTG) and excitation system. The HTG consists of a hydraulic turbine, a governor system, and a servomotor. The excitation system consists of a voltage regulator and DC exciter, as recommended in IEEE Recommended Practice for Excitation System Models for Power System Stability Studies [17]. In Fig. 1, T/F represents the transformer; VSand VRare the generator terminal and infinite-bus voltages respectively; V1 and V2 are the bus voltages; VDC and Vcnvare the DC voltage source and output voltage of the SSSC converter respectively; I is the line current and PLis the total real power flow in the transmission line respectively.The dynamics of the stator, field and damper windings are included in the present analysis. Two-axis reference frame (d–q frame) is used to express the stator and rotor quantities. All rotor quantities are referred to stator (represented by primed variables) as given in (1)–(8):(1)Vd=RSid+ddtφq−ωRφq(2)Vq=RSiq+ddtφq+ωRφd(3)V′fd=R′fdi′fd+ddtφ′fd(4)V′kd=R′kdi′kd+ddtφ′kd(5)V′kq1=R′kq1i′kq1+ddtφ′kq1(6)V′kq2=R′kq2i′kq2+ddtφ′kq2whereφd=Ldid+Lmd(i′fd+i′kd)φq=Lqiq+Lmq+i′kqφ′fd=L′fdi′fd+Lmd(id+i′kd)φ′kd=L′kdi′kd+Lmd(id+i′fd)φ′kq1=L′kq1i′kq1+Lmqiqφ′kq2=L′kq2i′kq2+LmqiqIn the above equations, the subscripts: d and q stand for d-axis and q-axis quantities, R and s stand for rotor and stator quantities, f and k stand for field and damper winding, l and m stand for leakage and magnetizing inductance.The mechanical equations are given by:(7)ddtωr=1J(Pe−Frωr−Pm)(8)ddtθ=ωrwhere ωrand θ are angular velocity and angular position of the rotor respectively, Peand Pmrepresent electrical and mechanical power respectively, J and Frrepresent inertia and friction of rotor respectively.The proposed MISO controller structure consists of two PD-type lead lag controllers as shown in Fig. 2. Each lead lag structure consists of a proportional gain and a derivative gain block, a signal washout block and two-stage phase compensation block. Derivative mode improves stability of the system. However, when the input signal has sharp corners, the derivative term will produce unreasonable size control inputs to the plant. Also, any noise in the control input signal will result in large control output signals. These reasons often limit the practical applications of derivative term in the controller. The practical solution to the these problems is to put a first filter on the derivative term and tune its pole so that the chattering due to the noise does not occur since it attenuates high frequency noise. In view of the above a filter is used for the derivative term in the present paper.The phase compensation block provides the appropriate phase-lead characteristics to compensate for the phase lag between input and the output signals. The signal washout block with time constants acts as a high-pass filter to allow signals associated with oscillations in input signal as unchanged signals. Without the high-pass filter, steady changes in input would alter the output. The phase compensation blocks give the exact phase-lead characteristics to overcome the phase lag between input and the output signals. Vqrefstands for the reference injected voltage as desired by the steady state power flow control loop. In the present study Vqrefis assumed constant during large disturbance transient period as it acts quite slowly. The necessary value of compensation is obtained according to the change in the SSSC injected voltage ΔVq1 and ΔVq2 which is added to Vqref.In lead-lag structured controllers, the washout time constants are generally pre-specified [17]. In the present study, TWL=TWR=10s and filter coefficient N=100 are used. The proportional and derivative gains (KDL, KDRand KPL, KPR) and the time constants T1L, T2L, T3L, T4Land T1R, T2R, T3R, T4Rare to be calculated. During steady state conditions ΔVq1, ΔVq2 and Vrefare constant. During dynamic conditions the series injected voltage Vqis adjusted to damp power system oscillations and is given by:(9)Vq=Vqref+ΔVq1+ΔVq2An integral time absolute error of the speed deviations is taken as the objective function given by Eq. (10).(10)J=104∫0t|Δω|⋅t⋅dtwhere Δω is the speed deviation; and t is the time range of the simulation. To calculate the objective function, a 5-cycle 3-phase fault is applied at the middle of one transmission line which is cleared by line outage for 5-cycles. Thus, the design problem is formulated as the following optimization problem:(11)MinimizeJSubject to(12)KPLmin≤KPL≤KPLmax,KPRmin≤KPR≤KPRmaxKILmin≤KIL≤KILmax,KIRmin≤KIR≤KIRmaxT1Lmin≤T1L≤T1Lmax,T1Rmin≤T1R≤T1RmaxT2Lmin≤T2L≤T2Lmax,T2Rmin≤T2R≤T2RmaxT3Lmin≤T3L≤T3Lmax,T3Rmin≤T3R≤T3RmaxT4Lmin≤T4L≤T4Lmax,T4Rmin≤T4R≤T4RmaxDifferential Evolution (DE) algorithm is a simple but efficient search technique proposed by Storn and Price [10]. In DE algorithm, an optimization task consisting of D variables is represented by a D-dimensional vector. At the beginning, a population of NP solution vectors is initialized within the parameter bounds. Mutation, crossover and selection operators are applied to update the population. DE algorithm uses two generations; old generation and new generation of equal population size. Individuals of the current population become target vectors for the next generation. The mutation operation produces a mutant vector for each target vector, by adding the weighted difference between two randomly chosen vectors to a third vector. A trial vector is generated by the crossover operation by mixing the parameters of the mutant vector with those of the target vector. The trial vector replaces the target vector in the next generation if has a better fitness value than the target vector. The DE evolutionary operators are described below [10,11].At the beginning of a DE run i.e. at Generation G=0, search parameters are initialized within the search space constrained by the specified minimum and maximum boundsXmin={xmin,G1,…,xmin,GD}andXmax={xmax,G1,…,xmax,GD}. The initial value of jth parameter in the ith individual at first generation (G=0) is generated by:(13)xi,0j=xminj+rand(0,1)⋅(xmaxj−xminj),j=1,2,…,DA parent vector Xi,Gfrom the current generation is selected (known as target vector) and a mutant vector Vi,Gis created by the differential mutation operation (known as donor vector). A child is produced by combining the donor with the target vector (known as trial vector). For each target vector Xi,Gat the generation G, its associated mutant vectorVi,G={vi,G1,…,vi,GD}can be generated through a number of mutation strategies. Several strategies can be employed in DE optimization algorithm. The strategy in a DE algorithm is denoted by DE/x/y/z, where x represents the mutant vectors, y represents the number of difference vectors used in the mutation process and z represents the crossover scheme used in the crossover operation. A comparison of various strategies has been presented in [18] and the best strategy reported is DE/best/2/bin given by:(14)Vi,G=Xbest,G+F⋅(Xr1i,G−Xr2i,G)+F⋅(Xr3i,G−Xr4i,G)The indicesr1i,…,r4iare randomly generated once for each mutant vector and are mutually exclusive integers within the range [1,NP]. Xbest,Gis the best individual vector within the best fitness value in the population at generation G and mutation strategy is executed binomial crossover.To enhance the potential diversity of the population, the crossover operation is applied to each pair of target vectors Xi,Gand its corresponding mutant vector Vi,Gemployed to generate a trial vectorUi,G={ui,G1,…,ui,GD}. The donor vector enters the trial vector with a probability. The crossover operation can be expressed as:(15)ui,Gj=vi,Gjif(randj≤CRor(j=jrand)xi,Gjif(randj,i>CR)or(j≠jrand)j=1,…,DThe crossover rate CR is a user specified constant within the range and controls the fraction of parameter values copied from the mutant vector. jrandis a randomly selected integer in the range [1,D]. The condition j=jrandmakes certain that the trial vector differs from its corresponding target vector by at least one parameter.Selection operation is performed to keep the population size constant over successive generations. The objective function value of each trial vector is compared to that of its corresponding target vector in the current population. If the trial vector has better or equal objective function value than the corresponding target vector, the trial vector replaces the target vector and enters the population of the next generation. Otherwise, the target vector remains in the population for the next generation. The selection operation can be represented by:(16)Xi,G+1=Ui,Giff(Ui,G)≤f(Xi,G)Xi,Gotherwisei=[1,…,NP]The performance of the DE algorithm is highly dependent on the choice of control parameter. Inappropriate selection of control parameters may lead to premature convergence or stagnation of the algorithm. The important control parameters that influence the performance of DE algorithm are: scaling factor F and crossover rate CR. It has been reported that the effectiveness, efficiency, and robustness of the DE algorithm depend on the control parameters setting and the control parameter settings may be different for different functions or the same function with different requirements [19]. Many empirical strategies have been reported in literature for selecting the control parameter settings. It has been reported that the searching capability and convergence speed of DE algorithm are very sensitive to the choice of control parameters F, CR and NP and suggested 0.6, 0.3–0.9 and 3D–8D for F, CR and NP respectively [20].Researchers have also proposed a number of techniques to change the control parameters during the run. In [21], an optimal value of 0.5 for CR and variable F in the range 0.4–1 for each generation was suggested. In [22], the factor F was linearly reduced with increasing generation count. A uniform distribution between 0.5 and 1.5 with a mean value of 1 was employed in [23] for selecting F. Normal distribution between 0.5 and 1.5 was employed in [24] for choosing CR for each individual. Self-adapted schemes were employed for the scaling factor F in [24] and crossover rate CR in [25].It is observed from the literature survey that various conflicting conclusions have been drawn with regard to the rules for setting the control parameters. Furthermore, in most of the cases conclusions lack sufficient justification as their validity is restricted to the problems, strategies, and parameter values considered in the investigations. So it can be concluded that choosing suitable control parameter values is a problem-dependent task.In majority of population based search methods, the individuals are encouraged to sample diverse zones of the search space during the early stages of the search process. During the later stages of search process, it is important to regulate the movements of trial solutions finely so that they can explore the interior of a relatively small space in which the suspected global optimum lies. To meet the above objective, F and CR values are reduced with time from a predetermined maximum to a predetermined minimum value. The ranges of F and CR values are suitably chosen to maintain both exploitation (with small values) and exploration (with large values) power of the algorithm throughout the evolution process. Following expressions is used to vary the F and CR values during generations:Linear decrease (IDE-1):(17)FG=Fmax−Fmax−FminGmax⋅G(18)CRG=CRmax−CRmax−CRminGmax⋅GExponential decrease (IDE-2):(19)FG=Fmax⋅e(−K1G/Gmax)(20)CRG=CRmax⋅e(−K2G/Gmax)Parabolic decrease (IDE-3):(21)FG=(FG−1−Fmin).(Gmax−G)(Gmax+Fmin).e−[G/(Gmax/4)]2(22)CRG=(CRG−1−CRmin).(Gmax−G)(Gmax+CRmin).e−[G/(Gmax/4)]2where FGand CRGare the F and CR values at generation G, Gmaxis the maximum generation, Fmax, Fminand CRmax, CRminare the maximum and minimum values of F and CR respectively. The constants K1 and K2 values are so chosen that F and CR values are at their maximum limit at the first generation (G=0) and minimum values at the last generation (G=Gmax).Pattern Search (PS) optimization technique is a derivative free evolutionary algorithm suitable to solve a variety of optimization problems that lie outside the scope of the standard optimization methods. It is simple in concept, easy to implement and computationally efficient. It possesses a flexible and well-balanced operator to enhance and adapt the global search and fine tune local search [26]. By examining the neighborhood of the current solution, pattern search is very effective to exploit the local regions. PS performs individual learning by exploiting small local regions effectively in relatively short periods of time. In addition, its convergence to local minima for constrained problems as well as unconstrained problems has been proven in [26]. The PS algorithm computes a sequence of points that may or may not approaches to the optimal point. The algorithm starts with a set of points called mesh, around the initial points. The initial points or current points are provided by the IDE technique. The mesh is created by adding the current point to a scalar multiple of a set of vectors called a pattern. If a point in the mesh is having better objective function value, it becomes the current point at the next iteration [15,16]. The Pattern search begins at the initial point X0 that is given as a starting point by the IDE algorithm. At the first iteration, with a scalar=1 called mesh size, the pattern vectors or direction vectors are constructed as [01], [10], [−10] and [0−1]. The direction vectors are added to the initial point X0 to compute the mesh points as X0+[01], X0+[10], X0+[−10] and X0+[0−1]. The algorithm computes the objective function at the mesh points in the same order. The algorithm polls the mesh points by computing their objective function values until it finds one whose value is smaller than the objective function value of X0. Then the poll is said to be successful when the objective function value decreases at some mesh point and the algorithm sets this point equal to X1. After a successful poll, the algorithm steps to iteration 2 and multiplies the current mesh size by 2. As the mesh size is increased by multiplying by a factor i.e. 2, this is called the expansion factor. So in 2nd iteration, the mesh points are: X1+2*[01], X1+2*[10], X1+2*[−10] and X1+2*[0−1] and the process is repeated until stopping criteria is met. Now if in a particular iteration, none of the mesh points has a smaller objective function value than the value at initial/current point at that iteration, the poll is said to be unsuccessful and same current point is used in the next iteration. Also, at the next iteration, the algorithm multiplies the current mesh size by 0.5, a contraction factor, so that the mesh size at the next iteration is smaller and the process is repeated until stopping criteria is met.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
