@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new approach of rules extraction for word sense disambiguation by features of attributes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new approach of rule extraction by features of attributes is proposed.Simple class exclusive attributes and composite class exclusive attributes are calculated.The attributes are used in rule extraction for WSD of English preposition on.The accuracy of WSD is improved. Comparative result shows the new approach has a few advantages over the well-formed SPOAD approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rule extraction,English preposition,Feature of attribute,Word sense disambiguation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Classification is an important issue in data mining and knowledge discovery. It is a significant issue to develop effective and easy approach of rule extraction for classification. A new approach of rule extraction by features of attributes is proposed in this article for word sense disambiguation (WSD). English preposition on is taken as a target word of WSD, a data set of 600 samples is randomly selected from a 350,000 words corpus. Semantic and syntactic features are extracted from the context, and the corresponding formal context is generated. The rules for WSD of English preposition on are extracted based on the theoretical descriptions and calculation of the simple class exclusive attributes and composite class exclusive attributes. The extracted rules are used in the WSD of English preposition on, and the accuracy reaches 93.2%. The results of the comparative analysis show that the proposed feature of attribute approach is simpler, more effective and easier to use than the existing well-formed structural partial ordered attribute diagram approach.word sense disambiguation“on” with the sense of “time”“on” with the sense of neither “time” nor “place”“on” with the sense of “place”nouna formal contexta set of objectsa set of attributesa set of relation between objects and attributesan objectan attributeextent of a conceptintent of a concepta subset of Ma subset of Gempty seta set of a class of objectsany set of objects other than G1decision attribute setobject sets corresponding to the decision attributesnon-decision attribute set of a classnon-decision attribute set corresponding to Githe jth object in G1power set of Mcithe kth attribute set of P(Mci)object set corresponding to mcika subset of G1mutual informationprobability of co-occurrence of w1 and w2probability of w1the ith conceptthe ith attributethe jth objectstructural partial ordered attribute diagram

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rule extraction is an important issue in natural language processing. It is a process of deriving a symbolic description of a model for classification. It simulates the behavior of the model in a concise and comprehensible form. Rule extraction gives insight into the logic behind the model. Many researchers have studied rule extraction from different perspectives. In the aspect of rule extraction from different models, Setiono et al. [1] proposed an approach for rule extraction from minimal neural networks for credit card screening. Ozbakir et al. [2] proposed an approach for rule extraction from artificial neural networks to discover reasons of quality defects in fabric production. Chorowski and Zurada [3] presented an eclectic approach for rule extraction from neural network as decision diagrams. Zhu and Hu [4] proposed a rule extraction technique by support vector machines through analyzing the distribution of samples. Chaves et al. [5] proposed a new method for fuzzy rule extraction from trained support vector machines for classification of multi-class problems. Tang et al. [6] presented a method of extracting classification rules from concept lattice. Li et al. [7] extracted rules for word sense disambiguation (WSD) of English modal verbs from a structural partial ordered attribute diagram. Asaduzzaman et al. [8] reported a method of finding out interesting rules from heterogeneous internet search histories.In the aspects of the algorithms for rule extraction, Liu et al. [9] proposed an algorithm to simultaneously extract rules and select features for better interpretation of the predictive model. Zhao and Sun [10] proposed an approach to rough set rule extraction from a decision system using conditional information entropy. He et al. [11] proposed a guidance rule extraction algorithm for getting the attribute information along the quickest direction and achieving the intelligent information analysis. Sun [12] developed an algorithm framework for rule extraction with different levels of knowledge granular from decision system in order to delete redundant features from decision system and highlight the most efficient features to construct classifiers. Ahmed and Carson-Berndsen [13] presented a method for automatic rule extraction for modeling pronunciation variation in order to model pronunciation variation in phoneme based continuous speech recognition at language model level. Sarkar et al. [14] introduced a genetic algorithm-based rule extraction system to improve prediction accuracy over any classification problem irrespective to domain, size, dimensionality and class distribution. They [15–17] also proposed a hybrid approach to design efficient learning classifiers and an accuracy-based learning system to extract efficient rule set for the implement of a multi-category classification, and select informative rules by using parallel genetic algorithm. Rodriguez et al. [18] presented an efficient distributed genetic algorithm for classification rule extraction in data mining. Wang et al. [19] introduced a method for rule extraction based on granular computing in order for default diagnosis of a helicopter transmission system. Koklu et al. [20] presented a new method of rule extraction from medical related datasets using artificial immune system algorithm. Huang et al. [21] proposed a method based on clustering artificial fish-swarm algorithm and rough set theory to extract decision rules. Costro et al. [22] described a rule extraction algorithm based on fuzzy logic, named linguistic rules in fuzzy inductive reasoning, to derive linguistic rules from a fuzzy inductive reasoning model. Chen et al. [23] presented an integrated mechanism for simultaneous extraction of fuzzy rules and selection of useful features in order to solve the classification problem. Cheng [24,25] studied the approached for rule extraction in fuzzy information systems based on rough set theory.The previous studies in rule extraction have solved many practical problems and made a great progress in natural language processing. However, most of them have focused on the rule extractions for solving problems in engineering, business, medical diagnosis, and fuzzy information system etc. Up to now, few of them are related to WSD and no studies on the rule extraction by features of attributes have been found. In addition, there is a clear need in natural language processing to develop approaches which can extract effective and high quality rules for classification with less effort. Therefore, a new approach of rule extraction by features of attributes is proposed in this article for WSD of English preposition, with on as a target word, in order to simplify the process of rule extraction and improve the qualities of the extracted rules and the accuracy of WSD. The proposed approach may be applied to the WSD of other English prepositions, and it can also be used in different fields, such as pattern recognition, knowledge discovery, data mining, default diagnosis, decision support system and intelligent robot. The result of the study may provide references for natural language processing and understanding, semantic studies of prepositions and WSD of other part of speech.The rest of the article includes the following contents. Section 2 presents the senses of on occurred in the corpus and the granularity of the senses of on in this study. Section 3 gives the theoretical descriptions of formal context and features of some attributes. Section 4 gives the procedure of calculating simple class exclusive attribute and composite class exclusive attributes. Section 5 explains the process of generation of the formal context of English preposition on. Section 6 exhibits the process of rule extraction for WSD of on. Section 7 makes a comparison between two approaches of rule extraction; the feature of attribute approach and the structural partial ordered attribute diagram approach. Finally, Section 8 comes to the conclusions of the study.English preposition on is one of the most frequently used simple prepositions in the natural language. It may have about 20 senses, and it may mean differently in different contexts. For instance [26],(1)My mobile phone isonthe table (on-place)The meeting will beonTuesday (on-time)He made a lot of moneyonthe deal (on-cause)He walkedontiptoe (on-manner)He had thrown me downonone hundred pitchforks (on-direction)He would lead a violent assaultonthe jail (on-objective)His roleonbase was hardly formal (on-subordination)The ambiguity of on may cause trouble in natural language understanding and processing. In addition, the senses of prepositions are complex; therefore, the disambiguation of prepositions is a tough and inevitable issue. In this study, a corpus is constructed in order to extract rules for WSD of English preposition on. The corpus is composed of 350,000 words including written and spoken materials, such as research articles, laws, movie subtitles, news, speeches, literatures, and interviews, and about 50,000 words for each genre are included in the corpus. The senses of on in the corpus are tagged and the occurrence of on with each sense is counted by Wordsmith Concordance Tool, the statistic result is shown in Table 1. In this study, the granularity of the senses of on is set to be 3 in order to simplify the WSD and the rule extraction of it: (1) on-time, on with the sense of “time” (TESon); (2) on-others, on with sense of others—neither “time” nor “place (NPSon) and (3) on-place, on with the sense of “place” (PSon).The new approach of rule extraction of English preposition goes through the following procedures:The new approach of rule extraction is based on the following theoretical descriptions of formal context (Definitions 1–3 [27]) and the features of some attributes (Definition 4–5 [28]):Definition 1A formal context K=(G, M, I) consists of two sets G and M and a relation I between G and M. The elements of G are called the objects and the elements of M are called the attributes of the context. I represents the relation between an object g and an attribute m, written as gIm or (g, m)∈I.Let K=(G, M, I) be a formal context, for a set A=Gs⊆G, f(A)={m∈M|(g, m)∈I,∀g∈A}. Correspondingly, for a set B=Ms⊆M, define h(B)={g∈G|(g, m)∈I,∀m∈B}. A formal concept is a pair (A, B) with A=Gs⊆G, B=Ms⊆M, f(A)=B and h(B)=A. A is called the extent of the concept and B is called the intent of the concept.Let K=(G, M, I) be a formal context, if for any objects g1, g2∈G from f(g1)=f(g2), it always follows that g1=g2 and correspondingly, h(m1)=h(m2) implies m1=m2 for all m1, m2∈M, the formal context K=(G, M, I) is called clarified.Let G1⊆G, G1 is a set of a class of objects and it satisfies h(m)⊆G1 and h(m)∩Gp=Ø, here Gpis any set of objects other than G1, then, m is called a simple class exclusive attribute of G1.Let G1⊆G, G1 is a set of a class of objects. M1⊆M, M1={m1, m2, …, mk} (k≥2) is a set of attributes. If h(M1)⊆G1 and h(M1)∩Gp=Ø, here Gpis any set of objects other than G1, then, the attributes m1, m2, …, mkare called composite class exclusive attributes of G1.In [28], different features of attribute are defined. In this study, only simple class exclusive attributes and composite class exclusive attributes are needed, and they are calculated by the following procedure.1.Determine the decision attribute set corresponding to different classes D1, D2,…, Dp; p≥2;Initialize i=1;Calculate the object sets corresponding to the decision attributes h(Di)=Gi;Suppose that the object set Giincludes n objects, Mcis the non-decision attribute set of a class. Calculate the non-decision attribute setMci=⋃j=1n{(m|(gj,m)∈I)},gj∈GicorrespondingtoGi,P(Mci)={Mci1,Mci2,…,Mcik},k≥1isthepowersetofMci;Initialize t=1;Calculate the object set g(Mcik)=Gcikcorresponding to Mcik∈P(Mci);If Gcik⊆Gi, then go to the next step, otherwise, t=t+1, go back to step 6;If, at this time, #(Mcik)=1, then, the attributes in Mcikare simple class exclusive attributes; If #(Mcik)>1, the attributes in Mcikare composite class exclusive attributes;If t=k, go to the next step; else t=t+1, go back to step 6;If i=p, it is ended; else i=i+1, go back to step 3.For instance, a formal context for decision is given in Table 2.The simple class exclusive attributes and composite class exclusive attributes can be calculated by the following procedure:1.Calculate the object sets corresponding to the decision attribute D1, h(D1)=G1={g1, g4, g8};Calculate the non-decision attribute setMc1=⋃j=13{m|(gj,m)∈I},gj∈G1correspondingtoG1,Mc1={m1,m2,m3,m4,m5,m6,m7,m8},P(Mc1)isthepowersetofMc1;∃Mci={m8}∈P(Mc1), h(m8)={g1, g4, g8}=Gc1i⊆G1 is the object set corresponding to m8, at this time, #(Mci)=1, then, the attribute in Mci={m8}is a simple class exclusive attribute of the class that D1 is corresponding to;∃Mcj={m1, m6, m8}∈P(Mc1), h(m1, m6, m8)={g8}=Gc1j⊆G1 is the object set corresponding to Mcj={m1, m6, m8}, at this time, #(Mcj)>1, then, the attributes in Mcj={m1, m6, m8} constitute a composite class exclusive attribute of the class that D1 is corresponding to.In the same way, other simple class exclusive attributes and composite class exclusive attributes can be calculated.A data set is constructed for WSD and rule extraction of on. It is composed of 600 samples, among which 200 samples are for on-time, 200 are for on-others and the rest 200 are for on-place. Different linguistic features are extracted from the context based on the sample sentences of the data sets. Semantic features include the mutual information (MI) between a preposition on and the followed noun, which is calculated by the following formula [29]:(1)MI(w1,w2)=logP(w1,w2)P(w1)P(w2)where w1 and w2 are two words, P(w1, w2) is the probability of the co-occurrence of w1 and w2; P(w1) and P(w2) are the probabilities of w1 and w2, respectively. The number of co-occurrences and the occurrences of the words are counted by the Concordance Tool of Wordsmith 4.0 software. P(w1, w2) is calculated by the following equation:(2)P(w1,w2)=Numberofco-occurrenceofw1andw2incorpusTotalnumberofwordsincorpusSince the granularity of on is set to be 3, there are 3 MIs: MI(TESon, n) – mutual information of on-time and the following noun, MI(NPSon, n) – mutual information of on-others and the following noun, and MI(PSon, n) – mutual information of on-place and the following noun, respectively. Two syntactic features are considered: (1) the noun after on is a noun with the sense of time, for instance, day, year, Sunday; (2) the noun after on is a noun with the sense of place or direction, for instance, floor, table, left. If the noun after on has one of the above features, then a logical value 1 is given to the sample, otherwise, 0 is given to it. In this way, the data set for training is prepared, as shown in Table 3. The “No.” in the first column denotes the number of the objects and the numbers in parenthesis denotes the class the object belongs to. For instance, 5(1) denotes the 5th object belongs to class 1. This is the same with Tables 5 and 6. The “time n” denotes that preposition on is followed by a time noun; and “place n” denotes that on is followed by a place noun.The MIs in Table 3 need to be symbolized into bi-values in order to express the direct relation between objects and attributes. Therefore, the symbolization of the MIs is carried out based on the MI value distributions shown in Fig. 1, where, a in the parenthesis represents MI(TESon, n), b – MI(NSPon, n) and c – MI(PSon, n), respectively.The optimal division method is used, and the ranges of the MIs are divided as shown in Table 4. Finally, the formal context for the WSD and rule extraction of on is formed, see Table 5. In Table 5, m13 represents the attribute of syntactic feature – the noun after on is a time noun and m14 represents the attribute of syntactic feature – the noun after on is a place or direction noun.The formal context in Table 5 is clarified by deleting the repeated attribute patterns, and the class labels D1, D2 and D3 are added to the formal context for class (1) (on-time), class (2) (on-others) and class (3) (on-place), respectively. By now, the formal context for rule extraction is formed, as shown in Table 6.In order to make sure that the data set for this study is valid, a 5-fold cross-validation to the data set is carried out. The data set is evenly classified into 5 groups; each group is composed of 120 samples, 40 samples for each of the 3 senses of on. In each test, one group is taken as the testing data and the rest four groups are used as training data. The results of the 5-fold cross-validation are shown in Table 7.The average test accuracy is 92.67%, and the mean-square deviation is calculated by standard deviation function in Excel which is 2.39%. The final accuracy of the data set by 5-fold cross-validation is 92.67±2.39%, which is quite high. Therefore, the formal context is proven valid.Based on the theoretical description and calculation method of the features of attributes, the rules for WSD of on are extracted by the following steps:(1)Calculate all the simple class exclusive attributes and the composite class exclusive attributes of each of the 3 classes (senses of on). They constitute m in the concept pair (g, m), and their corresponding objects constitute g in the concept pair (g, m).Carry out calculations for every two pairs in the pair set by the following algorithm. If C1=(A1, B1) is a pair of a concept in the formal context, and C2=(A2, B2) is another pair of the concept, then C3=f{C1⊕C2}={A3, B3}={A1∪A2, B1∩B2}. In this way, the new pair set is obtained. If any newly generated pair is the same as any pair in the original pair set, the new one is deleted.If the intent of any pair in the new pair set is the same as that of any pair in the original pair set, then the original one is deleted, i.e., the pair that has the larger extent is retained.If there is only one element in the new pair set, the calculation about this attribute is stopped; if not, go back to step (2) and the calculation will continue.The flowchart of rule extraction is shown in Fig. 2; the rules extracted for WSD of English preposition on are listed in Table 8.The rules in Table 8 are used to disambiguate the word senses of on with the data set in Table 5, and the accuracy of WSD reaches 93.2%.Both the feature of attribute approach and the structural partial ordered attribute diagram (SPOAD) approach are based on the theory of formal concept analysis and they can both be used for rule extraction. Since the SPOAD approach is a well-formed approach, a comparison is made between it and the new approach in order to see the merits of the new approach.The SPOAD approach is another approach for rule extraction. It is based on the theory of formal concept analysis [30]. It visualizes the relationships between objects and attributes according to the principle of attribute partial orders. The objects with common attributes gather together, and the objects with exclusive attributes depart from them. In this way, classification is realized. The SPOAD also shows the hierarchical orders of the attributes for each object. A SPOAD can be generated by SPOAD software based on a formal context and the generated SPOAD can be used for classification, data mining and knowledge discovery. WSD and rule extraction can be realized according to the feature cluster on each line in the diagram. In this study, the formal context in Table 6 is used for WSD and rule extraction of on by the SPOAD approach. Since there are some objects with the same feature patterns in the formal context, the formal context is clarified by deleting the objects with repeated feature patterns. Then the SPOAD is generated by a SPOAD software [31] based on the clarified formal context, as shown in Fig. 3.Based on the SPOAD in Fig. 3, the rules for WSD of on are extracted by the similar procedure as mentioned in Section 6, except for step (1). Substitute the following step (1′) for the step (1) in Section 6:(1′) Find an attribute miin the SPOAD, and then go up the line to the top node; the attribute combination constitutes m in the concept pair (g, m); then go down the line or lines to the end, and the object set constitutes g in the concept pair (g, m).The extracted rules by the SPOAD approach are shown in Table 9. The extracted rules are used for WSD of on with the data set in Table 5 and the accuracy reaches 91%.By comparing the feature of attribute approach with the existing SPOAD approach, it is known that the feature of attribute approach has following merits.(1)The proposed feature of attribute approach is simpler than the existing SPOAD approach in three aspects: (1) The SPOAD approach extracts rules from a structural partial ordered attribute diagram which is generated from the clarified formal context by SPOAD generation software. However, the proposed feature of attribute approach extracts rules directly from the clarified formal context; it does not need to use the SPOAD generation software to generate the SOPAD diagram. This makes the process of rule extraction simpler; (2) the step (1′) (see Section 7.1) in the SPOAD approach requires one to examine the SPOAD and track up and down along each line in the SPOAD, and find the sense category of the object and the feature combination on that line, which is a relatively complicated and time consuming process. However, this step is avoided in the proposed feature of attribute approach; (3) the step (2) in the SPOAD approach is relatively complex with high error rate, because every new rule needs to be testified in the SPOAD. However, in the proposed feature of attribute approach, the new rules do not need to be testified in the original formal context. Therefore, the proposed approach is simple and the error rate is low.The proposed feature of attribute approach is more effective than the SPOAD approach in two aspects:(1) the accuracy of WSD by the proposed approach is 93.2%, which is higher than 91% by the SPOAD approach; (2) simple class exclusive attributes are the most effective attributes in the WSD. The proposed feature of attribute approach can extract more simple class exclusive attributes than the SPOAD approach. Some of the simple class exclusive attributes, such as m12 and m13 in this study, cannot be extracted by the SPOAD approach.The proposed feature of attribute approach is easier to operate because extracting rules from the clarified formal context is easier than that from the SPOAD. It needs only to calculate the simple class exclusive attribute and the composite class exclusive attributes according to their definitions, and the calculation is just simple and repetitive comparison.The contributions of the existing SPOAD approach and the proposed feature of attribute approach are listed in Table 10.It can be seen through the above comparison that the proposed feature of attribute approach can extract rules for WSD simply, effectively and easily, and the extracted rules are in high quality, which leads to a high accuracy of WSD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new approach of rule extraction for word sense disambiguation (WSD) of English preposition by features of attributes is proposed. It is based on the theory of formal concept analysis and the descriptions and calculations of the simple class exclusive attribute and the composite class exclusive attribute. The approach is used in the rule extraction for WSD of English preposition on, and the accuracy of WSD reaches 93.2%. Compared with the well-formed SPOAD approach, the proposed feature of attribute approach has the following innovations.(1)It can extract rules for WSD by features of attributes; the technique can extract rules for classification with less effort. Until now, none of the existing approaches have been found extracting rules by features of attributes.The proposed approach can extract rules for WSD without using the structural partial ordered attribute diagram (SPOAD) generation software, which makes the rule extraction more available and easier.The proposed approach can extract some simple class exclusive attributes which are unable to be extracted by the SPOAD approach. In addition, the extracted composite class exclusive attributes by the proposed approach are generally clusters of fewer features than the ones by the SPOAD approach. Both of the merits may facilitate the process of classification.The proposed approach is proven through experiment to be more effective, simpler and easier to operate than the existing structural partial ordered attribute diagram approach.The accuracy of WSD is improved by the proposed feature of attribute approach.The proposed approach can be extended to the rule extraction of other English prepositions and semantically complex words. The results of study provide a theoretical foundation for the study of preposition semantics, WSD of other prepositions and natural language processing.A further extension of the proposed approach will focus on developing some programs for computer to calculate the simple class exclusive attributes and composite class exclusive attributes in order to improve the speed of rule extraction. Also the proposed approach will be extended to the WSD of other part of speech, such as verbs, modal verbs, adjectives and nouns.