@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Promoting sales of online games through customer engagement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Customer engagement has been conceptually reviewed and empirically examined.This study probed the different dimensions of customer engagement in online games.Both psychological and behavioral engagement were positively associated with online sales.Three factors together explained 65% of the variance in psychological engagement.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Customer engagement,Online sales,Virtual world,Online games,Customer satisfaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With keen competition in the online game industry, game developers and publishers are finding new ways to induce players’ to spend money on subscriptions and virtual items. As the online game itself provides a highly engaging environment, this study examines online sales from the perspective of customer engagement. We propose a research model that examines why game players actively engage in playing online games, and how such engagement can contribute to sales of online games, empirically testing the model using 377 online game players. The results support our research hypotheses and illustrate the effect of customer psychological engagement on stimulating game players’ spending in online games. In particular, both psychological and behavioral engagement exerted a positive influence on online sales, and the dimensions and antecedents of psychological engagement were also identified. The findings of this study are expected to provide some suggestions for game developers and publishers on promoting the sales of digital items/goods. This study also adds to the current understanding of customer psychological engagement by identifying its antecedents and consequences in the context of online games.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The advent of high-speed broadband services, personal computers, and mobile technology has cultivated a fertile ground in which online games have flourished. The online game business is a compelling domain that attracts a huge level of investment. A recent global games market report predicted a growing upward trajectory of the online game market, with the number of gamers worldwide set to rise from 1.21 billion to 1.55 billion, and global games market will grow to $86.1 billion in 2016, using a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 6.7% (de Heij et al. 2013).Although the online game industry has a huge market potential, competition within the industry is fierce due to the many product substitutes. With the global popularity of and growing demand for online games, there are hundreds of companies competing with each other, offering a wide variety of games ranging from text-based to massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs). There are many options in almost every online gaming domain. To dominate the competition in the online game industry, online game developers and publishers are seeking new ways to offer the best gaming experience for players, and to induce players to spend money on subscriptions and virtual items.Previous studies have explored possible strategies to deal with the increasing competition in the online game industry by focusing on the operation and marketing of online games (Chan et al. 2014, Guo and Barnes 2012, Hamari and Järvinen 2011, Paavilainen et al. 2013). However, a long-term competitive advantage is inseparable from a firm’s ability to sustain and expand its customer base and develops a solid customer relationship with the game players. It is also necessary to note that the online game itself provides a highly engaging environment for many game players, who can lose track of the amount of time and money they spend while playing. In this regard, the operation and marketing strategies are built around an understanding of how to improve game players’ engagement in the game-specific activities, which until recently was rarely examined in online game-related research. Although customer engagement has not been systematically explored in this area, the concept has recently attracted increasing attention from some marketing scholars (Brodie et al. 2013, Hollebeek et al. 2014, Kabadayi and Price 2014), and is regarded as an effective retention and acquisition strategy for establishing and maintaining the competitive advantage, and a predictor of future business success.Recently, research interest in understanding the nature and scope of customer engagement has increased. However, most research studies are descriptive and qualitative analyses (Brodie et al. 2011, Hollebeek 2011, Mollen and Wilson 2010, Van Doorn et al. 2010), rather than empirical and quantitative. Of the few studies including empirical work, the research focuses primarily on customer engagement with brands (Hollebeek et al. 2014, Laroche et al. 2012) and brand communities (Brodie et al. 2013, Gummerus et al. 2012). Empirical research of customer engagement with the products (such as online games) is rarely reported. Considering the importance of customer engagement in helping game developers and publishers to attain strategic goals, such as a growth in the market share and an increase in game sales, this study represents an initial attempt to (1) conceptualize and operationalize customer engagement in the context of online games, (2) identify the antecedents of customer engagement with online games, (3) examine the relationship between psychological engagement and behavioral engagement, and (4) understand the role of customer engagement in contributing to players’ spending in online games.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we address the concept of customer engagement. We then present the research model and research hypotheses, followed by a description of the research design and the methodology used in the study. In the fifth section, we present the results of our empirical study and conclude the paper with a discussion of the implications for both research and practice.The sustainability and success of an online game has always hinged on game players who are willing to constantly invest their time and money in the game. Thus, concern over how and why game players purchase virtual items/goods becomes a more fundamental and challenging issue. Research has investigated the issue from different points of view. Ho and Wu (2012) and Park and Lee (2011a,b) used consumption value theory to examine virtual item purchase decisions in online games. Guo and Barnes (2012) examined how perceived value, game customization, and perceived enjoyment strongly affected the purchase intention and actual purchase behavior within World of Warcraft. Similarly, Kim (2012) explored the relationship between user satisfaction and repurchasing behavior in social virtual worlds. Recently, research has demonstrated that customer engagement can be considered as an effective strategy to improve customer relationships in the online environment (Brodie et al. 2013, Cheung et al. 2011, Chan et al. 2014). The role of customer psychological engagement in purchasing decisions in online games remains unknown.The concept of “engagement” has been widely explored by a variety of scholars from different disciplines, including management, social psychology, marketing, and information systems (Bowden 2009, Hollebeek 2011, Mollen and Wilson 2010, Vivek et al. 2012). In particular, customer engagement, as a sub-concept under the umbrella term of “engagement”, has been investigated in the marketing literature. Brands (Sprott et al. 2009), products and organizations (Patterson et al. 2006), and brand communities (Algesheimer et al. 2005) are the key objects of customer engagement cited in the literature. Although the consensus is that customer engagement is essential to the success of marketing and sales activities (Calder et al. 2009, Hollebeek et al. 2014, Solis 2010), this concept suffers from a lack of agreement on the definition, dimensionality, and operationalization, as illustrated in Table 1.According to Table 1, the interpretation of customer engagement is still mired in vagueness and controversy. However, it is also worthwhile to note that customer engagement is a complex and multifaceted concept, which can be conceptualized in different ways. Despite all these different definitions, there are three primary perspectives from which scholars have investigated and defined the concept of customer engagement, i.e., the psychological process, the behavioral manifestation, and the motivational psychological state.•Customer engagement as a psychological process: for example, Bowden (2009) postulated customer engagement as a psychological process that leads to the formation of customer loyalty and returns.Customer engagement as behavioral manifestation: for example, Van Doorn et al. (2010) defined customer engagement as the behavioral manifestation of a customer toward a brand or a firm which goes beyond purchase behavior.Customer engagement as motivational psychological state: for example, Patterson et al. (2006) defined customer engagement as a psychological state that is characterized by a degree of vigor, dedication, absorption, and interaction.Chan et al. (2014) have further developed three key dimensions of customer psychological engagement, including vigor, absorption, and dedication for research in the IS discipline. This echoes what has been claimed by Patterson et al. (2006), who drew on a variety of parent disciplines, including social psychology and organizational behavior, and defined customer engagement as a psychological state that is characterized by a degree of vigor, dedication, absorption, and interaction. In fact, it is also commonly agreed that a multidimensional view of engagement can best capture the breadth and complexity of this construct (Newman and Harrison 2008). Following Patterson et al.’s (2006) work, three key dimensions of customer psychological engagement in an online game were identified as follows.•Vigor refers to the customer’s level of energy and mental resilience while playing an online game, and the willingness to invest time and effort in his/her role as a game player.Absorption refers to the customer concentrating fully, being happy, and being deeply engrossed in an online game, whereby time passes quickly.Dedication refers to the customer’s sense of significance, enthusiasm, inspiration, pride, and challenge towards an online game.Recently, researchers have begun to explore the concept of customer engagement in the online environment. We notice that a majority of research studies are conducted in the context of social networking sites and online brand communities (e.g., Brodie et al. 2013; Calder et al. 2009; Hollebeek et al. 2014; Tsai and Men 2013, 2014). Empirical studies on engagement with products are rarely reported. In this study, we attempt to examine the concept of customer engagement in the context of online game.In this study, we built on the conceptual framework of customer engagement (Van Doorn et al. 2010) and identified three major types of antecedent variables of customer engagement in the context of online games. Van Doorn et al. (2010) proposed a conceptual framework by suggesting that customer engagement is affected by three major types of factors, including customer characteristics, firm initiatives, and the contextual environment. Customer characteristics, such as satisfaction, brand commitment, brand attachment, consumption goals etc., represent the attitudinal antecedents of customer engagement. Among factors in this category, customer satisfaction is one of the most commonly cited in studies associated with customer relationship management (Anderson and Mittal 2000, Bowden 2009, Palmatier et al. 2006). Firm initiatives refer to actions undertaken by a focal firm to enhance customer engagement. These actions may include building a consistent brand image, producing high-value and customizable products, forming a positive firm reputation, etc. As a superior user experience with a product will engender higher levels of customer engagement in the context of online games, it is important to consider product characteristics (game customization, in particular, in this study), which may create a better consumer experience (Teng 2010). The contextual environment is related to the context within which firms and customers exist. Such contexts can be either at the macro (e.g., political, economic, and social) or micro (e.g., organizational climate, group norms, and social interaction among the customers) level. As this study examines customer engagement at an individual level, and social interaction is frequently observed in MMOG, we have chosen social interaction among game players to capture the contextual influence. It is also necessary to note that, as a parsimonious consideration, the research model is built with the above three identified factors, but Van Doorn et al.’s (2010) conceptual framework provides a foundation to enrich and expand future research. Based on the above discussion, we attempt to explore how customer satisfaction with an online game, game customization, and social interaction among online game players can influence the formation and development of psychological engagement. Fig. 1depicts our research model.Game satisfaction is defined as a positive affective state resulting from game players’ overall evaluation of their experience within an online game. In particular, satisfaction in the context of online games has been viewed as “cumulative satisfaction” as opposed to “transaction-specific satisfaction” (Olsen and Johnson 2003). Cumulative satisfaction is a more abstract construct that describes a user’s overall evaluation of his/her experience (Homburg et al. 2005). According to the conceptual model proposed by Van Doorn et al. (2010), attitudinal factors are among the most important factors affecting customer engagement. Thus, a higher level of user satisfaction with an online game will lead to a higher level of players’ engagement toward the focal game (Bowden 2009). In particular, we believe that when users are satisfied with their playing of an online game, they will be more likely to devote their time, effort, and energy to the game, and further will be deeply engrossed in and highly enthusiastic about the game.Hypothesis 1Game satisfaction is positively associated with psychological engagement.Customization is an important element in establishing a psychological connection between the players and the game (Bailey et al. 2009), and is recognized as the key of driving immersive and compelling game experience (Dickey 2006). With the increasingly sophisticated game designs, players are now able to customize almost every single aspect in the game, such as appearance of their avatars, skills and abilities. For example, in World of Warcraft (WoW), players can customize their avatars with the built-in character creation toolkits. They could modify the race, facial characteristic, clothing and body of the initial character, making the avatar truly represents them. When players are in game, these customized avatars align with their psychological resources and their game playing experiences (Oulasvirta and Blom 2008), acting as the vessels through which episodic game memories can be formed, stored, and retrieved later as experiences that happened not to the avatars, but to the players (Ng and Lindgren 2013). As the result, this attribution of personal relevance allows players to feel the sense of being an origin, transform the game to ‘my game’, and engage them into the game psychologically (Oulasvirta and Blom 2008).Empirical results have also provided support to the relationship between customization and psychological engagement. For example, Ng and Lindgren (2013) explored the impact of customization in a video game and found that the feeling of engagement increased when respondents were allowed to create their own avatars. Turkay et al. (2013) further indicated that these customization tasks heavily influenced players’ sensory, imaginative immersion and flow experiences. In the same vein, we expect that if online game players are allowed to customize every single details of the game system, they are more likely to be psychologically engaged with the game.Hypothesis 2Game customization is positively associated with psychological engagement.Social interaction refers to interactions between game players. It is considered as an important contextual element of an online game (Van Doorn et al. 2010), and is one of the central aspects related to optimal game experience (Lewinski 2000). Particularly, online game designers cultivate a competitive yet sociable environment to bond players from different backgrounds together. For example, they make the quests difficult to be accomplished alone to encourage players to form groups and exchange ideas. By carefully crafting the reward system, players would be able to experience teamwork, encouragement and fun, and eventually engage with the game.The relationship between social interaction and psychological engagement was evidenced in prior literature. For instance, Lee et al. (2012) reported that social interaction is a salient factor of players’ intention to engage in social network games. They also suggested that players engage in socializing and building relationships with others in the game. Similarly, we expect that cohesive and rewarding social interactions among online game players will enhance their feelings of engagement towards the game.Hypothesis 3Social interaction is positively associated with psychological engagement.To fully understand the role of customer engagement in promoting sales in online games, this model incorporates both psychological and behavioral engagement. As discussed above, customer engagement is a complex and multifaceted concept, and it would be valuable to include multiple perspectives of this construct (Brodie et al. 2013, De Vries and Carlson 2014). In the current study, psychological engagement has been modeled as a second-order latent construct and operationalized as a “motivational psychological state” that is characterized by vigor, dedication, and absorption (Cheung et al. 2011).This psychological state of customer engagement is expected to bring about behavioral engagement, including duration, frequency, and recentness of game participation. If a player is willing to invest his/her personal energy and time into an online game, or even immerse himself/herself in the game, he/she will be more likely to increase the frequency and intensity of game participation. Some recent studies have made the similar argument that psychological engagement should have a positive effect on engagement behavior in an online social platform (Cheung et al. 2011) or in brand virtual communities (De Vries and Carlson 2014). Based on the discussion above, we believe that game players’ psychological engagement leads to their behavioral engagement in the online games.Hypothesis 4Psychological engagement in an online game is positively associated with behavioral engagement.Customer engagement has been found to be associated with a number of positive outcomes. For example, in the organization literature, engagement is closely related to organizational citizenship behavior and organizational commitment (Macey and Schneider 2008, Saks 2006). In the service literature, Patterson et al. (2006) have argued that customer engagement is a superior predictor of customer loyalty. In the marketing literature, Algesheimer et al. (2005) empirically showed how brand community engagement affects membership continuance intentions, community recommendation intentions, and community participation intentions. In line with these viewpoints, we believe that engagement in online games will produce positive behavior in the game players, such as purchase behavior (Hennig-Thurau et al. 2010, Malthouse et al. 2013). It is not difficult to understand that, if game players are heavily engaged in an online game, they will invest more energy, time and effort into the game, with a high engrossment and a lot of enthusiasm, and further they will have a greater propensity to purchase in the online game. Furthermore, when game players increase the duration, frequency, and recentness of participation in an online game, it is likely that they will spend more money (e.g., purchasing virtual items, etc.) in the particular game.Hypothesis 5Psychological engagement in an online game is positively associated with the amount of money spent in the game (online sales).Behavioral engagement in an online game is positively associated with the amount of money spent in the game (online sales).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
