@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An optimal vibration control strategy for a vehicle's active suspension based on improved cultural algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel control strategy based on improved culture algorithm for a vehicle's active suspension was proposed and supported by numerical simulation.The culture algorithm was improved by using niche algorithm in this research.By simulation, the perfect control effect is obtained by using fuzzy PID control with the optimal fuzzy rules optimized by improved culture algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automobile active suspension,Fuzzy-PID control method,Improved cultural algorithm,Niche algorithm,Vibration control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research is conducted such that the bodywork vertical vibration acceleration of a quarter car model is selected as a control objective and Fuzzy-PID control strategy based on improved cultural algorithm is proposed for vibration reduce. Cultural algorithm and niche algorithm are mixed together to design Fuzzy-PID controller and optimize control rules, which can accelerate optimization speed and has a good global optimal performance. The numerical results show that the active suspension, with Fuzzy-PID control strategy in which control rules are optimized by improved cultural algorithm, can significantly suppress the bodywork vertical vibration acceleration, and the ride comfort is improved. All the simulation analyses can give the support for the optimal control scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The active suspension can adjust active force generated by actuator to suppress the bodywork vertical vibration according to control laws, ease the shock of uneven road and vibration of carrier systems, ensure the ride performance and improve ride comfort. The active suspension is one of the main symbols of modern cars and its actuator can generate active force to inhibit the bodywork vertical vibration, for which the active suspension directly affects the characteristics of a vehicle's stability, comfort and safety. Therefore at present, a number of scholars still research on the active suspensions of vehicle with the focus on its control method [1–4].In the aspect of motion control, intelligent control methods attract much attention of scholars. Many significant results are obtained by using neural network [5,6], fuzzy inference, and optimization method. Among them, Fuzzy control method is developed rapidly in recent years. It uses linguistic variables instead of numeric variables and the controller based on fuzzy method contains a large number of people's control experience and knowledge, which is similar to human intelligence [7,8]. Fuzzy control technology has its unique advantages. The controlled system does not necessarily be as accurate as a mathematical model, and fuzzy controller is not sensitive to the system parameters. It is highly robust and the control laws are based on a number of control rules. So, it is especially suitable for nonlinear, time-varying vehicle dynamic system which often travels on different roads. Based on the virtues of its strong-points, a lot of research work has been done about the fuzzy control strategy by many scholars. Tzuu-Hseng et al. [9] used a novel fuzzy feedback linearization control strategy via differential geometry approach to improve the control effect and stability. A field programmable gate array was proposed by Aldair et al. [10] to build an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system for controlling a full vehicle nonlinear active suspension system. Chiou et al. [11] used fuzzy logic control for an automotive active suspension system in which the membership functions were optimized using a genetic algorithm. Du, et al. [12] proposed a fuzzy control method for nonlinear uncertain electro-hydraulic active suspensions with input constraint. Lin et al. [13] and Nurkan et al. [14] proposed two different fuzzy sliding mode controllers (FSMC) to control active suspension systems and evaluated their control performance. In a word, fuzzy method has broad application prospects in the domain of intelligent control and fuzzy logic control has been applied successfully in active suspension systems [15].As a key problem, it plays an important role to select suitable control strategies and design effective controllers in active suspensions. However, the application of fuzzy logic control requires considerable efforts in determining appropriate fuzzy rules [16]. This work is difficult if the controlled system is complicated. Active suspension systems generally possess time-varying and uncertain dynamic characteristics, for which to design a fuzzy logic controller is complex. To solve the problem that mentioned above, the cultural algorithm associated with niche algorithm is proposed to design a Fuzzy-PID controller and optimize its control rules, which can accelerate optimization speed and has a good global optimization performance.In terms of research on the bodywork vertical vibration caused by uneven road, the quarter car model with two degrees of freedom is selected as a control and simulation model. This model can reflect the performance indexes of the active suspension well, such as the bodywork vertical vibration acceleration, the suspension travel and tire dynamic load. On the premise of correctness and effectiveness, this model can reduce system parameters and the dynamic differential equations are easy to be solved with low computational cost. So, the quarter car model with two degrees of freedom is established and used in this study.As to analysis on dynamic performance of the active suspension in time domain, the road input model gives more important roles. It is the basis of research on the active suspension, which belongs to a member of the active suspension model system. For the continuous random road input model, the vehicle speed is also taken into consideration and the white noise speed spectrum is used to describe the road model in time domain. The random road input model is acquired through integral of white noise signal.The frequency spectrum density function of the road contour in the time domain can be given by(1)Gq(f)=1vGq(n0)nn0−2=Gq(n0)n02vf2where Gq(n0) is the road roughness coefficient.vis the vehicle speed. f is the frequency in time domain. n is the space frequency, and it represents per meter length of wave number. n0 is the reference value of space frequency. Here, n0=0.1/m.The power spectrum function of the vehicle speed in the time domain can be expressed by(2)Gq˙(f)=(2πf)2⋅Gq(f)=4π2Gq(n0)n02vIf assuming that the vehicle speed is a constant, the power spectrum functionGq˙(f)can be calculated, and it is denoted by Cn. In this way, the road contour can be described as follows(3)x(t)=Cn1/2∫tw(t)dtwherew(t)is white noise.If letting that the speed is 20m/s and the road is B rank, it is can be obtained that Gq(n0)=64×10−6, Cn=5.05×10−4. So, the formula (3) can be given by(4)x(t)=0.022∫tw(t)dtBy computation, the road contour of B rank in time domain is shown in Fig. 1.The quarter car model with two degrees of freedom is shown in Fig. 2. In this model, the sprung mass and unsprung mass are respectively denoted by m2 and m1. The suspension system is represented by a linear spring with the stiffness coefficient ksand a linear damper with a damping coefficient c0. The tire is described by a linear spring with the vertical stiffness coefficient kt. The active control force is u generated by the actuator.Point contact theory is applied between tire and the surface of road. Assuming that the tire is contacted with the surface of road at all times, the dynamic differential equation of the active suspension can be obtained as follows(5)m2x¨2+c0(x˙2−x˙1)+ks(x2−x1)+u=0m1x¨1+c0(x˙1−x˙0)+kt(x1−x0)+ks(x1−x2)−u=0where x0 is the road contour excitation. x1, x2 is individually the vertical displacement of m2 and m1.In the dynamic Eq. (5), the concrete parameter values used in this study are derived from a ford car and they are created and shown in a list in Table 1.Because the errors exist in the measurement and modeling, the dynamic model established in this study is uncertain. Fuzzy control strategy does not depend on the precise mathematical model. It uses linguistic variables to describe the system characteristics and produces the corresponding control rules. Then the actuator generates the active control force using these control rulers. However, the precision and stability of fuzzy control system are not satisfactory. For avoiding the shortcomings of fuzzy control, a PID control scheme combined with fuzzy inference optimized by cultural algorithm is advanced to control the active suspension system. It can exert the advantages of optimal fuzzy control and PID control. After that, the control effect is enhanced. In this part, a Fuzzy-PID controller is designed and interpreted. The optimal control rules of fuzzy inference are obtained in Section 4 by using cultural algorithm.The Fuzzy inference system with 2-input and 3-output is designed in this research. The inputs are the vertical acceleration error of bodywork and its derivative, and they are denoted by E and EC. The outputs are the proportionality factors, and they are expressed by Kp, Kiand Kd. The flow chart shown in Fig. 3gives the optimal Fuzzy-PID control scheme.In Fig. 3, r(t) is the acceleration reference value of bodywork. c(t) is the acceleration feedback of bodywork. The error of the acceleration is expressed by e(t) instead of denotation E. u is the input of active control force. The scale factors in PID controller are defined byK′p,K′iandK′dwhich can be automatically tuned depending on the following formula(6)K′p(n)=K′p(n−1)+KpK′i(n)=K′i(n−1)+KiK′d(n)=K′d(n−1)+KdThus, the active control force can be given by(7)u(n)=K′p(n)e(n)−e(n−1)+K′(n)ie(n)+K′d(n)e(n)−2e(n−1)+e(n−2)+u(n−1)where e(n) is the acceleration error of the nth iterative step.The Fuzzy inference system of Fuzzy-PID controller is designed according to the steps below(1)Fuzzy domain and fuzzy variables.The Fuzzy domain of the input variables E and EC and the output variables Kp, Ki, and Kdare both belonging to [−6,6]. The Fuzzy linguistic variables are defined by [NB, NM, NS, ZO, PS, PM, PB]. The values of quantization factors are chosen as Ke=0.1 and Kec=0.001, and the initial values of scale factors areK′p(0)=2010,K′i(0)=16andK′d(0)=0.4.Membership functionThe inputs E and EC and the outputs Kp, Ki, and Kdentirely use Gauss membership function and linear division method, and then they have the same distribution.Fuzzy control ruleThe fuzzy control rules are made up of a set of fuzzy condition sentences. The form is given as follows1. If E is NB and EC is NB then Kpis PS and Kiis PM and Kdis ZO.2. If E is NB and EC is NM then Kpis NM and Kiis PB and Kdis NM.3. If E is NB and EC is NS then Kpis PB and Kiis NB and Kdis NM.⋮49. If E is PB and EC is PB then Kpis NM and Kiis PM and Kdis NS.Cultural algorithm advanced by Robert G. Reynolds in 1994 is a two-level evolution mechanism [17]. In terms of evolutionary computation, culture is modeled as the source of data that influences the behaviors of all individuals within the population. The culture stores the general behavioral traits of the population, and then the cultural information is accessible to all the individuals in the population and produces many generations. Cultural algorithm is also a dual-inheritance system, which maintains two search spaces. One is a population space that represents a genetic component based on biological evolution principle and the other is a belief space that represents a cultural component. Cultural algorithm enables the population to adapt to their changing environment at a higher speed than biological evolution algorithm which depends on gene inheritance, and its global optimization property is favorable.As shown in Fig. 4, cultural algorithm mainly contains three elements, and they are the population space, the belief space and the communication protocol. The population space simulates biological evolution process from microscopic perspective and the belief space simulates society derivation process which contains the formation and transmission of cultural from macroscopic perspective. The population space and belief space evolve in parallel, and influence with each another. The communication protocol that includes the acceptance function and influence function is an important constituent of cultural algorithm because it defines two communication channels. One uses a selected group of individuals to amend the belief space and the other defines the method used by the belief to guide the evolution of all the individuals in the population space.Cultural algorithm makes the individuals in the population space evolve like the derivation of human beings in society which has the intentionality and directivity. When the algorithm program ends, the optimal individual via decoding in final population can be regard as the optimal solution to a given problem.Better computational performance can be obtained by using a floating-point representation because the Fuzzy-PID controller has three control tables that contain a total of 147 elements. In accordance with a certain order, these 147 elements are connected into a string of numbers as a chromosome which is regarded as a vector. This encoding scheme can shorten the chromosome length of the individuals in population space, reduce the searching space and enhance the running speed of algorithm program. In the program, the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 respectively represent the fuzzy variables NB, NM, NS, ZO, PS, PM, and PB.The individuals are generated randomly. For each gene, the value of that gene is selected as a random positive integer in the range [1,7], and the size of the initial population is 100.The root-mean-square value (RMS) of bodywork vertical vibration acceleration is selected as objective function. The smaller value of the RMS of bodywork vertical vibration acceleration means the better ride comfort of the vehicle. The expression of objective function can be written as follows(8)g=1N∑t=1N|x¨2|2where N is the number of sampling points.Generally, the solution represented by a chromosome is directly evaluated using the fitness function. The fitness function is defined by the reciprocal of the objective function (1/g). The individual with the higher fitness value shows that the property of control rules is better. When the evolution process ends, the optimum individual can be obtained.Crossover operation is the procedure of creating new individuals according to crossover rate through the random combination of genetic material selected from the parents. Two-point crossover algorithm is utilized in this paper. Each pair of parents has a crossover rate expressed by pc=0.95, and the offspring can be produced by using it. Two positions are randomly selected, and by comparing the crossover rate and random rate, if the crossover condition is satisfied, the new strings can be acquired by using swap method. Otherwise, do nothing. For example, the parents are P1=[1112227], P2=[1122356], if the two crossover positions are 2 and 5, then the offsprings are C1=[1222567] and C2=[1111223].Mutation is the process of randomly changing the values of genes in a chromosome. The aim of mutation is to introduce new genetic material into an existing individual and add diversity to the genetic characteristics of the population. Mutation is applied at a certain rate expressed by pm, which is usually a small value and can make each gene produce the mutated offspring.Here, in-order mutation method is used. Two mutation points are randomly selected and only the strings between these mutation points execute mutation. The mutation rate is pm=0.5. If the random rate is bigger than mutation rate, the strings between the points reverse order. Otherwise, do nothing. For example, the parent isP1=[231275], the two mutation positions are 2 and 5, then the offspring isC1=[2121375].A new population of candidate solutions is selected at the end of each generation to serve as the population of the next generation. The selection operator ensures that good individuals can survive and be put into next generation. The main objective of selection operator is to obtain the better solution.Roulette wheel selection is a proportional selection operator. By using this method, the fitness values are normalized via dividing the fitness value of each individual by the summation of fitness values of all individuals. Therefore, the probability distribution can be seen as a roulette wheel, and the size of each slice is proportional to the normalized selection probability of an individual. Selection can be likened to the circumrotating of a roulette wheel and the slice which ends up at the top shall be recorded. After that, the corresponding individual is selected. Roulette wheel selection method is utilized and the selection rate is ps=0.95. The probability of the ith individual is described as following expression(9)Pi=fi∑i=1Ifiwhere fiis the fitness value of the ith individual. I is the size of all the individuals in the population space.Cultural algorithm based on the principles of human social evolution is an approach to bias the search process with the prior knowledge in the domain as well as the knowledge gained during the evolutionary process. The belief space serves as a global knowledge repository of behavioral traits, where the collective behaviors (or beliefs) of the individuals in the population space are stored. The knowledge within the belief space is the generalizations of the experience of individuals within the population space. These experiential generalizations are accumulated and described over several generations. These generalizations express the beliefs as to what the optimal behaviors of individuals consist of. The belief space contains two knowledge components. They are situational knowledge and normative knowledge described by 〈S, N〉 structure [18].Situational knowledge keeps track of the best solution found at each generation. It stores a set of best individuals which are arranged in a descending order according to fitness value. The situational knowledge components can be described as follows(10)S=s1t,s2t,⋯,sjt,⋯,smtwhere S is a matrix. m is the number of column vectors in matrix S.sjtis the jth most suitable individual of the tth generation, and it is a column vector.The situational knowledge components can be updated as followsIff(sj−1t)>f(st+1)>f(sjt)thenS=[s1t,⋯,sj−1t,st+1,sjt,⋯,sm−1t]Else iff(st+1)>f(s1t)thenS=[st+1,s1t,s2t,⋯,sjt,⋯,sm−1t]ElseS=Swhere st+1 is one of the most suitable individuals of the (t+1)th generation. f(·) is the fitness function.Normative knowledge provides the standards for individual behaviors, and it is used as guidelines for mutational adjustments to individuals. The normative knowledge components can be described as follows(11)N=[Z1,Z2,⋯,Zj,⋯,Zm]where N is a matrix. Zjis the column vector of normative knowledge.The information of the column vector Zjis stored in matrix [Ij, Lj, Uj]. Here Ij=[lj, uj]. lj, ujrespectively represents the lower limit vector and the upper limit vector of Zj. Ljand Ujare both column vectors that their variable value of each dimension is respectively consist of the fitness value of ljand uj. The initial fitness values of ljand ujare both +∞.The normative knowledge components can be updated as follows(12)ljt+1(i)=Zjt(i)Zjt(i)≤ljt(i)orf(Zjt)>Ljt(i)ljt(i)else(13)ujt+1(i)=Zjt(i)Zjt(i)≥ujt(i)orf(Zjt)>Ujt(i)ujt(i)elsewhereZjt(i),ljt(i),ujt(i)is respectively the ith dimension variable of vector Zj, lj, ujin the tth generation.ljt+1(i)represents the lower limit value of Zj(i) in the (t+1)th generation.ljt(i)represents the lower limit value of Zj(i) in the tth generation.ujt+1(i)is the upper limit value of Zj(i) in the (t+1)th generation.ujt(i)is the upper limit value of Zj(i) in the tth generation.Ujt(i),Ljt(i)is respectively the ith dimension variable ofUjt,Ljt, and they are the fitness values ofujtandljt.The acceptance function determines that which individuals in the current population can be used to describe the beliefs for the entire population. Generally, it provides a set of most suitable individuals to the belief space. The dynamic acceptance function combined with niche algorithm is proposed in this paper. There is a changeable number of individuals which can be accepted to adjust the belief space, and the number of individuals accepted by belief space may change from generation to generation. By using this approach, the number of individuals used to adjust the belief space is large at the beginning. With the decrease of the number of individuals over time, the diversity of individuals in evolutional prophase is relatively better than evolutional anaphase. The number of outstanding individuals decided by fitness value for pre-acceptance can be expressed by(14)M=P⋅βwhere P is the number of the population. β is the acceptance rate.Then the Euclidean distance of every two different pre-acceptance individuals can be calculated. According to the literature [19], the computational formula can be given by(15)zk−zl=∑i=1n(zk(i)−zl(i))2where zk, zlis respectively the different pre-acceptance individual, i.e. k≠l. zk(i), zl(i) respectively represents the ith dimension variable of zkand zl. n is the dimensional number of each individual.Next executing the operation of crowding and penalty. If∑zk−zl<L, here L is the Euclidean distance parameter, it shows the similarity of pre-acceptance individuals is higher, so some individuals need to be supplanted depending on crowding factor 1/Cf and their fitness values are defined by zero to ensure that they are not reselected. Otherwise if∑zk−zl≥L, it shows the diversity of pre-acceptance individuals is higher, the number of acceptance individuals needs to be enlarged.The expression of the dynamic acceptance function of niche algorithm is given by(16)acp=P⋅β−P⋅β⋅(1/Cf)∑zi−zj<LP⋅β+2∑zi−zj≥Lwhere acp is the number of accepted outstanding individuals in belief space.The adjusting of individuals in the population space is realized via influence function. The destination is to find the global optimal solution quickly. It can be seen from the influence function that the situational knowledge is used to determine the mutational direction, and the normative knowledge is used to determine the mutational step size. The influence function can be written as followsIfZjt(i)≤sjt(i)thenZjt+1(i)=Zjt(i)+(ujt(i)−ljt(i))⋅rand(0,1)ElseZjt+1(i)=Zjt(i)−(ujt(i)−ljt(i))⋅rand(0,1)where rand(0, 1) is the random number between 0 and 1.sjt(i)is the ith dimension variable ofsjt.Zjtrepresents the jth individual of the tth generation in population space.Zjt+1represents the jth individual of the (t+1)th generation in population space.Zjt(i)is the ith dimension variable ofZjt.Zjt+1(i)is the ith dimension variable ofZjt+1. Fig. 5shows the concrete optimal calculation process based on improved culture algorithm, by which the optimal fuzzy control rules can be obtained.In order to avoid the subjectivity and empiricism in fuzzy-PID control strategy and get the good control results, the control rules are optimized by improved cultural algorithm. Simulation model is established by Matlab 7.0. The 4-order RK method is used to solve the Eq. (5) and the optimized process is realized according to the flow chart expressed by Fig. 5.Through running the program of the improved cultural algorithm, the fitness curve is obtained after 100 times evolutionary computation and shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6 presents that the fitness curve becomes a straight line after 23 generations in the evolution process which hints that the optimal solution is found. The code of optimal control rules is obtained when the program finished successfully and it is shown in Fig. 7. The code expressed by Fig. 7 is R=[632 551 255 325 264 566 771; 663 127 753 315 754 623 724; 765 122 764 672 513 667 672; 312 566 367 464 234 773 176; 353 521 415 244 353 735 415; 733 644 521 142 743 577 317; 635 352 141 524 533 335 155]. By decoding, the optimal fuzzy control rules are described in Table 2.Based on the optimal control rules after decoding, the vertical vibration acceleration curves of bodywork are acquired. In order to compare the optimal control effect with passive control, two acceleration curves are plotted into one figure which are shown in Fig. 8. Meanwhile, there are two vertical vibration acceleration curves of bodywork; one is obtained by the optimal control method and the other is obtained by Fuzzy-PID control without optimization, are plotted into Fig. 9. It can be seen from Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 that the acceleration of bodywork obtained by the optimal method is much smaller than passive control and simple Fuzzy-PID control which gives the strong support for the optimal control scheme proposed by this paper.In addition, to verify the optimization effect of improved cultural algorithm, the contrastive curves of the suspension travel and the tire dynamic load are described from Figs. 10–13. As it shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11, compared with passive control and simple Fuzzy-PID control, the suspension travel obtained by the optimal method is decreased. This decreasing phenomenon also can be seen in Figs. 12 and 13. The tire dynamic load is decreased through using the optimal control rules obtained by improved culture algorithm. So the optimal control method based on improved cultural algorithm is effective.The vertical vibration acceleration of bodywork is mainly used to evaluate the performance of active suspension. The two most important indexes are the maximum value of vertical vibration acceleration of bodywork and its RMS, while maximum value of suspension travel and tire dynamic load serve as auxiliary indexes. Table 3shows the maximum value of the vertical vibration acceleration and its RMS of bodywork, the maximum value of suspension travel and tire dynamic load. According to the Table 3, by using the optimal control method, the vertical vibration acceleration and its RMS of bodywork are obviously decreased, the maximum value of vertical vibration acceleration of bodywork is reduced to 0.8m/s2 and its RMS is down to 0.25m/s2, the maximum respective value of suspension travel and tire dynamic load is respectively reduced to 0.018m and 620N.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel optimal controller is obtained by combining cultural algorithm improved by the niche algorithm with fuzzy-PID control strategy. The ride comfort and handling stability of automobile are obviously improved through using the optimal controller proposed by this paper. According to the numerical simulation results, compared with passive control and Fuzzy-PID control without optimization, the control effect produced by the proposed optimal Fuzzy-PID approach is the best. All the numerical analyses give the support for this control scheme.