@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid method for inversion of 3D AC resistivity logging measurements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hybrid strategy hp-HGS for solving inverse problems.Global step solved by Hierarchical Genetic Search (HGS) coupled with self-adaptive hp-Finite Element Method (hp-FEM).Local search performed with Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfar–Shanno (BFGS).hp-HGS algorithm adapts the length of the genetic code and the accuracy of the direct solver.Application to 3D AC resistivity logging measurement simulations in deviated wells.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hierarchic genetic strategy,Inverse problem,Hybrid method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose the use of a hybrid algorithm for the inversion of 3D Alternate Current (AC) resistivity logging measurements. The forward problem is solved using a goal-oriented self-adaptive hp-Finite Element Method (hp-FEM) that provides exponential convergence of the numerical error with respect to the mesh size. The inverse problem is solved using a Hierarchical Genetic Search (HGS) coupled with a Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfar–Shanno (BFGS) method. Individuals from the genetic populations represent the resistivity of the formation layers. The fitness function is estimated based on hp-FEM results. The hybrid method controls the accuracy of evaluation of particular individuals, as well as the accuracy of the genetic coding. After finding those regions where the fitness function has small values, the local search method by means of BFGS algorithm is executed. The paper is concluded with numerical results for the hybrid algorithm.magnetic field (magnetizing field)electric fieldelectric current densityelectric free charge distributionpermittivity, permeability, conductivity, resistivity and angular frequencydomain inℝ3and its boundary ∂Ω=Γmain space of forward solutions (see (3) and (4)) and its conjugate and biconjugate spacessesquilinear form of Maxwell's equation (see (10))quantity of interest functional (see (23))primal and dual forward solutionsapproximate hp-FEM forward solutionsprimal and dual relative hp-FEM errorsadmissible set of inverse solutions (see (43)) and fitness function domain (see Section 5)

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we presented a hybrid strategy for solving inverse problems exhibiting multiple minima. The strategy utilized a hp-HGS algorithm, namely the Hierarchical Genetic Search (HGS) as the inverse engine coupled with self-adaptive hp-Finite Element Method (hp-FEM) as the direct solver. The hp-HGS algorithm imposes the accuracy of individual's encoding in the inverse engine as well as the accuracy of the direct solver. The hp-HGS algorithm finds the regions on the global level where we expect to find the local minima. In these regions, the accuracy of the genetic search is first increased by increasing the encoding accuracy and the requested accuracy for the goal-oriented self-adaptive hp-FEM solver. Second, after several iterations of the hp-HGS strategy, we switched to the BFGS local gradient search method to quickly converge to the local minima within the regions delivered by the global level search of the hp-HGS algorithm.For the efficient control of the hp-HGS strategy, it is required to relate forward and inverse solutions errors. The error has been related in Appendix A (see Propositions 9, 10 and Remark 11). The crucial features necessary for establishing this relation were Lipschitz continuity of the primal solution with respect to the conductivity distribution (see Lemma 5) and the proper evaluation of the quantity of interest functional taken for the relative hp-FEM error (see Lemma 6).We tested our strategy on two challenging numerical problems consisting of the inversion of 3D AC borehole resistivity measurements in deviated wells for different setups of the formation layers. In the first problem, the hp-HGS strategy found ten points that were candidates for the local gradient search. These points were utilized as starting points for the BFGS method with the gradient approximated by finite differences. All the points found by the global search converged to local minima, located in a valley. The firstv0value for all points was approximately equal to 1, but the second valuev1falls into the valley with the range of5,50000. In the second problem, the hp-HGS strategy found four points that match the original layers, but also contained unexpected jumps in the center of each of the three considered layers.On the other hand, neither simple genetic algorithms nor multi-start methods, utilizing the same computational budget, were able to localize the values of parameters for the first problem nor to find a single reasonable solution for the second problem. Moreover, the comparison of the Multi-Start dynamics with the local phase of hybrid strategy behavior shows, that the local convex optimization methods have to be very carefully applied in case of the ill conditioned inverse problems with a multimodal and generally “flat” misfit. In order to make the local convex methods efficient it is necessary is to start them sufficiently close to the local/global minimizers, namely in their basins of attraction.We hope that multiple minimizers found by the proposed hybrid strategy enable an expert on the field to evaluate all possible solutions, and thus, they allow to better estimate the subsurface properties as well as to assess the uncertainty level. Thus, the proposed hybrid method provides an adequate alternative for solving challenging multi-modal inverse problems.