@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy decision making model for selection of real time location systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A fuzzy decision making model is developed for selection of the appropriate Real Time Location System (RTLS) technology for companies operating in different sectors.Three main criteria are determined namely economic, technical and implementation factors for the model.The Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP) method is proposed to select the appropriate RTLS technology.The model is applied to a hospital in Istanbul considering three types of RTLS systems which are given as IR–RF hybrid, UHF RFID and Active RFID.Since the scores of the hybrid system for economic, implementation and technical factors are higher comparing the other technologies, it is selected as the best alternative.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-criteria decision making,Fuzzy AHP,Real Time Location System,Healthcare management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Real Time Location Systems (RTLS) have gained importance in contemporary world since they allow real time positioning of assets, people and workflows. They can be used in different sectors to increase work efficiency and quality in areas of application. The selection of the appropriate RTLS technology becomes a major decision problem since it has a multi-criteria structure which includes both qualitative and quantitative factors. In this study, a decision making model is developed for selection of the appropriate RTLS technology for companies operating in different sectors. Three main criteria are determined by existing literature and with the help of the experts, namely economic, technical and implementation factors. The Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP) method is proposed to select the appropriate RTLS technology. Also sensitivity analysis is performed according to the incremental rates of main criteria. The model is applied to a hospital in Turkey considering three types of RTLS systems which are given as IR–RF hybrid, UHF RFID and Active RFID. Since the scores of the hybrid system for economic, implementation and technical factors are higher comparing the other technologies, it is selected as the best alternative.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Real Time Location System (RTLS) is a wireless system that allows real time positioning and tracking of assets, people and workflows. By using the RTLS technology, speed, ambient temperature, humidity and other information predefined on object or human can be obtained and the changes can be monitored. According to the definition of Malik [1], RTLS is a system that we can reach the information regarding the location and other properties anytime we want from a person or an object. On the other hand, in the definition Cyplik and Patecki [2] made in their study, RTLS is locating a defined object in a specified three-dimensional field.Real-time positioning systems are complete technological systems that consist of several equipments. They generally practice the applications by communicating between the devices via radio waves and these can be changed according to the technology used. Systems and devices constituting the system are tags, positioning sensors and engine, interface software and application. Tags can be placed on the object or person that requires tracking. The information regarding the target object or person is gathered by communicating with the tag on the target. This data of object or person can be about the location, speed, temperature, being in a specified area or other information defined.The main objective of RTLS is to increase work efficiency and quality in areas of application. By using the RTLS, organization efficiency is increased as security is provided, service quality is increased, human factor is minimized in quality control operations, customer satisfaction is increased and return on investment is accelerated. Commonly used RTLS technologies can be listed as Ultra-Wide Band, RFID, Wi-Fi, Zigbee, Bluetooth and Infrared. Moreover, RTLS technologies have become more important in the contemporary world and can be used in many different sectors such as logistics, manufacturing and healthcare.Health sector is a field where RTLS are being used since 10 years for positioning the assets, patients and staff [1,3]. Due to various technologies, applications are different from each other. By developing technology, hospitals are using more intelligent systems and reach high monitoring capacity. In a hospital, with reliable and accurate positioning, automation level increases and efficiency increase is obtained in a short time period. Due to realtime positioning, the investments of expensive equipments made by hospitals can be decreased. Positioning of the personnel, monitoring patient movements, decreasing of waiting periods, tracking the equipment positions are among the aims of RTLS usage purposes.Although the RTLS technologies are used for determining the locations of materials such as pallet, container, etc. in open areas at first place, locating in room bases and use of it in closed areas has become widespread after the advance in tag technology. With determining the location in room bases, the use of RTLS technologies in hospitals increased [2].The places of use and the functions of the RTLS can be listed as below:•Pre- and post-surgery: locating in room bases.Emergency: locating doctors and specified equipment in a quick and updated.Locating the workers.Specifying the location at room bases: Provide workers to work efficiently.Acquiring the necessary equipment more quickly.Tracking people, assets and equipment.Tracking patient movements.When comparing the operating features of the RTLS technologies; precision, speed and security are the main topics that should be analyzed. The system should provide these three factors at an optimum level. In addition, RTLS technologies should be selected carefully by taking the environment to work in into account and adapted to the organization.RTLS technology selection is a multiple criteria decision-making problem. The aim of the paper is to analyze the important both quantitative and qualitative decision criteria for selection of RTLS technologies and develop a decision making model. Three main criteria are determined with the help of the experts, namely economic, technical and implementation factors. The Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP) method is proposed to select the appropriate RTLS technology and the proposed model is applied to a hospital in Istanbul. Since, in some cases AHP method often have not enough capability to evaluate the alternatives when decision maker express preferences using without numerical values. For this, in some cases, Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP) is required to identify vagueness of human thoughts instead of crisp numbers efficiently [4].The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review. Section 3 provides criteria and sub-criteria definition for multi-criteria RTLS selection problem. In Section 4, the methodology for the problem is presented. The application of the model is given in Section 5. In Section 6, results are discussed. Section 7 presents the sensitivity analysis. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
