@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Solving dynamic double row layout problem via combining simulated annealing and mathematical programming

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A dynamic double row layout problem (DDRLP) is proposed.A mixed integer programming model is established for the DDRLP.An approach combining simulated annealing and mathematical programming is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Double row layout problem,Dynamic layout problem,Simulated annealing algorithm,Mathematical programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Double row layout problem (DRLP) is to allocate facilities on two rows separated by a straight aisle. Aiming at the dynamic environment of product processing in practice, we propose a dynamic double-row layout problem (DDRLP) where material flows change over time in different processing periods. A mixed-integer programming model is established for this problem. A methodology combining an improved simulated annealing (ISA) with mathematical programming (MP) is proposed to resolve it. Firstly, a mixed coding scheme is designed to represent both of sequence of facilities and their exact locations. Secondly, an improved simulated annealing algorithm is suggested to produce a solution to DDRLP. Finally, MP is used to improve this solution by determining the optimal exact location for each facility. Experiments show that this methodology is able to obtain the optimal solutions for small size problems and outperforms an exact approach (CPLEX) for problems of realistic size.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Facility layout problems (FLPs) drew much attention over the years. It is to place a number of facilities in a production workshop to achieve such objectives as saving operational cost, enhancing production efficiency and balancing device capabilities [1]. Studies have shown that 15–70% of the total operational costs concern with the layout and a good layout can reduce those costs by at least 10–30% [2].Single-row layout problem (SRLP) [3,4] and multiple-row layout problem (MRLP) are the most common pattern in manufacturing systems. SRLP is to place facilities on one side of the aisle and each facility pair is separated by their minimum clearance. It has been proved to be a NP-complete problem, and as such, there exist no exact algorithms able to solve it for large size problems within a reasonable computational time. Solution approaches for SRLP include exact algorithms [5,6,7,8] and heuristic ones [9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. MRLP involves multiple rows and is to place facilities on those rows and each pair of facilities is separated by their minimum clearances. This problem is usually formulated as a quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [16] and some meta-heuristics have been proposed to solve it [17,18].Both SRLP and MRLP are combinatorial due to the sequence of facilities being considered on one row or multiple rows. However, in real-world workshops of manufacturing systems, considering the exact location of facilities contributes to the decrease of operational cost when existing more than one row. Chung and Tanchoco [19] first proposed double-row layout problem (DRLP), where facilities are placed on both sides of a corridor with zero width and materials are carried from one facility to another by an automated guided vehicle (AGV) system operating along the corridor. DRLP is related to SRLP and MRLP but much different from them because it needs to determine not only the sequence of facilities on both rows but also the exact location of each facility. It has applications in industries, such as the semiconductor industry, because determining the exact location for each facility may result in a layout with less material flow cost than only consider the sequence of facilities. In our previous work [20], we extended the DRLP and proposed an extended DRLP, where the aisle width is assumed to be non-zero and the two objectives of minimizing layout area and material flow cost are optimized.For a practical manufacturing environment, material flows among facilities play an important role to achieve a superior layout. The static facility layout problem (SFLP) assumes that material flows between any two facilities are known and fixed, such that rearrangement of facilities is not needed. All literatures mentioned above belong to SFLP. In practice, material flows among facilities may change over time since different product types are processed in different processing periods. This requirement leads to dynamic facility layout problem (DFLP) [21], which involves multiple processing periods and material flows among facilities are fixed in a specific period but change over different periods. Apparently, DFLP with one period can be considered as a SFLP. The optimization objective of a DFLP is to minimize the sum of two types of costs, namely material handling cost in all periods and the rearrangement cost of those facilities to be relocated.In this paper, we extend the DRLP in [20] to a dynamic environment and propose a dynamic double row layout problem (DDRLP). A mixed-integer programming model is established for DDRLP. A methodology combining an improved simulated annealing (ISA) and mathematical programming (MP), termed ISA-MP, is proposed to resolve this problem. Firstly, a mixed coding scheme is devised to represent the sequence of facilities as well as the exact location of each facility in all periods. Secondly, an improved simulated annealing is proposed to solve this problem and its four operators are suggested to enable it to effectively handle this problem. Thirdly, a mathematical programming method is used to optimize the exact location of each facility in all periods to improve the solution quality.The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a review of the related literatures. In Section 3, a mathematical programming formulation of DDRLP is presented. Section 4 introduces ISA with its four operators as well as the MP. Experimental results are presented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
