@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interval type-2 fuzzy PID load frequency controller using Big Bang–Big Crunch optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Interval type-2 fuzzy PID (IT2FPID) controllers are proposed for the load frequency control (LFC) problem.For the first time in literature, the Big Bang–Big Crunch algorithm is applied to tune the scaling factors and the footprint of uncertainty (FOU) of membership functions.Proposed IT2FPID controllers are designed for a four area interconnected power system.The proposed optimum IT2FPID load frequency controller is superior compared to the ordinary fuzzy PID and conventional PID controllers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interval type-2 fuzzy PID controllers,Load frequency control,Big Bang–Big Crunch optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an optimization based design methodology of interval type-2 fuzzy PID (IT2FPID) controllers for the load frequency control (LFC) problem. Hitherto, numerous fuzzy logic control structures are proposed as a solution of LFC. However, almost all of these solutions use type-1 fuzzy sets that have a crisp grade of membership. Power systems are large scale complex systems with many different uncertainties. In order to handle these uncertainties, in this study, type-2 fuzzy sets, which have a grade of membership that is fuzzy, have been used. Interval type-2 fuzzy sets are used in the design of a load frequency controller for a four area interconnected power system, which represents a large power system. The Big Bang–Big Crunch (BB–BC) algorithm is applied to tune the scaling factors and the footprint of uncertainty (FOU) membership functions of interval type-2 fuzzy PID (IT2FPID) controllers to minimize frequency deviations of the system against load disturbances. BB–BC is a global optimization algorithm and has a low computational cost, a high convergence speed, and is therefore very efficient when the number of optimization parameters is high as presented in this study. In order to show the benefits of IT2FPID controllers, a comparison to conventional type-1 fuzzy PID (T1FPID) controllers and conventional PID controllers is given for the four-area interconnected power system. The gains of conventional PID and T1FPID controllers are also optimized using the BB–BC algorithm. Simulation results explicitly show that the performance of the proposed optimum IT2FPID load frequency controller is superior compared to the conventional T1FPID and PID controller in terms of overshoot, settling time and robustness against different load disturbances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The load frequency control (LFC) is a very critical component in power system operation and control for generation and distribution of electric supply with good reliability and quality [1,2]. Large scale power systems are normally composed of control areas or regions representing coherent groups of generators. Various areas are interconnected through tie lines. The tie lines are utilized for contractual energy exchange between areas and provide inter-area support in case of abnormal conditions. Area load changes and abnormal conditions lead to mismatches in frequency and scheduled power interchanges between areas. These mismatches have to be corrected by load frequency control (LFC), which is defined as the regulation of the power output of generators within a prescribed area [3]. The regulation is performed so as to maintain the scheduled system frequency and/or established interchange with other areas within predetermined limits in response to changes in system frequency and tie line loading. The key assumptions in the classical LFC problem are [4,5]:i.The steady state frequency error following a step load change should vanish. The transient frequency and time errors should be small.The static change in the tie power following a step load in any area should be zero, provided each area can accommodate its own load change.Any area in need of power during an emergency should be assisted from other areas.The conventional control strategy for the LFC problem is to take the integral of the control error as the control signal. An integral controller provides zero steady state frequency deviation but it exhibits poor dynamic performance [5,6]. To improve the transient response, various control techniques have been proposed. In [7], an adaptive regulator which uses the a priori known information and satisfies the multi-objective character of the control is proposed for the Hungarian power system. A new systematic approach to design of sequential decentralized load frequency controllers for four-area power systems based on μ synthesis and analysis is proposed in [8]. The design strategy includes enough flexibility to set the desired level of stability and performance and consider the practical constraints by introducing appropriate uncertainties. In [9] two robust decentralized proportional integral (PI) control designs are proposed for load frequency control (LFC) with communication delays; and in both methodologies, the PI based LFC problem is reduced to a static output feedback (SOF) control synthesis for a multiple delay system. An intelligent wavelet neural network (WNN) approach for the load frequency controller (LFC) to damp the frequency oscillations of two area power systems due to load disturbances is presented in [10]. The comparison between the proposed WNN controller responses with those of the fixed gain PI controller indicated the effectiveness of the proposed controller in damping the frequency oscillations and tie line power very fast with less undershoot and overshoots. In [11] PID tuning method, which is based on a two-degree-of-freedom internal model control (IMC) design method, of load frequency controllers for power systems is discussed. The resulting PID controller is related to two tuning parameters thus it is showed that detuning is easy when necessary. In addition, some of the researchers used super magnetic energy storage (SMES) units to improve the transient response [12–17]. Artificial neural networks have been successfully applied to the LFC problem with rather promising results [18–22].As mentioned above, a multi-area power system comprises areas that are interconnected by high voltage transmission lines or tie-lines, and the trend of frequency measured in each control area is an indicator of the trend of the mismatch power in the interconnection and not in the control area alone [8]. In the event of a decentralized power system, area frequency and tie-line power interchange vary as power load demand varies randomly; accordingly, the objectives of LFC are to minimize the transient deviations of these variables and to guarantee their steady state errors to be zero. When dealing with the LFC problem of power systems, unexpected external disturbances, parameter uncertain ties and the model uncertain ties pose big challenges for controller design. Because of the complexity and multi-variable conditions of the power system, conventional control methods may not give satisfactory solutions for multi-area power system. Fuzzy logic control is an excellent alternative to the conventional control methodology when the processes are too complex for analysis by conventional mathematical techniques. Correspondingly, the robustness and the reliability property of fuzzy controllers make them useful for solving a wide range of control problems in the power systems. The fuzzy control techniques for the LFC problem are applied, and amazing improvements are obtained [2,6,23–26], and a big collection of all the current LFC techniques can be found in Ibraheem [27] and in Shayeghi et al. [28].To date, all of the fuzzy logic applications are focused on conventional type-1 fuzzy logic system (T1FLS). However, the type-1 fuzzy logic controller (FLC), whose membership functions are type-1 fuzzy sets, is sometimes not sufficient to directly handle uncertainties. To deal with this problem, the concept of type-2 fuzzy sets (T2FLS) was introduced by Zadeh [29] as an extension of T1FLS. Compared to T1FLS, T2FLS handle the vagueness inherent in linguistic words. The MFs of type-2 fuzzy sets are three dimensional and include a footprint of uncertainty (FOU), which is the new third-dimension of type-2 fuzzy sets. Accordingly, the FOU provides additional degrees of freedom that can make it possible to directly model and handle the uncertainties in a better way compare to type-1 fuzzy sets. As a result, FLCs that use type-2 fuzzy sets to represent the inputs and outputs of the FLC can handle the short and long term uncertainties to produce a good performance [30–32].A fuzzy logic system (FLS) that is described using at least one type-2 fuzzy set is called a type-2 FLS. The operations of type-2 fuzzy systems are typically more computationally involved than type-1 systems. This has urged researchers to search for ways to alleviate this high computational burden if type-2 FLCs are to find their way to real-world applications; therefore, interval type-2 fuzzy sets were introduced [33,34]. It has been acknowledged that using interval type-2 fuzzy sets (IT2FLS) to represent the inputs and/or outputs of FLC has many advantages when compared to the type-1 fuzzy sets (T1FLS) [35]. To optimize the parameters of T2FS and IT2FS researchers have proposed many different methods [36–43]. Lately, Castillo and Melin published an invaluable review on design and optimization of type-2 fuzzy controllers [44].Some control applications of type-2 fuzzy logic are liquid-level process control [45]; bioreactor control [46]; autonomous mobile robots [41]; pH neutralization process [47,48] and system identification [49]. However, the applications of T2FLS in power systems are limited. Lately, Sudha and Santhi [50] proposed a type-2 fuzzy controller for two area power system and showed that type-2 fuzzy controller shows superior performance compare to type-1 fuzzy controller. Then, the same authors developed their controller structure and included SMES to type-2 fuzzy controller [51]. In [50] and [51], no methodology is shown to tune the type-2 fuzzy controllers optimally. The authors only show that the performance of type-2 fuzzy controllers in power systems are better than the conventional type-1 fuzzy controllers since type-2 fuzzy sets represent the uncertainties better than type-1 fuzzy sets.In this study, interval type-2 fuzzy PID (IT2FPID) controller is proposed as a load frequency controller since a power system is a large and complex system with many uncertainties. Consequently, for optimizing the parameters of IT2FPID controller Big Bang–Big Crunch (BB–BC) optimization [52] is used for the first time in literature as a method to tune the FOU. It will be illustrated that the extra degree of freedom of the antecedent IT2-FSs gives the BB–BC method an opportunity to find a more optimal solution than those obtained for the optimized conventional PID and type-1 fuzzy PID controllers with respect to the Integral of Time Absolute Error (ITAE) performance index. Consequently, for the two inputs of IT2FID, which are the error and the change of the error, the total numbers to be optimized for the IT2FPID design is 8, and it is obvious that the IT2FPID has these parameters as the extra degrees of freedom.A multi-area power system includes many areas and consequently each area must have a controller, which is in this study an IT2FPID controller. Since the number of optimization parameters of type-2 fuzzy controller is relatively big for a multi-area power system, the BB–BC optimization method [52] which has a low computational cost and a high convergence speed is preferred. In order to make a fair comparison, the rule base and scaling factors are kept fixed for the fuzzy controller structures while only the antecedent parameters are optimized off-line for possible power load demands. The Big Bang–Big Crunch (BB–BC) optimization method is a natural evolutionary algorithm similar to the genetic algorithms, the ant colony optimization, the particle swarm optimizer and the harmony search [53]. The algorithm generates random points in the Big Bang phase and shrinks those points to a single representative point via a center of mass or minimal cost approach in the Big Crunch phase. It is reported to be capable of quick convergence even in long, narrow parabolic shaped flat valleys or in the existence of several local minima. Though it is a new algorithm, it has been applied to many areas including non-linear controller design [54], design of space trusses [55,56], inverse controller design [57] and airport gate assignment problem [58].The optimization results demonstrated that the IT2FPID, which has more design parameters, outperforms the optimized type-1 fuzzy and conventional PID controller structures with respect to ITAE performance index. Since the FOU provides the antecedent type-2 fuzzy sets with extra degrees of freedom, it can be concluded that an IT2FPID is more capable of providing lower ITAE performance measure compared to a type-1 counterpart that has the same rules and scaling factors. In other words, this extra degree of freedom gives the BB–BC global search method an opportunity to find a more optimal solution than those obtained for the optimized PID and type-1 fuzzy PID (T1FPID). Furthermore, the proposed IT2FPID controller decreases the settling time and oscillations in the frequency deviations.The rest of the paper is divided into five sections. In Section 2, a four-area interconnected power system model, which represents a large and complex power system, is presented. The type-2 fuzzy controllers are detailed in Section 3. The structure of the proposed IT2FPID controller is discussed and the BB–BC optimization algorithm used for tuning the type-2 membership functions of FLC is presented. In Section 4, simulations are presented to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed unified method. The proposed IT2FPID controllers performance are compared with type-1 fuzzy PID (T1FPID) controllers and conventional PID controllers. Possible extensions and future work on this issue with conclusions are finally given in Section 5.An interconnected four-area [2,60–65] power system has been used to confirm the effectiveness of the proposed approach in a more realistic power system scenario. The interconnected power system consists of four single areas connected through power lines called the tie line. Area 1, Area 2 and Area 3 are denoted as the area with reheat unit and they are interconnected with each other, and Area 4 is denoted as the area with hydro unit, as well Area 4 is only connected with Area 1. A simplified representation for an interconnected system in a general form, including both ring and bus interconnections, is shown in Fig. 1.Each area feeds its user pool, and the tie line allows electric power to flow between areas. Since the areas are tied together, a load perturbation in one area affects the output frequencies of the areas as well as the power flow on the tie line. The control system of each area needs information about the transient situation of other areas in order to bring the local frequency back to its steady state value. Information about the other areas is found in the output frequency fluctuation of that area and in the tie line power fluctuation. Therefore, the tie line power is sensed, and the resulting tie line power signal is fed back into corresponding areas. A block diagram representing the four area interconnected power system is given in Fig. 2.In the multi-area power system, Δfiis the frequency deviation of Area #i (Hz), Biis the frequency bias setting of Area #i (p.u. MW/Hz), Tijis the synchronizing coefficients between Area #i and Area #j (p.u. MW/Hz), ΔPiis the load disturbance in Area #i (p.u. MW), ΔPtiei is the tie-line power between Area #i and other areas (p.u. MW), and final Rirepresents the speed regulation of Area #i (Hz/p.u. MW).In a conventional system, turbine reference power of each area is tried to be set to its nominal value by an integral controller and the input of the controller of each area is BiΔfi+ΔPtiei (i=1, 2, 3, 4) called Area Control Error (ACE) of the same area.Fuzzy logic is credited with being an adequate methodology for designing robust systems that are able to deliver a satisfactory performance in the face of uncertainty and imprecision. Hence, the fuzzy logic system (FLS) has become established as an adequate technique for a variety of applications [35]. As the type-1 fuzzy set (T1FS), the concept of type-2 fuzzy set (T2FS) was introduced by Zadeh [29] as an extension of the concept of an ordinary fuzzy set. While type-1 fuzzy logic has been the most popular form of fuzzy logic, recent years have shown a significant increase in research toward more complex forms of fuzzy logic, in particular, type-2 fuzzy logic. A fuzzy logic system (FLS) that is described using at least one type-2 fuzzy set is called a type-2 FLS. Type-1 FLSs are unable to directly handle rule uncertainties, because they use type-1 fuzzy sets that are certain. However, type-2 FLSs are very useful in circumstances where it is difficult to determine exact rules [34,59].Type-2 fuzzy sets (T2FS) are generalized forms of those of type-1 fuzzy sets (T1FS), and characterizing a type-2 fuzzy set is not as easy as characterizing a type-1 fuzzy set. Mathematically, a type-2 fuzzy set, denoted asA˜, is characterized by a type-2 membership functionμA˜(x,u), where x∈X and u∈Jx⊆[0, 1], i.e.:(1)A˜=((x,u),μA˜(x,u))∀x∈X,∀u∈Jx⊆[0,1]in which0≤μA˜(x,u)≤1. For a continuous universe of discourse,A˜can be expressed as(2)A˜=∫x∈X∫u∈JxμA˜(x,u)(x,u)Jx⊆[0,1]where ∫∫ denotes union over all admissible x and u. Jxis referred to as the primary membership of x, andμA˜(x,u)is a type-1 fuzzy set known as the secondary set. The uncertainty in the primary membership of a type-2 fuzzy setA˜is represented by a region called footprint of uncertainty (FOU) which is also the union of all primary memberships. WhenμA˜(x,u)=1for ∀u∈Jx⊆[0, 1], an interval type-2 fuzzy set (IT2FS) is obtained. The uniform shading for the FOU represents the entire interval type-2 fuzzy set and it can be described in terms of an upper membership functionμ¯A˜(x)and a lower membership functionμ_A˜(x)[34].An example of a triangular type-2 fuzzy set is given in Fig. 3. The primary membership Jxis given in Fig. 3a, and its associated possible secondary memberships, that are triangular and interval, are presented in Fig. 3b and c, respectively. When the interval secondary membership function that is illustrated in Fig. 3c is taken, an IT2FLS is obtained. The term FOU, the shaded region in Fig. 3a, is very useful because it not only focuses the attention on the uncertainties inherent in a specific type-2 membership function, whose shape is a direct consequence of the nature of these uncertainties, but it also provides a very convenient verbal description of the entire domain of support for all the secondary grades of a type-2 membership function [34].A FLC described using at least one type-2 fuzzy set is called a type-2 fuzzy logic controller (T2FLC). A block diagram of a T2FLC, that is a special fuzzy logic system, is illustrated in Fig. 4. Similar to a type-1 FLC, a type-2 FLC includes type-2 fuzzifier, rule-base, inference engine, and substitutes the defuzzifier by the output processor. The type-2 FLC works like a type-1 FLC, of course in this case the fuzzifier take crisp inputs and this inputs are fuzzified into, in general, input type-2 fuzzy sets, which then activate the inference engine and the rule base to produce output type-2 fuzzy sets. A type-2 FLS is again characterized by IF-THEN rules, but its antecedent and/or consequent fuzzy sets are now type-2. These output type-2 fuzzy sets are then processed by the type-reducer which combines the output sets and then perform a centroid calculation, which leads to type-1 fuzzy sets called the type-reduced set. The defuzzifier can then defuzzify the type-reduced type-1 fuzzy outputs to produce crisp outputs [34].According to the rule-base formation, there are three possible structures for building such FLCs as classified in Table 1. The most general case is called Model I and this structure has type-2 fuzzy sets in antecedents, and type-1 fuzzy sets in consequents. There are two special cases of Model I: Model II with crisp numbers (singletons) in the consequents; Model III type-1 fuzzy sets in antecedents and in consequents. Some may argue that Model III is a Mamdani type-1 FLC, where the output is a crisp number, but here the consequent is type-1 fuzzy set [66]. A special application of Model III type-2 fuzzy systems in fault detection is presented by Oblak et al. [67].A type-1 fuzzy PID (T1FPID) controller can be designed using one, two or three inputs [68]. From the computational and performance point of view, in this study, a T1FPID controller with two inputs is used as a load frequency controller. To obtain proportional, integral and derivative control action all together, it is appropriate and usual way to combine PI and PD actions together to form a fuzzy PID controller. The formulation of fuzzy PID controller can be achieved either by combining fuzzy PI and fuzzy PD controllers with two distinct rule-bases or one fuzzy PD controller with an integrator at the output and then adding the output of FLC to the output of the integrator as it is given in Fig. 5[69].Here, the ACE and the ΔACE are the inputs of the load frequency fuzzy PID controller and the universe of discourse is chosen to be [−1,1] for the membership functions of input and output variables as given in Fig. 6. For the inputs, three triangular membership functions (N: Negative, Z: Zero, P: Positive) are chosen and alternatively for the output singleton membership functions (NL: Negative Large, NM: Negative Medium, Z: Zero, PM: Positive Medium, PL: Positive Large) are prepared. The T1FPID controller is designed using a product–sum inference method with center of gravity defuzzification method.The ith fuzzy rule used for T1FPID controller has the following form:RuleRi:IFACEisA1iANDΔACEisA2iTHENuisci,i=1,…,9where A1iand A2iare type-1 fuzzy sets, ciis a singleton. The complete rule base of the T1FPID controller with 9 rules is given in Table 2.The input and output parameters are scaled to fit this range via scaling factors as illustrated in Fig. 5. The input scaling factors (Ke and Kd) normalize the real world inputs to a range in which membership functions are defined. The output scaling factors (α and β) are used to change the normalized control effort to its practical value. The values of the scaling factor play an important role in the performance of the fuzzy PID controllers [70,71].The operations of type-2 fuzzy systems are typically more computationally involved than type-1 systems. This has urged researchers to search for ways to alleviate this high computational burden if type-2 FLCs are to find their way to real-world applications. For this purpose, interval type-2 fuzzy sets were introduced [33,34]. This type of fuzzy sets provides a simplified and efficient alternative to easily compute the input and antecedent operations for FLSs and offers a balanced tradeoff between performance and complexity [72].The distinction between type-1 and type-2 rules is associated with the nature of the membership functions; the structure of the rules remains exactly the same in the type-2 case [46]. The antecedent part of the IT2FLC used in this study uses interval type-2 fuzzy sets, and the consequent part is of the singletons that are the zero-order fuzzy set. The ith fuzzy rule used for the interval type-2 load frequency fuzzy PID controller has the following form:RuleRi:IFACEisA˜1iANDΔACEisA˜2iTHENuisci,i=1,…,9whereA˜1iandA˜2iare interval type-2 fuzzy sets, ciis a singleton.In the interval type-2 FLC, the inference engine combines the fired rules and gives a mapping from input type-2 fuzzy sets to output type-2 fuzzy sets. The type-2 fuzzy outputs of the inference engine are then processed by the type-reducer, which combines the output sets and performs a centroid calculation that leads to type-1 fuzzy sets called the type reduced sets. The type reduced fuzzy set for an interval type-2 fuzzy model can then be expressed as YTR=[yl, yr] where YTR is the type reduced interval type-1 fuzzy set determined by its two end points and yl and yr. There are many ways to perform type-reduction in type-2 fuzzy systems [34,73]. The iterative Karnik and Mendel method (KM) is used most commonly for type reduction [74]. Wu [74] pointed out two features of the Karnik–Mendel type reduction method; namely, novelty and adaptiveness. Novelty means that the upper and lower membership functions of the same type-2 fuzzy set may or may not be used simultaneously in computing the type-reduced set. The adaptiveness has the meaning that the bounds of the type-reduced interval set change as the inputs change. It has been stated that the alternative approximations to the KM algorithms cannot simultaneously capture novelty and adaptiveness features. Therefore, the Karnik–Mendel type reduction method is preferred. It should be emphasized that the consequent part of the IT2FPID controller has singleton membership functions instead of the interval type-2 fuzzy sets; therefore Model II IT2FLC is obtained. Then, the defuzzifier computes the system output variable y by performing the defuzzification operation on the interval set [yl, yr] from the type reducer by taking the average of the type-reduced to obtain crisp outputs that are sent to the actuators [35,38].There are numerous types and shapes of membership functions can be chosen for inputs of the IT2FPID. Three possible triangular IT2FS that can be used in controller design are shown in Fig. 7. In this study, for each of the IT2FPID controller, triangular IT2FS with uncertain end-points given in Fig. 8are used. The membership functions that are in the antecedent part of the fuzzy rules have 8 free parameters of FOU to be determined by the designer. The output membership functions of the fuzzy controller are kept as singletons as shown in Fig. 6c.In this study, first the gains of the conventional PID controller, then the scaling factors of the T1FPID and then finally IT2FPID controller parameters that are the parameters of the IT2FS shown in Fig. 8 are optimized using the Big Bang–Big Crunch (BB–BC) algorithm. This global optimization method is prepared since it has a low computational cost and a high convergence speed.The Big Bang–Big Crunch (BB–BC) optimization method developed by Erol and Eksin [52] consists of two main steps: The first step is the Big Bang phase where candidate solutions are randomly distributed over the search space and the next step is the Big Crunch phase where a contraction procedure calculates a center of mass for the population.The initial Big Bang population is randomly generated over the entire search space just like any other evolutionary search algorithms. All subsequent Big Bang phases are randomly distributed about the center of mass or the best fit individual in a similar fashion. In [52], the working principle of the Big Bang phase is explained as energy dissipation or the transformation from an ordered state (a convergent solution) to a disordered or chaotic state (new set of candidate solutions).After the Big Bang phase, a contraction procedure is applied during the Big Crunch. In this phase, the contraction operator takes the current positions of each candidate solution in the population and its associated cost function value. In this study, the best fit individual is chosen as the starting point in the Big Bang phase. Instead of the best fit individual, as stated in [52] the center of mass, can be computed as(3)xc=∑i=1N(1/fi)xi∑i=1N1/fiwhere xc is the position vector of the center of mass, xiis the position vector of the ith candidate, fiis the cost function value of the ith candidate, and N is the population size.The new generation for the next iteration Big Bang phase is normally distributed around xc as follows:(4)xnew=xc+rα(xmax−xmin)kwhere r is a normal random number, α is a parameter limiting the size of the search space, xmax and xmin are the upper and lower limits, and k is the iteration step. Since normally distributed numbers can be exceeding ±1, it is necessary to limit the population to the prescribed search space boundaries. This narrowing down restricts the candidate solutions into the search space boundaries. The procedure and the flowchart of the BB–BC optimization is given in Table 3and in Fig. 9, respectively.The parameters of the four-area interconnected power system that has been used in this study are given in Table 4[2]. As previously stated, the aim of the load frequency control task is to minimize the system frequency deviations in each area and the tie-line power flow ΔPtie between the related areas under the load disturbances ΔPD1, ΔPD2, ΔPD3 and ΔPD4 in the power system.In this study, the performance of the three different controllers, namely conventional PID controller, type-1 fuzzy PID controller (T1FPID), and interval type-2 fuzzy PID (IT2FPID) controller are compared. In order to make a fair comparison, the controller parameters of each controller are optimized using the Big Bang–Big Crunch optimization method.(5)JITAE=102∫025t(|ACE1(t)|+|ACE2(t)|+|ACE3(t)|+|ACE4(t)|)dtIn different studies, different cost functions such as ISE, IAE, ITSE, ITAE, are proposed for the optimization of the load–frequency controllers. As clearly mentioned in [20], ISE penalize excessively overdamped and excessively underdamped responses, ITSE penalize large initial and final errors. Nevertheless, in this study, the expectation from the IT2FPID controller is to reduce long-duration transients; therefore ITAE cost function given in Eq. (5) is preferred since ITAE penalize long duration transients and errors occurring later in the response [6].For Area 1, 2 and 3 the same controller with the same control parameters is used; on the other hand, for the fourth area with hydro turbine other controller parameters are determined. First the simulations are performed to determine the gains of the conventional PID, scaling factors of T1FPID, and the membership parameters of IT2FPID controller. Therefore, for these simulations, always step disturbances of ΔPD1=−0.01pu, ΔPD2=−0.01pu, ΔPD3=−0.01pu and ΔPD4=−0.0005pu are applied to the corresponding areas. During all the simulations in the parameter optimization stage, 40 individuals and 50 iteration steps are used for BB–BC algorithm.As a first step, the gains of the conventional parameters are searched using the cost function given in Eq. (5). As a result of the optimization process, the cost function is obtained as 1.135 and the obtained gains of conventional PID controllers after BB–BC optimization are given in Table 5.As a second step, the scaling factors of the T1FPID controller are searched using the same method discussed above. The optimum parameters of the F1FPID controller Ke, Kd, α, β which are all positive constants are listed in Table 6. The optimum cost function value obtained for these scaling factors is 0.848 which is around 25% better than the one obtained for conventional PID controllers.For the third and the last controller structure which is IT2F PID controller the scaling factors kept as the same that are obtained for T1FPID controller. The aim of this approach is only to show the effect of interval type-2 fuzzy sets in the fuzzy controller. On the other hand, it is quite possible for one to make one more search using the BB–BC algorithm to set the scaling factors of the IT2FPID controllers. For the IT2FPID controller used in Areas 1, 2, 3 and the other IT2FPID controller designed for Area 4, there exist 8 parameters which is the extra degree of freedom. As a result of the BB–BC optimization search, the parameters of the interval type-2 fuzzy sets in the fuzzy rule base are obtained with a cost function value of 0.411. It is 51.5% better than the one obtained for T1FPID controller. The optimized parameters of the interval type-2 fuzzy sets are given in Table 7and the type-2 fuzzy sets illustrated in Fig. 10.The simulation result obtained after the BB–BC optimization process is illustrated in Fig. 11. As it can be easily seen from the results, the conventional PID controller performs more smooth response when it is compared to the T1FPID controller but it has a big overshoot and large settling time. When the performance of the IT2FPID controller is compared with the other two controllers, it can easily be concluded that the transient response is much smoother, the overshoots are less and the settling time is much smaller.As previously mentioned the power load demand varies randomly, so to demonstrate the benefits of the proposed IT2FPID controller, also other simulation results are given here. This time, there is no load disturbance in the first area are but the disturbances to second and third thermal power plants are ΔPD2=0.01pu, ΔPD3=−0.03pu, and the load disturbances to hydro power plant is ΔPD4=−0.001pu. When the simulations are done using the same controller parameters obtained previously by BB–BC optimization, the results given in Fig. 12are obtained. As a result of the simulations, the values of cost functions for PID controller, T1FPID controller, and IT2FPID controller are obtained as 1.888, 1.868 and 1.589, respectively. Once more, it can be attained from the frequency deviations of each area that IT2FPID highly improves the performance compared to the other controller structures especially with regard to overshoots. The obtained results are tabulated in Tables 8 and 9. In addition, the responses of the tie lines, which drive to zero deviation, are illustrated in Fig. 13.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, for the first time in literature, type-2 fuzzy PID controllers are suggested for the load frequency control problem. Additionally, for the first time in literature, the BB–BC optimization algorithm is successfully used to optimize the scaling factors and membership functions of the fuzzy PID controllers. In the beginning, the definitions of type-2 fuzzy sets and interval type-2 fuzzy sets are introduced. Among the discussed fuzzy sets, interval type-2 fuzzy sets are preferred because of their simplicity and applicability. The present study is focused on a four-area interconnected power system that includes three reheat thermal plants and one hydro power plant. For each of the three reheat thermal turbine units the same controllers are designed and used; whereas, for the hydro power plant another controller is designed. First, T1FPID controllers were chosen with 9 fuzzy rules and triangular membership functions for antecedent parts and singletons for the outputs. BB–BC was used to optimize the scaling factors of the controllers.Subsequently, T2FPID controllers were designed using the same scaling factors obtained for the T1FPID controllers. The input membership functions changed into IT2FSs and the outputs membership functions were kept as singletons. Eight design parameters were defined for each controller for the reheat and hydro turbine plants. These total 8 parameters of interval type-2 sets were optimized using BB–BC. Due to the aim of the present study, is mainly to show the effect of type-2 fuzzy controllers in the load frequency control problem and not the effect of scaling factors, the scaling factor as tuning parameters was not selected to optimize 24 parameters finding slightly better results. Finally, conventional PID controllers were designed for the reheat thermal plants and hydro power plant using the BB–BC optimization. For the optimization process, the cost function was chosen as the integral of time absolute error (ITAE) index since it penalizes long-duration transients. The results in terms of the cost function show that T1FPID controllers performed almost 25% better than conventional PID controllers; in addition, IT2FPID controllers operated 51.5% better then T1FPID controllers even with the same scaling factors optimized for T1FPID. Furthermore, more simulation results were presented for different load disturbances than the ones used for the optimization stage. The IT2FPID controller noticeably showed superior performances compared to the other two controllers in terms of overshoot and settling time with fewer oscillations.