@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding why consumers engage in electronic word-of-mouth communication: Perspectives from theory of planned behavior and justice theory

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Consumers’ positive and negative eWOM Intentions are related to diverse antecedents.Consumers who intend to post positive eWOM are more driven by attitude.Consumers who consider posting negative eWOM are more driven subjective norm.For negative experience, satisfaction is largely driven by distributive justice.For positive experience, interactional and procedural justice influence satisfaction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) communication,Theory of planned behavior,Justice theory,Satisfaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Word-of-mouth has been recognized as a dominant factor in shaping consumer behavior. However, what drives consumers to post their positive and negative purchasing experiences in the online environment remains an important but largely neglected issue. Building on the theory of planned behavior, the justice theory and the social psychology literature, this study aims to investigate the antecedents of consumers’ intention to engage in eWOM communication. Specifically, we separate negative and positive eWOM into two distinct concepts since the motivations underlying consumers’ decisions to post positive and negative eWOM are likely to be different. Through an experience survey, respondents were required to reflect on recent positive or negative shopping experiences. The findings reveal that intentions to engage in positive and negative eWOM communication are associated with different antecedents. Consumers who intend to post positive eWOM appear to be more driven by underlying attitudinal factors, whereas those who consider posting negative eWOM are more driven by social pressure. In addition, consumers’ feelings of satisfaction are largely driven by their perception of distributive justice for negative shopping experiences. In contrast, satisfaction is significantly influenced by the perceptions of interactional and procedural justice for positive shopping experiences. Our results provide insights and implications for scholars and managers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Word-of-mouth (WOM) has long been recognized as an important factor in shaping consumer purchase behavior (East et al. 2007). It is described as “a dominant force in the marketplace” and the “ultimate test of the customer’s relationship” (Bendapudi and Berry 1997). This practice now extends into the online world. The increasing access to the Internet has transformed people from passive consumers to active participants. While only a limited number of consumers may be exposed to WOM in the offline setting, consumers at present have more convenient access to websites where they are free to share positive or horrible experiences with total strangers (Cheung and Lee 2012). These posted comments and evaluations will substantially damage or significantly improve consumers’ perceptions of the trustworthiness of the seller (Lee and Lee 2006).In light of these developments, the business press has identified electronic word-of-mouth (thereafter, eWOM) as a growing opportunity and a threat that deserves managers’ consideration (Ariely 2007). Yet, despite these warnings, to our surprise relatively few studies help practitioners understand the factors that influence consumers’ intention to engage in eWOM communication. Although existing studies have advanced our knowledge of eWOM, most of them have focused their attention on how consumers’ eWOM evaluations affect their purchase decisions (e.g., Utz et al. 2012). Limited attention has been paid to the investigation of antecedents of the two distinct types (positive and negative) of eWOM.Past research has considered intention to engage in WOM communication as an important dependent variable (e.g. de Matos et al. 2009). Hennig-Thurau et al. (2004) report that due to the conceptual closeness of traditional offline and online WOM communication, factors which in the literature have been identified as relevant in the traditional offline environment can also be anticipated to be of relevance in the online setting. However, Brown et al. (2007) disagreed and insisted that existing offline research maynot be appropriate to describe eWOM and its influence on consumer behavior. We concur with Brown et al. (2007) since there are several incidents and issues unique to the online environment. First, in the offline setting, exit can be seen as an economic action, whereas voice is more of a political statement (Fornell and Wernerfelt 1987). However, in the online environment, voice turns into not only a political movement, but also a significant economic action, which can influence the decisions of other consumers (Lee and Lee 2006). Past research unanimously suggests that service providers should encourage their customers to voice their complaints rather than exit silently (e.g., East 2000) because sellers can benefit from direct complaints by receiving valuable feedback. However, when it comes to online environments, negative eWOM is likely to dissuade potential buyers from considering a particular product or brand, thus damaging the company’s reputation and financial position (Pfeffer et al. 2014). Compared with offline word-of-mouth, negative eWOM is mass-public oriented and is likely to entail an explicit intent to “get the firm in trouble”. Although this threat has been considered, what drives consumers to post eWOM online has seldom been investigated.Second, eWOM communication is an observable, social activity (Mattila and Patterson 2004). Thus, the social and cultural effects may keep consumers silent even if they are willing to put extra effort into reporting their satisfactory/poor performing counter parties (Hsiao 2011). Spreading eWOM is thwarted by the fact that the content is bound to, or is likely to be traced back to the name of the person distributing it (Riivits-Arkonsuo and Leppiman 2013). Thus, consumers’ concerns about their own reputations are important (Dellarocas and Wood 2008).Third, substantial evidence in the literature suggests that social behavior is often motivated by the “need to help others” or by a desire to improve social welfare (Chelminski and Coulter 2011). Consumers in communal relationship norms (especially on the Internet) are likely to do something for other people without expecting anything in return. Thus, consumers may engage in eWOM communication in anticipation of other people becoming aware of a company’s service failures to prevent them from experiencing similar situations. Most past research in offline settings has neglected consumers’ social characteristic and assumes they are rational; thus, there are limitations to our understanding of why consumers engage in eWOM communication with the intent of low benefits but high costs, which is usually found in online settings.The objective of this study is to provide a better understanding of the motivations behind a consumer’s decision to engage in eWOM communication. Given its assigned importance, there is clearly a gap in understanding the antecedents of consumers’ intention to engage in eWOM communication, since several researchers have found that consumers increasingly place more weight on eWOM when making evaluations (e.g. Lee et al. 2008). In particular, since the motivations for individuals to engage in positive vs. negative eWOM communication are likely to be different, we separate negative and positive eWOM into two different concepts. This approach allows us to understand the relative importance of different possible determinants. It will also be effective for practitioners to identify which factors should be stressed in certain situations, and then to develop effective programs.There are three reasons why we believe this study is important. First, it addresses an important topic yet largely ignored in the literature. While eWOM today is an influential source of consumer judgments and decisions, much of the research examines the receiver’s perspective rather than the senders’ views. What remains unknown is why consumers are inclined to spend their own time posting eWOM (Yap et al. 2013). The present study is an attempt to address this research gap. Second, a review of the past literature suggests that most research on eWOM intention remains exploratory in nature. Thus, we contribute conceptually to enriching the current eWOM literature with a more comprehensive model of the simultaneous effects of several key antecedents. Finally, East et al. (2007) suggest that the motivations behind a consumer’s decision to engage in positive vs. negative WOM communication are likely to differ. Therefore, we specifically separate negative and positive eWOM communication into two different concepts. Thus, the theoretical understanding of the eWOM intention is extended by demonstrating how positive and negative eWOM are triggered by different antecedents.The topic of eWOM communication is attracting increasing attention in many research disciplines, such as marketing, consumer behavior, computer-mediated communication, and economics. Several different definitions have been proposed for behaviors related to eWOM communication. Sun et al. (2006) defined eWOM communication as “online opinion leadership” which stressed the process by which people (opinion leaders) influence the attitudes or behaviors of friends. It implies that eWOM communication is an act by which individuals exert powerful influences upon others. Hsiao (2011) defined “public online consumer complaining behaviors” as seeking redress from the company or resorting to the third party via the Internet. Negative eWOM communication was viewed as an action to recover losses caused by unsatisfactory products or services. These definitions, however, imply certain motivations underlying a consumer’s eWOM communication behaviors. A more holistic conceptualization, which was also adopted by the current study, was provided by Hennig-Thurau et al. (2004), who defined “eWOM communication” as any positive or negative statement made by potential, actual, or former customers about a product or company, which is made available to a multitude of people and institutions via the Internet.To provide an overview of the eWOM communication research field, a systematic literature review was conducted. Key words such as “online word-of-mouth”, “ewom”, “owom” were searched in a number of academic databases (ABI/INFORM, ScienceDirect, Emerald, EBSCOhost and Proquest). A few hundred journal articles were found. In the literature, we found that how eWOM influences consumers’ decisions is far more extensively studied than why consumers engage in eWOM communication. Studies unrelated to intention to engage in eWOM communication were excluded from the list. This resulted in a total of 11 relevant papers.Drawing upon Table 1, two observations can be made. First, most past research has focused on the determinants of negative eWOM. These studies demonstrated that individuals are likely to disclose negative eWOM when they want to influence others and gain revenge by exerting their power (Grégoire et al. 2010; Ward and Ostrom 2006), when they are motivated by altruism (e.g., warning other consumers) (Sparks and Browning 2010), when consumers are part of an individualistic culture (Koh et al. 2010), and when they are driven by negative emotions (Verhagen et al. 2013). It represents the efforts made by customers to cause inconvenience to or even punish the accused firm for the damages it caused them. The intention to engage in eWOM communication is motivated by a desire to “bring down” a firm in some fashion, or by an intention to take possible means to “get even”.Second, another stream of research focuses on motivations to contribute to or participate in online communities. Desire for social interaction (Hennig-Thurau et al. 2004), concern for other consumers (Cheung and Lee 2012), the potential to enhance their own self-worth (Hennig-Thurau et al. 2004; Yoo and Gretzel 2008), and a sense of belonging (Cheung and Lee 2012) are distinct reasons for posting eWOM online. These studies are largely exploratory in nature and tend to view eWOM communication as a monolithic behavior. However, both positive and negative WOM communications have different implications for theory and practice (Sundaram et al. 1998). East et al. (2007) investigated the relative incidence of positive and negative word-of-mouth to identify patterns across categories. Their results shed some light on the issue that the motivation for individuals to engage in positive word-of-mouth communication is likely to be different from that of negative actions.In sum, despite the considerable volume of studies on eWOM, it is important to acknowledge that intention to engage in eWOM communication still remains a very under-researched area. In particular, what drives individuals to engage in different types (positive vs. negative) of eWOM remains less explored.In order to develop our research framework, we begin by examining the relationships between satisfaction and eWOM that typically appear in the literature. We then discuss the role of justice perceptions which has been established as an important antecedent for satisfaction and its indirect effect on WOM intention. East (2000) found that although satisfaction may be a necessary condition for WOM to occur, limited association has been found between the degree of dissatisfaction and the probability of negative WOM. Therefore, a more comprehensive model would help to account for the variance beyond satisfaction. The theory of planned behavior is adopted to predict eWOM intention. Figs. 1 and 2present our proposed model.Consumer satisfaction, defined as “the favorability of the individual’s subjective evaluations of outcomes and experiences associated with his or her consumption activities” (Brown et al. 2005), is a post-purchase response. Satisfaction with products or services is usually related to outcomes such as loyalty and positive WOM (e.g., de Matos et al. 2009; Wangenheim and Bayón 2007). In the shopping context, consumers perceive an emotional imbalance when their expectations are either surpassed (satisfaction) or not met (dissatisfaction). They will strive to restore homeostasis by engaging in some post-purchase behaviors (e.g., word-of-mouth) (Hennig-Thurau et al. 2004).A consumer with a satisfactory service experience is more likely to respond to the seller in a positive way. Past researchers provide empirical evidence of the significant impact of satisfaction on WOM in the offline settings (e.g., Wangenheim and Bayón 2007). We propose that this reasoning can be extended to the online setting, where the greater the satisfaction among customers, the greater the possibility that they will intend to engage in positive eWOM communication. Therefore,H1aConsumer satisfaction has a positive effect on positive eWOM intention.Prior research has confirmed that satisfaction is negatively associated with complaining behavior (Zeelenberg and Pieters 2004), which implies that consumers will be more likely to manifest a negative eWOM communication if they are less satisfied with the service. Thogersen et al. (2009) argued that consumers’ dissatisfaction with the products or services is the basic antecedent of consumers’ complaining intention. Similarly, Voorhees and Brady (2005) found that dissatisfaction would make future complaint intentions occur. Extending previous research, therefore, we argue that the less satisfied consumers are with the service, the more likely their intention to engage in negative eWOM communication. Hence, it is hypothesized:H1bConsumer satisfaction has a negative effect on negative eWOM intention.Researchers have investigated the formation of satisfaction perceptions. While several theories exist regarding the process through which consumers reach satisfaction/dissatisfaction judgments, the perspective of justice theory seems particularly of relevance in a service context (Maxham III 2001). Moreover, ample empirical evidence reveals that consumers’ justice perceptions are critical to their satisfaction with a firm’s efforts (e.g., Tax et al. 1998).The literature in social psychology indicates that consumers in a service encounter base their justice perceptions on three dimensions: the perceived justice of the tangible outcome (distributive justice), the perceived justice of the procedures leading to the outcome (procedural justice), and the perceived justice of the manners (e.g., courtesy or rudely) in which consumers were treated throughout the process (interactional justice). These dimensions have been hypothesized and demonstrated to act as significant cognitive antecedents to satisfaction (e.g., de Matos et al. 2009; Tax et al. 1998; Wu 2013). Consumers will make judgments about the degree to which the products/services were just, and in turn form their satisfaction perceptions. That is, consumers will perceive more satisfaction if firms provide their service in a just manner. Hence, it is hypothesized that:H2Distributive justice has a positive effect on consumer satisfaction.Procedural justice has a positive effect on consumer satisfaction.Interactional justice has a positive effect on consumer satisfaction.Singh and Wilkes (1996) suggested that complaining behavior is goal directed. Extending this reasoning, we propose that individuals would consider the consequences and implications of the eWOM communication to decide whether or not to do it. Thus, eWOM communication is the product of an individual’s consequent actions and therefore can be treated as a planned behavior in order to maximize its utility by fulfilling the obligation and disposing of any sanctions or consequences (Merchant and Van der Stede 2007).Based on the TPB, intention signifies the motivational components of a behavior. It represents the conscious effort that a person is willing to invest in a behavior. Human action is guided by three kinds of readily accessible beliefs: behavioral beliefs are those about the likely consequences of the behavior, normative beliefs are those about the normative expectations and actions of important referents, and control beliefs are those about the presence of factors that may facilitate or impede performance of the behavior (East 2000). In their respective aggregates, behavioral beliefs bring on a favorable or unfavorable attitude (ATT) toward the behavior; normative beliefs give rise to subjective norms (SN) or perceived social pressure (which also contribute to the forming of attitudes); and control beliefs result in perceived behavioral control (PBC).Drawing from the complaint literature in offline settings, several studies provide empirical support for the impact of the three variables on consumers’ complaint intention. For example, consumers’ attitude towards complaining significantly influences complaining intentions (East 2000; Hansen et al. 2011). It has been shown to significantly influence customers’ decisions as to whether or not to voice a complaint. Likewise, subjective norms were found to be significant in predicting consumers’ complaining intentions (East 2000), and perceived control was positively related to voicing (Bodey and Grace 2006).Attitudes toward eWOM communication is defined as the overall affect of ‘goodness’ or ‘badness’ of eWOM communication and is not specific to a certain episode of satisfaction. It is determined through an assessment of one’s beliefs with respect to the outcomes of a behavior and an evaluation of the desirability of these outcomes. Before posting their opinion or comments online, consumers are likely to be concerned about whether or not such behavior is appropriate. Consumers may feel that they should disclose their opinion online because airing one’s discontent/content with products or services is one’s moral obligation to benefit the public. Phau and Sari (2004) suggest that people are likely to complain if they believe it is appropriate. That is, consumers who have a more favorable attitude towards eWOM communication are more likely to express their opinion and comments on the Internet. Conversely, a consumer who has a negative attitude towards eWOM communication would tend to do nothing, or may engage in a private action. Accordingly, we posit:H5eWOM Attitude has a positive effect on eWOM intention.Subjective norm is a social pressure which represents an individual’s perception of whether significant referents think the behavior should be performed. Chu and Kim (2011) identified normative interpersonal influence as an important driver of eWOM behavior. Riivits-Arkonsuo and Leppiman (2013) found that consumers do not want to share their negative consumption experiences on Facebook since negative comments are bound to or are likely to be traced back to the name of the person who posted them; thus they prefer to avoid negative posts since these are public – instead they would rather share their comments via offline WOM. Consumers may hesitate if they perceive others’ negative reactions to such behavior. Stated differently, the possibility of losing face is conceivably emotionally undesirable. Richins (1982) noted that some feel they do not like to be seen or to see themselves as nuisances/troublemakers or recommenders/opinion leaders. This would inhibit them from posting their opinions or comments about their satisfactory/unsatisfactory experiences. Therefore,H6Subjective norms have a positive effect on eWOM intention.Fishbein and Ajzen (1975) have admitted that attitudinal and normative influences might be dependent on each other. Drawn from persuasion theory and cognitive dissonance theory, Lim and Dubinsky (2005) provide explanations of the relationship between subjective norms and attitudes. In order to associate oneself with significant others, cognitive dissonance theory predicts that an individual’s attitude toward a specific behavior may change. In contrast, a person’s attitude toward carrying out a behavior can be influenced through the internalization process of recommendations and arguments received from important others, as suggested by persuasion theory. Thus, positive attitudes may arise directly out of advice or information from others.Evidence in past research indicates that attitudes are influenced by subjective norms. Chang (1998) found that the model fit was significantly improved when the causal path from subjective norms to attitudes was added. For these reasons, we conclude that consumers’ attitudes toward eWOM communication are influenced by subjective norms.H7Subjective norms have a positive effect on eWOM attitude.Perceived behavioral control is the perception of the ease or difficulty of performing a particular behavior. The more opportunities and requisite resources (e.g., information technology, knowledge, ability) consumers believe they have, the greater their perceived behavioral control over eWOM communication should be. Empirical evidence suggests that the inclusion of perceived behavioral control in the TPB model has resulted in significant improvements in the prediction of intentions (Ajzen 1991). Accordingly, we posit:H8Perceived behavioral control has a positive effect on eWOM intention.Ajzen (Ajzen 1991) suggested that the TPB is open to expansion. To improve its explanatory power, many new predictors have been integrated into the original TPB by researchers. In this study, several additional variables were incorporated into the model in order to improve its predictive power and to enhance the relevance of the TPB to the particular context under examination. Past studies have suggested a range of factors relating to consumers’ engagement in WOM (e.g., Dichter 1966; Hennig-Thurau et al. 2004; Sundaram et al. 1998; Yap et al. 2013). Based on these studies, we examined variables which are relevant to consumers’ attitudes toward eWOM communication. Three of the variables were identified to explain positive eWOM communication (i.e., helping the company, helping other consumers, and self-enhancement), while the other three variables give reasons for negative eWOM communication (i.e., warning other consumers, vengeance, and anxiety reduction). Furthermore, based on the social psychology literature, three perspectives were identified to explain consumers’ attitudes towards eWOM communication: altruism, reciprocity, and egoism.Numerous studies testing TPB have included a measure of moral obligation. A moral obligation is a duty or responsibility that someone feels bound to perform because of personal beliefs and values. Altruism is a belief which holds that individuals have a moral obligation to help, serve or benefit others, if necessary at the sacrifice of self-interest (Shechter and Freeman 1994). The inclusion of moral obligation as an antecedent of attitude has been justified on the basis that some behaviors are likely to be regarded as inherently right or wrong by individuals (Manstead 2000).Yap et al. (2013) suggested that altruists recognize that the best way to be helpful in WOM communication is to be informative and functional. Hennig-Thurau et al. (2004) conceptualized “concern for others” in terms of both help and warning other consumers. “Concern for others” implies an element of altruism, which is a voluntary act benefiting others without expecting something in return. However, Yap et al. (2013) posited that “concern for others” is not likely to be uni-dimensional. We follow Yap et al. (2013) work and separate this altruistic belief into “helping other consumers” and “warning other consumers”. Thus, consumers with a favorable experience are likely to display concern by helping others make the right decision. Conversely, consumers with an unfavorable experience are concerned about warning other consumers to prevent them from experiencing the same problems. Therefore, a consumer who believes that voluntarily helping or warning others with his/her experience is appropriate will tend to have a more favorable attitude towards eWOM communication.H9Helping other consumers has a positive effect on eWOM attitude.Warning other consumers has a positive effect on eWOM attitude.Reciprocity is the belief or norm that we should do to others as they do to us, calling for positive responses to favorable treatment and negative responses to unfavorable treatment (Tedeschi et al. 1985). In reciprocity, the more one receives, the more one is obligated to give to the other party. We separate this reciprocity belief into “helping the company” and “vengeance”.A very positive consumption experience creates a consumer’s true wish to help and promote the company (Riivits-Arkonsuo and Leppiman 2013). Therefore, we posit that consumers who believe that “a good social institution is worthy of support” tend to hold a favorable attitude toward eWOM communication in order to give the firm “something in return” and to reward the company by referring it to others.H10Helping the company has a positive effect on eWOM attitude.On the contrary, people who are unhappy with a consumption experience may want to convince others to boycott the offending organizations, intending to seek vengeance and punish the organization (Sundaram et al. 1998; Ward and Ostrom 2006). There is evidence to suggest someone looking to punish an organization or vent negative feelings is likely to word his/her eWOM message with strong emotional language (Yap et al. 2013). This suggests that consumers who believe that a bad company should get what it deserves would have a more favorable attitude toward posting their eWOM to express their anger, frustration, and irritation to strike back at the company associated with a negative shopping experience. Therefore,H13Vengeance has a positive effect on eWOM attitude.Egoism is defined as “one’s self is, or should be, the motivation and the goal of one’s own action” (Brandt 1972). A belief is regarded as egoistic if the ultimate goal is to enhance one’s own welfare or interest (Cheung and Lee 2012). As rational people, individuals try to maximize their benefits and minimize their cost for returns (e.g., recognition, reputation, and pay). While a person can have multiple ultimate goals, the beliefs of altruism and egoism can co-occur (Batson 2010).Stern (2000) asserted that the self-enhancement dimension includes egoistic value orientations. Individuals with self-enhancement value desire positive recognition from others. Wojnicki and Godes (2008) found that consumers’ propensities to generate positive word-of-mouth (WOM) are affected by their motivation to self-enhance, that is, to seek experiences that bolster the self-concept and seek opportunities to enhance their own self-worth. A desired outcome commonly associated with positive self-enhancement is to present oneself as an intelligent or discerning shopper (Hennig-Thurau et al. 2004; Yap et al. 2013). Therefore, we posit that consumers with higher self-enhancement value are inclined to have a more favorable attitude toward posting their positive eWOM.H11Self-Enhancement has a positive effect on eWOM attitude.Alicke et al. (1992) suggested that a desire for catharsis is considered as a primary driving force for the relief of negative emotion. Venting negative feelings through articulation and sharing of negative consumption experiences online can help consumers reduce their anxiety and lessen the frustration associated with the events (Sundaram et al. 1998). Thus, consumers who consider negative eWOM as an effective avenue to ease their anger, anxiety, and frustration are likely to have a more favorable attitude toward negative eWOM communication.H14Anxiety reduction has a positive effect on eWOM attitude.We used several control variables which in theory are influential in consumers’ eWOM intention. The first is the past experience of posting WOM online. The uncertainty involved in eWOM communication would be lowered if consumers were knowledgeable or experienced about eWOM communication. The second variable is the post-purchase advice-seeking for negative shopping encounters. Consumers who encounter negative experiences tend to share their experience to obtain advice on how to resolve their problems (Hennig-Thurau et al. 2004). The final control variable is product involvement for positive shopping encounters. Consumers whose purchase and use of products are perceived as highly important or relevant tend to create excitement and employ eWOM to vent their positive feelings (Sundaram et al. 1998).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
