@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Granular type-2 membership functions: A new approach to formation of footprint of uncertainty in type-2 fuzzy sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new approach for the formation of type-2 membership functions is introduced.The footprint of uncertainty is formed by using rectangular type-2 fuzzy granules.This new approach provides more degrees of freedom and design flexibility in type-2 fuzzy logic systems.Mathematical expressions and derivative computations of granular type-2 membership functions are very simple.Type-2 fuzzy logic systems using granular type-2 membership functions have more potential to model and handle uncertainties.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Type-2 fuzzy logic systems,Type-2 membership functions,Footprint of uncertainty,Fuzzy granule,Granular type-2 membership functions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, a new approach for the formation of type-2 membership functions is introduced. The footprint of uncertainty is formed by using rectangular type-2 fuzzy granules and the resulting membership function is named as granular type-2 membership function. This new approach provides more degrees of freedom and design flexibility in type-2 fuzzy logic systems. Uncertainties on the grades of membership functions can be represented independently for any region in the universe of discourse and free of any functional form. So, the designer could produce nonlinear, discontinuous or hybrid membership functions in granular formation and therefore could model any desired discontinuity and nonlinearity. The effectiveness of the proposed granular type-2 membership functions is firstly demonstrated by simulations done on noise corrupted Mackey–Glass time series prediction. Secondly, flexible design feature of granular type-2 membership functions is illustrated by modeling a nonlinear system having dead zone with uncertain system parameters. The simulation results show that type-2 fuzzy logic systems formed by granular type-2 membership functions have more modeling capabilities than the systems using conventional type-2 membership functions and they are more robust to system parameter changes and noisy inputs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The type-2 fuzzy sets (T2-FSs), introduced by Zadeh [1], are more capable of modeling and minimizing the effect of uncertainties in rule-based fuzzy logic systems than type-1 fuzzy sets [2–4]. Since the degrees of type-2 membership functions (T2-MFs) are themselves fuzzy; whereas, degrees of type-1 membership functions (T1-MFs) are crisp, this property provides additional degrees of freedom in design procedure to handle the uncertainties directly. Interval type-2 fuzzy sets (IT2-FSs), of which the secondary MFs are equal to 1, are widely used in type-2 fuzzy logic systems (T2-FLSs) due to their computational facilities [5–8].MFs of T2-FSs are characterized by their footprint of uncertainty (FOU). FOU can be defined as a bounded region of uncertainty in the primary membership of a T2-FS and it represents the union of all primary memberships [9]. In IT2-FSs, FOU is a complete description of the fuzzy set since the secondary grades of an IT2-FS convey no new information [10]. In T2-FLSs, FOU can be defined by several ways such as starting with type-1 base MF and blurring or displacing it [11,12], using T1-MF distribution [13], choosing upper and lower MFs of IT2 FS as Gaussian, triangular, trapezoid, etc. [14–16], using geometrical approach [17–19], using zSlices approach [20], using linguistic hedges [21,22], using diamond shaped MFs [23], using sine-square embedded form [24], etc. In the literature, the most commonly used conventional T2-MFs are in the shapes of Gaussian, triangular, trapezoid and sigmoid. However, it is not fair to assume that the real uncertainty distribution is in such specific conventional shapes [18].Therefore, T2-MFs with conventional shapes might be incapable of modeling the uncertainties properly in some cases such as dealing with hybrid and switching systems and/or the systems having high nonlinearities like dead zone, backlash, etc. In such cases we need more flexibility to model uncertainties and form FOU of T2-MFs.A fuzzy granule (FG) was introduced by Zadeh [25] and it has been widely used in the literature [26–31]. Mendel and Wu [32] suggested that a single rectangular interval type-2 fuzzy granule (RIT2-FG) can be considered as an IT2-FS and the area of the FG can be considered as FOU of this IT2-FS. However, it is more appropriate to use RIT2-FGs as a part of FOU of an IT2-FS instead of an IT2-FS itself [33].In this study, general rectangular type-2 fuzzy granules (RT2 FGs) are used to form FOU of a new general T2-MF called as granular type-2 membership function (GT2-MF). GT2-MFs provide more degrees of freedom and design flexibility in T2-FLSs and have more potential to model and handle uncertainties. By using GT2-MFs, uncertainties on the grades of MFs can be represented independently for any region in the universe of discourse and this makes it possible to form highly nonlinear, discontinuous or hybrid membership functions. This provides us to model any desired discontinuity and various kinds of nonlinearities on the universe of discourse or in the input-output mapping. Thus, GT2-MFs are useful and quite effective in modeling and control of nonlinear systems having high nonlinearities such as dead zone, backlash, etc., and also in hybrid or switched systems. Additionally, obtaining the derivatives of variables of GT2-MFs are rather simple, and therefore derivative based optimization algorithms are easily used in determining the appropriate parameters of GT2-MFs. The effectiveness of the proposed GT2-MFs is demonstrated through simulations on Mackey–Glass time series prediction and modeling a nonlinear system having dead zone with uncertain parameters.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, preliminaries are briefly given. In Section 3, the proposed GT2-MFs and their features are presented. In Section 4, simulation results are given to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of this new approach. Finally, conclusions are outlined in Section 5.In T2-FLSs, the degrees of T2-MFs are themselves fuzzy; whereas, degrees of T1-MFs are crisp. Therefore, T2-FSs have additional degrees of freedom in design procedure to handle the uncertainties directly. The definitions related to T2-FSs are given below.Definition 1A T2-FS Ã is characterized by a T2-MF as [2]When the secondary membership grades are all equal to 1, the result of a T2-FS is named as IT2-FS.Definition 2An IT2-FS Ã is characterized by an IT2-MF as [2]Uncertainty in the primary memberships of a T2-FS, Ã, consists of a bounded region named as FOU. It represents the union of all primary memberships as [10]The lower bound and upper bound of FOU of a T2-FS Ã are called as Lower Membership Function (LMF),μ_A˜;x, and Upper Membership Function (UMF),μ¯A˜;x, respectively. They are defined asThe FOU is a very important and useful characteristic of IT2 FSs, because an IT2 FS is completely described by its FOU [10] and the size and shape of FOU is directly related to nature of the uncertainty.A granule represents a clump of objects which are drawn together by some criteria like indistinguishability, similarity, proximity or functionality [25]. Granulation means partitioning of an object into a collection of granules. Granulation provides us a way to deal with complex problems in a simpler way by breaking up or decomposing them into smaller pieces.There are two major issues in the granular construction [34]. These are the determination of the scope (the purpose of the granulation) and the resolution. For example, the scope of the granulation can be dividing the objects into similar weights. So the granules will be determined with respect to weight similarities of the objects. The resolution of the granulation depends on the division of the whole. Then, the resolution will determine the dimension of the granules. If the weights in the range of [0–100] is granulized by choosing the resolution of the granulation as 25kg then the granules [0–25],…,[75–100] are obtained. Then, it is obvious that the granules of [0–10],…,[90–100] are obtained for a higher resolution of 10kg.The type of the granule can either be crisp or fuzzy as shown in Fig. 2. Crisp granules are used in various methods such as rough set theory, interval analysis, machine learning, Dempster–Shafer theory, cluster analysis, quantization, constraint programming, fuzzy set theory and many others [35–45].However, since in almost all of human reasoning and concept formation the granules are fuzzy rather than crisp, the FG is more convenient to reflect human reasoning [25]. A fuzzy granule can be considered as a fuzzified version of crisp granules. It is defined by a fuzzy set or a fuzzy number in which the transition from membership to nonmembership is gradual rather than abrupt as in crisp granules [31]. So the great features of the fuzzy logic theory about representing uncertain and imprecise knowledge can easily be utilized.There are various shapes of FGs such as circular, rectangular, triangular, etc. In this study RT2-FGs are used because they have many advantages on computations in T2-FLSs. The following definitions can be made for RT2-FGs.Definition 5RT2-FG is a rectangular prism of which the base area represents FOU as the primary MF and the height of the granule α є [0,1] represents the secondary MF as shown in Fig. 3.Here, xLand xRare minimum and maximum boundary values in x-axis, uLand uRare minimum and maximum primary membership values of the RT2-FG and α is a secondary membership value of the RT2-FG. The shaded area represents the FOU of the RT2-FG.Definition 6RIT2-FG is a RT2-FG of which the secondary membership value α is equal to 1.Mendel and Wu [32] suggested that a single RIT2-FG can be considered as an IT2-FS and the area of the FG can be considered as FOU of this IT2-FS. There, it is shown that when RIT2-FG is considered as an IT2-FS, the centroid of this IT2-FS can be computed in closed form. This is undoubtedly an important property of RIT2-FGs. However, using a single RIT2-FG as an IT2-FS in this sense reduces the fuzziness in the meaning of the T2-FS and linguistic interpretability. Thus, this is not much reasonable for modeling and control applications. Actually, RT2-FGs should be considered as a part of FOU of a T2-FS instead of a T2-FS itself. This preserves the feature of fuzziness and linguistic interpretability in T2-FLSs. From this point of view, in this study, RT2-FGs are used to define FOU of a T2-FS.In this section, a new type of MF named as GT2-MF is introduced which is formed by using RT2-FGs.Definition 7The T2-FS of which FOU is formed by using RT2 FGs is named as Granular Type-2 Fuzzy Set (GT2-FS) and its membership function is called as GT2-MF.The IT2-FS of which FOU is formed by using RIT2 FGs is named as Granular Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Set (GIT2-FS) and its membership function is called as Granular Interval Type-2 Membership Function (GIT2-MF).The mathematical representation of GT2-MF is given as follows(6)μ_x=uixi≤x<xi+1(7)μ¯x=ui+∑j=1NiΔi,jxi≤x<xi+1(8)μx,u=αi,jui+∑k=1jΔi,k−1≤u<ui+∑k=1jΔi,kandxi≤x<xi+1where Δi,0=0, i=1,…,n and j=1,…Ni. Here n is the number of the granular regions on x-axis, Niis the number of RT2-FGs in ith granular region that form FOU, xiis the boundary points of each granular region on x-axis,μ_xandμ¯xare the LMF and UMF of GT2-MF, uiis the lower membership grade of GT2-MF in ith granular region, Δi,jis the depth of the jth RT2-FG in the ith granular region and αi,jis the secondary membership grade of the jth RT2-FG in the ith granular region as shown in Fig. 6.An example for GT2-MF with numerical values of i=5 and N1=2, N2=1, N3=2, N4=3, N5=2 is shown in Fig. 7.RT2-FGs can be combined in three different ways to form FOU of GT2-MF as shown in Fig. 8. The basic form of RT2-FGs used in the formation of FOU is shown in Fig. 8a. The other two forms are obtained by shifting RT2-FGs in the basic form vertically and horizontally as shown in Fig. 8b and Fig. 8c, respectively.Horizontally shifted form can be defined by means of the vertically shifted form as shown in Fig. 9. Therefore, only basic form and its vertically shifted form are enough to be used in the formation of GT2-MFs.Various kinds of GT2-MFs can be formed by using these forms of RT2-FGs.Relying on the following features, GT2-MFs provide more freedom and flexibility in modeling and handling uncertainties in T2-FLSs.Mostly specific conventional functions such as Gaussian, triangular, trapezoid, sigmoid are used in defining T2-MFs. Such conventional MFs might not reflect the real uncertainty distribution or might be incapable to model the uncertainties properly in some cases. For instance, if there is an uncertainty on membership grades of a FS on the universe of discourse as shown in Fig. 10a, then a convenient T2-MF in the trapezoid form is not able to cover up and express the given uncertainty properly as shown in Fig. 10b. On the other hand, as it is seen from Fig. 10c, this uncertainty is expressed more properly by using a GT2-MF.Another important feature of the proposed approach is that GT2-MFs provide more degrees of freedom and design flexibility in T2-FLSs. FOU of GT2-MFs can be easily formed in shapes of conventional MFs such as triangular, Gaussian, trapezoid, etc., by using RT2-FGs as shown in Fig. 11. Besides conventional shapes of MFs, this approach provides us a way to define uncertainty on MFs independent from any specific function. Thus, T2-MFs in highly nonlinear, hybrid (consisting of type-1 and type-2 fuzzy characteristics) and discontinuous forms can easily be devised as shown in Fig. 12a–c, respectively.The modeling feature of the proposed approach provides us an opportunity to express the uncertainties without any dependence on the shape of a specific function. Thus, GT2-MFs have more capability to model the uncertainties properly than conventional T2-MFs. Moreover, due to the flexible design properties of the proposed granular approach in forming T2-MFs, the desired continuity and/or discontinuity on universe of discourse or input-output mapping in modeling and control applications could easily be achieved.Defining a GT2-MF is very simple as seen from Eqs. (6)–(8). This property would naturally reduce the complexity and simplify the computational issues in T2-FSs and T2-FLSs. Additionally, derivatives of variables of GT2-MFs are always constant and equal to 1. Thus, derivative based optimization algorithms such as Steepest Descent (SD) algorithm are easily used when the appropriate parameters of GT2-MFs are determined.As it is seen from Fig. 6, for each granular region of GT2-MF, there are 1+2 Niparameters to be determined as degrees of LMF ui, uncertainty levels Δi,jand secondary grades αi,j. The granular regions can be divided evenly in the universe of discourse or the length of each region could be variable. In the case that the lengths of the regions are taken as variable then the parameter xiis to be considered as another tuning parameter.The derivatives of upper, lower and secondary membership functions of GT2-MF (Eqs. (6)–(8)) with respect to their parameters (ui, Δi,jand αi,j) are as follows(9)∂μ_x∂ui=1xi≤x<xi+10else(10)∂μ_x∂Δi,j=0(11)∂μ_x∂αi,j=0(12)∂μ¯x∂ui=1xi≤x<xi+10else(13)∂μ¯x∂Δi,j=1xi≤x<xi+10else(14)∂μ¯x∂αi,j=0(15)∂μx,u∂ui=0(16)∂μx,u∂Δi,j=0(17)∂μx,u∂αi,j=1ui+∑k=1jΔi,k−1≤u<ui+∑k=1jΔi,kandxi≤x<xi+10elsewhere Δi,0=0, i=1,…,n and j=1,…Ni.As it is seen from the definitions, although the boundary point of a granular region xican be considered as a tuning parameter, it is only seen in if condition parts of GT2-MF definitions. Therefore, the derivatives with respect to these boundary points do not exist. However, certain function approximations can be proposed to deduce the derivative information related to xiin optimization procedure. In this context, the boundaries between adjacent granules of LMF can be designated by a linear function having sharp slope in very small interval xi−ε<x<xi+ε as shown in Fig. 13. In practice, it is enough to select the ε value as 5% of granular width resolution.The linear function is given as follows(18)f(x)=ax+bwhere(19)a=ui−ui−12ϵ(20)b=ui−1xi+ϵ−uixi−ϵ2ϵIn optimization procedure of xiparameters, the LMF can be defined as follows(21)μ_optX=ui−ui−12ϵX+ui−1Xi+ϵ−uiXi−ϵ2ϵXi−ϵ<X<Xi+ϵμ_Xelsei=1,…,nThe derivative of the LMF with respect to xithen becomes(22)∂μ_optx∂xi=ui−1−ui2ϵxi−ϵ<x<xi+ϵ0elsei=1,…,nAs it is seen from (22), the derivative values related to xiparameters are constant. The same derivative information can also be driven for the UMF as well. These derivatives formulas provide us to use derivative based algorithms in optimization procedures in a simple manner.In order to show the effectiveness and the design flexibility of the proposed GT2-MFs, the following two modeling applications are chosen:i)Mackey–Glass time series predictionNonlinear system having dead zone.The modeling is performed by interval type-2 fuzzy logic systems (IT2-FLSs) using conventional and granular IT2-MFs which are named as C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS, respectively. In the case of Mackey–Glass time series prediction, the performances of C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS are compared under noisy inputs. Moreover, the effect of granular resolution on the performance of G-IT2FLS is shown for Mackey–Glass time series prediction. For the modeling application of nonlinear system having dead zone, the performance comparisons are done under uncertain system parameters.Mackey–Glass time series is defined by the following dynamic equation [46]:(23)x˙(t)=0.2xt−τ1+x10t−τ−0.1xtThe initial value and the parameter τ are chosen as x(0)=1.2 and τ=17 in this modeling application.In order to study the effect of noisy inputs in the modeling performances, it is assumed that the data x(k) are corrupted by uniformly distributed additive noise n(k) with zero mean and signal to noise ratio (SNR) of 0dB. This means that the available noisy data can be expressed as S(k)=x(k)+n(k), k=1,2…N. The number of the sampling points is chosen as N=1000. The first 500 data s(200), s(201),…, s(700) are used for training and the rest 500 data s(701), s(702),…, s(1200) are used for testing. Fig. 14shows the noise free and noise corrupted signals of Mackey–Glass time series.The structure of the IT2-FLSs is chosen as Takagi–Sugeno–Kang (TSK). The antecedent MFs are T2-FSs and the consequent MFs are crisp functions. This type of FLS is called as A2-C0 TSK [2]. The general structure of A2-C0 TSK model is as follows(24)Ruleith=IFx1isF˜;1iandx2isF˜;2iand⋯xnisF˜;niTHENyi=a0i+a1i⋅x1+a2i⋅x2+⋯ani⋅xn,i=1,...,M.whereF˜;jirepresents T2-FS of input state j in rule i, x1,…, xnare inputs,a0i,⋯,aniare the coefficients of output crisp functions for rule i, yiis the output of the ith rule, and M is the number of rules.The inputs of IT2-FLSs are chosen as s(k−3), s(k−2), s(k−1) and s(k) and the output is x(k+1). Two IT2-MFs are selected for each input and thus the number of rules becomes 24. The first of the 16 rules is given as an example as follows:(25)Rule1=IFsk−3isF˜;11andsk−2isF˜;21andsk−1isF˜;31andskisF˜;41THENy1=a01+a11⋅sk−3+a21⋅sk−2+a31⋅sk−1+a41⋅skThe following closed form formula is preferred for defuzzification to avoid the complexity of the type reduction procedure [47](26)y=m∑i=1Mf_iyi∑i=1Mf_i+n∑i=1Mf¯iyi∑i=1Mf¯ii=1,…M.Here m and n are weighted parameters andf_iandf¯iare lower and upper firing degrees of each rule and yiis the output of the ith rule.Since the noise that affects the time series has a zero mean, the MFs of C-IT2FLS are chosen as Gaussian IT2-MFs with uncertain mean. A Gaussian IT2-MF is shown in Fig. 15a.Since there are three tuning parameters for each Gaussian T2-MF with uncertain mean as σ, m1 and m2, there will be 24 parameters for antecedent MFs. Similarly since there exist 5 consequent crisp function parameters for each rule, and we have overall 24 rules, there are 80 tuning parameters for consequent crisp functions. Moreover, there are 2 tuning parameters in defuzzifier as weighting factors which are m and n. Thus, there exist 106 tuning parameters for C-IT2FLS in total.In the case of G-IT2FLS, GIT2-MFs with granular resolution of 3 are chosen. This means that GIT2-MFs are formed by 3 RIT2-FGs. A GIT2-MF of this type is shown in Fig. 15b. There are 8 tuning parameters for each GIT2-MF with granular resolution of 3 as u1, u2, u3, Δ1, Δ2, Δ3, x1 and x2. Therefore, there will be 8×8=64 tuning parameters for antecedent MFs of G-IT2FLS. Similarly, there are 80 tuning parameters for consequent crisp functions and 2 tuning parameters for defuzzifier as in C-IT2FLS. Thus, there exist 146 tuning parameters for G-IT2FLS in total.The SD algorithm is used to optimize the structure of IT2-FLSs. In SD algorithm the parameter “a” is optimized as follows(27)a(k+1)=a(k)−λ∂e(k)∂a(k)where e is the error and λ>0 is the learning parameter. The learning parameter determines the convergence rate of the algorithm. If the learning parameter is chosen too high, the convergence may not be obtained. On the other hand, if the learning parameter is chosen too small, the convergence becomes sluggish. In practice, the learning parameter is usually chosen as 0<λ<1 [48]. After some systematical trials it has been observed that the λ value 0.1 has been adequate for the desired convergence rate. For SD optimization algorithm the performance index is taken as(28)E=12y(k)−x(k)2For the comparison of the performances of IT2-FLSs, RMSE values are calculated from(29)RMSE=1500∑k=1500y(k)−x(k)2The initial Gaussian IT2-MFs and GIT2-MFs are chosen to be distributed in the universe of discourse equally. The initialajiparameters of consequent crisp functions are all chosen as 0.2.Since the modeling capabilities of conventional IT2-MFs and GIT2-MFs are tried to be compared, the consequent and defuzzifier parameters of both IT2-FLSs are chosen to be the same. This implies that only the antecedent MFs of C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS will be different. Thus, the modeling capabilities of C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS will only depend on their antecedent MFs. This means that there will be no improving effect on modeling performance of IT2-FLSs other than the parameters of the antecedent MFs. So, the comparison will be handled on more fair bases. In this respect, m and n parameters in defuzzifier are chosen as 0.5 for both IT2-FLSs. Although this will cause a disadvantage for G-IT2FLS, the parameters of the consequent crisp functions are optimized only for C-IT2FLS where Gaussian IT2-MFs are used; that is, the optimized consequent parameters of C-IT2FLS are used in G-IT2FLS.After the determination of the consequent parameters, 10 iterations are performed to optimize the parameters of the antecedent MFs of C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS. The optimized Gaussian IT2-MFs and GIT2-MFs are shown in Figs. 16 and 17, respectively.The comparison of the testing results of the C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS are shown in Fig. 18.The RMSE values of the model outputs of C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS are shown in Table 1.As it is seen from the RMSE results, G-IT2FLS outperforms the C-IT2FLS for modeling and minimizing the effect of uncertainties even though the consequent parameters are tuned for only C-IT2FLS. The reason of this superiority is that GIT2-MFs have more degrees of freedom in design parameters and this makes it possible to model uncertainties more freely than conventional IT2-MFs.In order to show the effectiveness of granular resolution on the uncertainty modeling performance of GIT2-MFs, granular resolutions are also chosen as 4 and 6, and IT2-FLSs using these MFs are named as G4-IT2FLS and G6-IT2FLS, respectively. The granules are distributed in the universe of discourse equally for each initially chosen GIT2-MF.There are 11 and 17 tuning parameters for each GIT2-MF with resolution of 4 and 6, respectively. Therefore, there will be 11×8=88 and 17×8=136 tuning parameters for antecedent MFs of G4-IT2FLS and G6-IT2FLS.The learning coefficient for SD algorithm is chosen as λ=0.1 and 10 iterations are performed for both G4-IT2FLS and G6-IT2FLS in the optimization procedure. The RMSE results of all IT2-FLSs are shown in Table 2. G-IT2FLS using GIT2-MFs with granular resolution of 3 is named as G3-IT2FLS.It is seen from the RMSE results that as the granular resolution gets higher, the performance of G-IT2FLS improves. The reason is that higher resolution provides us to model uncertainties more accurately. However, the number of tuning parameters naturally increases as the resolution gets higher.In this modeling application, in order to show the design flexibility of the proposed GIT2-MFs, the modeling of a nonlinear system having dead zone with uncertain parameters is considered. The system block diagram and the dead zone characteristic of the system are shown in Fig. 19a and b, respectively. The system parameters are assumed to be uncertain. The nominal system is modeled again by C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS. Then, the modeling performances of these two IT2-FLSs are compared under system parameter uncertainties.In Fig. 19, s(t) is the input signal of the overall system, u(t) is the input signal of the nonlinear system after dead zone and y(t) is the system output signal. The model of the nonlinear system is given as follows(30)x˙(t)=−ax(t)+bu(t)+cx2(t)y(t)=x(t)where x(t) is the system state variable and a, b, and c are the system parameters. The nominal system parameters are chosen as a=100, b=100 and c=20. It is considered that there is 10% uncertainty on the system parameters so the parameters a and b vary in the interval of [90,110].The input sinusoidal signal s(t)=sin((2 π 0.05) t) and the corresponding system response y(t) are shown in Fig. 20.As it is seen from the Fig. 20, the system response is equal to 0 when the input signal is in the interval of [−0.3, 0.2] due to the dead zone. If the system is to be modeled using a FLS, there should not be any MF in this interval of input universe of discourse in order to express dead zone characteristics properly.The structure of the IT2-FLSs is chosen as A2-C0 TSK. Here, the inputs of IT2-FLSs are chosen as u(k−1), u(k), x(k−2) and x(k−1) and the output is x(k). The number of the sampling points is chosen as N=1000. The first 500 data are used for training and the rest 500 data are used in testing. Two IT2-MFs are selected for each input and thus the number of rules becomes 24. Eq. (26) is preferred for defuzzification.Triangular IT2-MFs are chosen for the C-IT2FLS as shown in Fig. 21a. Here a1, a2, b1, b2, c1, c2 are tuning parameters of the triangular IT2-MF. Since two MFs are chosen for each input, only one MF can be assigned to each of the active regions on the right and left side of the dead zone interval [−0.3, 0.2] in the universe of discourse of u(k−1) and u(k).Since there are 6 tuning parameters for each triangular IT2-MF, there will be 48 parameters for antecedent MFs. Similarly since there exist 5 consequent function parameters for each rule, and we have overall 24 rules, there are 80 tuning parameters for consequent crisp functions. Moreover, there are 2 tuning parameters in defuzzifier as weighting factors which are m and n. Thus, there exist 130 tuning parameters for C-IT2FLS in total.GIT2-MFs with the granular resolution of 4 are chosen for G-IT2FLS as shown in Fig. 21b. Since there are 11 tuning parameters for each GIT2-MF as u1, u2, u3, u4, Δ1, Δ2, Δ3, Δ4, x1, x2 and x3, there will be 88 parameters for antecedent MFs. Similarly there are 80 tuning parameters for consequent crisp functions and 2 tuning parameters for defuzzifier. Thus, there exist 170 tuning parameters for G-IT2FLS in total.The genetic algorithm (GA) of the MATLAB Optimization Toolbox v5.1 is utilized to optimize the structure of IT2-FLSs instead of the derivative based SD algorithm. The chosen parameters of the GA are given in Table 3.As it is mentioned before, the universe of discourse of the inputs u(k−1) and u(k) are discontinuous and only one MF can be assigned to each of two active regions of these discontinuous universes of discourses. In this case, due to this discontinuity, always 4 of 16 rules are fired at most; therefore, SD algorithm, which is a derivative based optimization method, is not convenient in the optimization of the C-IT2FLS. Thus, GA is used in the optimization procedure in this modeling application.Since GT2-MFs are able to define discontinuous MFs, these two disconnected regions on discontinuous universe of discourse can be covered by one GT2-MF. This means that there will be two MFs in each active region, and more rules will be fired for a more effective modeling. Here, GA is again used to optimize the G-IT2FLS parameters for fair comparison with C-IT2FLS. The results obtained by using SD algorithm are also shown at the end of the simulation study for comparison purposes. The performance index for the GA is chosen as in Eq. (29). The optimized triangular IT2-MFs and GIT2-MFs are shown in Figs. 22 and 23.The design flexibility of GT2-MFs is obviously seen from Fig. 23. Here, the input u(k−1) possesses discontinuous and hybrid GIT2-MFs, the input u(k) has discontinuous GIT2-MFs and there is a GIT2-MF with the granular resolution of 3 instead of 4 for the input x(k−2). Especially discontinuous GIT2-MFs are very effective for discontinuous universe of discourses and they improve the performance of IT2-FLS.The results of the GA search for C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS are shown in Fig. 24. The comparison of testing results of the C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS are shown in Fig. 25and the RMSE values of the system responses are shown in Table 4.The performance of G-IT2FLS and C-IT2FLS which are modeled for the nominal system are compared in the case of system parameters changes. When the system parameters a and b change from their nominal values to 110 and 90, RMSE results of the C-IT2FLS and G-IT2FLS are shown in Table 5for all cases.As it is seen from the RMSE values, G-IT2FLS has a superior performance compared to C-IT2FLS. As it is mentioned above, SD algorithm can be used to optimize the parameters of G-IT2FLS. The results of G-IT2FLS optimized by using SD algorithm are also presented.Allajiparameters of the consequent crisp functions are chosen as 0.2 and m and n parameters are chosen as 0.5 in defuzzifier, initially. The learning coefficient of SD algorithm is chosen as λ=0.1. 50 iterations are performed to optimize the parameters of G-IT2FLS.The RMSE result of G-IT2FLS optimized by using SD algorithm is compared with G-IT2FLS and C-IT2FLS optimized by using GA in Table 6. G-IT2FLSs optimized by using SD algorithm and GA are named as G-IT2FLS-SD and G-IT2FLS-GA, respectively.As it is seen from the RMSE results, G-IT2FLS optimized by using SD algorithm shows the best performance and it is more robust to system parameters changes. The optimization of GIT2-MFs by using SD algorithm is very simple and as it is seen from the results it is very effective.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, GT2-MFs are introduced to form the FOU of T2-MFs in more flexible and accurate way. The FOU of GT2-MFs is formed by using RT2-FGs. GT2-MFs provide more degrees of freedom and design flexibility in T2-FLSs, since uncertainties on the grades of MFs can be represented independently for any regions in the universe of discourse. Therefore, T2-FLSs using GT2-MFs have more potential to model and handle uncertainties. This makes it possible to form highly nonlinear, discontinuous or hybrid MFs and provides us to model any desired discontinuity and nonlinearity on the universe of discourse or in the input-output mapping. This is important in modeling and control of nonlinear systems having hard nonlinearities such as saturation, dead zones, backlash, and hysteresis. Moreover, the proposed GT2-MF is also quite effective in handling hybrid and/or switched systems including subsystems with diodes, thyristors, relays or switches; motion controllers such as transmissions, stepper motors; chemical and industrial processes controlled by valves or pumps; constrained robotic systems; embedded computation systems; etc. In modeling and control of these types of systems, each subsystem has been mostly considered separately. However, the proposed approach provides to opportunity to design only one FLS instead of various FLSs for each subsystem.Mathematical expressions of GT2-MFs are very simple and this would naturally reduce the complexity and simplify the computational issues in T2-FSs and T2-FLSs. The derivative information related to GT2-MFs arouses to be always constant; therefore, derivative based optimization algorithms such as SD algorithm are easily used in determining the appropriate parameters of GT2-MFs.The simulation results show that T2-FLSs formed by GT2-MFs have more modeling capabilities than the systems formed by conventional T2-MFs and they are more robust to system parameters changes and noisy inputs. Our future work would include the application of the proposed approach in control of hybrid and switched systems.