@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Solving the integrated scheduling of production and rail transportation problem by Keshtel algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An integrated production and transportation model, which considers rail transportation, is developed.A heuristic, two metaheuristics and some related procedures are developed.Keshtel algorithm is developed for the first time for a mathematical model.Taguchi experimental design method is utilized to improve their performance.Performance evaluation, comparison, and analysis are employed for the proposed algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Keshtel algorithm,Integrated production–distribution, Supply chain optimization,Rail transportation,Single machine scheduling,Taguchi experimental design.,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nowadays, scheduling of production cannot be done in isolation from scheduling of transportation since a coordinated solution to the integrated problem may improve the performance of the whole supply chain. In this paper, because of the widely used of rail transportation in supply chain, we develop the integrated scheduling of production and rail transportation. The problem is to determine both production schedule and rail transportation allocation of orders to optimize customer service at minimum total cost. In addition, we utilize some procedures and heuristics to encode the model in order to address it by two capable metaheuristics: Genetic algorithm (GA), and recently developed one, Keshtel algorithm (KA). Latter is firstly used for a mathematical model in supply chain literature. Besides, Taguchi experimental design method is utilized to set and estimate the proper values of the algorithms’ parameters to improve their performance. For the purpose of performance evaluation of the proposed algorithms, various problem sizes are employed and the computational results of the algorithms are compared with each other. Finally, we investigate the impacts of the rise in the problem size on the performance of our algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Firms usually focus on competitive advantages; improvement of customer service levels as well as reduction of operational costs. So, supply chain (SC) performance plays a key role in this context and has attracted researchers’ attention. A SC refers to the flow of material through different facilities, starting with raw-materials and ending with finished products delivered to final consumers [19]. It is also a complex system which needs decisions at each stage, like location of manufacturing plants or distribution centers (DCs), inventory control, the production process, the delivery of commodities, etc. These decisions are usually linked, but in practical situations, most firms focus on optimizing these decision processes one at a time.Although the production is a key function within a supply chain, the product distribution is the best known aspect of SC management which includes all services directly linked to the physical movement of goods from plants to customers via warehouses. Moreover, the cost of product distribution accounts for about 30 percent of the cost of the product and it plays a vital role in the determination of products’ price [18]. The problem of distribution is an important consideration for industrial firms and supply chain decision makers [34]. In many applications including make-to-order (MTO) or time-sensitive (e.g., perishable, seasonal) products, finished orders are often delivered to customers immediately or shortly after the production. Hence, joint approach to production–distribution is one of the main and interesting issues in SC, which has been recently discussed both in academia and industry. In particular, in a typical SC materials and resources are available at some release dates at the manufacturer's site; the manufacturer should process them in accordance with technological constraints; finally, finished goods should be delivered to a customer by given due dates. Effective management of customers’ demand through appropriate production and distribution decisions play a key role in determining the economy of the supply chain networks. Integrated production and distribution planning has gained considerable attention in the recent past due to the complexity involved in making critical decisions. Many researchers have proposed different production–distribution models to minimize the overall production and distribution expenses incurred in the supply chain.One of the important decisions in SC at operational level is scheduling; both in production and distribution from plant to the customers. Traditional scheduling research deals with problems of sequencing jobs on processing machines without taking into account distribution or transportation issues. The coordination between the production schedule and the delivery plan has not been considered in these models. They implicitly assume that there are ample resources available for delivering finished works to their destinations without any delay. Recent trends in scheduling involve extended scheduling models where more practical constraints are included. Rather than considering production scheduling in isolation, several researchers in this decade have designed models that integrate several of the operational functions to optimize customer service at minimum total cost [48]. In the context of a supply chain, scheduling of production cannot be done in isolation from scheduling of transportation since a coordinated solution to the integrated problem may improve the performance of the whole supply chain [15]. Integrated production and distribution planning have received a lot of attention throughout the years and its economic advantages are well documented [1].Generally, researches in this area are mainly focused on road transportation and there has been a relative neglect of other transportation modes while there are sizable sectors of industry such as air and rail transportation. Here, in this research, because of the importance of rail transportation in distribution systems, we aim to study the problem of integration of production and rail transportation scheduling to achieve accurate scheduling minimizing total cost. The difference between rail or air transportation with road transportation is the fixed departure time of the formers. Also the difference between rail and air transportation is that in the rail transportation, a train can transfer the orders of customers which are in the same pass in the railway (like a tree in a graph). Because of this, we would consider the tradeoff between all costs occurred in a product to choose the best strategy.Soft computing is a group of unique methodologies, contributed mainly by Expert System, Fuzzy Logic, Neural Networks, and Evolutionary algorithms, which provide flexible information processing capabilities to solve real–life problems [36]. In other words, soft computing provides the opportunity to represent ambiguity in human thinking with the uncertainty in real life [54]. The advantages of employing soft computing is its capability to tolerate imprecision, uncertainty, and partial truth to achieve tractability and robustness on simulating human decision-making behavior with low cost [47]. These techniques usually start with an initial set of variables and then evolve to obtain the global minimum or maximum of the objective function. Over the last decades, there has been a growing interest in algorithms inspired by the observation of natural phenomena. It has been shown by many researches that these algorithms are good replacements as tools to solve complex computational problems [52]. A variety of soft computing techniques including evolutionary algorithms have been utilized to improve effectiveness and efficiency in various aspects of supply chain management. Different techniques have been employed to solve problems occurring in various dynamic segments of supply chain. As more soft computing applications are introduced and used, a growing body of papers has been established that can guide the future design and deployment of supply chain solutions.Application of heuristics and metaheuristics to handle these integrated problems is also one of the issues that has been highlighted and discussed in the literature review. Until now, because of the nature of the problems, there are lots of heuristics and metaheuristics in terms of soft computing techniques have been utilized in this research area, like [2,3,5–9,15,25,33,35,42,53,55] which used metaheuristics like GA, SA, Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Memetic algorithm (MA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Tabu Search and also [39,41] which used heuristics. Besides, a recent outstanding review on integrated production–distribution, written by Fahimnia et al. [23], classified the previous works in this research area by some criteria such as models, complexity, and soft computing techniques.Here, we study an integrated production and delivery scheduling problem for a facility faced by a make-to-order company and utilized rail transportation to deliver its orders to the customers (warehouses). At the beginning of a planning horizon, the company has accepted a set of orders and committed a delivery date for each order. The company needs to process these orders on a dedicated production line and deliver the finished orders to the respective customers by the pre-planned trains with their corresponding capacities and traveling times. The problem is to determine a production schedule for the accepted orders and to allocate the orders to the available trains for delivering each completed order subject to the constraint that all the orders are completed and delivered to their customers on the respective committed delivery dates. In this system, earliness and tardiness penalties happen at both production site and at the warehouses.The ‘departure time earliness’ cost happens as a result of the need to store the order at the production facility or waiting charges at the rail station. Also there is an extra cost corresponding to charter trains considered as ‘departure time tardiness’ when shipping in a scheduled train is missed or there is no scheduled train for a specific time interval. Delivery penalties are incurred by delivering an order either earlier or later than the committed due date to customers. The ‘delivery tardiness’ cost includes customer dissatisfaction, contract penalties, loss of sales, and potential loss of reputation for manufacturer and retailers. If the arrival time of allocated orders in rail transportation model is earlier than its due date, retailers encounter the storing cost of orders which is considered as ‘delivery earliness’ cost. In this paper, we schedule both the production and allocate the trains in a way to minimize the total cost. In this work, we utilize several algorithms, especially a new introduces algorithm inspired by Keshtel's feeding named Keshtel algorithm (KA) [31], to handle such an NP-hard problem.Six sections follow this Introduction. The next section briefly reviews the literature. Section 3 describes the problem's details and elaborates the mathematical formulation of our model. The proposed algorithms are detailed in Sections 4 and 5. Section 6, describes the Taguchi experimental design and compares the computational results. At the end, in Section 7, the paper is concluded and some areas of further research are proposed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
