@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling of Wind/Environment/Economic Dispatch in power system and solving via an online learning meta-heuristic method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Load dispatch is developed by thermal and wind units with its uncertainties.Consider many objective functions into a new multi objective method.Propose a new decision making method to select best Pareto front.Propose some new operators for local and global searches.Propose a new online training mechanism for self adaptive goals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi objective optimization,Wind power,Non-convex problem,Online learning,Wind environment/economic dispatch,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the effect of the wind power units into the classical Environment/Economic Dispatch (EED) model which called hereafter as Wind/Environment/Economic Dispatch (WEED) problem. The optimal dispatch between thermal and wind units so that minimized the total generating costs are considered as multi objective model. Normally, the nature of the wind energy as a renewable energy sources has uncertainty in generation. Therefore, in this paper, use a practical model known as 2m-point to estimate the uncertainty of wind power. To solve the WEED problem, this paper proposed a new meta-heuristic optimization algorithm that uses online learning mechanism. Honey Bee Mating Optimization (HBMO), a moderately new population-based intelligence algorithm, shows fine performance on optimization problems. Unfortunately, it is usually convergence to local optima. Therefore, in the proposed Online Learning HBMO (OLHBMO), two neural networks are trained when reached to the predefined threshold by current and previous position of solutions and their fitness values. Moreover, Chaotic Local Search (CLS) operator is use to develop the local search ability and a new data sharing model determine the set of non-dominated optimal solutions and the set of non-dominated solutions to kept in the external memory. Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS) as a decision-making technique is employed to find the best solution from the set of Pareto solutions. The proposed model has been individually examined and applied on the IEEE 30-bus 6-unit, the IEEE 118-bus 14-unit, and 40-unit with valve point effect test systems. The robustness and effectiveness of this algorithm is shows by these test systems compared to other available algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
ELD is one of the basic optimization problems in the power system planning and operation. The main goal in this problem is optimal allocation of required power between available thermal units to minimize the total fuel cost while satisfy all the power units, load demand and diverse operating constraints [1–3]. In the past few years, due to the environmental awareness for clean air as well as due to the “global warming” concept, new clean air regulations and policies have been forced on the industries, as environmental effect is a direct consequence of power utilities to minimize emissions [4–6]. Solving of EmD is alike to EcD, except it extends to minimize the total production net emissions instead of total fuel cost [5]. There are generally two objectives for industrial power units, one of them is minimization of emission cost and another is minimization the total fuel cost. Hereby, it is essential to find an optimal solution for both functions simultaneously. The multi objective generation dispatch in the electric power systems is simultaneous minimization of total fuel cost and emission cost which satisfy systems constraints. By means of renewable energies such as wind-based capacity additions to power systems, operational economics continues as a matter of prime concern to utilities [7,8]. In wind power generation, the wind speed is an important random variable which affects the output power. The wind speed in a given period may be represented by a probability density function. In recent years the Weibull distribution has been one of the most widely used and recommended tool to determine the potential of wind energy [9]. In this paper, the effect of wind power uncertainty into the EED problem is evaluated by probable formulations [10].Conventionally, the EED problem has been addressed in some literatures using optimization methods that can be summarized into classical and meta-heuristic intelligent methods. The classical methods are linear programming [11], quadratic programming [12], linearly combined different objectives through the weighted sum technique [13], Lagrangian relaxation [14] and the ɛ-constraint method [15], etc. The intelligent methods are IHBMO [5], multi objective HBMO [6], scatter search approach [16], charged system search algorithm [17], harmony search algorithm [18], multi objective particle swarm optimization [19], bacterial foraging PSO-DE algorithm [20], etc. Nevertheless, the aforementioned subjects along with uncertain parameters integrated in the EED problem have been made the researchers to appraisal the various phases of the problem based on stochastic methods [21,22]. In [23], proposed a fuzzy optimization method to model the hourly load demand, solar radiation, wind speed and available water uncertainties for generation dispatch. In this way, the fuzzy set model is as well developed to model the uncertainty of wind power in [24]. In [25], the studied distribution model by specified scale and shape factor was performed to describe the wind power uncertainty. Lately, an incomplete gamma method was modeled in [21] to represent the impact of wind energy on the EED problem. Unfortunately, the above-mentioned methods lost numerous non-dominated solutions in the search process since some of dominated solutions may be misclassified as non-dominated ones due to the selection process. Therefore, they do not offer an outline in the direction of Pareto-optimal front that has lost its diversity and convergence to local optimum. Moreover, these methods don’t have ability to obtain more suitable solutions and as a result it might not be possible to proceed toward the global optimum (quick convergence). In other words, when the optimization problem has many objective functions and number of decision variables to be optimized, then they will be unable to obtain global optimum solution. HBMO is a relatively new meta-heuristic algorithm that has been empirically shown well performance on many of the optimization problems [5,6,26]. Unfortunately, the standard HBMO algorithm often converges to local optima, especially in optimization problems with many local optima and constraints. In other words, standard HBMO greatly depends on its parameters adjustments, so that unsuitable values lead to bad local and global search. Therefore, in this paper, some modifications are proposed so that the performance of the HBMO algorithm would be improved efficiently. Within the above framework, the novel finding of this paper can be summarized as follows:(i)The WEED problem is model under a stochastic encoding framework to correctly taken into account the power system uncertainties i.e. wind speed.A new modified OLHBMO algorithm is presented to solve WEED problem with three objective functions. Moreover, a decision-making method known as TOPSIS is used to find best solution from the set of Pareto-solutions.To reduce the dependence of HBMO to its parameters adjustments, proposes an online training process with two neural networks.The effectiveness of the proposed OLHBMO algorithm is fruitfully validated with obtained numerical simulations from three test systems along with their limitations.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the WEED model. The meta-heuristic OLHBMO algorithm is given in Section 3. Implementation of the proposed meta-heuristic algorithm on the WEED problem is given in Section 4. In Section 5, the inherent uncertainties of wind power is formulated and three test systems are described. The simulation results of WEED based on multi-objective OLHBMO models are presented in Section 6 and discussed in Section 7. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 8.The total cost caused of thermal and wind units can be formulated as follows [44]:(1)FPG,Pw=∑i=1NGFiPGi+∑j=1NF∑k=1NWWj,kPwj,kwhich NG, NF, NWare the number of thermal generator, the wind farm and the wind power generator, respectively. F (PG,Pw) is the total cost of all generator (in $/h). The non-convex cost function for the generating unit Fi(PGi) with valve point effect as shown in Fig. 1, and can be defined by [27](2)FiPGi=ai+biPGi+ciPGi2︸quadraticfunction+|eisinfiPGimin−PGi|︸valvepointeffectwhich ai, bi, ci, eiand fiare the fuel cost coefficients of the ith generator.Let Wj,k(PWj,k) be the electrical energy cost of wind power of the jth wind farm and the kth wind power generator. Therefore, the cost of the wind unit can be defined by(3)Wj,kPwj,k=ψj,kPˆj,k+ψz1,j,k×P˜j,k−Pˆj,k+ψz2,j,kP˜j,k−Pˆj,kwhichPˆj,k,P˜j,kare expected and available generation output of the unit j in the wind farm k (MW). ψj,k,ψz1,j,kandψz2,j,kare namely direct, overestimation and underestimation electrical wind energy cost coefficient of the unit j in the wind farm k ($/MWh). Interested readers are referred to [3,9,28] in more details.According to [3], the total ton/h pollution cost in the atmosphere can be defined as(4)EPG=∑i=1N10−2αi+βiPGi+γiPGi2+ξiexpλiPGiwhich ζi, λi, γi, αiand βiare the fuel coefficients of the ith generator.The total real power loss in power systems is represented by Eq. (5), popularly known as “exact loss formula”(5)PL=∑i=1N∑j=1NαijPiPj+QiQj+βijQiPj−PiQjwhichαij=rij/ViVjcosδi−δj,βij=rij/ViVjsin(δi−δj). Vi≺δiis the complex voltage at the bus ith. Zij=rij+jxijis the ijth element of [Zbus] impedance matrix. Piand Pjare the active power injections at the ith and jth buses, respectively. Qiand Qjare the reactive power injections at the ith and jth buses, respectively. N is the number of buses.Thus, the equality constraint can be calculated by [25](6)∑i=1NPi−PD−Ploss=0which Ploss, PDand Piindicates the power loss, power demand and power generation, respectively.For steadfast operation, the active power, the reactive power and the bus voltage must be between theirs lower and upper values:(7)Pimin≤Pi≤Pimax,Qimin≤Qi≤Qimax(8)vimin≤vi≤vimax,0≤Pw≤Pwmaxwhich Pimin, Pimax, Qimin, Qimax, Vimin and Vimax are minimum and maximum values for the active power, the reactive power and bus voltage of the ith generator, respectively. Pwmax denote the maximum power generation limit of the wth wind generator.One important issue of EED problem is security of the transmission lines, because transmission line has limit capability for current power; it can be modeled by(9)SLf,k≤SLf,kmax,k=1,2,…,Lwhich SLf,k is the real power flow of line k;SLf,kmaxis the upper limit for the power flow in the kth line and L is the number of transmission lines.This constraint dictates several feasible sub-regions for thermal units as shown in Fig. 2and can be expressed by [28](10)Pimin≤Pi≤PiLB1⋮PiUBk−1≤Pi≤PiLBkPiUBk≤Pi≤Pimax,i=1,2,…,Ng,k=1,2,…,NkwhichPiUBk−1andPiLBkare upper and lower limits of the kth sub-regions of the ith unit, respectively. Ngand Nkare the number of thermal units and sub-regions.Finally, wind power can be formulated by the piecewise linear [28]:(11)Pˆj,k=Pˆh,j,kD1,j,kTj,k−Tci,j,k,Tci,j,k≤Tj,k≤T1,j,kD1,j,kT1,j,k−Tci,j,k+D2,j,kTj,k−T1,j,k,T1,j,k≤Tj,k≤T2,j,kD1,j,kT1,j,k−Tci,j,k+D2,j,kT2,j,k−T1,j,k+D3,j,kTj,k−T2,j,k,T2,j,k≤Tj,k≤Th,j,k1,Th,j,k≤Tj,k≤Tco,j,k0,otherwisej=1,2,…,Nw,k=1,2,…,Nfwhich Di,j,kis slope of section j of the wind unit w in wind farm f (MWs/m). Tci,j,k, Tco,j,k, Ti,j,kand Th,j,kare cut-in wind speed, cut-out wind speed, breakpoint of segment i and rated wind speed, for all the wind units w in the wind farm (m/s), respectively. Interested readers are referred to [3,9,28] in more details.Generally, the WEED problem can be expressed as(12)minPGFPG,Pw,EPG,PLPGsubjectto:gpG=0hpG≤0which g and h are the equality and inequality constraints, respectively.In this section the standard (single-objective) HBMO is briefly reviewed. Interested readers are referred to [6] for more details. The details of HBMO method include five stages show as follows:Stage 1: Generate the initial drone sets and queenGenerate m drones with gene length c, denoted by the matrix Dmc:(13)D=D1,D2,…,Dm,Di=di1,di2,…,dicwhichdijis the jth gene value of the ith drone that is restricted into [0,.,L] and thedij<dij+1for any j. Among all drones, the drone Dhwith the maximum value of f(Di) for all i is assigned as the queen Q. The queen Q is described Xbest as shown as(14)Q=Xbest1,Xbest2,…,XbestcStage 2: Flight mattingThe stage2 do the flight matting of queen Q. The best drone Dkwith the largest Prob(Q, Di)prob(Q,D)=e−Δ(f)/S(t)Prob among the drone set D is selected the object of matting for the queen Q. After the flight matting the queen's speed and energy decay is reduced by,St+1=αHBMO×St,αHBMO∈0,1andEt+1=Et−γHBMO,γHBMO∈0,1. The flight matting is continues until the speed S(t) is less than a threshold d or the number of sperms of the queen's spermatheca is less than the threshold nsperm. In general, the values of d and nsperm are predefined by users and the nsperm is less than m. The selected sperms, Sperm, are described by(15)Sperm=Sp1,Sp2,…,Spnsperm,Spi=Xi1,Xi2,…,XicSpiis the ith individual in the queen's spermatheca.Stage 3: Breeding processIn this step, a population of broods is generated based on matting between the queen and the drones stored in the queen's spermatheca. At first the jth individual is selected if the random number Rjis less than a user-defined breeding ratio Pcto breed. The breeding process can transfer the genes of drones and the queen to the jth individual based on(16)Broodj=Q+βHBMOSpj−QThe Broodjis a brood that generated by the queen and the jth individual of spermatheca of queen. The parameter βHBMO is randomly generated in the interval [0,1]Stage 4: Brood mutation with the royal jelly by worksThe population of broods is improved by applying the mutation operators as follows:Step 1: For all broods, the random number Riof the ith brood is generated.Step 2: The ith brood needs mutation if the Riis more than the predefined mutation ratio Pmbased on the Eq. (17). For the mutated brood Broodi, the only one geneXikdo the mutation. The k is randomly selected in integer interval (1,…,c).(17)Broodik=Broodik±δHBMO+εHBMOBroodikδHBMO∈[0,1],0<εHBMO<1which, δHBMO is randomly generated and εHBMO is pre-defined.Step 3: The best brood, broodbest with maximum objective function value is selected as the candidate queen.Step 4: If the objective function of broodbest is superior to the queen, the queen replaces with broodbest.Stage 5: Check the termination criteriaIf the termination criteria satisfied finish the algorithm, else generate new drones set and go to stage 2.The graphical process of the proposed OLHBMO algorithm is shown in Fig. 3.Based on Eq. (16), the mating process combines the features of two parent structures to form a similar offspring. Its purpose is the maintenance and exchange of queen's place. However, this cannot guarantee the convergence to the optimal point and sometimes causes premature convergence to local minima [5]. In order to remove this shortage, IHBMO which combines HBMO with CLS, is proposed in this paper, one gets:(18)ci+1j=2cij×1+gbestk−1gbestk×cos2πgbestk−1gbestk,0.5<cij≤10.1cij×1−cos1+gbestk−1gbestk,0<cij≤0.5which, gkbest is best optimal value for kititeration. The CLS mechanism can be summarized as follows:Step 1: Generate initial chaos population:(19)Xcls0=Xcls,01,Xcls,02,…,Xcls,0Ng1×Ng,cx0=cx01,cx02,…,cx0Ng,cx0j=Xcls,0j−Pj,minPj,max−Pj,min,j=1,2,…,Ngand, the chaos variable can be generated as follows:(20)Xclsi=Xcls,i1,Xcls,i2,…,Xcls,iNg1×Ng,i=1,2,…,Nchaos,xcls,ij=cxi−1j×Pj,max−Pj,min+Pj,min,j=1,2,…,NgStep 2: Determine the chaotic variables(21)cxi=cxi1,cxi2,…,cxiNg,i=0,1,2,…,NchoasNchaos is the number of individuals for CLS. Cxijis the ith chaotic variable, j=1, 2, …, Ng.cx0jinitially defined with random value between (0, 1).Step 3: Map the decision variables.Step 4: Convert the chaotic variables into decision variables.Step 5: Evaluate the new solution with decision variables.The application of multi objective optimizer makes it possible to visualize the trade off among different conflicting objectives to guide the engineer in making his/her compromise. In this theory, the inner information of each colony makes a relation bridge between them so that the best solution i.e. queen will be enable to exchange between them based on ring migration topology. The exchange of this information leads to Pareto-optimal solutions. It is reasonable aim so that D drones, S1,S2,….,SDof size N optimize simultaneously for M-objective functions. Colonies are evaluated just with one of the objective functions. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 4.As an example with two objective functions, let D1and D2be population of drone1and drone2, respectively, and queen1and queen2are their best answer for colony1and colony2, respectively. The objective functions f1and f2are approximated by D1and D2, respectively. Each drone is exclusively calculated according to the respective objective function. The queen of the second drone (D2) is used to calculate the new queen of the first drone's (D1) colony and accordingly, queen of the first drone is used for the calculation of the new queen of the second drone (D2).The main goal for all population-based algorithms is diversity so that drawback of some of them is due to the lack of diversity lead to bad exploitation in the search space. In other words, standard HBMO greatly depends on its control parameters adjustments, and it often leads to premature convergence. To improve this shortage, a learning mechanism for brood mutation (escape from local optima) is proposed to adaptively tune grows factor and it can be employed in local or global diversity performance. Therefore, this paper consider four options to control algorithm diversity, namely (i) global, (ii) local, (iii) global random and (iv) local random. The proposed learning algorithm can be summarized as below steps:Step 1: Calculate the objective functions based on the current drones.Step2: The proposed networks are trained by the drones in the previous and current positions and their cost values. First, ɛHBMO and δHBMO estimated by first training network and the second network is trained to adjust βHBMO. In this learning mechanism, drones in the colony are used as the input data and the output data is their cost values. The proposed mutation based on Eq. (22) is applied on the best drone and sequential neural network colony including Tsdrones is created by:(22)Di,j(t)=Dje(t)1+μ12−rand×1ift=n×fr0ift≠n×fr,i=1,2,…,qj=1,2,…,dn=1,2,…which μ is user-defined amplitude coefficient, fris the performance frequency, the base vector Deis the global best called best drone of the colony, and q is the maximum number of new drones locally produced. rand is random variable in the range (0,1).Their objective values (ObjNN) are estimated by neural nets (NNObj(Ts)). The drones are sorted based on NDS [5]. The best d particles of Tsare randomly placed into the new swarm to use as candidates at the next step of the algorithm as follows:(23)ObjNN=NNObjTs,ObjNNorder=NDSObjNN,Dk(t)=Tsorder(i),k=rand[1−s]i=1,2,…,dTOPSIS is one of the multi criteria decision techniques that provide best decision. The aim of decision support is assistance of designer to make best decisions that are consistent with their values, goals and performances [8]. TOPSIS method works based on dedicated ranking values of the critical success factors. TOPSIS implies that every given decision matrix with m alternatives and n attributes can be represented by points on n dimensional hyperplane with m points. The locations of these points are given by the value of their attributes. TOPSIS compares two set of solutions known as the positive and negative ideal solutions. The ideal solutions are data driven, i.e. the positive ideal solution contains data that is the most desirable among of all the alternatives and similarly negative ideal solution contains data points that are the least desirable among of all the alternatives [8]. Let R={Rij|i=1, 2,…., n (no. of pareto-optimal solutions); j=1,2,…., m (no. of objectives)} be the n×m decision matrix, and Rijis the performance rating of alternative Xj(pareto-optimal solutions) with respect to attribute Ai(objective function values). To determine objective weights by the entropy measure, the decision matrix needs to be normalized for each objective Ajas follows:(24)Pij=Rij∑p=1nRpj,i=1,2,…,Npj=1,2,…,Nowhich Npand Noare the number of Pareto-optimal solutions and number of objectives, respectively. Therefore, normalized decision matrix representing the relative performance of the alternatives is calculated by(25)P=P11P12...P1mP21P22...P2m⋮⋮⋱⋮Pn1Pn2...PnmThe quantity of decision data given in Eq. (25) and emitted from each attribute Aj(j=1, 2,…, m) by(26)ej=−1lnn∑i=1nPijlnPijThe degree of divergence (dj) for the intrinsic information controlled by Ajcan be obtained by(27)dj=1−ejThe objective weights for Ajcan be calculated by(28)wj=dj∑k=1mdkThe weighted normalized value vijis obtained by(29)vij=wjPijAfter obtained Rijand vij, the subsequently step is to aggregate them to produce an overall performance index for Ajthat can be defined as:(30)A+=(max(vi1)max(vi2)…max(vim))=v1+,v2+,…,vm+A−=(min(vi1)min(vi2)…min(vim))=v1−,v2−,…,vm−A+and A−are positive and negative ideal solution, respectively. Morover, distance between alternatives can be calculated by:(31)dj+=∑i=1mvji−vi+,j=1,2,…,n,dj−=∑i=1mvji−vi−,j=1,2,…,nThe relative closeness to the ideal solution of alternative Xjwith respect to A+is calculated as:(32)Cj=dj−dj−+dj+,j=1,2,…,nWhereas (dj–and dj+) ≥0 then Cj∈[0,1]. Choose an alternative with maximum Cj, in descending order. It is clear that an alternative Xjis closer to A+than to A−as Cjapproaches 1.Finally, the following steps are proposed:Step 1: Choose pareto-optimal solutions based on objective functions.Step 2: Identify the selection attributes with cost or benefit of them.Step 3: List all probable pareto-optimal solutions.Step 4: Compute the relative significance of attributes via Eq. (28).Step 5: Make the Pijand vij.Step 6: Compute A+and A−.Step 7: Rank the Pareto-optimal solutions based on the overall ranking values and choose the Cjwith the maximum overall ranking value as the tiptop answer.The graphical process of the proposed OLHBMO algorithm is depicted in Fig. 5.This section illustrates how the proposed OLHBMO algorithm is applied on the WEED problem. As a result, these steps can be summarized as:(1)Step 1: In this step, a set of the initial population with random distribution is generated, one gets:(33)D=D1,D2,D3,…,DnDi=di1,di2,…,dimwhich dijis the jth state variable value of the ith drone bee. For each individual (Di) the objective function values are evaluated.Step 2: In this step, the initial population of bees based on state variables and chaos initialization are generated and can be defined as follows:(34)XInitial-Bee=X1X2…XNinitialX0=x01,x02,…,x0Ngx0j=rand×Pj,max−Pj,min+Pj,min,j=1,2,…,NgXi=xi1,xi2,…,xiNg,i=1,2,…,Ninitialwhich Ninitial is the number of population.xijis a generated solution based on CLS operator.Step 3: Calculate the fitness value for all objective functions. Sort the initial population according to their related data obtained from fitness.Step 4: In this step, use the proposed OLHBMO algorithm to find the best solution. The best solution is memorized as an initial solution (X0cls) for CLS operator. If the best solution found by CLS is better than the previous solution, it will be replaced.Step 5: In this step, after new broods are generated, an attempt is made to improve both the new solutions and the best solution by mutation procedure.Step 6: If the number of iterations reaches the maximum, then finished. Otherwise, go to step 2.According to inherent uncertainties of the wind sources, it is necessary to model these parameters in a probabilistic environment. Based on EED goal, the system operator must be able to describe the distribution functions of output arbitrary variables during the distribution functions of input random uncertainties. Let func be a nonlinear function as(35)S=func(z)To find the solution of equation S, there is required to signify the uncertainty of the wind speed and load demand. Therefore, 2m point estimated method employed to calculate the moments of Si, which is a function funciof m input random variables [29]:(36)Si=funciz1,z2,…,zmUsually, in the 2m point estimated method, the probability density function fzlof variable zlis replaced by two point using the first three central moments that obtained from the statistical data named exception (μzl), variance (σzl), and skewness (λzl,3) coefficient. The graphical structure is shown in Fig. 6.The usefulness of the proposed population-based algorithm to solve the WEED problem is evaluated with three test systems. The proposed OLHBMO algorithm is implemented in MATLAB language version 2011 Rb in the PC with an Intel Duo Core processor T5800, 2GHz with a 4GB RAM. To obtain full ability of optimization methods, 50 independent runs were made. The algorithm parameters are chosen based on our review from other papers and several tests with some standard benchmarks. Number of drone bees, brood bees, worker bees, and queen's spermatheca size are 300, 40, 150 and 50, respectively. In order to reveal the effectiveness of the proposed OLHBMO algorithm, some different cases have been considered as follows:Case (I) The conventional EED problem without wind power is considered as a multi objective optimization problem which the fuel cost, power loss and pollutant emission were optimized simultaneously.Case (II) Solve WEED problem which uncertainty of demand and wind speed is considered, too. The additional data (the wind power generators) for these test systems is given in Table 1. Note that the line and other useful data for these test systems can be found in [5,6].First, the proposed OLHBMO algorithm applied on the famous electrical network, IEEE 30-bus 6-unit which shown in Fig. 7. The system contains six thermal units, 26 buses and 46 transmission lines. The load was set to 2.834pu on a 100MVA base.The values of the fuel and emission coefficients of the IEEE 118-bus system are given in Table 1; meanwhile the total load demand is 950MW. The single-line diagram of this system is shown in Fig. 8.For completeness and comparison purposes, this is the largest practical test system, we could find in the existing literature with the complete data required for WEED problem. The value of the load demand is 10,500MW.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes a new meta-heuristic algorithm known as OLHBMO, which is successfully applied to the multi objective WEED problem. It is non-convex problem with taking into account inequality and equality constraints, the valve-point effects, the emission pollutions, wind power model and the transmission line loss. This algorithm proposes a new mutation operator. In the proposed algorithm, chaotic sequences are applied to improve the local search and prevent the premature convergence. Three test systems with 6, 14 and 40unit are analyzed. It is clear from tables and figures that the total cost value for the proposed algorithm is lower than the other methods and shows the superiority of it. According to its structure, it is noticed that it retains the positive characteristics of the original HBMO algorithm: simple in concept, easy to implement, allows the hybridization with other classical or artificial intelligence algorithms. Compare to other meta-heuristic algorithms the proposed algorithm keeps better balance between exploration and exploitation.