@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal power flow using black-hole-based optimization approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We solved the optimal power flow for different cases and different test systems.We used a new approach which is the black-hole-based optimization approach (BHBO).The efficiency of the BHBO has been proven by carrying out a comparative and statistical studies.BHBO is conceptually very simple, further unlike other optimization techniques BHBO parameter-less optimization technique.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal power flow,Black-hole-based optimization,Power system optimization,Metaheuristic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper a new nature-inspired metaheuristic algorithm is proposed to solve the optimal power flow problem in a power system. This algorithm is inspired by the black hole phenomenon. A black hole is a region of space-time whose gravitational field is so strong that nothing which enters it, not even light, can escape. The developed approach is called black-hole-based optimization approach. In order to show the effectiveness of the proposed approach, it has been demonstrated on the standard IEEE 30-bus test system for different objectives. Furthermore, in order to demonstrate the scalability and suitability of the proposed approach for large-scale and real power systems, it has been tested on the real Algerian 59-bus power system network. The results obtained are compared with those of other methods reported in the literature. Considering the simplicity of the proposed approach and the quality of the obtained results, this approach seems to be a promising alternative for solving optimal power flow problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since it has been introduced by Dommel and Tinney in the early 1960s, the concept of Optimal Power Flow (OPF) has received an immense attention [1,2]. The OPF can be defined as a nonlinear optimization problem, where a specific objective function has to be optimized while satisfying operational and physical constraints of the electric power system [3].A large variety of optimization techniques have been employed to solve OPF problems. Earlier, many traditional (deterministic) optimization techniques have been successfully used, the most popular were: gradient based methods, Newton-based method, the simplex method, sequential linear programming, sequential quadratic programming, and interior point methods. A survey of the most commonly used traditional optimization algorithms applied to solve the OPF problem is given in [4,5]. Although, some of these deterministic techniques have excellent convergence characteristics and many of them are widely used in the industry however, they suffer from some shortcomings. Some of their drawbacks are: they cannot guarantee global optimality i.e. they may converge to local optima, they cannot readily handle binary or integer variables and finally they are developed with some theoretical assumptions, such as convexity, differentiability, and continuity, among other things, which may not be suitable for the actual OPF conditions [5,6].In additions to the abovementioned drawbacks, there was a rapid development of recent computational intelligence tools such as genetic algorithm, ant colony algorithm, artificial immune algorithm, particle swarm optimization algorithm, harmony search algorithm, differential evolution algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm, which have been widely used in many applications instead of the conventional techniques like in [7–12]. Moreover, hybrid evolutionary optimization algorithms have received significant interest for fast convergence and robustness in finding the global minimum at the same time as illustrated and demonstrated in [13–21]. Hence, all these new developments, have motivated significant research in the area of non-deterministic that is, metaheuristic, optimization methods to solve the OPF problem in the past two decades [6]. These methods are known for: their capabilities of finding global solutions and avoid to be trapped with local ones, their ability of fast search of large solution spaces and their ability to account for uncertainty in some parts of the power system. A review of many optimization techniques applied to solve the OPF problem is given in [6,22].However, it is noteworthy to mention that, most of the existing metaheuristics are dependent of some internal parameters. For example, the performance of the PSO technique depends on the inertia weight and the acceleration factors that have to be selected carefully. Hence, many simulations have to be done in order to select these internal parameters. In the OPF problem, simulations are time costly and any changes in the configuration of the network or in its characteristics, like the load for instance, require a new tuning of the internal parameters.The main contribution of this paper is to apply a new metaheuristic approach based on the black hole phenomenon to solve the OPF problem. The basic idea of a black hole is simply a region of space that has so much mass concentrated in it that there is no way for a nearby object to escape its gravitational pull. In other words, anything falling into a black hole, including light, is forever gone from our universe. Its advantage over other well-known optimization algorithms is simplicity and it is a parameter-less optimization algorithm (i.e. it has no internal parameter to tune).This paper is organized as follows. After this first section which is the introduction, the second section focuses on the formulation of the OPF problem. The third section of this paper presents the concept and main steps of the developed BHBO approach. Next, we apply the BHBO approach to solve the OPF problem in order to optimize the power system operating conditions. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in the fifth section.As aforesaid, OPF is a power flow problem which gives the optimal settings of the control variables for a given settings of load by minimizing a predefined objective function such as the cost of active power generation or transmission losses. The majority of OPF formulations may be represented using the following standard form [5]:(1)MinimizeJ(x,u)(2)Subject tog(x,u)=0(3)andh(x,u)≤0where u represents the vector of independent variables or control variables. x represents the vector of dependent variables or state variables. J(x,u) represents the system's optimization goal or the objective function. g(x,u) represents the set of equality constraints. h(x,u) represents the set of inequality constraints.The control variables u and the state variables x of the OPF problem are stated in (4) and (5), respectively.These are the set of variables which can be modified to satisfy the load flow equations. The set of control variables in the OPF problem formulation are:-PG: represents the active power generation at the PV buses except at the slack bus.VG: represents the voltage magnitude at PV buses.T: represents the tap settings of transformer.QC: represents the shunt VAR compensation.Hence, u can be expressed as:(4)uT=[PG2⋯PGNG,VG1⋯VGNG,QC1⋯QCNC,T1⋯TNT]where NG, NT and NC are the number of generators, the number of regulating transformers and the number of VAR compensators, respectively.All OPF formulations require variables to represent the electrical state of the system [5]. Most often, the state variables for the OPF problem formulation are:-PG1: represents the active power output at slack bus.VL: represents the voltage magnitude at PQ buses; load buses.QG: represents the reactive power output of all generator units.Sl: represents the transmission line loading (or line flow).Hence, x can be expressed as:(5)xT=[PG1,VL1⋯VLNL,QG1⋯QGNG,Sl1⋯Slnl]where NL, and nl are the number of load buses, and the number of transmission lines, respectively.OPF constraints can be classified into equality and inequality constraints, which are detailed in the following sections.The equality constraints of the OPF reflect the physics of the power system. These equality constraints are as follows.(6)PGi−PDi−Vi∑j=iNBVj[Gijcos(θij)+Bijsin(θij)]=0(7)QGi−QDi−Vi∑j=iNBVj[Gijsin(θij)+Bijcos(θij)]=0where θij=θi−θj, NB is the number of buses, PGis the active power generation, QGis the reactive power generation, PDis the active load demand, QDis the reactive load demand, Gijand Bijare the elements of the admittance matrix (Yij=Gij+jBij) representing the conductance and susceptance between bus i and bus j, respectively.The inequality constraints of the OPF reflect the limits on physical devices present in the power system as well as the limits created to guarantee system security. These inequality constraints are as follows.For all generators including the slack: voltage, active and reactive outputs ought to be restricted by their lower and upper limits as follows:(8)VGimin≤VGi≤VGimax,i=1,…,NG(9)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimax,i=1,…,NG(10)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimax,i=1,…,NGTransformer tap settings ought to be restricted within their specified lower and upper limits as follows:(11)Timin≤Ti≤Timax,i=1,…,NTShunt VAR compensators must be restricted by their lower and upper limits as follows:(12)QCimin≤QGCi≤QCimax,i=1,…,NGThese contain the constraints of voltage magnitude at load buses and transmission line loadings. Voltage of each load bus must be restricted within its lower and upper operating limits. Line flow through each transmission line ought to be restricted by its capacity limits. These constraints can be mathematically formulated as follows:(13)VLimin≤VLi≤VLimax,i=1,…,NL(14)Sli≤Slimax,i=1,…,nlIt is worth mentioning that control variables are self-constrained. The inequality constraints of dependent variables which contain load bus voltage magnitude; real power generation output at slack bus, reactive power generation output and line loading can be included into an objective function as quadratic penalty terms. In these terms, a penalty factor multiplied with the square of the disregard value of dependent variable is added to the objective function and any unfeasible solution obtained is declined. Mathematically, penalty function can be expressed as follows:(15)Jaug=J+λP(PG1−PG1lim)2+λV∑i=1NL(VLi−VLilim)2+λQ∑i=1NG+λS∑i=0nl(Sli−Slimax)2where λP, λV, λQand λSare penalty factors and xlim is the limit value of the dependent variable x. If x is higher than the upper limit, xlim takes the value of this one, likewise if x is lower than the lower limit xlim takes the value of this limit hence:(16)xlim=xmax;x>xmaxxmin;x<xminAt a conference in New York in 1967, the American physicist John Archibald Wheeler first coined the term “black hole”. Before the adoption of the term by Wheeler, the objects now known as black holes were referred to as frozen stars, dark stars, or collapsed stars [23]. Black holes have different sizes. Stellar black holes are the result of massive stars dying. Supermassive black holes are believed to be created during the early Universe. The exact mechanism by which they were created is under debate. Some scientists believe in the existence of mini-black holes that were created at the same time as the universe. This type of black hole, they maintain, has the approximate size of an atom yet has the mass of a large mountain [23]. Though black holes have probably been around since the universe began, only recently we have begun to learn in-depth information about them. In the last few decades astronomers began to look at the Universe in the radio, infrared, ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum and have been able to gather much more black hole data [23].No matter what the size of a black hole, they all share a common characteristic; they are so dense that not even light can escape their gravity, and since nothing can travel faster than light, nothing can escape from inside a black hole. Therefore, no information can be obtained from this region. The sphere-shaped boundary of a black hole in space is known as the event horizon [23,24].To be “sucked” into a black hole, one has to cross inside the Schwarzschild radius. The Schwarzschild radius can be calculated using the following equation [23,24]:(17)R=2GMc2where G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the black hole, and c is the light speed.The BHBO algorithm is a population-based method that evolves the created population towards the optimal solution via a mechanism inspired from the black hole phenomenon. The black hole terminology has been used for the first time in solving benchmark functions in [25] where a black hole PSO optimization technique has been proposed. The proposed BHBO algorithm in this paper is similar to the one used in [24] with some modifications and improvements. The main steps of the proposed BHBO algorithm are detailed in the following sections [26].The variables to be optimized have different ranges of variation, for example the power can varies between 50MW and 200MW while, bus voltages can vary between 0.95V and 1.1V. To normalize all these ranges between 0 and 1, we have introduced a step called bounds normalization. The most robust approach for transforming variables, regardless of their original range, is given by the following expression:(18)variableinormalized=variablei−lower boundiupper boundi−lower boundiThe goal the bounds normalization step, is to improve the convergence speed of the algorithm.Like other population-based algorithms, in the proposed BHBO a randomly generated population of candidate solutions, called the stars, are placed in the search space of the problem consisting of n dimensions where each dimension is limited by an upper and a lower bound. After that, the objective function or the fitness value of each star is evaluated and the best star, which has the best fitness value, is designated as the black hole xBH.The black hole has the ability to absorb the stars that surround it [24]. Once the stars are initialized and the black hole is designated, the black hole starts absorbing the stars around it. Therefore, all stars move towards the black hole and the absorption of stars by the black hole is given by [24]:(19)xi=xi+rand×(xBH−xi)∀i;i≠bestIt is noteworthy to mention that, the black hole does not move, because it has the best fitness value and then attracts all other particles.While moving towards the black hole, a star may reach a location with lower cost (with a best fitness) than the black hole. Therefore, the black hole is updated by selecting this star.As aforementioned, if a star crosses the event horizon of the black hole it is sucked. In other words if the distance between a star and the black hole is less than the Schwarzschild radius, this star dies. In order to keep the number of candidate solutions or stars constant a new star has to born and it is distributed randomly in the search space. The radius of the event horizon in the BHBO algorithm is calculated using the following equation [24]:(20)R=fBH∑Ni=1fiwhere fBH is the fitness value of the black hole and fiis the fitness value of the ith star. N is the number of stars.The third through the fifth steps are repeated until a termination criterion is reached. The termination criterion could be the maximum number of iterations or the amount of iterations performed without replacing the current black hole. In other words, if the current black hole is not changed for certain number of iterations, the algorithm may stop. However, this decision has to be studied carefully since the algorithm may be stopped before converging to the global optimum. On the other hand, unnecessary function evaluations may be avoided by stopping earlier. In this study the maximum number of iterations is used as stopping criterion.Based on the above description the flowchart of the developed BHBO approach is given in Fig. 1.The BHBO has been applied to solve the OPF problem for two test systems and for several cases with different objective functions. The studied power systems networks are: the IEEE 30-bus test system and the Algerian 59-bus power system network. The developed software program is written in MATLAB computing environment and applied on a 2.20GHz i7 personal computer with 8.00 GB-RAM. In our study the BHBO population size or number of stars is chosen to be 50.In order to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed BHBO approach, it has been tested first on the standard IEEE 30-bus test system shown in Fig. 2. The standard IEEE 30-bus system chosen in this paper has the following characteristics [27,28]: six generators at buses 1, 2, 5, 8, 11 and 13, four transformers with off-nominal tap ratio at lines 11, 12, 15 and 36, nine shunt VAR compensation buses at buses 10, 12, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 24 and 29.Further, the line data, bus data, generator data and the minimum and maximum limits for the control variables are given in [29].For this first test system, five different cases have been studied with different objectives and all the obtained results are summarized in Table 1. The first column of this table represents the optimal control settings found where:-PG1 through PG6 and VG1 through VG6 represent the powers and the voltages of generator 1 through generator 6.T11, T12, T15 and T36 are the tap settings of transforms included between lines 11, 12, 15 and 36.QC10, QC12, QC15, QC17, QC20, QC21, QC23, QC24 and QC29 represent the shunt VAR compensations connected to buses 10, 12, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 24 and 29.Further, fuel cost ($/h), active power losses (MW), reactive power losses (MVar), voltage deviation and Lmax represent the total fuel cost of the system, the total active transmission losses, the total reactive transmission losses, the deviation of load voltages from 1 and the index of stability, respectively. More details about these results will be given in the following sections.In this first case the minimization of the generation fuel cost, which is the most common OPF objective, is considered. Hence, the objective function J represents the total fuel cost of all generator units and it is expressed as follows:(21)J=∑i=1NGfi($/h)where fiis the fuel cost of the ith generator.Generally, the OPF generation fuel cost curve is expressed by a quadratic function. Therefore, fican be expressed as follows [30]:(22)fi=ai+biPGi+ciPGi2($/h)where ai, biand ciare the basic, the linear and the quadratic cost coefficients of the ith generator, respectively. The values of these coefficients are given in [29].The trend of the total fuel cost over iterations is shown in Fig. 3. It appears that the proposed approach has excellent convergence characteristics. The optimal settings of control variables are given in Table 1. The total fuel cost obtained by the proposed BHBO approach is ($799.9217). Compared to the initial case ($901.9516), the total fuel cost is considerably reduced by 11.31%.It is noteworthy to mention that, the initial operating point has voltage violation at buses from 19 to 30. These violations have been alleviated with the control variables found in this case using the proposed BHBO approach.Using the same conditions (control variables limits, initial conditions, and system data), the results obtained in Case 1 using the BHBO approach are compared to some other techniques reported in the literature as shown in Table 2. There is some evidence, that the proposed approach outperforms many techniques used to solve the OPF problem by minimization of generation fuel cost. For instance, the results obtained by the OBHB are better than the ones obtained the well-known GA and PSO techniques.Bus voltage is one of the most important and significant safety and service quality indices [29]. Minimizing only the total cost in the OPF problem as in Case 1 may result in a feasible solution, but voltage profile may not be acceptable. Therefore, in this second case a twofold objective function is considered. The objective here is to minimize the fuel cost and improve voltage profile at the same time by minimizing the voltage deviation of PQ buses from the unity 1.0. Thus, the objective function can be expressed as follows:(23)J=JCost+wJVoltageDeviationwhere w is a suitable weighting factor, to be selected by the user to give a weight (an importance) to each one of the two terms of the objective function. In this study w is chosen as 100. JCost and JVoltage Deviation are given as follows:(24)JCost=∑i=1NGfi(25)JVoltageDeviation=∑i=1NL|Vi−1.0|The BHBO approach has been applied to search for the optimal solution of the problem. The variations of fuel cost and voltage deviation over the iterations are sketched in Fig. 4. The optimal settings of control variables are given in Table 1. Using BHBO the fuel cost and the voltage deviation obtained are ($804.2600) and (0.1262p.u.), respectively. The system voltage profile in this case is compared to that of Case 1 as shown in Fig. 5. It appears that the voltage profile is greatly improved compared to that of Case 1. It is reduced from 0.8727p.u. in Case 1 to 0.1262p.u. in Case 2, which yields a reduction of 85.54%. However, in Case 2 the fuel cost is slightly increased by 0.58% compared to Case 1.Recently, transmission systems are forced to operate very close to their security limits, due to economical and environmental reasons. One important characteristic of the power system is its ability to conserve constantly acceptable bus voltage at each node under normal operating conditions, after load increase, following system configuration changes or when the system is being subjected to a disturbance. The non-optimized control variables may lead to progressive and uncontrollable drop in voltage resulting in an eventual wide-spread voltage collapse [41]. As a result, voltage stability has become an issue of paramount importance to electric utility and it is attracting more and more attention. Out of the different methods to assess the voltage stability margin, Kessel and Glavitch [42] have developed a voltage stability index (L-index) based on the feasibility of power flow equations for each node. The L-index of a bus indicates the proximity of voltage collapse condition of that bus. It varies between 0 and 1 corresponding to no load and voltage collapse, respectively.For a power system with NB, NG and NL buses representing the total number of buses, the total number of PV buses and the total number of PQ buses, respectively, we can separate buses into two parts: PV buses at the head and PQ buses at the tail as follows:(26)ILIG=[Ybus]VLVG=YLLYLGYGLYGGVLVGwhere YLL, YLG, YGLand YGGare sub matrix of Ybus.The following hybrid system of equations can be written:(27)VLIG=[H]ILVG=HLLHLGHGLHGGILVGwhere H matrix is generated by the partial inversion of Ybus, HLL, HLG, HGLand HGGare sub matrix of H, VG, IG, VLand ILare voltage and current vector of PV buses and PQ buses, respectively.The matrix H is given by:(28)[H]=ZLL−ZLLYLGYGLZLLYGG−YGLZLLYLGZLL=YLL−1Therefore, the L-index denoted by Ljof bus j is represented as follows:(29)Lj=1−∑i=1NGHLGjiViVjj=1,2,…,NLFor stable situations the condition Lj≤l must not be violated for any of the buses j.Hence, a global indicator Lmax describing the stability of the complete subsystem is given by [42]:(30)Lmax=max(Lj)j=1,2,…,NLThe lower Lmax, the more the system is stable.Enhancing voltage stability can be achieved through minimizing the voltage stability indicator L-index values at every bus of the system and consequently the global power system Lmax[29].In order to minimize total the fuel cost and enhance the voltage stability and move the system far from the voltage collapse point, the objective function chosen in this case is a linear combination of total fuel cost and Lmax. Thus, the objective function can be expressed as follows:(31)J=JCost+wJVoltageStabilityEnhancementwhere w is a weighting factor selected to be 6000 in this study as it has been chosen in [29,31], JCost and JVoltage Stability Enhancement are given by:(32)JCost=∑i=1NGfi(33)JVoltageStabilityEnhancement=LmaxApplying the BHBO approach, it appears from Table 1 that the value of Lmax is significantly reduced in this case. It is reduced by 10.35% and 15.2486% compared to Case 1 and Case 2, respectively. Consequently, distance from collapse point is increased. Fig. 6shows the variations of both the fuel cost and Lmax over iterations.In this case the OPF problem goal is to minimize the power losses, which can be stated as follows:(34)J=∑i=1NBPi=∑i=1NBPGi−∑i=1NBPDiFig. 7shows the trend for minimizing the total active power transmission losses objective function using the BHBO approach. The optimal settings of control variables are given in Table 1. The total active power transmission losses has dramatically decreased from (5.8219MW) to (3.1775MW) for the initial case and from (8.6793MW) to (3.1775MW) for Case 1. This is considered as 39.82% and 59.63% lower than the initial case and Case 1, respectively. However, other system objective functions in this case became worse like the total fuel cost for example.Static network-related system voltage stability margin depends on the availability of reactive power to support the transportation of real power from sources to sinks [43]. Based on the premise, the VAR losses are minimized using the following equation:(35)J=∑i=1NBQi=∑i=1NBQGi−∑i=1NBQDiIt is noteworthy that the reactive power losses are not necessarily positive.The optimal settings of control variables are given in Table 1. The reactive power losses minimization study has resulted in (−20.1522MVAR) which is considered as 337.46% lower than the initial case. However, other system objective functions in this case became worse like the cost for instance. Fig. 8shows the trend for minimizing the reactive power transmission losses objective function using the BHBO approach.To demonstrate the scalability and suitability of the proposed BHBO approach for large-scale and real power systems, it has been tested on the real Algerian 59-bus power system network shown in Fig. 9. This network is composed of 59 buses, 10 generators, 36 loads of 684.10MW and 83 branches [44,45]. It is worth mentioning that generator no. 5 at bus no. 13 is not in service. The line data, bus data, generator data, the values of fuel cost and the minimum and maximum limits for the control variables are given in [46].The objective function in this case represents the total fuel cost of all generator units as expressed by Eq. (21). The results obtained using the proposed BHBO approach for Case 6, are tabulated in Table 3. Moreover, these results are compared to some other techniques reported in the literature as shown in Table 4. It appears from this comparison that, the proposed approach outperforms many techniques used to solve the OPF problem. This highlights its ability to find better quality solution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
