@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel multi attribute decision making approach for location decision under high uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel soft computing approach for location decision under uncertainty is presented.A new notion named as cloud based design optimization (CBDO) which tackles high uncertainty is utilized.It is revealed out that location decision is very sensitive to the consideration of uncertainty.This study contributes to by handling high uncertainties in a location selection by utilizing CBDO as a first time.CBDO can be a helpful supportive tool for decision makers in providing solution under high uncertainty.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud based design optimization,Location selection,Multi attribute decision making,Multi criteria decision making,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Location selection is a multi dimensional issue which requires consideration of quantitative and qualitative evaluation criteria. Some of these criteria may have imprecise and uncertain data which make the location selection decision hard to progress. Although many multi attribute decision making (MADM) techniques are utilized in location decision study field, there is a lack of studies which provide solutions by considering high number of supply chain uncertainties. In this study, against the drawbacks of traditional MADM techniques, a novel MADM approach is applied for location decision under high uncertainty as a first time. In the proposed model, a new notion named as cloud based design optimization (CBDO) is utilized because CBDO can take into consideration certain and uncertain factors simultaneously. Furthermore, it provides robust solution within worst case scenario to existing approaches by mediating between aspects of fuzzy set theory and probability distributions. Robustness enables decision makers have managerial and operational foresights about possible unexpected situations, and take necessary actions against risk. An illustrative example is conducted in warehouse location selection problem area to indicate the performance of the proposed approach. It is revealed out that location decision is very sensitive to the consideration of uncertainty and CBDO can be a helpful supportive tool for decision makers in providing solution under high uncertainty.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supply chain is an integrated network which is coordinated to transform the raw materials to the finished goods by adding value to the products, transfer the finished goods to the demand points and simplify the information flows between actors of the network. A supply chain network process includes three decision levels: (1) number, location and capacity of facilities; (2) selection of suppliers, channels and transportation modes and assignment of products; and (3) material flow [1,27]. As one of strategic supply chain decisions, location selection has drawn much attention from both the academic and business environment [2] because it directly affects long-term profits of companies [3]. This critical decision is hard to redeemable compared to short term decisions, difficult to reverse and implies a high degree of uncertainty [4]. It is prone to have high degree of uncertainty because of the complex nature of supply chain network. In a typical supply chain, the uncertainties can be mainly originated from following issues [5]:-suppliers (such as average on time deliveries by suppliers, average supplier quality in filling orders, etc.);manufacturing process (such as duration of planned shutdown, duration of unplanned stoppages, etc.); andcustomers (such as average accuracy of monthly demand forecasts, size of customer base, etc.).Under these circumstances, it becomes hard to develop an effective and feasible process for evaluation of the alternative locations.Location selection is one of geographical multi criteria decision making (MCDM) problem. MCDM problems mainly include three steps: (1) data processing; (2) planning; and (3) evaluation. In the planning stage, two approaches are utilized: multi objective decision making (MODM) and multi attribute decision making (MADM) [6,7]. MODM techniques goal to design best option that meets the objective function under some constraints. On the other hand, MADM techniques are utilized to make decision makers be able to select the best alternative in related to priorities and interaction between criteria. Most popular MADM techniques are maximin, maximax, conjunctive method, disjunctive method, elimination by aspects, linear assignment method, simple additive weighting (SAW), elimination and choice expressing reality (ELECTRE), technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS), linear programming techniques for multidimensional analysis of preference (LINMAP), analytic network process (ANP), analytical hierarchical process (AHP), and multi attribute utility theory (MAUT) [6]. Besides them, there are group decision making (GDM) approaches which include multiple individuals coordinate for selection of best alternative. GDM has five main steps: problem definition, problem analysis, determination of options, determination of criteria and expert panel, and implementation of the process [8]. In Appendix 1, there are some important papers, which examine location selection by utilizing decision making approaches.Although multi criteria decision making is known as the most popular area of decision making [9], its traditional methods have some main drawbacks [10]. One of the important drawbacks is that they mostly take into account personal ideas [11,12]. That makes the process result in subjective decisions which have high potential to change across time. The decision making process is sensitively affected by uncertainties and traditional methods are not good enough at dealing with uncertainties and inaccuracies [7,13]. Furthermore, for example, in GDM techniques, the most important disadvantage is that several experts are required to predict the lost values of a specific one, which connected to remarkable difference between the preferences of experts could lead to the prediction of information not inherently compatible with the rest of the information of the expert [14]. In the past, it was popular to tackle uncertainties by interval assignment or safety margins to the uncertain variables. The intervals are refined by experts who focus on worst case scenario and the values can be more pessimistic or optimistic. This process is not computed and evaluated by experts. Besides interval assignment, there are also some popular methods that deal with uncertainties, such as fuzzy programming and simulation (like Monte Carlo). Simulation techniques need high amount of reliable information. The lack of information results in underestimation of the impacts of the uncertain tails of the probability distribution [15]. Therefore, it inevitably becomes necessary to improve more robust techniques that tackle imprecise and unknown factors independently of the amount of data. Rather than utilization of only subjective decisions, it is also required to evaluate and filter out the probability distributions of some uncertain parameters. Because, handling high number of certain and uncertain parameters strengthens the system against possible variances and risks.The trends in utilization of decision making techniques address the importance of handling uncertainties which are originated from various resources [16]. In the literature, interest in combination of handling uncertainty and MADM is increased recently. Hanandeh and Zein [17] proposed modified decision-making tool named ELECTRE-SS which was built for uncertainties in criteria weightings and threshold values. The proposed methodology is utilized for cases where incomplete or uncertain preference data are available. Vahdani et al. [13] proposed a new interval-fuzzy modified TOPSIS method in order to handle subjective and objective data simultaneously. By the help of new methodology version, the flexibility of decision-making process has been increased and uncertainties are better represented. Huang and Li [7] proposed a multiple inputs and outputs information (MIO) classification technique represented as the FVM-index method integrates fuzziness, variable precision rough set theory, and a modified cluster validity index function. Its robustness is validated by comparing the obtained for the three different FVM-index filtered datasets. Ureña et al. [8] stated that reciprocal intuitionistic fuzzy preference relations have important impact on uncertainty dealing because they have ability to address uncertainty and hesitation. Therefore they improved a new notion as confidence-consistency driven group decision making approach to decrease the computational complexity of intuitionistic fuzzy preference relations. Considering these studies, the overview given in Appendix 1, and comprehensive reviews of Farahani et al. [6] and Chen et al. [18], it is noticeable to state that there is an important necessity for utilization of methods with an explicit focus on high number of various uncertainties.Under the circumstances stated above, the motivation of this study is mainly depending on two following main issues:1.Location decision is a complex and risky MCDM problem due to uncertainty and volatility of business environment. But unfortunately, it is important to point out that many MADM techniques are not strong to deal with high uncertainties in quantitative and qualitative data. Although some fuzzy integrated techniques can handle the human subjective linguistic data and some techniques consider the judgments of decision makers on supply chain uncertainty, there is a lack of techniques which can handle the imprecision of the high number of quantitative data. Decision makers who utilize MADM techniques should no longer continue to ignore the influence of uncertainties.Moreover across the time, any of parameters of location decision process can become highly unsteady and fluctuate widely. The process should be safeguarded against the worst situations. Recognizing this, development of robust solution techniques under uncertainty is a high priority for decision makers and researchers to provide solutions by considering the worst case performance of the system. Otherwise, the decisions cannot effectively have foresight for most unexpected situations to take necessary actions, cannot reduce supply chain risk, and thereby cannot increase competitiveness and profitability of companies.Recognizing motivating factors, this study goals to utilize a novel approach named cloud based design optimization (CBDO) that is efficiently utilized for problems including high amount of uncertainties. In CBDO, high amount of uncertainties are transformed to a basic form by the help of potential cloud formalism that allows a worst case analysis development on generated scenarios’ confidence regions. The reasons of CBDO utilization can be summarized as following: (1) CBDO can take into consideration high number of certain and uncertain factors simultaneously; (2) provides alternative solution to existing approaches by mediating between aspects of fuzzy set theory and probability distributions; and (3) gives robust solution within worst case scenario. By the help of robust programming approach, decision makers and experts become able to have foresights about unexpected situations, and take necessary actions against risk. The proposed model has been applied only in two case studies from spacecraft industry [19]. Although it is addressed that the performance of the proposed model is satisfactory, in the literature there is a lack of cases generated from various problems. The originality of this study comes from providing solutions for these lack points by following ways:1.This paper is the first study which aims to implement CBDO to verify its feasibility in industrial problems, and increase its popularity to motivate researchers benefit from this technique in different kinds of decision-making problems from various sectors.Comparison of an alternative model with traditional ones increases the originality. The trends in utilization of decision making techniques indicate that utilization of a robust approach which handle uncertainties which are originated from various resources is a significant necessity. Recognizing these, after implementation, the results of CBDO are compared with traditional MADM techniques in order to highlight the sensitiveness of models against high uncertainties.Within this scope, this study is structured as follows. Firstly, the research framework is stated by clarifying the assertions of the study. Then, research method is examined with description of CBDO model by giving detail information about its working principles and specifications. Thirdly, an illustrative example is conducted to clarify the implementation of proposed model and evaluate its performance by comparing other techniques. Also, a sensitivity analysis is conducted in order to indicate the marginal effects of criteria weights on the objective. This study ends with discussion of the results and further study suggestions.Uncertain data is categorized as “imprecise data”, “range data” and “linguistic data” [20]. “Imprecise data” are represented approximately. “Range data” are known to take place within a certain interval. “Linguistic data” are represented verbally, such as “high, low, medium”. Subulan et al. [21] categorize uncertainties into two groups: (1) randomness and (2) epistemic uncertainty. In order to face with the randomness, stochastic programming and probabilistic methods are chosen in common. But sometimes the historical data can be unavailable and it becomes impossible to utilize possibility distributions as in stochastic approaches. In this epistemic uncertain situation, fuzzy and possibility distributions are figured out by developing a forecasting system on distributions with the help of experts or decision makers’ ideas [21].Supply chain competitiveness can be increased by conducting location selection decision approaches which are progressed under high number of various uncertainties (imprecise, range and linguistic). Within this scope, the main assertions of this research can be briefly highlighted as following:1.Uncertainty has a vital importance in the competitiveness of supply chains.Inputs of location selection processes have uncertainty and they should not be ignored.Solution retrieved by considering the worst case performance of the system is a significant necessity.In order to satisfy these assertions, CBDO model as an alternative decision making technique is utilized. Because CBDO is used as a decision making tool in this study rather than an optimization which needs to run under some constraints, it is accepted as an alternative MADM technique. The research framework based on CBDO is shown in Fig. 1. In the first steps, based on literature review and opinions of decision maker committee, the evaluation criteria are identified and their certainty statuses are specified. The historical data of uncertain criteria is gathered in order to define their probability distributions. Decision makers also define the list of alternative locations. Secondly, uncertain criteria are processed for cloud generation which will be entered into the optimization model as a safety constraint. In parallel to this, other requirements of system model (such as fixed variables, design variables, constraints, etc.) are also defined by decision makers. Thirdly, the optimization model minimizes or maximizes the defined objective subject to specified constraints. The optimization gives worst case results and they are again evaluated by decision makers to check whether any new uncertainty is necessary to add. After the satisfactory results are revealed out and best location is found, the rest of locations are ranked by rerunning the system iteratively until preferences of alternatives are defined. Finally, sensitivity analysis is conducted in order to indicate how changes in criteria weights affect the optimum results.In CBDO, high amount of uncertainties are transformed to a basic form by the help of concept of clouds that is proposed first by Neumaier [22]. Clouds make it possible to stand for incomplete information in an explicit and computationally effective way. They represent the incomplete stochastic information in clearer and computationally effective way [15]. They intervene between dimensions of fuzzy set theory and probability distributions, and provide an adaptive worst case analysis by tracking important probabilistic data. Robustness is gained by safeguarding the system against perturbations due to unconsidered and imprecise data. Clouds define the crude figures of samples which have different sizes. For large scale problems, “potential based cloud” is developed. Potential function of clouds allows a worst case analysis development on generated scenarios’ confidence regions [23]. In the study of Fuchs and Neumaier [15] and Fuchs [19], potential cloud formalism based robust design optimization is developed and named as CBDO. In order to develop a robust optimization, heuristic methods are improved in the solution.The details of the model can be briefly clarified into two main phases as following [23]:A continuous potential V refers to a potential based cloud. V makes assignments to each scenario ɛ from a set M⊆Rna value V(ɛ)∈R+ determining the cloud figure (as shown in Fig. 2) and a lower probabilityα_(U)and an upper probabilityα¯(U)expressing the cloud bound, such that for all U∈R+:α_(U)≤Pr(V(ε)<U)≤Pr(V(ε)≤U)≤α¯(U)where ɛ∈M is a random variable, andα_andα¯are increasing continuous functions of U mapping the range of V to [0,1] [23].The mappingx→α_(V(x)),α¯(V(x))is named “potential based cloud”. The functionsα_andα¯are boundings on the distribution of V(ɛ).For a given failure probability perr and α:=1−perr, the so called α-cut describes inner regionC_α(lower α-cut) of α-relevant scenarios and a regionC¯α(upper α-cut) of α reasonable scenarios. DefineC_α≔ε∈M|V(ε)≤U_αifU_α≔minUα∈V(M)|α¯(Uα)=αexists andC_α≔∅otherwise. Similarly,C¯α≔ε∈M|V(ε)≤U¯αifU¯α≔maxUα∈V(M)|α_(Uα)=αexists andC¯α≔Motherwise. The states determining the cloud (i.e.,α_≤α¯,α_andα¯precisely increasing and monotone) assure thatU_α≤U¯α, and that there is a region CαwithC_α⊆Cα⊆C¯αinvolving a fraction of α of all scenarios [23].Potential clouds help to transform high uncertainty to one uncertainty case. Generation of potential cloud mainly includes four main steps as shown in Fig. 3. Firstly, one of potential function which determines the cloud shape is chosen. There are two main potential functions: box shaped potential and ellipsoid shaped potential. Fuchs [19] states that box shaped potential function can be accepted as satisfactory for many cases. Secondly, appropriate bounds of potential cloud are found by the help of Kolmogorov Smirnov statistics. In third step, a sample is generated by utilizing Latin Hypercube Sampling approach. At the end, in order to preserve the marginal effects, weights are assigned to the sample points. Researchers can be referred to Fuchs [19] in order to examine detailed information about steps of potential cloud formalism.CBDO has two main steps: (1) meeting design objectives by fixing uncertain variables at their nominal values; and (2) investing design point for robustness. The main objective of CBDO is to reveal out confidence regions in which can be searched for worst case scenarios via optimization techniques. It combines uncertainty analysis and design optimization into the robust design. The general mixed integer bi level CBDO model is shown below [19].minmaxθx,z,εf(x)(objectivefunction)Subject toz=Z(θ)+ε(tableconstraints)F(x,z)=0(functionalconstraints)V(ε)≤Vα(cloudconstraints)θ∈T(selectionconstraints)The design objective f(x) is a function of the output variables. ɛ is the vector of uncertainties. θ is the vector of choice variables. z is the vector consisting of all global input variables (u) and all design variables(v). x is the vector including all output variables. The table constraints assign to each choice θ a design vector z whose value is the nominal table entry Z(θ) plus its (unknown) error ɛ with certainty stated by the cloud. The functional constraints specify the functional relationships in model, which is mostly obtained as a black box. One of assumptions is the quantity of equations and output variables is the same and they are solvable for x uniquely. This holds in particular case that the black box is given in the formF(x,z)=F¯(z)−xwith some black box functionF¯and dimF¯=dimx. The cloud constraint can be set up as a collection of linear inequalities parameterized by the confidence level. The selection constraints indicate the number of alternatives which are convenient for each choice variable. The cloud constraint consists of the potential function V. The cloud constraint can be expressed as a collection of linear inequalities parameterized by the confidence level. The selection constraints address the amount of choices for each choice variable [23].The robust optimization model has difficulties because of complex nature of the problem. That makes impossible to have solution by utilizing traditional optimization techniques. Because of that reason, the model is handled with heuristic approaches. The inner of the model which consists of specification of worst case scenario is solved by using linear programming. The outer of problem which consists of specification of design choice θ can be solved by using two approaches: quadratic model (objective function's quadratic model is fixed by ignoring discrete nature of choice variables and it is optimized by estimation) and separable underestimation (it considers discrete nature of choice variables) [23].An illustrative example is provided by considering the study of Özcan et al. [10] in order to indicate performance and feasibility of the CBDO model for the warehouse location selection. The study of Özcan et al. [10] is chosen because they conduct a comprehensive comparative analysis by using three classical MADM techniques: TOPSIS, ELECTRE, Grey Theory. It enables to compare CBDO model results with the classical techniques.To remind briefly, TOPSIS evaluates alternatives by considering shortest distance from the most ideal alternative and farthest distance from the worst alternative. Comparison is made by assigning weights to dimensions. ELECTRE is a ranking technique that utilizes a complex mathematical process to present options. Higher ranks are assigned to alternatives which are found as satisfactory in most criteria. Then, indices are expressed for the strength of proof for outranking relationship between alternatives. The best option is found by the help of pairwise comparison of all alternatives [24]. Grey theory takes into account interval type data. It is a high mathematical analysis of systems named as “partially known” and “partially unknown” systems [25]. These methods have subjective evaluation procedure and not capable of handling high number of various uncertainties by itself.In the case of Özcan et al. [10], there are four alternative warehouse locations (warehouse A, warehouse B, warehouse C, warehouse D) which are specified by considering 5 year business targets. The selection decision is made on the basis of five main evaluation criteria. These criteria which are found as critical related to the sector structure are defined as follows [10]:•Unit price (unit price per m2) (UP): if a location alternative has less unit price, its priority increases.Stock holding capacity (unit) (SHC): if a location alternative is out of top and bottom borders of specified stock holding capacity, it does not have chance to be chosen.Average distance to shops (km) (DS): if there is less distance between a location alternative and a main shop, this location can have high potential to increase sales volume.Average distance to main suppliers (km) (DMS): if there is less distance between a location alternative and a main supplier, this location can have high potential to decrease supply chain cycle time and thereby transportation costs.Movement flexibility (MF) (0–4 scale): if a location alternative has more conformity to different layout arrangements and useful area rate, this location can have high potential to increase flexibility and thereby profitability.The data of warehouse location alternatives according to five main evaluation criteria is given in Table 1[10].Uncertainty is one of the important characteristics of supply chain inputs. In this case, it is assumed that data of unit price and stock holding capacity are uncertain because of following reasons:-Unit price of a warehouse location is determined according to economical status of the related region and basic macroeconomic statuses such as supply and demand balance. Especially in unsteady economics, unit price has high volatility and it is not possible to define a fixed value for a specific time period.Stock holding capacity is a critical issue for profitability of organizations. The low capacity can cause operational faultiness; high capacity can increase the cost. The determination of an effective stock holding capacity is belongs to many supply chain uncertainty factors such as demand, size of customer base, duration of unplanned stoppages, etc. Therefore, optimum capacity value cannot be assumed as precisely known.The distance criteria are assumed as fixed and certain, because of steadiness in geographical conditions. The movement flexibility criterion is also assumed as fixed and known because it is evaluated based on a technical issue (conformities of warehouses to layout arrangements) and it is expected that layout arrangement flexibilities are fixed for a long time period.It is assumed that uncertain criteria are normally distributed with the mean of given values and two different standard deviations (as 25% and 50% of means). These possible standard deviations are selected by discussing with two experts who are good at analyzing the fluctuations and their effects on prices and capacities in the sector. 25% refers to the normal status and 50% refers to the unexpected status. The renewed raw data for the case in which standard deviation equals to 25% of mean is given in Table 2.In this case, the main aim is to select best location and ranking all alternatives by considering the design objective of maximizing total performance (mtotperf), and the worst possible performance of a location with respect to mtotperfto select the location with the maximum performance worst case scenario. Total performance is calculated as following (wdenotes to the weight of each criterion):Totalperformance(TP)=−wup⋅UP+wshc⋅SHC−wds⋅DS−wdms⋅DMS+wmf⋅MFBecause an increase in values of some criteria (unit price, average distance to shops and average distance to main suppliers) have negative impact on total performance, they have minus value. Weights of each criterion which are calculated based on Simos procedure in case of Özcan et al. [10] are given as:{wup,wshc,wds,wdms,wmf}={0.29,0.35,0.15,0.15,0.06}In CBDO literature, it is stated that CBDO is an effective support tool especially for high dimensional problems. If number of uncertainties in a problem exceeds 5, it means the problem has high uncertainty, in other words “high dimensionality” [19]. In the example, the number of uncertain criteria is 8 (is the total of UP and SHC values of four warehouse location alternatives) in this application. It is seen that the problem has high dimensionality (>5) and application example is large enough to develop a representative case for dealing with uncertainty by utilizing CBDO.In the model, each choice is specified by 5 main design variables (evaluation criteria), therefore ni=5. θiwhich stands for choice variables refers to the choice of best location. It denotes the location alternatives can be selected between 1 and 4. Let 1,…,Nibe the possible choices for θithen the discrete choice variable θicorresponds to a finite set of Nipoints. Therefore Ni=4.It should be also pointed out that the evaluation criteria are measured on various scales. Therefore they should be adjusted for normalization. They are normalized to bring all values into the range [0,1] by following formula:nnorm=n−nminnmax−nminThe set of problem is provided in a Nixnitable. The Nixnitable of the case with normalized mean values and standard deviation 25% of normalized mean are shown in Table 3.In the proposed model, it is assumed that the uncertainties are normally distributed. Nominal value is 5.31 and sigma value is chosen as 0.053. The generated sample size of CBDO is 1000 for cloud generation stage. Transformation function is chosen as logarithmic. The iteration for weight computation is selected as 3000. Number of starting points is automatically defined by the software. The results are confirmed two times. The optimization model is run within 10 iterations. The principle of optimization is depending on local search. CBDO is a computationally realizable approach [26] and has some computational advantages over the existing traditional MADM approaches such as:•It has adaptive and iterative process that helps to imitate real life design strategies and improve the uncertainty information.It enables handling the changes in probability distributions and reveling out results according to different levels of confidence.It enables to provide quantitative statements about design reliability. It is able to handle the uncertainties in reliable way even though there is lack of information.It consists of an iterative process and makes confirmation on results, as a testing procedure.It does not need to structure the data gathered from experts therefore it provides computational time advantage for decision makers.It decreases time needed for dealing with high number of uncertainties. In most of approaches, uncertainties are handled within an extra programming model (such as fuzzy programming) in order to convert uncertain data into numerically defined mode. After that the optimization is run. It increases the computational complexity associated to using new steps (such as membership degree, etc. for fuzzy programming) and makes the decision makers spend more time on adopting new steps. Furthermore, there are not any effective graphical user tools in which hybrid models can operate in practical way. That makes the motivation of decision makers on utilizing traditional approaches decrease.The graphical user interface (GUI) software of CBDO which is set up by Fuchs [19] is used in order to define the elements of the model and run for obtaining optimum results with computational time advantage. Elements of model are declared as GUI's specific needs by clarifying input (global and design) variables, output variables, objective function, certain data, distributions and features of uncertain data. The CBDO model is run for four scenarios:•Scenario 1: uncertain data have standard deviation with the 25% of mean. Cloud constraints for the optimization are generated for a confidence level of α=95%.Scenario 2: uncertain data have standard deviation with the 50% of mean. Cloud constraints for the optimization are generated for a confidence level of α=95%.Scenario 3: uncertain data have standard deviation with the 25% of mean. Cloud constraints for the optimization are generated for a confidence level of α=90%.Scenario 4: uncertain data have standard deviation with the 50% of mean. Cloud constraints for the optimization are generated for a confidence level of α=90%.The preference ranking results of all CBDO scenarios and the case of Özcan et al. [10] are given in Table 4.Results indicate that the ranking derived by using the proposed CBDO scenarios are different compared to TOPSIS, ELECTRE and Grey Theory except Scenario 2 (the ranking result of Scenario 2 is similar with results of TOPSIS application). It demonstrates the effect of uncertainty on location selection decision.The most important outputs of the results are:•The comparisons between scenarios represent that different confidence levels and different standard deviations produce different estimations of location performances.Considering high uncertainty directly changes the results. Decision makers should not ignore the uncertain criteria of supply chain in location selection decision.Precisely, Warehouse D is the most satisfactory location in both of certain and uncertain structure. Warehouse D should be selected in order to increase the strength of the organization not only in steady conditions and but also unsteady environment to tackle volatilities in unit price and stock holding capacity.Although Warehouse A takes place at the end of ranking in certain structure (TOPSIS, ELECTRE, Grey Theory), it is explicit that it has higher preference in uncertain structure. It becomes third in Scenario 1 and Scenario 3, second in Scenario 4.Interestingly, Warehouse A has the second preference rank in Scenario 4 of CBDO application. Scenario 4 denotes the most uncertain structure (with high standard deviation and less confidence level) therefore in unsteady economics; Warehouse A can be more preferable after Warehouse D.Another important output is Warehouse C do not have satisfactory strength to deal with uncertain conditions. As seen in Scenario 4 which denotes the most volatile environment, the rank of Warehouse C has decreased.By the help of high uncertainty assessment in CBDO models, it is verified that the optimal design point is very sensitive to the consideration of uncertainty. The results also indicate that CBDO application contributes to the literature by revealing out necessity to take into consideration uncertainties as one of vital responsibility for decision makers in MADM.In CBDO application, the weights are calculated by Simos method [10]. Simos procedure considers decision maker's opinion while weighting the criteria. Regarding to decision makers’ attitudinal character, they can have various opinions while holding the procedure. Their judgments can change across time and becomes more optimistic or pessimistic. Their personal attitudes directly have impact on weighting criteria and thereby the evaluation of location alternatives. Because of that reasons, two weighting alternatives for uncertain criteria are generated and sensitivity analyses are conducted in order to explore how changing in weights of uncertain criteria affect the preference ranking of warehouse locations.In the first sensitivity analysis, total weights of uncertain criteria are shared equally to unit price and stock holding capacity. In the second sensitivity analysis, the weights are displaced and the weight of unit price becomes highest. With updated weights, all scenarios of CBDO model are rerun. The results of preference ranking are shown in Table 5.The results reveal out that the ranking obtained in Scenario 2 differs. Increase in importance of unit price changes the rank of Warehouse A in high standard deviation existing case. In a volatile business environment, unit prices can fluctuate widely and preference of Warehouse A can be affected. This output certifies the results of optimization which highlight the sensitiveness of Warehouse A. Decision makers have responsibility to track the changes in economy (such as changing in supply and demand balance) to have foresight on unit price changing. Otherwise, it becomes difficult to safeguard location decisions against perturbations and increase competitiveness in the market.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
