@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal reactive power dispatch by particle swarm optimization with an aging leader and challengers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ORPD is a non-linear constrained optimization problem.ALC-PSO algorithm is applied for the solution ORPD problem of power systems.ORPD problem is formulated for real power loss and voltage deviation minimization.The study is implemented on IEEE 30-, 57- and 118-bus test power systems.The results presented demonstrate the potential of the proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aging,Leader,Particle swarm optimization,Reactive power dispatch,Power system,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study presents a particle swarm optimization (PSO) with an aging leader and challengers (ALC-PSO) for the solution of optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problem. The ORPD problem is formulated as a nonlinear constrained single-objective optimization problem where the real power loss and the total voltage deviations are to be minimized separately. In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, it has been implemented on IEEE 30-, 57- and 118-bus test power systems and the optimal results obtained are compared with those of the other evolutionary optimization techniques surfaced in the recent state-of-the-art literature. The results presented in this paper demonstrate the potential of the proposed approach and show its effectiveness and robustness for solving the ORPD problem of power system.transfer susceptance between buses i and jpositive coefficients that determine the influence of the personal and neighborhood best positions, respectivelyconductance of branch ktransfer conductance between buses i and jnumber of iteration for which the leading power of challenger is testedobjective function to be minimizednumber of total busesnumber of possible reactive power source installation busesnumber of network branchesnumber of generator busesnumber of buses adjacent to bus i (including bus i)number of load busesnumber of total buses excluding slack busnumber of particles in a populationnumber of PQ busesnumber of transformer branchesmaximum NFFEsnumber of fitness function evaluations or iteration cyclesdemanded active power at bus iinjected active power at bus ishunt capacitor/inductordemanded reactive power at bus igenerator reactive powerinjected reactive power at bus irandom numbers uniformly distributed in [0,1]power flow in branch ltth iterationtransformer tapvector of control variablesgenerator voltage (continuous)voltage at bus ireference value of the voltage magnitude of the ith bus which is equal to 1.0 p.u.ith particle's velocity vectorload bus voltageinertia weightmaximum value of wminimum value of wvector of dependent variableshistorically best position of the entire swarmhistorically best position of particle i (i=1, 2, …, NP)ith particle's position vectorvoltage angle difference between buses i and j

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problem aims to allocate reactive power generation so as to minimize the real power transmission losses and/or to keep all the bus voltages within the limits, while satisfying a number of equality and inequality constraints including the power flow equations, upper and lower voltage limits and reactive power capacity restrictions in various reactive power sources such as generators, shunt capacitor banks and transformer taps [1].Many classical optimization techniques such as linear programming [1], nonlinear programming (NLP) [2], quadratic programming [3,4], Newton approach [5] and interior point methods [6,7], etc. have been applied in the literature for solving ORPD problem of power system. These techniques are computationally fast. However, these techniques have severe limitations [8] like (i) need of continuous and differentiable objective functions, (ii) easy convergence to local minima and (iii) difficulty in handling a very large number of variables. Hence, it becomes essential to develop optimization techniques which are capable of overcoming these drawbacks.To overcome these limitations, flexible evolutionary optimization techniques such as, simple genetic algorithm (GA) [9,10], improved GA [11], adaptive GA (AGA) [12], evolutionary strategies [13], evolutionary programming [14,15], differential evolution (DE) [16–19], harmony search (HS) algorithm [20], real-parameter GA [21], self-adaptive real coded GA (SARGA) [22], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [23], seeker optimization algorithm (SOA) [24], biogeography-based optimization (BBO) [25], gravitational search algorithm (GSA) [26], etc. have been applied in the literature for the solution of ORPD problem of power system. These evolutionary algorithms have shown success in solving ORPD problem since they do not need the objective and constraints as differentiable and continuous functions.PSO and DE have received increased attention from researchers because of their simplicity and searching capability. However, it does not mean that these techniques do not have any limitations. In solving complex multimodal problems, these methods may be easily and early trapped into a local optimum. Furthermore, their searching performances depend on the appropriate parameter settings [27]. Premature convergence and local stagnation are frequently observed in many applications [28].PSO algorithm is one of the swarm intelligence techniques based on simulating the food-searching behavior of birds [29]. Since its inception in 1995, constant emphasis is being given by the researchers’ pool towards its improvement in performance. Since the original PSO proposed in [29] is prone to suffer from the so-called “explosion” phenomena [30], two improved versions of PSO viz. PSO with a constriction factor (PSO-cf) and PSO with adaptive inertia weight (PSO-w), were proposed by Clerc et al. [30] and Shi et al. [31], respectively.Application of PSO in diversified field of power system is reported in [32,33]. Recently, the use of PSO to solve ORPD problem is gaining more importance due to its effectiveness in handling the inequality constraints and discrete values compared with those of conventional gradient-based methods.Yoshida et al. [23] have used PSO for reactive power and voltage control with voltage security assessment. Zhang and Sanderson [27] have proposed an adaptive PSO for reactive power optimization. Zhao et al. [34] have presented reactive power dispatch problem using a multi-agent-based PSO. Esmin et al. [35] have developed an approach to optimize the power loss by using a hybrid PSO with mutation operator. Kumari and Sydulu [36] have solved optimal reactive power control problem using an improved PSO. Vlachogiannis and Lee have proposed three new PSO algorithms in [37] for reactive power and voltage control. Cai et al. [38] have reported a modified PSO method to realize ORPD problem considering voltage stability improvement. A PSO with time varying acceleration is proposed in [39] for ORPD problem for reactive power cost allocation under deregulated environment of power system. Subbaraj and Rajnarayanan [22] have applied a two-phase hybrid PSO approach to solve ORPD problem. Mahadevan and Kannan have utilized a comprehensive learning PSO (CLPSO) in [40] for the solution of ORPD problem of power system. Vaisakh and Rao have proposed PSO with differentially perturbed velocity [41] for ORPD problem of power system. PSO with Cauchy and adaptive mutations have been applied for the solution of ORPD problem in [42]. Parallel PSO has been applied in dynamic ORPD problem of power system by Li et al. [43].It is the general law of nature that every organism in the earth ages and has a limited lifespan. With the passage of time, leader of the colony becomes old and feeble. And this old leader has no longer the capability to lead the colony unless or otherwise it is challenged by a new and young challenger with great deal of enthusiasm and motivation to accomplish certain targets. Thus, aging provides opportunities for the other individuals of the colony to challenge the leadership capability of the leader. Based on these concepts, a modified PSO called as PSO with aging leader and challenges (ALC-PSO) has been presented in [44].In ALC-PSO [44], the lifespan of the leader is adaptively tuned in accordance with the leader's leading power. If a leader shows strong leading power, it lives longer to attract the swarm toward better positions. Otherwise, if a leader fails to improve the swarm and gets old, new particles emerge to challenge and claim the leadership. This, in turn, brings diversity in the colony. In this way, the concept of “aging” in ALC-PSO actually serves as a challenging mechanism for promoting a suitable leader to lead the swarm. In this way, natural aging mechanism of the organism has been modeled into ALC-PSO.In the present work, ALC-PSO is applied for the solution of ORPD problem of power system. Three IEEE standard test power systems like IEEE 30-, 57- and 118-bus power systems are adopted as standard power networks whose ORPD problem are solved with different objectives such as minimization of either active power transmission loss (PLoss) or that of absolute value of total voltage deviations (TVD) and the results are compared with those of other computational intelligence-based techniques surfaced in the recent literature to, finally, establish the optimization efficacy of the proposed ALC-PSO algorithm.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, mathematical problem of the ORPD work is presented. In Section 3, basic PSO is described. ALC-PSO is discussed in Section 4 with special emphasis on how it is applied to ORPD problem of power system. Simulation results are presented and discussed in Section 5. Finally, conclusions of the present paper are drawn in Section 6.The ORPD problem is concerned with optimization of steady-state performance of power system with respect to specified objective function, subject to various equality and inequality constraints. Mathematically, ORPD problem [45] may be represented by (1)–(3)(1)MinimizeJ(x,u)(2)subjecttoeq(x,u)=0(3)andieq(x,u)≤0The vector of dependent variablesxmay be represented by (4)(4)xT=[VL1⋯VLNPQ,QG1⋯QGNPV,Sl1⋯SlNl]Similarly, the vector of control variablesumay be written as in (5)(5)uT=[VG1⋯VGNG,T1,…,TNT,QC−1⋯QC−NC]In (2), eq is the set of equality constraints representing the load flow equations as stated in (6) and (7)(6)PGi−PDi=Vi∑j=1NiVj(Gijcosθij+Bijsinθij),i=1,2,…,N0(7)QGi−QDi=Vi∑j=1NiVj(Gijsinθij−Bijcosθij),i=1,2,…,NPQIn (3), ieq is the set of system inequality constraints presented below.(i)Generator constraints: For all generator voltages (including slack bus), reactive power outputs (including slack bus) must be restricted within their respective lower and upper limits as stated in (8) and (9).(8)VGimin≤VGi≤VGimax,i=1,2,…,NG(Includingslackbus)(9)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimax,i=1,2,…,NG(Includingslackbus)where min and max represent the minimum and maximum values of the respective variables.Transformer constraints: Transformer tap settings must be within their specified lower and upper limits as presented in (10).(10)Timin≤Ti≤Timax,i=1,2,…,NTShunt VAR compensator constraints: Reactive power outputs of shunt VAR compensators, assumed as optimizing continuous variables, must be restricted within their lower and upper limits as written in (11).(11)QCimin≤QCi≤QCimax,i=1,2,…,NCSecurity constraints: These include the constraints on voltages at PQ buses and transmission line loadings. Voltage of each PQ bus must be within its lower and upper operating limits. Line flow through each transmission line must be within its capacity limits. Mathematically, these constraints may be expressed as in (12) and (13).(12)VLimin≤VLi≤VLimax,i=1,2,…,NPQ(13)Sli≤Slimax,i=1,2,…,NLIt is to be noted here that transformer tap settings in this work are not discrete rather there are optimizing continuous variables restricted within their respective standard minimum and maximum limits. After getting the optimal values for the tap setting, these are restricted within their respective standard limits in the program.In this paper, two different objective functions are considered to determine the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. These objective functions are as follows:(i)Minimization of transmission loss: The aim of this type of problem is to minimize the real power loss in network while satisfying all equality and inequality constraints and may be formulated as in (14).(14)MinimizeJ(PLoss)=∑k=1NEgk(Vi2+Vj2−2ViVjcosθij)Minimization of TVD: The aim of this type of problem is to minimize the absolute TVD of load bus voltages from their desired values while satisfying all equality and inequality constraints and may be modeled as in (15).(15)MinimizeJ(TVD)=∑i=1NLVi−VirefPSO [29] is a swarm intelligence based algorithm, inspired by the social dynamics and an emergent behavior, which arises in socially organized colonies. PSO algorithm exploits a population of individuals to probe promising regions of search space. In this context, the population is called swarm and the individuals are called particles or agents. In PSO algorithm, each particle moves with velocity within the regions of decision space and retains a memory of the best position it has ever encountered. The best position ever attained by each particle of the swarm is communicated to all other particles.PSO is initialized with a population of particles randomly positioned in a d-dimensional search space. Each particle in the population maintains two vectors viz. a velocity vector and a position vector. During each generation, each particle updates its velocity and position by learning from the particle's own historically best position and the best position found by the entire swarm so far. In the original PSO, the update rules for the velocity and the position vectors are given by (16) and (17), respectively.(16)v→ij(t+1)←w(t)×v→ij(t)+c1×r1j×{x→pBestij−xij(t)}+c2×r2j×{x→gBestj−x→ij(t)}(17)xij(t+1)←xij(t)+vij(t+1)In (16), w is the inertia weight, which controls the degree that the velocity of a particle at tth iteration influences the velocity of that particle at the (t+1)th iteration and its value at the tth iteration is determined by (18).(18)w(t)←wmax−wmax−wminNFFEmax×tIn PSO model, particles share information through the swarm attractorx→gBestand evoke memories by particle attractorsx→pBestiby employing (16) and (17), respectively. All variables and parameters used to model basic PSO algorithm are described in Nomenclature Section.In ALC-PSO [44], it is assumed that the leader of the swarm ages within a limited lifespan. The lifespan is adaptively adjusted according to the leader's leading power. When the lifespan is exhausted, the leader is challenged and replaced by newly generated particles. Therefore, the leader in ALC-PSO is not of necessity to be thex→gBest, but it may be a particle with adequate leading power guaranteed by the aging mechanism.To differentiate the leader in ALC-PSO from thex→gBestof original PSO [29], the leader is denoted byx→Leader(x→Leader1,x→Leader2,…,x→Leaderd). The velocity update rule of (16) is, thus, changed to (19).(19)v→ij(t+1)←w(t)×v→ij(t)+c1×r1j×{x→pBestij−xij(t)}+c2×r2j×{x→Leaderj−x→ij(t)}The flowchart of ALC-PSO is illustrated in Fig. 1and the steps involved are given below [44].Step 1Initialization: The initial positions of all the particles are randomly generated within their respective minimum and maximum values, with velocities initialized to 0. Historical best position of the particles(x→pBesti)are calculated. The best particle among the swarm is selected as thex→Leader. The age of the leader is initialized to θ=0 and the lifespan Θ of the leader is set to an initial value of Θ0.Step 2Velocity and position updating: Velocity and position of each particle are updated in accordance with (19) and (17), respectively.Step 3Updatingx→pBestiandx→Leader: For particle i(i=1, 2, …, Np) if the newly generated position Xiis better thanx→pBestithen Xibecomes the newx→pBesti. In addition, if the best position built in this iteration is better than thex→Leader, then thex→Leaderis updated to be the best position in this iteration. In this sense, this step is similar to that of the basic PSO, but thex→Leaderrepresents the best solution generated by particles during the leader's lifetime.Step 4Lifespan control: After the positions of all particles are updated, the leading power of the leader to improve the entire swarm is evaluated. The lifespan Θ is adjusted by a lifespan control mechanism. The age θ of the leader is increased by 1. If the lifespan is exhausted, i.e., θ>Θ go to Step 5, otherwise, go to Step 7.Step 5Generating a challenger: A new particle is generated and is used to challenge the leader whose lifespan is exhausted.Step 6Evaluating the challenger: The leading power of the newly generated challenger is evaluated by repeating Step 2 and Step 3 for iter number of iterations withx→Leaderreplaced byx→Challengerin velocity update rule of (19). If the challenger has enough leading power, it replaces the old leader and becomes the new leader. The age and lifespan of the new leader are initialized to θ=0 and Θ=Θ0. Otherwise, the oldx→Leaderremains unchanged and will continue to lead the swarm.Step 7Termination condition check: If NFFEs is larger than the NFFEmax, the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, go to Step 2 for a new round of iteration.According to the above procedure of the ALC-PSO, the aging mechanism mainly involves three tasks viz. (a) design of the lifespan controller for adjusting the lifespan of the leader according to its leading power, (b) generation of a new particle to challenge and replace the old leader and (c) use of criterion to decide whether the generated particle can be accepted as a new leader. For elaborate discussions on Step 4 (life span control), Step 5 (generating a challenger) and Step 6 (evaluating the challenger), the work of Chen et al. [44] may be referred.For the application of ALC-PSO algorithm in solving the ORPD problem of different test cases (presented in Section 5), vector of dependent and control variables are stated in (4) and (5), in order. Essentially, the algorithm deals with a population (chosen as 60) of similar such vectors and optimize the variables of the vector during the iteration. While implementing the ALC-PSO algorithm in ORPD problem of power system, the objective functions stated in (14) and (15) are considered subject to the equality constraints mentioned in (6) and (7) and inequality constraints presented in (8)–(13). Finally, the values of control variables, PLoss, and TVD are taken as output from the program.In the present work, ALC-PSO is applied to IEEE 30-, 57- and 118-bus standard test power systems for the solution of ORPD problem. Description of these studied test systems is depicted in Table 1. The software is written in MATLAB 2008a computing environment and applied on a 2.63GHz Pentium IV personal computer with 3 GB RAM. The value of NFFEmax for ALC-PSO is set to 500 for all the test cases. Discussions on simulation results of the present work are presented below. Results of interest are bold faced in the respective tables to indicate the optimization capability of the ALC-PSO algorithm. In this study, 30 test runs are performed to solve the ORPD problem and the best results are presented. The values of the different parameters of the ALC-PSO algorithm, as used in the present work, are shown in Table 2. Parameter sensitivity analysis on IEEE 118-bus test power system is carried out and presented in Appendix Section.IEEE 30-bus power system is taken as the test system 1. Generator data, load data, line data and minimum and maximum limits for active power sources, bus voltages, tap settings and reactive power sources are also given in [26]. This test system has nineteen control variables and these are six generator voltage magnitudes (at the buses 1, 2, 5, 8, 11 and 13), four transformers with off-nominal tap ratios (at lines 6–9, 6–10, 4–12 and 28–27) and nine shunt VAR compensation devices (at buses 10, 12, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 24 and 29) (Table 1). The total system demand is 2.834 p.u. at 100 MVA base.The proposed approach is applied for minimization of active power loss as one of the objective function. The obtained optimal values of control variables from the proposed ALC-PSO method are given in Table 3. The results obtained by the proposed ALC-PSO algorithm are compared with those reported in the literature like GSA [26], BBO [25], DE [16], CLPSO [43], PSO [43] and SARGA [22]. The obtained minimum real power loss from the proposed ALC-PSO approach is found to be 4.4793MW. The value of PLoss yielded by ALC-PSO is less by 0.03501MW (i.e., 7.76%), as compared to GSA-based best results of 4.514310MW reported in [26]. In this table, “% PSave” means saving percent of PLoss with respect to base case PLoss reported in Table 1. ALC-PSO yields a real power loss reduction of 20.86% from the base case PLoss of 5.66MW. Comparative PSO and ALC-PSO based convergence profiles of PLoss (MW) for PLoss minimization objective of this test power system are presented in Fig. 2. From this figure, the proposed ALC-PSO based convergence profile of real power loss for this test power system is found to be more promising one. The computational times of the compared algorithms are also shown in Table 3, but they cannot be compared because of different NFFEs chosen for different algorithms.The proposed ALC-PSO approach is applied for the minimization of TVD of this test power network. The results yielded by the proposed ALC-PSO for TVD minimization objective are presented in Table 4. The results obtained by the proposed ALC-PSO algorithm are compared with those reported in the literature like GSA [26] and DE [16]. From this table, 35.38% improvement in TVD may be recorded by using the proposed ALC-PSO algorithm as compared to GSA counterpart as reported in [26]. In this table, “% TVDimprove” means percent improvement of TVD with respect to the base case TVD reported in Table 1. The value of % TVDimprove for ALC-PSO based approach is reported as 92.494% in Table 4, which is more than that of either GSA [26] (88.383%) or DE [16] (84.352%). Comparative PSO and ALC-PSO based convergence profiles of TVD (p.u.) for TVD minimization objective this power system are presented in Fig. 3. It may be noted from the figure that the proposed ALC-PSO based convergence profile of TVD (p.u.) for the TVD minimization objective of this test system is more promising one.The standard IEEE 57-bus system consisting of 80 transmission lines, seven generators (at the buses 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 12) and 15 branches under load tap setting transformer branches is taken as the test system 2. Three reactive power sources are considered at buses 18, 25 and 53. Line data, bus data, variable limits and the initial values of the control variables are given in [26,46,47]. The search space of this case system has 25 dimensions, including seven generator voltages, 15 transformer taps and three reactive power sources (Table 1).Table 5depicts the results for real power loss minimization objective of this test power system. In Table 5, ALC-PSO based results are compared with those of other optimization techniques recently reported in the literature like GSA [26]; NLP [24]; canonical GA (CGA) [24]; adaptive GA (AGA) [24]; PSO-w [24]; PSO-cf [24]; CLPSO [24]; a “real standard” version of PSO, called as SPSO-07 [24]; DEs with local search, instead of their corresponding original versions and denoted as L-DE [24], L-SACP-DE [24], L-SaDE [24]; SOA [24]; BBO [25]; BBO (after relaxing Q-limit of bus 2 and 9) [25]. From Table 5, it may be observed ALC-PSO based results yield near-global optimal value of PLoss for this power network. The best reactive power dispatch solutions offered by various algorithms for this objective are tabulated in Table 6. In Table 6, the symbol “%” denotes the saving percent of real power losses. Table 6 demonstrates that ALC-PSO yields the highest real power loss reduction of 17.82% from base case 0.28462p.u. (as reported in Table 1). The total computational times taken by the comparative algorithms are summarized in Table 7. Comparative convergence profiles of PLoss (MW) for conventional PSO and the proposed ALC-PSO are depicted in Fig. 4. ALC-PSO yields better convergence profile, showing final near-optimal real power loss.The best reactive power dispatch solutions as yielded by the proposed ALC-PSO for TVD minimization objective for this test power system are tabulated in Table 8. No comparison would be done for the solution results of the TVD objective function minimization as no such results are available in the literature. Promising convergence profile of TVD (p.u.), as yielded by the proposed ALC-PSO, may be observed from Fig. 5.To test the proposed technique in solving ORPD problem of larger power systems, a standard IEEE 118-bus test power system is considered as the test system 3 [46,48]. The search space of this case system has 77 dimensions, i.e., the 54 generator buses, nine transformer taps and 14 reactive power sources (Table 1). The power network has 64 load buses, 186 transmission lines. The system line data, bus data, variable limits and the initial values of control variables are given in [46,48]. The maximum and minimum limits of reactive power sources, voltage and tap-setting limits are given in [24,26].ALC-PSO based reactive power dispatch schedule for real power loss minimization objective of this test power system is presented in Table 9and the results obtained are compared with those offered by GSA [26], CLPSO [43] and PSO [43]. This table demonstrates that ALC-PSO yields minimal real power loss as compared with other algorithms. Table 9 demonstrates that a real power loss reduction of 8.245% from the base case 132.45MW (as reported in Table 1) is accomplished by using the proposed ALC-PSO approach, which is the biggest reduction of power loss than that obtained by the other approaches reported. Table 10shows the statistical comparison of the results obtained by GSA [26], CLPSO [43] and PSO [43] methods for minimization of real power loss objective function only. From this table it is observed that execution time of the ALC-PSO is the least one amongst the reported ones. From this table it is also noted that the standard deviation and median values are quite satisfactory for ALC-PSO. Success rate of ALC-PSO is almost double of that of PSO. The results in this table clearly indicate the superiority of ALC-PSO over either PSO or CLPSO. Fig. 6shows the comparative variation of the real power loss yielded by PSO and ALC-PSO algorithms against NFFEs. Good convergence profile of PLoss yielded by ALC-PSO may be noted from this figure by means of its ability to reach the near-global optimal solution.The best reactive power dispatch solutions as yielded by the proposed ALC-PSO for TVD objective function minimization objective of this test power system are tabulated in Table 11. No comparison could be done for the solution results of the TVD minimization objective as no such results are available in the literature. Promising convergence profile of TVD (p.u.) as yielded by the proposed ALC-PSO may be obtained from Fig. 7.Statistical analysis for the studied test systems (viz. IEEE 30-, 57- and 118-bus) is carried out and presented in Table 12. From this table it may be noted that the proposed ALC-PSO algorithm offers the minimum values of both PLoss (MW) and TVD (p.u.) for all the test systems. The values of standard deviations offered by the proposed ALC-PSO algorithm for IEEE 30- and 57-bus test system are presented in this table but the same for all other reported algorithms are not available in the referred literatures. However, the value of standard deviation yielded by the proposed ALC-PSO algorithm for IEEE 118-bus test system is found to be the minimum for loss minimization objective. This indicates the robustness of the proposed algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
