@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Red Swarm: Reducing travel times in smart cities by using bio-inspired algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We reduce travel times of vehicles in smart cities.We suggest a potentially customized route to each vehicle.We have designed an EA to compute the configuration of the system.We outperform all the other techniques considered in 60 different scenarios.Our proposal achieves an improvement up to 19% in average travel times.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolutionary algorithm,Road traffic,Smart city,Smart mobility,WiFi connections,Traffic light,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article presents an innovative approach to solve one of the most relevant problems related to smart mobility: the reduction of vehicles’ travel time. Our original approach, called Red Swarm, suggests a potentially customized route to each vehicle by using several spots located at traffic lights in order to avoid traffic jams by using V2I communications. That is quite different from other existing proposals, as it deals with real maps and actual streets, as well as several road traffic distributions. We propose an evolutionary algorithm (later efficiently parallelized) to optimize our case studies which have been imported from OpenStreetMap into SUMO as they belong to a real city. We have also developed a Rerouting Algorithm which accesses the configuration of the Red Swarm and communicates the route chosen to vehicles, using the spots (via WiFi link). Moreover, we have developed three competing algorithms in order to compare their results to those of Red Swarm and have observed that Red Swarm not only achieved the best results, but also outperformed the experts’ solutions in a total of 60 scenarios tested, with up to 19% shorter travel times.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a world where road traffic is continuously increasing faster than the infrastructure intended to contain it, traffic congestions and accidents are more frequent now than in the past, especially in urban areas. This situation affects different aspects of our society such as health, environmental pollution, and economic development, just to name a few.Nowadays, we have to address many challenges and do so from a global city perspective [1], this includes surveillance and control, keeping efficiency in terms of performance, cost, maintenance, and support, especially if the opportunities to increase the number and capacity of roads are limited.Smart City represents a world initiative which is defined by six characteristics [2]: smart economy, smart people, smart governance, smart mobility, smart environment, and smart living. They are related to factors such as innovative spirit, entrepreneurship, level of qualification, creativity, public and social services, pollution control, cultural facilities, health conditions, etc.On the one hand, smart mobility is related to transport and Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). Therefore, it is focused on local, national and international accessibility, the availability of ICT-infrastructure, and transport systems which are sustainable, innovative, and safe. A well accepted belief is that new transport strategies will improve urban traffic as well as citizens’ mobility and quality of life.On the other hand, smart environment is related to an intelligent management of natural resources and is focused on pollution reduction, environmental protection, and management of sustainable resources. Apart from the pollutant gas emissions from factories, power plants and waste incinerators, one of the main sources of greenhouse gas emissions are vehicles. Besides reducing travel times, our work is also related to reducing emissions from vehicles’ exhaust pipes as well as their fuel consumption.This is the motivation for this work. Here, we propose a data information system spread throughout the city at a low cost and able to redirect vehicles in movement in the city to finally achieve shorter travel times and fewer traffic jams in urban areas. The WiFi connectivity of drivers’ terminals (e.g., smartphones) plus an easy interaction with Red Swarm spots located at traffic lights will define our base scenario for a global intelligent mobile service with benefits for drivers and for general municipal policies. Note that in most cities there already are computers running Windows/Linux, which will support our proposal based on V2I (Vehicle to Infrastructure) communications.The deployment of Red Swarm, a real time system for suggesting distributed personalized routes in a modern city, not only provides customized routes to every single vehicle, but it is also able to collect information from the road traffic (anonymously) enabling local authorities to better know the on-line and historical data of the city.This paper is organized as follows: the next section reviews several publications related to our proposal. The subsequent sections present the Red Swarm architecture, three competing algorithms that we have designed in order to compare their results to those of Red Swarm, and the parameterization of the algorithms and the experimental settings. Section “experimental analysis” focuses on the studies done and a discussion of the results. And finally, in last section, conclusions and future work are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article we have described our Red Swarm architecture and developed several algorithms in order to compare their solutions and performances to the Red Swarm ones.Results show that Red Swarm configured by our EA always outperforms the other algorithms, and also outperforms the experts’ solution when there are more than 560 vehicles in the scenario. This is welcome news: whenever we have more than 600 vehicles per 2.5km2 in a city our solution clearly beats the experts’ one.In our work we have assumed that all drivers have a terminal (e.g. smartphone) and they follow the routes suggested by the system. We expect a reduction in the average improvement on travel times if a significant percentage of drivers do not follow the indications of Red Swarm; the gradual penetration of the system will be the next step in our research. Moreover, unexpected changes in the state of the city, such as accidents or suddenly closed streets, have to be addressed in future work so as to be able to change the active configuration of the spots according to the new situation. A city is a very complex organism, and so we need to move step by step, gradually incorporating layers of human behavior and technologies.Altogether, we think that our Red Swarm is a solution which could be used in current modern cities in order to reduce traffic jams and improve the citizens’ quality of life. Moreover, it could be utilized to collect anonymous information from cars allowing local authorities to better understand the on-line and historical state of the city.As a matter of future work, we are working on reducing emissions of greenhouse gases as we have evidence from previous work that this can be achieved by rerouting vehicles and avoiding traffic jams. We are also working on extending the geographical area to be analyzed to include the entire city of Malaga by adding more Red Swarm spots.We will probably attempt another sophisticated problem definition, such as a multiobjetive modeling. Due to its computational complexity, we will need to carry out careful analysis in terms of metrics and Pareto fronts obtained.