@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An overview of fuzzy research with bibliometric indicators

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bibliometrics in fuzzy research.List of most cited papers on fuzzy topics of all time.An overview of influential authors, institutions and countries.Journal analysis in fuzzy research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bibliometrics,Fuzzy research,H-index,Web of science,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Bibliometrics is a discipline that analyzes bibliographic material from a quantitative perspective. It is very useful for classifying information according to different variables, including journals, institutions and countries. This paper presents a general overview of research in the fuzzy sciences using bibliometric indicators. The main advantage is that these indicators provide a general picture, identifying some of the most influential research in this area. The analysis is divided into key sections focused on relevant journals, papers, authors, institutions and countries. Most of the results are in accordance with our common knowledge, although some unexpected results are also found. Note that the aim of this paper is to be informative, and these indicators identify most of the fundamental research in this field. However, some very influential issues may be omitted if they are not included in the Web of Science database, which is used for carrying out the bibliometric analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research in the fuzzy sciences originated almost 50 years ago with the seminal paper of Lotfi A. Zadeh [1] published in Information and Control. This paper analyzed the concept of fuzzy sets, allowing classical Boolean sets to use a multi-valued logic. Initially, this research did not attract very much attention, and it received many criticisms in the scientific community. In the mid-1970s, and after much skepticism about this new theory, an increased number of scientists started to analyze the work of Zadeh more seriously. This group of researchers consolidated the field in 1978 with the creation of Fuzzy Sets and Systems in 1978, the first international journal exclusively devoted to fuzzy theories. Later, they started to organize in professional associations, such as the North American Fuzzy Information Processing Society (NAFIPS), created in 1982 by James Bezdek, Piero Bonissone, King Sun Fu, Enrique Ruspini, Richard Tong, Ronald Yager and Lotfi Zadeh. The first NAFIPS conference was held in Utah (USA) on May 18–20, 1982.This group grew very quickly because it was especially motivated by the increased attention received by Asian and European researchers since the 1970s. The fuzzy community became a world entity with the creation of the International Fuzzy Systems Association (IFSA), which held its first conference in Palma de Mallorca (Spain) on July 1–6, 1985. Since then, many other associations have appeared, and many other journals with a strong focus on fuzzy research or being strictly dedicated to it have been launched, including the Journal of Japan Society for Fuzzy Theory and Intelligent Informatics (1989); the IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems (1993); the International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems (1993); the Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems (1993); the Fuzzy Economic Review (1995); the International Journal of Fuzzy Systems (1999); Fuzzy Optimization and Decision Making (2002); and the Iranian Journal of Fuzzy Systems (2003). For an overview of fuzzy theories, see [2–6].A strong consolidation process was performed in the 1990s with the creation of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computational Intelligence Society (IEEE CIS), which included fuzzy research as one of its three main branches. This implied the official recognition by the IEEE of the acceptance of fuzzy research as a strong entity in the scientific community. Today, it has over 7000 members. It is worth noting that this research field is also known as Soft Computing [7–9]. Briefly, it is composed of fuzzy systems, neural networks, evolutionary computation, probabilistic reasoning and other related areas, such as chaos theory. Currently, there is significant growth in this area with the creation and consolidation of new associations, including the World Federation on Soft Computing (WFSC), and journals, such as Mathware & Soft Computing (1994), the Journal of Multiple-Valued Logic and Soft Computing (1995), Intelligent Automation and Soft Computing (1995), Soft Computing (1997), Applied Soft Computing (2001) and the International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems (2008).Today, fuzzy research is a very general and established scientific field, with thousands of researchers studying different theoretical or practical aspects of this theory. The present organization of fuzzy sciences can be divided into two main blocks. The first block is based on the IEEE CIS society, and the second block has its nucleus in the IFSA association. IFSA is divided into 17 other associations that encompass researchers from a specific region or topic.Bibliometric analysis is a research field that analyzes publications, citations and their sources of information. Currently, it is receiving more attention due to the strong development of computers and the internet. There have been many definitions and discussions concerning bibliometrics [10,11]. One of the key advantages is that it permits one to analyze a specific research field by considering papers, journals, authors, institutions and countries. Thus, it is possible to construct a general picture of a research field. However, there are many limitations, especially because of the particular research style followed by each researcher, which may imply a different volume of self-citations and co-authored papers.In the literature, many studies have provided a general bibliometric overview of a research field. Among others, it is worth noting some key areas, including management [12], econometrics [13], health economics [14], marketing [15], statistics [16], ecological economics [17], ant colony optimization [18], pricing research [19], entrepreneurship [20], production and operations management [21–23], data envelopment analysis [24], gray systems [25] and innovation [26]. However, no paper has been published providing a general overview of fuzzy research. Some authors have studied some specific aspects, including a bibliometric mapping in computational intelligence that included fuzzy systems as one of its main components [27,28], tools for analyzing the evolution of topics in fuzzy research [29] and an application in the Spanish region [30].The aim of this paper is to present a general overview of fuzzy research from its inception 50 years ago using bibliometric techniques. The objective is to show the most productive and influential research in the scientific community according to information found in the Web of Science (WoS). The information is classified by articles, authors, journals, institutions and countries. Most of the results found are in accordance with our common knowledge, whereby Zadeh is the most influential author in fuzzy research and most of the main leaders are also found in the first author positions, including Yager, Sugeno, Dubois, Prade, Bezdek, Pedrycz and Mendel. Fuzzy Sets and Systems and the IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems are the main outlets for the dissemination of fuzzy theories, and the USA is the most influential country, although Asian countries have shown a substantial increase in publications during the last years. However, it is worth noting that many limitations may appear in the classification process because the focus is on the WoS; however, to provide a complete picture, many other factors should be considered, including editorial appointments in main journals and involvement in associations and conferences. Therefore, the aim of the paper is to be informative to show the current results found in the WoS regarding fuzzy research, although fundamental research developed in this field may be omitted if it is not included in this database.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology to be used. Section 3 presents the 50 most cited papers of all time in fuzzy research, and Section 4 presents the most productive and influential authors. Section 5 analyzes the main institutions in this area, and Section 6 presents the most relevant countries. Section 7 discusses the main conclusions of the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A general overview of fuzzy research using bibliometric techniques has been presented. From a general perspective, the results are in accordance with our common knowledge. First, there is a high degree of dispersion in this research field, with many influential countries. Initially, the USA was the most influential country thanks to Lotfi Zadeh, the father of fuzzy logic. However, today, many countries are very influential thanks to newly emerging research groups that are appearing all over the world. It is clear that Zadeh has been the most influential author by far. His first fuzzy paper is among the most cited papers of all time in all the sciences, and currently, it is the most cited paper of all time in computer science. His importance has given the University of California, Berkeley the status as the most influential institution in this area, and it has produced some of the most popular researchers in the field. Today, the Berkeley Initiative for Soft Computing (BISC) is connected to thousands of researchers all over the world, and most fuzzy researchers are influenced by it in some way. Apart from Zadeh, many other influential researchers are from the USA, including Yager, Bezdek, Mendel and Kandel. They are very well positioned in the most influential journals in the field, although a higher dispersion compared to other research fields is found [12], where American universities almost have a monopoly.However, an important issue to note is that most of the influential institutions working on fuzzy theories do not appear in the top 100 of general university rankings available for the general public, such as the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU), with the exception of Berkeley in the top 10 and at a lower level, the University of Toronto, the University of Manchester, the University of Southern California and Ghent University in the top 100. Note that when focusing on more specialized rankings in engineering and computer science, some other Asian institutions appear in the top 100, including the City University of Hong Kong, the Tokyo Institute of Technology, the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, National Tsing Hua University, National Chiao Tung University, National Cheng Kung University, Nanyang Technological University, Harbin Institute of Technology and the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Therefore, it is clear that in Asia, fuzzy research is receiving a substantial amount of attention, whereas in Europe and especially in America, there seems to be more skepticism.Focusing on European researchers, they have also exerted a strong influence in the fuzzy sciences, having 17 institutions in the top 50 and being responsible for Fuzzy Sets and Systems, most likely the most popular journal in this field. Currently, Spain is exhibiting the strongest increase since the 1990s, having four very influential institutions. Some other very influential institutions are those connected to key researchers in fuzzy theories, including the Paul Sabatier University of Toulouse III (Dubois and Prade), the Polish Academy of Sciences (Kacprzyk and, partially, Pedrycz) and Ghent University (De Baets and Kerre). It is also worth noting that many Western and Nordic countries have less influence than in other disciplines, while less developed countries, such as Eastern and Southern countries, obtain a better position.Countries in the rest of the world are still lagging behind, although in fuzzy research, it appears that more developing countries are doing significant research compared to other fields, and some of them, including India, Turkey, Iran, Brazil and Egypt, are already obtaining remarkable results. Thus, it appears that they will continue increasing their presence in this area, reaching more significant positions in the scientific community. Moreover, the future of fuzzy theories seems to be very healthy and productive because many new developments are appearing in the scientific community and because many potential applications can be developed. Therefore, it is expected that the number of publications and citations will continue to grow, consolidating more journals in this area and involving more people all over the world.Although this paper has provided a general bibliometric overview of fuzzy research, it is worth noting that there are some limitations that should be noted. First, the information presented here is only informative and only gives a general orientation of the most productive and influential research. However, many peculiar cases may appear due to the specific research nature considered. For example, some researchers may obtain a higher number of papers due to a high degree of co-authorship, while some others may usually publish single-authored papers. Therefore, the publication of 10 papers from the first type of author is not equivalent to the publication of 10 papers from the second one. In contrast, citations are also influenced by these issues because, for example, a research area may be more specific than another area and may therefore be less cited. This is very common in the fuzzy sciences because it is an interdisciplinary field that encompasses researchers from many disciplines, with different citation rates between them. Furthermore, a substantial amount of key information may be omitted when addressing bibliometric information based on publications and citations because a scientific field also depends on other issues that cannot be directly quantified, such as the involvement in journals, conferences and associations. Therefore, this paper attempts to identify some key research in fuzzy theories but with the only objective of being informative. However, it is worth noting that other relevant information could be included. In addition, inside the information provided in the paper, many differences regarding the rankings could appear, depending on the specific issues considered, that affect each paper, journal, author, institution and country.