@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Power quality disturbance detection and classification using wavelet and RBFNN

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The power quality disturbance detection and classification is important for improving the power quality.Various disturbances were taken in to account, over 20 events.Wavelet is used to extract features from a MATLAB simulated disturbance waveforms.Radial Basis Function Neural Network has been used to detect and classify the disturbance and compared with other considered approach.The entire work has been presented with particle swarm optimization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Neural networks,Wavelet transformation,Power quality,Particle swarm optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a novel approach to detect and classify power quality disturbance in the power system using radial basis function neural network (RBFNN). The proposed method requires less number of features as compared to conventional approach for the identification. The feature extracted through the wavelet is trained by a radial basis function neural network for the classification of events. After training the neural network, the weight obtained is used to classify the Power Quality (PQ) problems. For the classification, 20 types of disturbances are taken into account. The classification performance of RBFNN is compared with feed forward multilayer network (FFML), learning vector quantization (LVQ), probabilistic neural network (PNN) and generalized regressive neural network (GRNN). The classification accuracy of the RBFNN network is improved, just by rewriting the weights and updating the weights with the help of cognitive as well as the social behavior of particles along with fitness value. The simulation results possess significant improvement over existing methods in signal detection and classification.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The quality of electric power is more important because one of the main problem the industries facing is the distortion in electrical supply. The disturbance such as voltage sag, swell with and without harmonics, momentary interruption, harmonic distortion, notch, flicker, spike and transients causing problems such as malfunction, instability, short life times, failure of electrical equipments and so on. Switching off of large load and energization of large capacitor may cause voltage swell. Whereas the faults leading to voltage sag or momentary interruption, harmonic distortion and notching in the voltage and current are caused because of the usage of solid state switching device and nonlinear power electronically switched loads such as rectifier or inverters. Transformer energization or capacitor switching may cause transients. Flicker is caused because of furnaces and lightning strikes may lead to spikes.In power system, these disturbances need to be identified in order to improve the quality. PQ events identification is difficult because it involves wide range of disturbance categories. Therefore, the decision boundaries of disturbance features may overlap. For these reasons, the need of power quality analysis has been strongly increasing. Many techniques have been proposed in the literature to detect and classify the events envelope. Traditionally, probabilistic approach has been used for time varying signals in a power quality analysis assuming that the power line disturbance components vary too slowly to affect the accuracy of analytical process [1–3]. Another work suggested a combination of spectral method with probabilistic approach, which referred as evolutionary spectrum [4].The Discrete Fourier Transforms (DFT), which is computed via the Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT), is used to extract the features in the waveforms. However, the accuracy of the DFT algorithm is affected by the product available in the voltage waveform. Further, pit falls of the DFT are discussed in [5], which describes the digital filtering of the signals. Transient characteristics of disturbances waveforms are discussed in [6], since they pertain to signal analysis. This analytic technique includes the Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) which briefs time–frequency information related to disturbance waveforms. However, the disturbances signal cannot be adequately described in this transform, due to fixed window size [7]. For this reason, S-Transform (ST) is often adopted as a tool for signal analysis. The superior properties of the ST are due to the fact that the modulating sinusoidal is fixed with respect to the time axis, while the localizing scalable Gaussian window dilates and translates. As a result, the phase spectrum is absolute in the sense that it always referred to the origin of the time axis, the fixed reference point. ST is found to be superior [8]. However, the computational time is very large compared to Wavelet Transform (WT), which is undesirable for on-line applications. WT based approach, such as Wavelet MRA, has been widely applied to solve these issues [9,10].Wavelet Transform and multi-resolution analysis provide a short window for high frequency components and long window for low frequency components [11–13] and hence, provides an excellent time frequency resolution. This allows WT for analysis of signals with localized disturbances components and also for classifying low and high frequency power quality problems. Using the properties of WT technique and the feature of the decomposed waveforms along with ANN algorithm [14–17], it is possible to extract important information from a disturbance signal and determine the type of disturbance that caused. The energy of the distorted signal will be partitioned at different resolution levels in different ways depending on the event available. The standard deviation can be considered as a measure of energy signal with zero mean [18,19–22].The classification of seven types of PQ disturbances with self organizing learning array system considering 11 features, besides 22 families of wavelet are tested to identify the best one for a better classification. Classification of eleven types of PQ events using wavelets and Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN) is given in Ref. [20]. Energy distribution at 13 decomposition levels of wavelet and time duration of each disturbance are taken as features and applied to PNN for classification. If large number of features is considered, it may result in high memory and computational overhead [24]. Further, eleven types of PQ events are also classified with the help of ST and PNN using only four-dimensional feature sets for training and testing. The computation time is also very large compared to WT.Considering all these issues related to detection and classification of PQ events, RBFNN classifier, based on wavelet transform is proposed in this paper. Here, less number of features are required for effective classification of 20 types of PQ events. The RBFNN provides accurate results even with inputs found out under high noise condition. Thus, the proposed method provides robust and accurate results for power quality events classification.The performance of RBFNN is compared with other well known neural network like FFML, LVQ, GRNN and PNN. The classification accuracy of the RBFNN network is improved, just by rewriting the weights and updating the weights with the help of cognitive as well as the social behavior of particles along with a fitness value by particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm. Back-Propagation (BP) algorithm is a straightforward algorithm which is based on the steepest descent method. Calculating weights in backward does not seem to be biologically plausible. Neurons synaptic weight adjustment do not seems to work backward, and also in the design of RBFNN trained by BP algorithm, a set of system variables which affect voltage most were selected as RBFNN inputs, if the range of variation is increased, the accuracy of the voltage estimation greatly suffers. Furthermore, it suffers from extensive calculation and therefore in most of the cases has a slow convergence speed. PSO can be a solution which models the cognitive as well as the social behavior of a flock of birds which are in search of food over an area [26]. It improves neural network in various aspects such as learning algorithm, network connection weight and architecture.Here, only less number of features are required for effective classification of 20 types of PQ events. The RBFNN-PSO provides accurate results even with inputs found out under high noisy conditions. The performance of RBFNN-PSO is compared with RBFNN-BP, to prove the stability and accuracy of the classification. The proposed method is tested with the inclusion of white noise in the signal. From the simulation results, it is found that RBFNN-PSO classifies the PQ event more effectively than the other well known BP algorithm.To summarize, the paper shows the power quality problems classification using WT and RBFNN-PSO. First the work handles with wavelet transformation and feature extraction by WT needed for the neural networks for training and for effective classification for all the 20 types. Next the paper describes the structure and results and discussion about detection and classification PQ events using RBFNN and similarly for RBFNN-PSO. Finally, the performance of RBFNN-PSO is evaluated by simulation and compared with other considered approach.Wavelet transformation has the ability to analyze different power quality disturbances in both time and frequency domain. The wavelet transform is useful in extracting features of various power quality disturbances. Wavelet analysis deals with expansion of function in terms of a set of basis function. However, wavelet analysis expands functions not in terms of trigonometric polynomials but in terms of wavelets. Moreover, another important property that the wavelet possesses is perfect reconstruction, which is the process of reassembling a decomposed signal or image into its original form without loss of information.Scaling function and wavelet function are used as building blocks to decompose and construct the signal at different resolution levels in Multi-Resolution Analysis (MRA). Representation of signals at various levels of resolution is the ultimate goal of MRA. MRA consists of two filters in each level and they are low pass and high pass filters. The resolution of the signal, which is a measure of the amount of detail information in the signal, is changed by the filtering operations, and the scale is changed by up-sampling and down-sampling operations. Down-sampling, a signal corresponds to reduction of the sampling rate, or removing some of the samples of the signal. On the other hand, up-sampling a signal corresponds to raising of the sampling rate of a signal by adding new samples to the signal. MRA decomposition and reconstruction are shown in Fig. 1a and b. Assume a signal x[n], discrete time signal is distributed in 2 level. This signal is filtered into high frequency component in level 1 by using high pass filter (g(n)) and low frequency components in level 2 by using low pass filter (h(n)). This signal is passed through down sampling and in MRA level 2. The components in level 1 are used as initial signals. These signals are passed through high-pass filter and low-pass filter. The outputs of filter can be mathematically expressed as in Eqs. (1) and (2) as follows.(1)y1[k]=∑nx[n]⋅g[2k−n](2)y2[k]=∑nx[n]⋅h[2k−n]where g(n) is high pass filter and h(n) is low-pass filter.Where y1[k] and y2[k] are the outputs of the high-pass and low-pass filters, respectively.Power system comprises of various kinds of electrical disturbances such as sag, swell, momentary interruption, voltage fluctuation, harmonics etc. and for the analysis they are generated using MATLAB code. The generated waveform shows the plot of amplitude of a given magnitude in the time frequency coordinates system for the following signals and shown in Figs. 2a–j and 3a–j. Which all are decomposed by wavelet to extract features with the appropriate selection of the wavelet and decomposition scale.•S1 NormalS2 Pure sagS3 Pure swellS4 Momentary interruptionS5 Voltage fluctuationS6 HarmonicsS7 TransientsS8 Sag with harmonicsS9 Swell with harmonicsS10 Momentary interruption with harmonicsS11 Voltage fluctuation with harmonicsS12 Sag with fluctuationS13 Swell with fluctuationS14 Sag with momentary interruptionS15 Swell with momentary interruptionS16 Sag with swell and momentary interruptionS17 Sag with swell and harmonicsS18 Harmonics with fluctuation and momentary interruptionS19 Sag with fluctuation, momentary interruption and swellS20 Sag with fluctuation, momentary interruption, swell and harmonicsIn this section, a simple yet effective method to detect and classify power quality disturbance, there are a number of basis functions that can be used for wavelet transformation. The wavelet functions used in the transformation are through translation and scaling, it determines the characteristics of the resulting wavelet transform. Therefore, the details of the particular application should be taken in to account and the appropriate wavelet function should be chosen in order to use the wavelet transform effectively. The wavelets are chosen based on their shape and their ability to analyze the signal in a particular application. So the best wavelet function and optimal decomposition scale need to be carefully selected. Wavelet energy is the index to reflect the energy concentration of wavelet coefficients on certain scales.The larger the wavelet energy, the more the information is preserved after decomposition.The definition of total energy and average power for a signal x[n] being expressed as follows in Eqs. (3)–(5).(3)E=∑n=−∞∞x2[n]And the average power is(4)P=limx→∞12N∑n=−NNxn[n]And for a periodic signal of fundamental period N, the average power is given by(5)P=1N∑n=−0N−1x2[n]In this Daubechies (Db) and Symlet (Sym) wavelets are taken for the further analysis. The daubechies wavelets are a family of orthogonal wavelet defining a discrete wavelet transform, characterized by a maximal number of vanishing moments and given support to each wavelet, and there is a scaling function which generates an orthogonal multi-resolution analysis. The symlets are nearly symmetrical wavelets proposed by daubechies as modification to the Db family, and the properties of the two wavelet families are also similar. These wavelets have been chosen because they have shown best performance in analyzing disturbance signals. The wavelet corresponding to the highest total wavelet energy is chosen as the best wavelet function, and the scale corresponding to the highest wavelet energy is chosen as the optimal decomposition scale.All the proposed disturbance were taken in this paper and for simplicity only first seven disturbance results are listed in Tables 1 and 2, the elements highlighted in yellow indicate the highest wavelet energy of a specific signal, corresponding to a certain wavelet functions. Among these Db4 seem to have highest wavelet energy levels, and chosen as the best wavelet for feature extraction. Table 2 shows signal decomposition by Db4 in to scales and it is evident that the wavelet energy at scale 5 is the highest and can be used as the optimal decomposition scale for MRA. Fig. 4shows a voltage sag, approximate and detail coefficient for first decomposed levels (d1) and third decomposed level (d3) and fifth decomposed level (d5) and then Fig. 5shows voltage interruption signal, approximate and details coefficients for first decomposed levels (d1) and third decomposed level (d3) and fifth decomposed level (d5). From the figure the detailed level 1 of Figs. 4 and 5 of the transformed signal clearly shows a peak at t=68ms. This implies that disturbance phenomena has occurred at this time. Therefore the disturbance has been detected and located. And this particular disturbed portion is taken for further analysis mainly to extract feature to bring sufficient evidence about the kind of disturbance occurred to this signal.The parameters of voltage waveforms during power quality events are statistically different from those that are calculated during an event free time period. In this paper, features based on standard deviation, variance, norm, median, absolute deviation, and mean absolute deviation of transformed signals are extracted and energy at each decomposition level, which has the ability to quantify the magnitude of variation within the signal, is also extracted. The extracted features help to distinguish one disturbance event from another. In order to extract feature of these signals, the standard deviation of power quality problem signal is subtracted from standard deviation of pure sinusoidal waveforms in case of analysis based on standard deviation multi-resolution analysis. In order to reduce the features dimension, the detail and approximate information for future training and testing will not be used directly. Instead, energy at each decomposition level is used as a new input variable for accurate and faster classification. In this way, the wavelet based feature extraction for future analysis has been constructed.Radial basis function neural network consists of a network similar to back propagation network as shown in Fig. 6with a single hidden layer. RBFNN proves to be best for classification task from the investigation result presented in Ref. [22]. Each hidden layer consists of smoothing factor and centroids. The distance between the input and the centroid are normally computed by the neurons. The outputs are a radial symmetrical function of the distance [23]. When it is close to value the output will be a strong one.The real mapping function fmin general form(6)fm(x)=∑i=1Mwik[(xi−ci)/σiThe function k is a radial symmetrical kernel function computed by M kernel units.The Gaussian exponential function used in RBF is(7)f(x)=βexp−∑i[(xi−ci)/σi]2where ciis centroid, σiis smoothing factor, xiis input and β is constant.According to the training data set, centroid, constant and have to be chosen with the help of Eqs. (6) and (7).Population based optimization tool is the PSO. To get the optimal solution, every single solution ‘flies’ over the solution space. To check how close they are optimal is evaluated by using a fitness function [26]. Particles may have both cognitive and socialization. The neural network weight matrix is rewritten as an array to form a particle, and then initialized randomly and updated afterwards, according to the Eqs. (8) and (9)(8)w(t+1)=w(t)+Δw(t+1)(9)Δw(t+1)=w(t)+c1⋅rand()⋅[pBest(t)−w(t)]++c2⋅rand()⋅gBest(t)−w(t)where w, c1, c2 are inertia, cognitive and social acceleration constants, respectively [26].pBest is the best solution that the particle has achieved and indicates the tendency to replicate their corresponding past behaviors. gBest is the best solution that has achieved so far by the specific particle in the whole population, which indicates the tendency to follow the success of others by the particles. Another important parameter is the maximum velocity Vmax, associated with PSO, which mainly determines the resolution with which the search space is searched. There may be chances to fly past the better solution by the particle if the value is very large and get trapped in the local optima if the value is small.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
