@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using Fuzzy Analytic Network Process to assess the risks in enterprise resource planning system implementation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Using Fuzzy Analytic Network Process (FANP) method to assess the risk.To realize the risk factor of implementing enterprise resource planning system.How the intra-organizational cultures and cross-industry affect the risk of ERP?This study reveals the benefits of using the Fuzzy Analytic Network Process method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP),Risk Assessment,Fuzzy Analytic Network Process (FANP),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this paper was to evaluate the risk level for both intra-organizational cultures and for different industries in implementing an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system. This study adopts the Fuzzy Analytic Network Process (FANP) method to assess ERP implementation risks, which were categorized into four dimensions: management and execution, software system, users, and technology planning. An empirical survey was conducted that utilized the collected survey data of 20 ERP experts in Taiwan to assess, rank, and improve the critical risks of ERP implementation via the FANP method. Based on the results of the FANP method, a follow-up survey of ERP end-users in different departments of three industries was conducted to assess how intra-organizational cultures and cross-industries affect users’ perceived risks a real world scenario. Our research results demonstrated that “lack of management support and assistance” is vital risk for a successful ERP implementation. Top management support and involvement are crucial and essential factors to the success of a firm's ERP implementation. “Ineffective communication with users” was found to be the second highest risk factor. The benefits of using the FANP method for evaluating the risk factors come from the clear priority weights between alternatives. Finally, this study provides suggestions to help enterprises decrease ERP risks, and enhance the chances of success of ERP implementations among intra-organizational cultures and across-industries.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today, the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system is capable of combining all of the financial activities and information of firms, including sales, billing, purchasing, wage payment, utilities, taxes, and communication costs, especially in the exchange of information within and across organization boundaries [1,2]. Therefore, firms are implementing ERP systems to improve their enterprise performance and reinforce their competitiveness in the rapidly increasing global competition among industries. Current ERP systems are playing a critical role in underlying choices in technology development or tradeoffs implicit in new product development [2]. Presently, an ERP system is more than just an accounting information system widely accepted by enterprises [3].While decision makers decide on how to integrate or implement ERP, the best e-business strategy may be determined by choosing from different e-business models. An ERP system is an integrated set of programs that provides support for core organizational activities, such as manufacturing and logistics, finance and accounting, sales and marketing, as well as human resources [4]. An ERP system helps different departments of an organization to share data and knowledge, reduce costs, and improve the management of business processes. The implementation of ERP systems in organizations is an enormously complex undertaking. ERP systems can affect nearly every aspect of organizational performance; hence, measures of their success must reflect this fact in the real world [5]. When an organization plans to introduce an ERP system, the goal, the implementation method, and the Business Process Reengineering (BPR) should be considered first [6]. The influences of work flow, work style, and the organizational culture must also be considered by decision makers. In general, there are three methods of ERP system implementation strategy, namely the step-by-step, the big bang, and the roll-out approaches [7]. Each of these methods has its own set of opportunities and threats.Business intelligence models are useful in measuring and controlling financial or market risks. Business intelligence models such as Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) were adopted for developing the risk scoring model to assess the performance of Internet stocks [8]. Fuzzy multiple criteria decision-making (FMCDM) methodology has been used in determining, defining, testing, and comparing complex multi-level criteria for selecting strategic alliance partners for linear shipping [9]. In developing the methodology for supplier selection and evaluation in a supply chain, structured methodology – Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS), and multi-attribute decision-making (MADA) methods are adopted to rank, select, and improve potential supply chain suppliers [10,11] based on influential relationship map [12]. In risk management, a prototype expert system was applied to support the entire design process of risk management vehicles [13]. To measure the success factors of ERP implementation, an analytic hierarchical prediction method based on the Multi-Criteria Decision Making with Incomplete Linguistic Preference Relations (InLinPreRa) by natural language is adopted to help organizations become aware of the critical factors affecting ERP [14].Decision-making problems in the real world rarely can be represented by crisp numbers; they typically take place in a fuzzy environment where the information is imprecise or uncertain [15]. Decision-making information is hard to come by, and it is often unclear, particularly in private companies [9]. The thinking and perceptions of people are often vague; although the scales in the questionnaires are equal, the interpretations of the respondents would still be different [16]. The real problem can be represented in a better way using fuzzy numbers instead of crisp numbers to evaluate the related factors. In Dağdeviren's study, a fuzzy AHP approach was proposed to determine the level of faulty behavior risk (FBR) in work systems in a real manufacturing company [17]. Using a fuzzy AHP approach, these factors were evaluated based on the work system with different weights and fuzzy linguistic variables. The FBR levels of work systems can determine and plan for work systems [17]. Some studies have proposed new fuzzy set theories to evaluate the rate of aggregative risk in software development [18,19] and ERP implementation risk [14].In reality, human thought is vague and cannot be expressed precisely. Perceptions and feelings which are often expressed by natural language in experts are vague. For example, some words (e.g., “beautiful”, “old” and so on) do not have precise measurement; likewise, human perspectives for assessing the risks in ERP implementation are also different. Thus, Fuzzy Set Theory is adopted in this paper. Analytic Network Process (ANP) used in fuzzy environment because in real-world problems, the relationships between the dimensions (or so-called factors) are usually interdependent and sometimes even exert feedback effects in a fuzzy environment; thus, in this study, fuzzy ANP (FANP) is used for assessing the risks in ERP system implementation.In addition, the decision-maker (DM) has to express their subject option of preference information in various formats of preference presentation in the real-world. Five main preference formats include the ordering of alternatives, utility values, fuzzy estimates, multiplicative preference relations, and fuzzy preference relations cover a majority of real-world situations as decision makers’ presentation of preference information [20]. To overcome the problem, Pedrycz et al. [20] proposed several types of transformation functions for converting different preference formats into fuzzy preference relation. Transformation functions for additive reciprocal fuzzy preference relation (ARFPR) include ordered array, utility value, multiplicative preference relations, and nonreciprocal fuzzy preference relation (NRFPR). Other types of transformation function for NRFPR included ARFPR, ordered array, utility, and multiplicative preference relation.To rank and improve decision alternatives, fuzzy multi-criteria analysis often requires comparing fuzzy utilities (fuzzy numbers). Although the existing fuzzy ranking/improving methods have their advantages, these methods have some potential drawbacks including the capability to compare similar or a large set of fuzzy utilities [15]. Adequate transformation functions are helpful in converting heterogeneous preferences of information (e.g., qualitative or quantitative, ordinal, and even based on various types of scales (e.g., ordinal, interval, and ratio scales)) [20]. Moreover, one of the possible adequate methods for multi-criteria analysis is to consider an index of comparability to measure the possibility of distinguishing a doubtful judgment [21].Some other tools such as Dependence and Feedback mechanisms can be used to improve the discussion procedure for communicating to the experts who have different options between his/her own opinions and the consensus opinions [20,22,23]. In addition, in order to increase individual consistency of each expert in the experts’ group consensus, the web based consensus support system can also be utilized [23]. However, it is important to understand the advantages, weaknesses, and restrictions of these methods to adequately use those tools for avoiding the negative effect in the discussion process, namely inducing an expert to construct a complete fuzzy preference model with satisfying consistency conditions, but does not reflect the experts’ real preferences [21].ERP solutions go through three lifecycle phases: selection, implementation and operation [24]. In the real-world problem (i.e., ERP implementation risk evaluation), experts have to face the problem that using such traditional additive models may not provide an appropriate evaluation method due to the dependence and the feedback relationships that exist among the criteria [25,26]. Therefore, ANP is proposed to overcome the problem of dependence and feedback among criteria or alternatives [27]. Compared with other decision-making methods, the ANP results of evaluating and comparing alternatives are based on decision-makers’ preferences [25] and address multi-attribute decision-making where attributes exhibit dependencies [26]. Therefore, if the criteria of importance can be captured properly, the quality of decision-making involved in evaluating ERP implementation risks will be enhanced correspondingly.The ANP method has the function of establishing an evaluation framework for the criteria, which are dependent and feedback. In addition, it has the ability to rank and improve the importance of the criteria identified by systems (i.e., ANP method can be used in systematic approach to problem-solving, instead of addressing the systems of the problem, and can be to identify the sources of the problem, i.e., can avoid “stop-gap piecemeal”). In other words, the ERP risk factors identified in this study can be ranked and improved according to the weights calculated with the ANP method. Therefore, this study proposes a novel approach which combines Fuzzy Set Theory (FST), Triangular Fuzzy Number (TFN), and Analytic Network Process (ANP) to address the imprecise nature of the vague problems, used in selecting the best ERP design for the company that will implement the ERP system. In addition, a survey of ERP end-users in different departments of three industries was conducted to understand which types of ERP system designs were conceived as the least risky, and how the intra-organizational cultures affect the risks in real world scenarios by systematic consideration. The benefits of using the FANP method for evaluating the risk factors come from the clear priority weights between alternatives that it provides. From the information collecting process and the integral data, end-users from different departments of companies in across various industries could evaluate the degree of risk of each of the criteria and fully understand their own requirements.The Fuzzy ANP (FANP) method, which was used in this study for assessing risks while firms implement ERP systems, addresses with the imprecise and uncertain nature of human comparison judgments by natural language in perception/feeling from Experts [28]. An empirical study is presented to illustrate the application of the proposed method. This paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, the background of ERP is reported; a literature review of ERP risks is presented in Section 2. Section 3 describes the methodologies of ANP and TFN. Section 4 outlines an empirical study to show the process of ERP risk assessment. Section 5 presents our conclusions and suggestions.ERP systems are information technologies (IT) that support the integration of value-added processes throughout the enterprise. A successful ERP implementation is able to shorten the production cycle and the inventory level, as well as increase the accuracy of demand forecasting [29]. More recently, purchasing departments began to reconsider and reconstruct their decisions and process with a scope that goes beyond cost and quality [2]. The Robbins–Gioia survey [30] indicated that out of the 232 companies surveyed, a total of 36% had implemented, or were in the process of implementing an ERP system, and 51% of these expressed that their ERP implementation was unsuccessful. In the Peer-stone Research survey, the findings of over 200 companies using ERP applications were presented: 63% of the ERP customers reported the achievement of various forms of significant business benefits from their ERP software investment, while only 39% of these companies reported hard dollar Return on Investment (ROI) from ERP. Some companies, however, detected problems (such as untraceable incoming orders and disappearance of customer orders from the system).Appropriate assessment is necessary during the ERP implementation process. Owing to the complexity between system modules, it costs firms a great deal of money and time to correct and adjust the mistakes made during the implementation of ERP systems. Waste Management Incorporated failed in its ERP implementation after spending $45 million of the company's total $250 million budget [31]. Russ Berrie and Co., which had already spent $19.2 million to implement ERP from SAP, had to write off $10.4 million to terminate the project [32]. From the ERP vendor's viewpoint, providing inappropriate service and implementation incurred risks of indemnification. The service provider, LAS, did not follow standard implementation procedures as required by the software supplier while implementing ERP in Cosmetic Corporation. The surface and financial reports were also incompatible with the local finance standards. In the end, LAS had to pay $250,000 as indemnification because they had no solutions to resolve these problems [33]. As long as the implementation was a success, the enterprise performance would be improved. Enterprise’ operation performance would go down provisionally while installing and adjusting ERP systems; nevertheless, in the long-term, enterprises would profit from the implementation. Compared to companies without ERP systems, the average values of 3-year Return on Assets (ROA) and Return on Investment (ROI) were significantly greater for the adopters [34]. Hence, firms should pay more attention to the assessment and management of risks during an ERP system implementation.There were four phases in ERP implementation: (1) the chartering phase, (2) the project phase, (3) the shakedown phase, and (4) the onward and upward phase [35]. This study focuses on assessing risk factors that may occur in the “Implementation (or project) phase.” Many executive decisions have to be considered before implementing ERP. If an implementation proposal is not complete and properly integrated, the executive should not execute such a proposal.In the ERP related literature, many risk factors were identified. However, different risk factors have different impacts on ERP implementation. In other words, some risk factors might be crucial to ERP application, while other risk factors might have minor influences. FANP has the advantage of figuring out the weights of each risk factor. The importance of every risk factor can therefore be clarified. ANP and FANP use a system of pairwise comparisons to measure the weights of the risk factors of ERP implementation, to measure for evaluating the risk performance in each criterion and how risk performance improvement to reduce the risk scores to be zero (i.e., setting scores to be zero as the aspiration situation, how to reduce the risk scores to zero) [12], and finally to rank and select the best improved ERP implementation among alternatives for decision-making by network systems.Today, ERP systems have proliferated extensively and have reached a stage where development has become industry-specific. Thus, it is possible to search for an industry-specific ERP package. However, it has been recognized that there are many components of risk in ERP systems. Understanding the differences between these components enables more effective risk management. In this study, ERP implementation risks were categorized according to the literature review and experts’ opinions. Thus, a framework that is widely used in the literature by management and execution, software systems, users and technology planning functions [36,37] was identified and summarized the risk factors in ERP implementation as shown in Table 1.In dimension A, A1: “lack of management support and assistance” was identified as one of the critical risk factors in the management and execution dimension [36,38]. In A2, “resignation of project personnel” is also a risk factor in this study. Many organizations found that it was very hard to recruit or retain good ERP specialists [37]. Project personnel are the key persons in both the adoption and execution periods; their resignation will threaten the success of the project. In A3, “lack of effective project management methodology” may significantly affect ERP project success [38]. The methodology should include project planning and control functions, as well as risk management procedures. In A4, “risks of reliance on third parties” is a risk factor because widespread reliance on computer and Internet connectivity might become a crisis for ERP implementation [39].In dimension B, B1, “failure to customize the ERP system” means the specific requirements of the firm must be included in the system. While applying an ERP system, the firm's requirements and expectations must be considered. In other words, the software system should fit with the demands of the company [36]. In B2, “complexity of the interface” is a risk factor in applying an ERP system. Too many implementation modules also increase complexity. The adoption may cause trouble if planning is inadequate [38]. In B3, “automating existing redundant or non-value-added process in the new system” indicates that the ineffective redesign of the business process is often a risk factor in ERP utilization [36,37,39]. To achieve success in the implementation of ERP, the business process should be redesigned to fit the software. In B4, “the ERP system does not provide information needed to do the project” is a risk factor if resources are not sufficient to support the work. In other words, insufficient information which includes insufficient information accessibility and presentation, may cause trouble in adopting an ERP system [36].In dimension C, C1, “failure to get user support” may lead to major problems in the adoption process [39]. User involvement and support are important in the process of ERP implementation [38]. In C2, “insufficient training and re-skilling” implies that adequate re-skilling and understanding are crucial in an ERP implementation project [36]. Moreover, sufficient training is a necessity in the process of successful adoption [37–39]. In C3, “ineffective communication with users” is a risk factor. Therefore, the role of effective communication to facilitate ERP implementation should be well documented [37–39]. In C4, “unpreparedness for applying ERP system” may generate resistance to applying the system [37]. In other words, users who are not well prepared for using ERP systems might be a possible cause for failure of ERP implementation.In dimension D, D1, “lack of integration” was found as one of the main risk factors associated with ERP implementation failure in the technology planning dimension [37]. In D2, “lack of adequate testing” could degrade the efficiency or effectiveness of the ERP work system if the hardware and software contain serious bugs [36]; therefore, the technical system must be tested adequately. In D3, “lack of modules or functions in ERP system” is identified as a risk factor in this study. In an ERP adoption, technology performance should be adequate for business requirements. In addition, sufficient planning and control mechanisms must be considered and included in the system functions. If the functions and modules are ineffective or inadequate, there can be a negative effect in the implementation [36].The authors considered that improved understanding of the prime source of each risk component would enable more effective assignment of risk management responsibility and authority. From the tangible and intangible risk factors addressed in previous studies, 15 risk factors were collated through a literature review. All of the dimensions and risk factors in this study are shown in Table 1.The risk factor selection process can be described as follows. Step 1: The initial hierarchy structure of ERP risk factors was established through a literature review. Step 2: The expert panel was built to provide suggestions for adjusting the ERP risk factors of the initial hierarchy. Step 3: The experts in the panel were: (1) a senior engineer of SAP in an ERP consultant company; (2) a university professor in an ERP related field; (3) a manager in the information technology department of a corporation that has adopted an ERP system; and (4) a senior ERP manager in the consulting department of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu in Taiwan who has sufficient experience in the ERP area. Each of these experts has more than 10 years’ experience in the ERP field. An interview method (or DEMATEL [25,40] and ISM (interpretive structural modeling) technique [41]) can be used to obtain their opinions for adjusting the ERP risk factors and building the hierarchy frame. Finally, the final relationships of the ERP risk dimensions can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 1. Based on abovementioned techniques, decision makers can determine the high risks that need to be improved (i.e. reduce the risk) and how to improve the success chance of ERP implementation via the interrelationship figure between these ERP implementation risk factors in Fig. 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
