@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rank-sales relationship in electronic commerce: Evidence from publicly available data on 11 product categories

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A unique sku-level dataset of product sales is obtained from an online merchant.A modified sales-rank functional form is suggested.The relationship between actual sales and sales ranks is calibrated for 11 products.An approach for inferring product demand from publicly available data is modified.Functional form modifications led to a decreased prediction error.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sales rank,Pareto law,Online merchant,Demand estimation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Unlike actual sales figures, sales ranks are widespread in the field of electronic commerce, which motivates economists and marketing scholars to look for the avenues of converting sales ranks into actual sales or market shares that are needed for demand estimation. In this study the relationship between actual sales and sales ranks is calibrated using a large online store’s unique data on 11 product categories, for which this relationship has never been calibrated before. By allowing the shape parameter of the power law to vary with the sales rank we managed to increase a traditionally used model’s fit for most of the product categories. Our parameter estimates can be used by researchers that would like to get a reasonably good approximation of market shares based on sales ranks. We also validated and modified Garg and Telang’s (2013) approach to inferring market shares using data on product price, sales rank and revenue rank. The approach, especially its modified version, was shown to lead to a reasonably low market shares prediction error, making it possible for researchers to infer the shares of sales based solely on sales and revenue rankings from companies that prefer not to disclose actual sales data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Actual sales data is usually kept confidential by firms, while sales ranks are often available to researchers. This motivated economists and marketing scholars to use ranks to proxy actual sales or to infer sales based on publicly available data. In previous studies researchers were able to infer demand from the rank data in the case of Amazon’s book sales (Brynjolfsson et al. 2003, 2010; Chevalier and Goolsbee 2003; Chevalier and Mayzlin 2006). Garg and Telang (Garg and Telang 2013) proposed an ingenious approach to inferring app demand from publicly available data using both sales and revenue rankings available from App Store. Even though their approach is of great practical value, it requires not only a sales ranking, but also a revenue ranking. The latter is typically available only for some of the mobile apps stores.Scholars used the rank-sales relationship to establish the long tail phenomenon on the Internet, i.e. the fact that niche products account for an unusually high proportion of sales in online markets compared to traditional markets (Brynjolfsson et al. 2006, 2011; Peltier and Moreau 2012). Despite a number of arguments that justify that the phenomenon is persistent over time (Brynjolfsson et al. 2006), some researchers claim that it may be short-lived (Fleder and Hosanagar 2009). Continuous empirical studies of “rank-sales” relationship are needed to see, whether the long-tail phenomenon is really persistent over time or not.One of the most important aspect of calibrating the rank-sales relationship is that it paves the way for other interesting work related to demand estimation, studying sales dynamics, pricing strategies, etc. For example, in one of the studies the elasticity of substitution between new and used goods was estimated (Ghose et al. 2006). In another study researchers used the sales-rank relationship to study software security product marketplace (Ghose and Sundararajan 2006). Market shares data is also necessary for various demand estimation studies (Ackerberg et al. 2007, Berry and Pakes 2007). Researchers may also be interested in studying the dynamics of demand.The purposes of this paper are to estimate the parameters of the traditional power law functional form for a large number of product categories, suggest a more flexible alternative with a varying shape parameter and compare the accuracy of the two models in predicting product sales when only sales and revenue ranking data is available.So far the rank-sales relationshipsalesi=b·rankiahas been calibrated only for a few markets. In prior studies the shape parameter a varied from −0.613 (Brynjolfsson et al. 2010) to −1.2 (Chevaier and Goldsbee 2003). We obtained parameter estimates for 11 product categories using a unique source of publicly available data – Utinet.ru – one of the largest and innovative Internet stores in Russia, which for some reason provides users with sales data. We are not aware of any other store that discloses their sales data publicly. The richness of Utinet.ru data allowed us to test the link between the sales and the sales rank for multiple markets, not just a single one as it was done previously (usually, the book market). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that calibrates the rank-sales relationship for such products as CPUs, electric shavers, external HDDs, headphones, internal HDDs, memory cards, smartphones, tablet PCs, TVs, USB flash drives and washing machines. These categories are among the top-selling at Utinet.ru and seem to be important for academics and practitioners studying differentiated product markets. This interest is reflected in a great number of hedonic studies based on the information on high-tech product prices and characteristics (Chwelos et al. 2008, Dewenter et al. 2007). While some influential demand estimation studies (Ackerberg et al. 2007, Berry et al. 1995, Berry and Pakes 2007) deal with products for which sales data is relatively easy to collect (e.g. automobiles), there seem to be unmet demand for sales data from the markets for computers, consumer electronics and appliances, for which sku-level sales data is either unavailable due to confidentiality issues, or extremely expensive.Although absolute sales figures (measured in units) are store-specific, our estimation results can be useful for converting sales ranks to market shares, which are used as dependent variables in demand estimation (e.g. nested logit model). The fact that sales in units vary across stores and countries does not matter in most cases as market share, not actual sales, is usually used as the dependent variable in structural demand modeling approaches, such as random-coefficients discrete-choice modeling (Ackerberg et al. 2007, Nevo 2001). We believe that data from a large online store can often serve as a proxy for market shares data that is very difficult to obtain.In the second section of the paper we introduce two functional forms describing the sales-rank relationship: a typically used power law and a more flexible alternative with a varying shape parameter. We also infer the corresponding formulas for the share of sales. Section 3 describes the dataset used in our study. In Section 4 we assess how well the competing functional forms fit the data. We also validate and modify Garg and Telang’s approach (Garg and Telang 2013) that allows inferring market shares using data on product price, sales rank and revenue rank. The predictions obtained with the original and the modified approaches are then compared with the actual sales data and the accuracy is reported. Section 5 concludes.In most papers (Garg and Telang 2013) sales and sales rank are assumed to be related via the power law, implying that a small number of products account for a large market share. The ith product sales are given by the following formula:(1)si=bs·riasIn Eq. (1)siare the sales of the ith product measured by the number of items sold, riis the sales rank of the ith product, bsis the scale parameter and asis the shape parameter of the “sales-sales rank” relationship. The share of the ith product can be computed as follows:(2)sharei=si∑j=1Nsj=bs·rias∑j=1Nbs·rjas=rias∑j=1NrjasTherefore market share is independent of the scale parameter bsand estimating the shape parameter asis enough to infer market shares if sales ranks are known.The parameters of Eq. (1) can be estimated by running the following log-linear regression:(3)lnsi=β0+aslnriThe traditional log-linear regression method assumes that the coefficient onlnridoes not vary as a product’s sales rank increases. However,asis likely to vary with riindicating that the rank elasticity of sales is not necessarily constant. To test this hypothesis and make sales modeling more accurate we suggest estimating the following modified log-linear equation:(4)lnsi=a0+(a1s+a2sri)lnriThen the share of the ith product can be computed as follows:(5)sharei=ria1s+a2sri∑j=1Nrja1s+a2sriEqs. (3) and (4) were estimated using OLS regressions with robust standard errors (Wooldridge 2010).The data was collected from an online merchant Utinet.ru – one of the largest, fastest growing and innovative online stores in Russia and the only one that did the IPO (as of the end of 2014). This online merchant has a unique mini-statistics feature that allows users to see how many units of each product were sold within the last month.We obtained monthly sales data for products from 11 categories, in which the number of models with non-zero sales exceeded 25 at the time of data collection (Table 1).First, we estimated the parameters of the simple log-linear model ((3)) for each product category (Table 2).The lowest absolute values of the coefficient on ln riare observed for TVs and washing machines which are characterized by a relatively high price, technical complexity and a large size. The smaller absolute value of as corresponds to a flatter curve (longer tail) for Eq. (1). Absolute values of as are the highest for external HHDs and memory cards.Parameter estimates of a more flexible Eq. (4) are presented in Table 3.The hypothesis that the slope parameter varies with the sales rank was supported for 7 out of 11 product categories (at a 1% or a lower significance level). The direction of the moderating effect appeared to be positive for electric shavers, headphones, tablet PCs, TVs and washing machines, meaning that the higher the rank, the flatter the curve. Therefore, the sales of products from these categories drop at a lower speed than a regular power law would predict. Fig. 1illustrates that the simple log-linear model underestimates the share of sales attributed to niche TVs, while the modified functional form accounts for the fact that the curve becomes flatter as the rank increases. At the same time, a2sappeared to be negative for memory cards and smartphones, implying that certain factors limit the ability of online merchants to sell very niche products from these categories.Even though future research is needed in order to better explain the sign of a2sparameter, which differs across product categories, we can still suggest using Eq. (4) as a more flexible alternative to a more traditional Eq. (3). This recommendation is justified by the significance of a2s, increased adjusted R-squared for 10 categories out of 11 and decreased mean absolute percentage errors for 9 categories out of 11 (Table 4).Garg and Telang’s approach (Garg and Telang 2013) allows inferring the shape of the Pareto curve while having sales ranks, revenue ranks and product price data only. Knowing the shape parameter is enough for market share estimation (as shown by Eq. (2)), while absolute sales figures can be recovered if overall sales in the product category are known which is often the case.The original Garg and Telang’s approach is based on the following equation (we use the notation introduced in Section 2 of our paper):(6)pisi=br·Ri-arHere piis the price of the ith product, Riis the revenue rank of the ith product, bris the scale parameter and aris the shape parameter in the “revenue-revenue rank” relationship. Substituting siaccording to Eq. (1) yields:(7)pi·bsrias=br·Ri-ar(8)lnpi+lnbs+aslnri=lnbr-arlnRi(9)arlnRi=lnbr-lnpi-lnbs-aslnri(10)lnRi=1arlnbrbs-1arlnpi-asarlnri(11)lnRi=β0+β1lnpi+β2lnriParameter ascan be inferred from the parameters of Eq. (11) as follows:as=β2/β1.Allowing the shape parameters to vary with the sales and the revenue ranks results in Eqs. (12)–(16):(12)pisi=br·Ria1r+a2rrev_ranki(13)pi·bsria1s+a2sri=br·Ria1r+a2rRi(14)lnpi+lnbs+(a1s+a2s·ri)lnri=lnbr+(a1r+a2r·Ri)lnRi(15)lnpi=lnbrbs+a1rlnRi-a1slnri-a2srilnri+a2rRilnRi(16)lnpi=α0+α1lnRi+α2lnri+α3rilnri+α4RilnRiParameters a1sand a2scan be inferred from the parameters of Eq. (16) as follows:a1s=-α2,a2s=-α3. The parameter estimates of Eqs. (11) and (16) are given in Tables 5 and 6.Parameter estimates from Tables 5 and 6 were converted into parametersas,a1s,a2s, which were used to infer sales shares for each of the product categories. Mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) is within 25% for 4 products when the original approach is used and for 8 products when the modified approach is applied (Table 7).Even though for most products our modified functional form appeared to be a better alternative, for 3 categories (external HDDs, headphones and CPUs) it gave a significantly lower precision than the original approach. By confronting Tables 5 and 6, it is easy to see that every time both α1and α2from (16) were significant at 1% significance level our modified approach gave a lower MAPE than the original one, otherwise – a higher MAPE. Therefore, whether a modified approach will give better market share estimates or not can be anticipated based on Eq. (16)’s parameter estimates.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
