@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finishing mill strip gage setup and control by interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The setup and control of the finishing mill roll gap is made by an intelligent controller based on an interval type-2 fuzzy logic system.The controller calculates the finishing mill stand screw positions required to achieve the strip finishing mill exit target thickness.The input measurements are modeled as type-1 non-singleton fuzzy numbers.The proposed interval type-2 fuzzy logic system enhances the achieved strip thickness under high uncertainty level.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finishing mill exit strip thickness,Finishing mill stand screw positions,Non-singleton measurement data,Interval type-2 fuzzy logic systems,Modeling and control under uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The setup and control of the finishing mill roll gap positions required to achieve the desired strip head thickness as measured by the finish mill exit X-ray gauge sensor is made by an intelligent controller based on an interval type-2 fuzzy logic system. The controller calculates the finishing mill stand screw positions required to achieve the strip finishing mill exit target thickness. The interval type-2 fuzzy head gage controller uses as inputs the transfer bar thickness, the width and the temperature at finishing mill entry, the strip target thickness, the width and the temperature at finishing mill exit, the stand work roll diameter, the stand work roll speed, the stand entry thickness, the stand exit thickness, the stand rolling force, and the %C of the strip. Taking into account that the measurements and inputs to the proposed system are modeled as type-1 non-singleton fuzzy numbers, we present the so called interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic roll gap controller. As reported in the literature, interval type-2 fuzzy logic systems have greater non-linear approximation capacity than that of its type-1 counterpart and it has the advantage to develop more robust and reliable solutions than the latter. The experiments of these applications were carried out for three different types of coils, from a real hot strip mill. The results proved the feasibility of the developed system for roll gap control. Comparison against the mathematical based model shows that the proposed interval type-2 fuzzy logic system equalizes the performance in finishing mill stand screw positions setup and enhances the achieved strip thickness under the tested conditions characterized by high uncertainty levels.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In hot strip mill (HSM) process, the control function called finishing mill gage controller (GC) that uses interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic systems (IT2 NSFLS1) comprises two principal tasks: head end setup and feedback. Its purpose is to achieve and maintain target head end strip thickness at each stand exit side of the finishing mill (FM). The interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 finishing mill gage controller (IT2 GC) controls the strip head end thickness by calculating the roll gap of each finishing mill stand for the strip threading in the mill and updating for the next bar to compensate for the continuously changing mill conditions as reflected in the strip head thickness, the temperature, the width and the flatness at the finish mill exit zone.The IT2 GC system calculates the finishing mill roll gap and stand screw references required to achieve the strip head target thickness at the exit zone of the finishing mill. Once per bar, the feedback task updates for each stand the parameters of the IT2 GC finishing gage controller.The interval type-2 fuzzy logic system has taken position as mature technology [1], that accounts for all the components of the data uncertainty involved on industrial processes measurements [2]. The non-linearity in the processes is handled by interval type-2 fuzzy logic systems as identifiers and as universal approximators of non-linear dynamic systems [3–8]. It has the potential to outperform type-1 fuzzy logic systems because of its larger number of design degrees of freedom [1,4,6–8]. A non-singleton type-1 fuzzy logic systems has its inputs modeled as type-1 fuzzy numbers that can handle measurements uncertainties when apply to type-1 rules. The measured data that comes from the sensors of the process is uncertain, but there is no way to account for this in the antecedent and consequent membership functions of non-singleton type-1 fuzzy logic systems. It only takes into account for the noise through the filtering action of non-singleton fuzzification [1]. Interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic systems accounts for all the uncertainties that can be present in the fuzzy logic system: (a) rule (antecedent and consequent) uncertainties due to construction and initial training with noisy data, and (b) measurement uncertainties due to noisy measurements that are used during the initial training and production processes (setup and feedback) [1,5,7–10] (see Fig. 1). From the point of view of the mill process control, the proposed IT2 GC controller takes into account two types of data uncertainties: the first one is the uncertainty generated from the measurement process, the second is the uncertainty generated by the open loop calculations from the math-models of specific FM mill sub-processes.The uncertainty generated from the measurement process includes both the type A and B evaluations [2] of standard uncertainty. The type A may be based on any valid statistical method for treating data, whilst the type B evaluation is usually based on scientific judgment using all the relevant information available. Included in this type of uncertainty are the measurements of the following critical variables: the screw force generated by the hydraulic system is measured by stand load cells or pressure transducers; roll gap is measured by a resolver on the shaft of the screw or the shaft of the motor and by a linear position transducer which measures the expansion of the hydraulic cylinder; the speed roll is measured by the main drives using digital tachometer; the surface strip temperature is measured by pyrometers; and the strip width is measured by the width gauge.The second type of data uncertainty in the HSM is generated by the open loop estimations for the known physical processes that cannot be measured and they affect the performance of the strip thickness, i.e. the long term roll heating, the long term roll wear, the mill housing stretch and the stack deflection.The proposed IT2 GC control system tuned by the initial training algorithm is able to generalize to certain regions of the multi-dimensional space where no training data is given; it is able to interpolate the output as non-linear transformations of the uncertain input data.The critical variables of the proposed finishing gage controller are twelve uncertain variables: the transfer bar thickness, the width and the temperature at finishing mill entry, the strip target thickness, the width and the temperature at finishing mill exit, the stand work roll diameter, the stand work roll speed, the stand entry thickness, the stand exit thickness, the stand rolling force, and the %C of strip.Although finishing mill roll gap setup is a critical issue, the problem has not been fully addressed using Mamdani interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic systems [9,10], or using Mamdani interval type-2 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic systems [1,9,10]. There is not work reported in the literature using IT2 fuzzy logic systems in order to control the roll gap positions to achieve the target finishing thickness at the exit side of each finishing mill stand in a HSM [1,9,10].The selection of the Mamdani interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic systems for the implementation of the proposed IT2 GC controller is due to its well known simplicity and robustness; also it will be used as benchmarking in the finishing mill control implementations of the modernization project of this HSM facility.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the foundations of IT1 FLS fuzzy logic systems, whilst Section 3 gives the basis of the foundations of IT2 FLS fuzzy logic systems. Section 4 presents the theoretical analysis of the HSM and its uncertainties. Section 5 presents the implementation process of the proposed IT2 GC controller. Section 6 presents a description and discussion of experimental results, and Section 7 summarizes the conclusions.A type-1 (T1) fuzzy set, A which is in terms of a single variable, x∈X is a generalization of a crisp set. It is defined on a universe of discourse X and is characterized by the membership function μA(x) that takes on values in the interval [0,1]. A membership function provides a measure of the degree of similarity of an element in X to the fuzzy set, which is really the membership of x in A. Such a set may be represented as:(1)A={(x,μA(x))|∀x∈X}T1 membership function, μA(x) is constrained to be between 0 and 1 for all x∈X, and is a 2D function.The reader is referenced to [1] if extensive explanation is required.Fuzzy logic controllers (FLCs) are useful control schemes for plants having difficulties in deriving math-models or having performance limitations with conventional control schemes. According to [11], the most used inputs to the fuzzy controllers, regardless of the complexity of the plant are e(t) and e′(t). The error at time (t), e(t) is calculated as e(t)=r(t)−y(t), where r(t) is the reference or set point value at the time (t), and y(t) is the output value of the plant at the time (t). e′(t) is the change of error at time (t) and it is calculated as e′(t)=e(t)−e(t−1), where e(t−1) is the previous calculated error at the time (t−1). Also, the control variable u (PD-type) and the incremental control variable Δu (PI-type) are typically the output variable from the fuzzy controllers, which are at the same time the input to the controlled plant. See Fig. 2.T1 FLCs are both intuitive and numerical systems that map crisp inputs to a crisp output. Every FLC is associated with a set of rules with meaningful linguistic interpretations, obtained from either numerical data, or experts familiar with the problem at hand. Based on this kind of statement, actions are combined with rules in an antecedent-consequent format, and then aggregated according to approximate reasoning theory, to produce a non-linear mapping from input space X1×X2×⋯×Xnto the output space Y.A FLS as the kernel of a FLC consist of four basic elements, the T1 fuzzifier, the fuzzy rule-base, the inference engine, and the T1 defuzzifier. The fuzzy rule-base is a collection of rules on the form Rl, which are combined in the inference engine, to produce a fuzzy output. The T1 fuzzifier maps the crisp input into T1 fuzzy sets, which are subsequently used as inputs to the inference engine, whereas the T1 defuzzifier maps the T1 fuzzy sets produced by the inference engine into crisp numbers.The reader is referenced to [11] if extensive explanation is required.Consider the transition from ordinary set to fuzzy sets. When it is not easy to determine the membership of an element in a set as 0 or 1, fuzzy sets of type-1 are used. Similarly, when the circumstances are so fuzzy that there is trouble to determine the membership grade even as a crisp number in [0,1], fuzzy sets of type-2 are used.A general type-2 fuzzy set, denoted byA˜, is characterized by a type-2 membership functionμA˜(x,u), where x∈X and u∈Jx⊆[0, 1]:(2)A˜={((x,u),μA˜(x,u))|∀x∈X,∀u∈Jx⊆[0,1]}and0≤μA˜(x,u)≤1.The amplitude of a secondary membership function is called a secondary grade. In Eq. (2),μA˜(x,u)for x∈X, u∈Jxis a secondary grade. The reader is referenced to [1] if extensive explanation is required.WhenμA˜(x′,u′)=1,∀u∈Jx⊆[0,1], in (2), then the secondary membership functions are interval sets, and, if this is true for ∀x∈X, then is the case of an interval type-2 membership function. They reflect a uniform uncertainty at the primary memberships of x, as shown in Fig. 3.A Mamdani interval type-2 fuzzy logic system having p inputs x1∈X1, …, xp∈Xpand one output y∈Y is represented by fuzzy IF–THEN rules that represent input–output relations of a system [1] and can be expressed as:(3)Ri:IFx1isF˜1iand…andxpisF˜piTHENyisG˜iy is the consequent output of the ith rule with an interval type-2 fuzzy set valueG˜i(where i=1,…,M rules), andF˜ki(k=0, 1,…,p), are interval type-2 antecedents fuzzy sets. This rule represents a type-2 relation between the input space X1×X2×⋯×Xp, and the output space, Y of the type-2 FLS.Theorem 1In an interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 FLS with meet under product or minimum the result of the input and antecedent operations, Eq. (3), is an interval type-1 set:(4)Fi(x)=[f_i(x),f¯i(x)]≡[f_i,f¯i]with(5)f_i(x)=supx∫x1∈X1⋯∫xp∈XpμX1(x1)∗μ_F˜1i(x1)∗⋯∗μXp∗μ_F˜pi(xp)/xand(6)f¯i(x)=supx∫x1∈X1⋯∫xp∈XpμX1(x1)∗μ¯F˜1i(x1)∗⋯∗μXp∗μ¯F˜pi(xp)/xThe ith centroid of each consequent setCG˜iis an interval set of the form:(7)CG˜i=yli,yriThe output after type reduction (defuzzification) is an interval set too, and can be expressed as:(8)Y=[yl,yr]where ylis(9)yl=∑i=1Mfliyli∑i=1Mfli=∑i=1Lf¯iyli+∑i=L+1Mf_iyli∑i=1Lf¯i+∑i=L+1Mf_i=∑i=1Mylipli(x)=ylTpl(x)and yris(10)yr=∑i=1Mfriyri∑i=1Mfri=∑i=1Rf_iyri+∑i=R+1Mf¯iyri∑i=1Rf_i+∑i=R+1Mf¯i=∑i=1Myripri(x)=yrTpr(x)The reader is referenced to [1,12–17] if a more detailed explanation is required.The interval type-2 fuzzy logic controllers (IT2 FLCs) [11] use IT2 fuzzy sets as membership functions for the inputs and for the outputs. They do not require a mathematical-model of the system under control. They are model-free approaches, and are easy to understand and simple to implement [18–24]. IT2 FLC controllers are supposed to work in situations where there are uncertainties and unknown variations in any sub-process of the industrial facility. The basic objective of the IT2 FLC controller is to maintain the quality of the strip thickness in spite of the presence of these uncertainties. The HSM facility is an integration of a series of high non-linear and time variable sub-processes characterized by multiple sources of uncertainties produced by:(a)variations and miss specifications of the geometric and chemistry characteristics of the raw material;planned and unplanned mill operations, both automated and manual operations;machinery and equipment;sensors, and actuators;normal production scheduling;planned and unplanned product changes.An adaptive fuzzy controller can be a single adaptive fuzzy system, or it can be constructed from several adaptive fuzzy systems blocks [25,26] as shown in Fig. 4.In HSM mills, as in any other industrial process, achieve and maintain the product quality requirements are two of major concerns. The most critical section of the final product, the steel coil, is the head end section. This is due to the uncertainties involved at the head end of the incoming steel bar, and the varying conditions from bar to bar. Currently, in order to achieve the head end quality requirements, there are a set of automation systems based on physical modeling [27], particularly in the reheat furnace, roughing mill (RM), finishing mill, and the runout cooling zone.Fig. 5depicts a simplified and general diagram of a HSM facility, from its initial stage, the reheat furnace entry, to the final stage, the coilers. The slab leaves the furnace at about ∼1280°C and it is transported to the roughing mill by the transfer table. The reversing roughing stand gives in several passes the initial thickness reduction to the slab, from ∼250mm to ∼25mm. The product of the roughing mill is called transfer bar. The transfer bar is taken to the finishing mill where final thickness, finishing temperature and final width specifications have to be fulfilled. Due to the transfer bar length, the transfer stage between roughing mill and finishing mill is ∼120m. During the traveling time from roughing mill to finishing mill, scale formation on the transfer bar surface takes place. The scale breaker (SB) washes out the scale in order to allow proper rolling of the bar.Mathematical-based-models calculate the rolling variables as temperature, force, speeds, roll gap, water flow, etc. in order to setup the entire mill, i.e. the initial working conditions of reheat furnace, roughing mill, finishing mill, and runout cooling processes. Besides, there are commonly used additive terms to correct prediction errors, which generally come from proportional (P) or proportional plus integral (PI) like structures [27]. Since heat bar conservation is crucial, these math-model calculations have to be performed on-line and at the shortest possible time.Nowadays the steel industry requires the best flexible manufacturing system, capable of rolling a wider gamma of products in shorter periods. Such flexibility requirement implies higher level of variations for the rolling process conditions, demanding automation systems with higher adaptive capabilities. Most commercial systems compensation techniques (P or PI based) only compensate for error under current conditions, therefore, the first of coil a batch frequently present out of specification head end [9,10,27,28].Research on the estimation of process variables in a HSM by adaptive neural networks [16–20,29–37] (ANN), type-1 [38–42] fuzzy logic systems, granular computing [43], non-linear programming [44], optimization and filtering techniques [45–47], simulated annealing [48], and interval type-2 fuzzy logic systems [9,10] has received particular attention worldwide.Research on body strip thickness and roll gap position setup and control in HSM can be found using interval type-1 fuzzy logic systems [49–51], and mathematical modeling techniques [52,53]. In cold mills there are investigations and proposals using mathematical [54–59], fuzzy type-1 [60,61], and neural networks [62–66] modeling for strip thickness and gap position setup and control.The strip rolling force and roll gap setup depend highly on the head end temperature of the strip. It is also essential for finishing mill speed setup. Currently, in some HSM facilities the head end thickness and head end temperature of the transfer bar at the scale breaker entry zone, are used by the finishing mill setup (FSU) math-model [27] to preset the finishing mill stand screws, in order to setup the roll gap required to achieve the target head end thickness of the strip, at the finishing mill exit side. However, the measurements of the bar surface temperature at the scale breaker entry point, is not reliable due to scale formation, therefore it is measured using a pyrometer located at the roughing mill exit side, and later, the head end surface temperature of the transfer bar is estimated by the heat transfer tables (HTT) math-model [27], and used for finishing mill and runout cooling setups. The real head thickness of the transfer bar, is obtained at the last pass of the roughing mill. It is not measured by any sensor, and the estimated value contains high level of uncertainty.Finishing mill setup math-model calculates draft to divide total reduction among the available stands; sets stand speeds to maintain a balanced mass flow. Roll force is predicted from force math-model to calculate stand stretch and unloaded roll gap. Stand speed is calculated to maintain a constant mass flow throughout the finishing mill. Draft calculation uses finishing mill load patterns stored as a function of finishing mill exit thickness. This is a fixed pattern, however the finishing mill operator can modify actual load pattern by changing load distribution. The load pattern that results is a normalized array of numbers and used to make an initial estimation of the interstand thickness and forces. The set of interstand thickness in concordance to the load pattern, is the basis of the estimation of all the remaining mill references.Several references are provided by the FSU for distribution to the finishing mill drive control and actuators to place the mill in a state of readiness to roll next bar. These references are among others: the roll gap positions, the main drive speeds, the looper tensions, the side guide positions, the delivery X-ray head thickness set point, the finishing mill entry table draft compensation, the main drive lead speed for droop compensation, the interstand thickness for absolute automatic gage control (AGC), the interstand force for AGC, the strip modules for AGC, the maximum mill delivery speed, the descale spray references, the interstand spray references, and the delivery X-ray gauge temperature and alloy compensation. Also several measured uncertain data is used as feedback by the FSU math-model: (a) a head scan at the finishing mill exit side of head thickness, head width and head temperature, and (b) a body and (c) a sync scans of each finishing mill stand roll gap, force, power, speed, and looper height and tension.The FSU model is a set of math-models with either stored (mill deflection, draft distribution practice, mill speed practice, tension practice) or bar to bar adapted parameters (roll gap, force, power, temperature). Most of the finishing mill setup math-model compensations are open loop. The open loop calculations are adjusted manually by the automation process engineer to suit the requirements of changing process conditions and handle the mill uncertainties. On the top of open loop calculations there are modifiers, verniers, offsets, multipliers, gains, and adders to correct any non-linear and uncertain behavior.To set each roll gap in the right place, it is necessary to model the roll gap. This is done by estimating the roll wear, the roll heating, and the feedback term called gap_vernier for each stand [27].(11)roll_gap_reference=exitgage−housing_stretch−stack_deflection−gain_gap_vernier+stack_expansion+stack_wearwhere roll_gap is the required stand screw reference, exit_gage is the estimated gage from load pattern and drafting procedure, housing_stretch is the estimated (uncertain) housing stretch using the stored curve stretch data, stack_deflection is the estimated (uncertain) roll stack deflection using the stored curve stack data, gap_vernier is the estimated (uncertain) offset term that accounts for all errors of the estimated gap, stack_expansion is the estimated (uncertain) thermal roll stack expansion, and stack_wear is the open loop estimated (uncertain) roll stack wear (see Fig. 6).The roll separating force required to deform the strip causes the mill housing and rolls to stretch elastically. When the separating force is removed, the housing and rolls return to their original shape and position. The stretching affects the final thickness of the rolled strip and must be compensated to achieve a particular reduction. Also the amount of the stretch must be checked periodically in practice as it changes slightly due to changes in roll diameters and mill sensors. The two components of mill stretch are the roll stack deflection and the housing stretch.The roll stack thermal expansion (see Fig. 7), and the roll stack wear (see Fig. 8), are estimated by segmenting the rolls across the rolls width. The temperature asymptote is used by the roll thermal model to calculate the temperature across the roll. From the center line temperature, based on the thermal expansion characteristics of the steel, the linear thermal expansion can be calculated, which is the amount that the unloaded roll gap will close due to the roll expansion.The roll gap feedback math-model models the process using the mass flow thicknesses. As shown in Fig. 9, the mass flow at any point in the mill is the strip speed multiplied by the strip thickness.The strip thickness at the exit of the mill is known based on the uncertain measurements made by the X-ray sensor. The strip speed at each mill stand exit side is on the work roll periphery speed times the slip coefficient calculated by the force model.Once the finishing mill exit mass flow is known, the mass_flow_thickness at all interstand locations are calculated by dividing the mass flow by the strip speed at each location.The mass flow thicknesses are used in the setup and the feedback of the roll gap calculations. FSU sets up the mill to obtain these mass flow thicknesses by adjusting the initial estimation of stand roll gaps. At the feedback process, the roll gap model uses the stand gap_verniers to correct the roll gap references for the next transfer bar [27].(12)next_bar_gap_vernier=gap_vernier+gain_gap_vernier*feedback_offsertThe gain_gap_vernier has a predefined value manually tunned by the engineer to follow the process changes. The feedback_offset is calculated as the difference between the mass_flow_thickness and the gagemeter_gauge[27].(13)gagemeter_gauge=feedback_screw_position+housing_stretch+stack_deflection+gap_vernier−stack_expansion−stack_wearFrequently, these open loop calculations present high level of uncertainty and become obsolete due to non-linear and time-varying behaviors, so it is required to constantly revise and manually adjust the next constants and parameters:(a)The work rolls wear estimation.The work rolls thermal profile calculation.The time constants of the back up and work rolls heating.The following stand curves frequently require experimental update:(a)The housing stretch curve.The stack deflection curve.In addition, the FSU uses the stand exit thickness sensitivity multiplier to account for any remaining errors in the initial estimation of thickness and force.The HSM facility where this experiment took place uses a finishing gap setup math-model running on-line in order to calculate the roll gap position, required to achieve the desired strip thickness at the exit side of each of the six FM stands (F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, and F6).In this facility, the FM entry thickness ranges from 23.0 to 32.0mm, the FM entry width ranges from 600.0 to 1450.0mm, the FM mill entry temperature ranges from 920 to 1090°C, the FM exit maximum speed is 620mmin−1, the FM exit temperature ranges from 800 to 900°C, the FM exit thickness ranges from 1.5 to 11mm, the FM maximum per stand per unit draft limits are shown in Table 1, the FM work roll diameter ranges from 600 to 680mm, the per stand maximum rolling force is 3000t, and the %C of strip ranges from 0.020 to 0.860%.As the first process, the architecture of the IT2 GC controller is established in such a way that the parameters are continuously adapted (tuned) using the steepest-descent algorithm.The proposed controller estimates the roll gap of each finishing mill stand using only twelve process variables as inputs, eliminating the manual operation of constantly revise and adjust the constants and parameters of the following sub-processes: the roll wear, roll thermal expansion, housing stretch, and stack deflection (see Fig. 4).On the other hand, the statistical design of experiments is used in this application in order to collect only the appropriate data that can be analyzed by statistical methods, and that can produce valid and objective conclusions about performance and convergence.One important way to achieve high resolution and low complexity is to design and train the IT2 GC controller using representative data [67] that are collected for that specific application. This process can be viewed as approximating a function or fitting a complex surface in multi-dimensional high-dimensional space. Given a set of uncertain input–output data pairs, tuning is essentially equivalent to determining a system that provides an optimal fit to the input–output data pairs, with respect to a cost function [1].In order to make valid performance comparisons, the IT2 GC model uses the same twelve critical variables used by the FSU roll gap model to calculate the required roll gap to achieve the desired target thickness. It is not the scope of this experiment to compare the proposed IT2 GC model against the type-1 FLS.The antecedents of the IT2 GC model are the transfer bar thickness x1, the transfer bar width x2, the transfer bar temperature x3, the strip target thickness x4, the strip target width x5, the strip target temperature x6, the stand work roll diameter x7, the stand work roll speed x8, the stand entry thickness x9, the stand exit thickness x10, the stand rolling force x11, and the %C of the strip x12. They are the same math-models inputs used for roll gap estimation in most of the HSM industrial sites [27]. For all input variables their antecedent input space (universe of discourse) are divided into three fuzzy sets; only for the case of x2, its space is divided into two fuzzy sets.Because of the tight tolerance in many HSMs performance criteria, with the head end finish thickness error less than 0.06mm, and with the head end finish temperature error less than 10°C, it is required a higher precision estimation and intelligent adaptive capabilities by any process control system used to setup the mill, which final product not only should achieve precise target characteristics, but also do not present deviations from the targets.Currently in some worldwide mills, the finishing FSU math-model cannot guarantee the quality of any products which represent fewer than 3% of total product mix, unless production is arranged to group such products in minimum lots of 10 bars. Furthermore, the absolute value of the strip-to-strip thickness change must not exceed 30% of the thickness of the preceding strip. Clearly it is an issue to modern business requiring flexible manufacturing systems capable of rolling a wider gamma of products in shorter lots. These math-models require at least two or three coils after any strip target gage, target width or target temperature change in order to properly adapt the so called stand gap_vernier, gage-vernier, width-vernier and temperature-vernier, to compensate the uncertainty generated by the new mill conditions. To compensate this uncertainty the so called gage-vernier-gage, width-vernier-width and temperature-vernier-temperature target-offsets are added to the first bar rolled with the new target. However, the strip quality suffers and the final product requirements are not reached.Because of the mentioned conditions, the usage of one fuzzy set per target gage, one fuzzy set per target width and one fuzzy set per target temperature inputs, is required by the proposed IT2 GC model, in order to achieve the demanding mill flexibility and product accuracy at the first bar immediately after any target change; not until the second or third rolled bar as required by the math-model's parameters adaptation.The resulting IT2 fuzzy rule size is five hundred thirty one thousand four hundred forty one rules (3×3×3×3×3×3×3×3×3×3×3×3). The universe of the output (consequent, y) is divided into three fuzzy sets. A database management system (DBMS) is used to organize and access the rule bases efficiently [10]. In this application, each interval type-2 fuzzy rule is a record of the DBMS system capable of manage 4 billion data blocks (8kb each block) per single data file, which is loaded into fast access memory known as database buffer cache and large pool cache.Gaussian primary membership functions with uncertain means are chosen for both, antecedents and consequents. Each rule of the IT2 GC roll gap model is characterized by thirty six antecedent membership function parameters (one for the left-hand bound of the mean, one for the right-hand bound of the mean, and one for the standard deviation; for each of the twelve Gaussian membership functions of the antecedent section of the rule), two consequent parameters (one for the left-hand and one for the right-hand end points of the centroid of the consequent IT2 fuzzy set), and twelve input-data parameters (one for the standard deviation of each input value), giving a total of fifty parameters per rule.Each input of the IT2 GC system is modeled as type-1 non-singleton fuzzy sets, of the form:(14)μXk(xk)=exp−12xk−x′kσXk2where k=1, 2, 3,…,12 (the number of type-1 non-singleton inputs),μX˜k(xk)centered at the measured inputxk=x′k. The standard deviation of each input is initially set as:σX1=1.0mm,σX2=30.0mm,σX3=40.0°C,σX4=0.05mm,σX5=30.0mm,σX6=40.0°C,σX7=16.0mm,σX8=24.0m s−1,σX9=0.05mm,σX10=0.05mm,σX11=1120.0ton, andσX12=0.02%. These values are determined statistically using noisy input–output data pairs of three different coil types with different target thickness, target width, target temperature, and different steel grade are taken from a real HSM facility, and one of the two sets is used as the training data and the other set is used as the testing data (see Table 2).The standard deviation of each input is initially set as: σn1=0.2mm, σn2=2.0mm, σn3=19.7°C, σn4=0.005mm, σn5=2.0mm, σn6=2.0°C, σn7=0.37mm, σn8=1.0mmin−1, σn9=0.005mm, σn10=0.005mm, σn11=13.0t and σn12=0.002%. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of each input variables is: (x1)SNR=20.11dB, (x2)SNR=30.45dB, (x3)SNR=8.32dB, (x4)SNR=22.06dB, (x5)SNR=36.77dB, (x6)SNR=37.06dB, (x7)SNR=33.58dB, (x8)SNR=22.74dB, (x9)SNR=22.35dB, (x10)SNR=22.39dB, (x11)SNR=23.21dB, and (x12)SNR=33.12dB; for the output variable it is (y)SNR=22.83dB.The primary membership function of each antecedentA˜klis defined as Gaussian with uncertain means of the form:(15)Akl=μkl(xk)=exp−12xk−mknlσkl2where mlk∈[mlk1, mlk2] is the uncertain mean, k=1, 2, 3,…,12 (the number of antecedents), l=1, 2,…,531,441 (the total IT2 fuzzy rules); n=1, 2 (the lower and upper bounds of the uncertain mean) and σlkis the standard deviation. The means of the antecedent fuzzy sets are initially chosen to be uniformly distributed over the entire input space of each variable.Using the calculated mean and standard deviation from measurement of all inputs, the values of the antecedent intervals of uncertainty are established. The initial intervals of uncertainty for the input x1 are selected as shown in Table 3. Figure 10shows the initial membership functions for the antecedent fuzzy sets of variable x4. The values of the initial intervals of uncertainty for all variables x1 to x12 are selected as shown in Tables 4–14respectively.The IT2 fuzzy rule base consists of a set of IF-THEN rules that represents the Mamdani model type of the system. The IT2 GC model has twelve inputs x1∈X1, x2∈X2, x3∈X3, x4∈X4, x5∈X5, x6∈X6, x7∈X7, x8∈X8, x9∈X9, x10∈X10, x11∈X11, x12∈X12, and one output y∈Y, and a rule base of size M=531,441 of the form:(16)R˜l:IFx1isA˜1landx2isA˜2l,andx3isA˜3landx4isA˜4landx5isA˜5landx6isA˜6l,andx7isA˜7landx8isA˜8landx9isA˜9landx10isA˜10landx11isA˜11landx12isA˜12lTHENyisG˜lwhere l=1, 2,…,531,441. These rules represent a fuzzy relation between the input space X1×X2×X3×X4×X5×X6×X7×X8×X9×X10×X11×X12 and the output space Y, and it is complete, consistent and continuous [1,4].The primary membership functionG˜lof each consequent is a Gaussian function with uncertain means, as defined in equation (3). Since the center-of-sets type-reducer replaces each consequent setG˜lby its centroid, thenyllandyrlare the consequent parameters.Initially, only the input-output training data pairs (x(1):y(1)), (x(2):y(2)),…,(x(N):y(N)) are available and there is no data information about the consequents, hence the initial values of the centroid parametersyllandyrlare determined according to the linguistic rules from human experts or be chosen arbitrarily from the output space [1,8], being the latter the selected case of this construction.After the construction of the IT2 GC controller, the next process is the off-line supervised adjustment of the system, where the IT2 GC controller parameters are adjusted using a data-set of N input-output training data pairs, in order to minimize the following training error functionetrg(t)after E training epochs:(17)etrg(t)=12[ftrg(xtrg(t))−ytrg(t)]2where[ftrg(xtrg(t))]is the output at training phase (the estimated IT2 GC roll gap required to achieve the desired strip thickness at the finishing mill exit side),xtrg(t)is the input data vector for the initial training (the predicted transfer bar thickness x1, the predicted transfer bar width x2, the predicted transfer bar temperature x3, the strip thickness x4 measured by the X-ray sensor at finishing mill exit side, the strip width x5 measured by the width gauge sensor located at finishing mill exit side, the strip surface temperature x6 measured by the pyrometer located at finishing mill exit side, the stand work roll diameter x7, the work roll speed x8 measured by the digital tachometers, the recalculated strip thickness at the entry side of stand x9, the recalculated strip thickness at the exit side of the stand x10, the stand rolling force x11 measured by the stand load cells, and the %C of the strip x12),ytrg(t)is the roll gap position for the initial training (the screw position measured by a resolver located on the shaft of the each stand screw); it is recommended that N> total number of the FLSs parameters to be tuned, and E depends on the selected convergence for a particular application. The mechanism for the antecedent and the consequent parameters adjustment uses the steepest-descent method, and it is referred to as recursive back-propagation (BP) mechanism [1], since it is possible to represent the fuzzy logic controller as feed forward neural networks. The IT2 GC controllers are initially trained after fifty epochs of computations using a data set of input-output data pairs: 35 coils of type A, 28 coils of type B and 15 coils of type C.The next process, the on-line setup process, calculates bar-to-bar the stand roll gap required to achieve the desired strip thickness at the finishing mill exit as a function of the transfer bar thickness x1, the transfer bar width x2, the transfer bar temperature x3, the strip target thickness x4, the strip target width x5, the strip target temperature x6, the stand work roll diameter x7, the stand the work roll predicted speed x8, the recalculated stand entry thickness x9, the recalculated stand exit thickness x10, the recalculated stand rolling force x11, and the %C of strip x12. At the end of the setup, the IT2 fuzzy controller checks the predicted roll gap against the physical finish mill limits: the force limits, the power limit, the speed limit, the draft limits, the gap limits and the electrical limits. If there is a limiting condition, the IT2 GC controller alarms and it does not executes the next adaptation process. The IT2 GC controllers calculate bar-to-bar each stand roll gap of the finishing mill, using the following production scheduling: starting with the production of 9 coils of type C, immediately continuing with the production of 12 coils of type B and finalizing the sequence with the production of 22 coils of type A. Fig. 11shows the roll gap setups only of the stand six, of both the FSU and the IT2 GC controllers of these 43 coils.Immediately after the setup process, the on-line feedback-adaptation process take place, the IT2 GC controller adapts bar-to-bar its parameters, minimizing the setup error functionemrg(m):(18)emrg(m)=12[fmrg(xmrg(m))−ymrg(m)]2where[fmrg(xmrg(m))]is the calculated stand roll gap,xmrg(m)is the input on-line measured data vector for adaptation (the transfer bar thickness x1, the transfer bar width x2, the predicted transfer bar temperature x3, the strip thickness x4 measured by the X-ray sensor at finishing mill exit side, the strip width x5 measured by the width gauge sensor located at finishing mill exit side, the strip surface temperature x6 measured by the pyrometer located at finishing mill exit side, the predicted stand work roll diameter x7, the work roll speed x8 measured by the digital tachometers, the recalculated strip thickness at the entry side of the stand x9, the recalculated strip thickness at the exit side of stand x10 (only measured for the stand six), the stand rolling force x11 measured by the stand load cells, and the %C of the strip x12); andymrg(m)is the online measured stand roll gap.This adaptation permits to the model to respond to the continuously changing mill conditions. The IT2 GC controller inhibits the feedback process if the measured feedback data is invalid.Using the measurements of the 12 inputs and 1 output variables, the roll gap position error is calculated and immediately used to update each parameter of each IT2 GC database rule.Fig. 12shows the roll gap prediction errors generated by the FSU model and by the IT2 GC controller for the stand six.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
