@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A combined fuzzy approach to determine the best region for a nuclear power plant in Turkey

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The location selection for nuclear power plant is a critical decision making problem.The fuzzy sets provide huge facilities to decision makers.To address ambiguities more conveniently, type-2 fuzzy sets have been used.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi criteria decision making,Nuclear power plant location,Interval type-2 fuzzy numbers,AHP,TOPSIS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When increase in energy needs of developing countries cannot be met by conventional energy sources, alternative energy sources are considered to substitute them. Nuclear energy that meets the needs of a greater proportion of energy demands for countries is one of effective alternative energy types. In this context, after deciding on the use of nuclear energy, the selection of the most suitable location for the production of nuclear power is one of the important decision making problems. In this paper, we performed a facility location selection model for Turkey in meeting the needs of energy with using new and unused source of nuclear energy. For this aim, a combined fuzzy multi criteria decision making (MCDM) methodology that consists of Interval type-2 fuzzy analytical hierarchy process (AHP) that is applied to determine weights of criteria and interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS that is applied for ranking alternatives is used to determine the best location alternative for the nuclear power plant. By the way, the obtained results have been analyzed depending upon the criteria that used for the evaluation process. The obtained results are compared with existing nuclear power plants location selection policy for Turkey and some suggestions have been made for the plants where would be the located are not decided. By the way, a sensitivity analysis has been conducted to analyze effects of changes in decision's parameters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To provide energy needs is a major problem for all countries around the world in recent years. In particular, the oil bottleneck, which is emerged at the beginning of the 1970s, accelerate this seeking and procure nuclear as a reliable source of energy has come to the forefront. Turkey's basic energy strategy to meet our energy demand is to reduce external dependency and the adopted policies can be list as [1]:Ensuring the country of origin and route diversity,Increasing energy efficiency,Reduction of energy density,Using of all domestic resources,And in 2023, the share of renewable energy sources in electricity production to be increased to at least 30%.Nuclear technology is meeting the 17% of the world's electrical requirements. Today, more than 30 countries are operating nuclear power plant. Worldwide, more than 1000 commercial, military and research nuclear reactor is operated [2]. Nuclear energy has also great importance in terms of ensuring our energy supply security for countries, decreasing dependence on imported energy and reducing the current account deficit. For all these reasons, nuclear power plant installation work has begun in Sinop and Akkuyu for Turkey [1]. Many factors in the selection of these two regions were taken into consideration. In this paper, we try to find these selected regions whether the most appropriate regions or not and to make some suggestions for new nuclear power plant alternatives by using our suggested fuzzy multi criteria decision making (MCDM) methodology.Several criteria must be considered in the analysis of many real-world decision making problems [50]. Selection of appropriate locations for facilities is an important engineering problem which has many factors both qualitative and quantitative. Facility location problem is a typical MCDM problem which involves many conflicting attributes [3]. Facility location problem includes conflicting criteria such as political environment, proximity to markets and customers, supplier networks, expansion potential, availability of transportation systems and utility, quality-of-life issues, culture issues, etc. Choosing a location for the power plant affecting the state's energy policy is a strategic decision. Especially, selection of nuclear energy power plant, which has a high interaction with surroundings, is a decision that should be analyzed well. If the location of nuclear power plants cannot be selected correctly, it can lead to many problems such as unnecessary transportation costs, unavailability of qualified labor, raw material supply problems and loss of competitive advantage [4]. During the evaluation process of problem discussed, because all the criteria cannot be are expressed numerically, human judgment is needed and so applying the fuzzy sets will provide more accurate results. In modeling real world problems, using linguistic assessments is more reasonable instead of using numerical values when our knowledge is fuzzy. Different decision making tools can be extended to fuzzy environment. Fuzzy numbers can be applied used to establish decision making approaches [51].Therefore we have discussed to find the most appropriate nuclear power plant location alternative for Turkey with using a fuzzy MCDM methodology based on type-2 fuzzy sets.Using MCDM methods for the selection of facility location problems is a common approach that is adopted for many years by researchers. There are many papers that propose MCDM methods both facilities and power plant location selection. For example, Chakraborty et al. [5] presented four well-known MCDM methods that applied on a facility location selection problem and their relative ranking performances are compared. Aksu and Ocak [6] proposed a methodology to determine the locations of municipal centers for eight newly established counties within the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality. Athawale et al. [7] presented an approach solves two real time facility location selection problems using preference ranking organization method for enrichment evaluation (PROMETHEE II) method which is observed to an effective MCDM tool often applied to deal with complex problems in the manufacturing environment. They compared the ranking performance of PROMETHEE II method with the other MCDM methods and observed that the top-ranked alternatives exactly match with those as obtained by the past researchers. Özdağoğlu [8] proposed a fuzzy ANP method for a multi-criteria facility location selection problem where the criteria set includes interactions with each other on the hierarchy structure. Ertuğrul [9] proposed a method which is fuzzy group decision making based on extension of TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) method has been applied to a facility location selection problem of a textile company in Turkey. Kahraman et al. [10] presented different approaches and techniques used in location selection problems, especially on the fuzzy MCDM methods. Boran [4] presented the integration of intuitionistic fuzzy preference relation aiming to obtain weights of criteria and intuitionistic fuzzy TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) method aiming to rank alternatives for dealing with imprecise information on selecting the most desirable facility location and a practical application is given to illustrate the application of the proposed method. Hu et al. [11] proposed a fuzzy TOPSIS method for distribution center location selection. Ertuğrul and Karakaşoğlu [12] presented the use of fuzzy AHP and the fuzzy Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS) methods for the selection of facility location.Besides all these, some studies related directly to the location selection of nuclear power plants. Rechard et al. [13] summarized the historical events from the identification of the Yucca Mountain site in southern Nevada in 1978 to its selection by the US Congress as the sole site to characterize for a repository for spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste in 1987. Erdoğan and Kaya [14] proposed a fuzzy MCDM model for the nuclear power plant site selection in Turkey. Locatelli and Mancini [15] proposed a two-step framework to choosing the best nuclear reactor at the pre-feasibility study phase. Wu et al. [16] proposed a method which used firstly AHP to establish index system for inland nuclear station location; secondly establishes the evaluation model based on the gray comprehensive evaluation method; and finally applies the model to one location of a nuclear power station for instance, which confirm the feasibility of the model. Erol et al. [17] developed a fuzzy MCDM approach to select nuclear power plant location in Turkey. Their proposed framework employed fuzzy entropy and fuzzy compromise programming. Wu et al. [18] adopts the fuzzy mathematical theory, and suggests a combination of fuzzy comprehensive evaluation and AHP to determine the best plan for site selection of a nuclear power plant. Idris and Abd. Latif [19] presented the role of AHP and GIS in determining the optimum location of nuclear power plant, criteria for the site selection and the results for finding the optimum location of nuclear power plant. Ekmekçioğlu et al. [20] proposed fuzzy TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) integrated with fuzzy AHP (analytical hierarchy process) methodology to develop fuzzy multi-criteria SWOT analysis in order to selection of nuclear power plant site. Rechard et al. [21] proposed a process for site selection, characterization, and research and development for spent nuclear fuel and high-level waste disposal. Duncan et al. [22] presented that the bedrock around the determined coordinates is suitable for retarding radionuclide migration over a significant time period, and a repository design for the considered geological conditions. Li and Su [23] proposed a model to evaluate placement schemes of nuclear power plant planning by game theory, and optimal mathematical model and corresponding algorithm for the game of site selection of nuclear power plant to implement optimal planning. Shaver and Facella [24] proposed a process of site selection serves as the road map for decision-making on the location for the deep geological repository for Canada. Krütli et al. [25] proposed a procedure with a functional-dynamic view of public participation that combines the decision-making process (DMP) with specific types and extents of public participation and illustrate their arguments using a proposed site selection process for nuclear waste. Megahed [26] summarized the main findings of the feasibility study of nuclear power and desalination plant on El-Dabaa site. Kurt [27] presented fuzzy TOPSIS and generalized Choquet fuzzy integral algorithm for evaluation and selection of optimal locations for nuclear power plant in Turkey.Sanchez et al. [28] determined a technique for forming information granules based on the theory of uncertainty-based information. Hernandez et al. [29] proposed a hybrid learning method for interval A2-C1 type-1 non-singleton type-2 TSK fuzzy logic system that uses the recursive orthogonal least-squares algorithm to tune the type-1 consequent parameters, and the back-propagation algorithm to tune the interval type-2 antecedent parameters. Melin and Castillo [30] presented a review of type-2 fuzzy logic applications in pattern recognition, classification and clustering problems. Cortes-Rios et al. [31] proposed an extension of the simple tuning algorithm for fuzzy logic controllers based on the theory of type-2 fuzzy systems by using a parallel model implementation. Mendez et al. [32] presented the so-called interval type-1 non-singleton type-2 fuzzy logic roll gap controller.Also, the papers that are using type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS, type-2 fuzzy AHP and the combination of these two fuzzy techniques in MCDM problems are available. Kiliç and Kaya [33] proposed a new evaluation model for investment projects for development agencies operating in Turkey. Because of the ambiguities and relativities in real world, they used composition of type-2 fuzzy AHP and type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS methods for the investment project evaluation problem. Abdullah and Najib [34] presented a new FAHP characterized by interval type-2 fuzzy sets for linguistic variables. The proposed model is illustrated by a numerical example of work safety evaluation. Kahraman et al. [35] proposed an interval type-2 fuzzy AHP method together with a new ranking method for type-2 fuzzy sets and they applied the method to a supplier selection problem. Chen [36] presented the interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS procedure to determine the priority ranking orders of the alternatives under consideration of the multiple criteria evaluation/selection. Dymova et al. [37] proposed an interval type-2 fuzzy extension of the TOPSIS method realized with the use of α-cuts representation of the interval type-2 fuzzy values. Erdogan and Kaya [48] presented an integrated MCDM methodology based on type-2 fuzzy sets for selection among energy alternatives. Kılıç and Kaya [49] suggested a new city-ranking model based on type-2 fuzzy sets for development agencies operating in Turkey.In this paper, we aim to determine the best nuclear power plant location alternative in Turkey by using a fuzzy MCDM methodology based on type-2 fuzzy sets. For this aim, we used AHP and TOPSIS decision-making methodologies under fuzzy environment to find best alternative power plant location. The criteria weights are calculated with using type-2 fuzzy AHP method in the evaluation process and ranking of the alternatives are obtained with using type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS method. Sinop and Akkuyu are the two regions that were previously determined regions and chosen for the nuclear power plant location in Turkey by Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources [1] and Turkish Atomic Energy Authority [38]. The research studies are underway to find the location for the third nuclear power plant. According to the experts’ opinions and Turkish Atomic Energy Authority [38], the third alternatives are also thought between Ankara-Nallıhan, Beyşehir-Seydişehir, Akçakoca-Ereğli, Kırklareli-İğneada, Kırıkkale-Nevşehir regions. This paper tries to validate if the chosen alternatives are the best for Turkey and what should be the third alternative. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives information about the proposed type-2 based MCDM. Section 3 includes a real case application of selection for nuclear power plant location in Turkey. Finally, Section 4 includes obtained results and the future suggestions.As a developing country, Turkey's energy needs are increasing day by day. It is clear that the nuclear power plants, which are planned to be built in this country, will be a major contribution in meeting energy needs. After deciding the use of nuclear energy, the most important problem is to decide where the power plant should be established. In view of the energy needs, environmental, technical and economic concerns, Turkey must consider the selection of the best location for nuclear power plant and the main question is where the power plant should be invested in for gaining the best utility in Turkey. In this section, the proposed combined fuzzy MCDM methodology that is used in determining the best nuclear power plant location is explained. The combined fuzzy MCDM methodology that is consisting of the interval type-2 fuzzy AHP and interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS is used for a real-case study of evaluating the best nuclear power plant location. Because of the criteria weights cannot be obtained only by using TOPSIS method, the interval type-2 fuzzy AHP methodology is used to determine the evaluation criteria weights and then interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS methodology is also used to rank the location alternatives for nuclear power plant. In this section, firstly information about the fuzzy sets is given, then two MCDM methodologies that are used to find best alternative are introduced with interval type-2 fuzzy version. For this purpose, considering the uncertainties in the process, we applied interval type-2 fuzzy sets in order to obtain results closer to the truth.Fuzzy logic was introduced by Zadeh in 1965 [39]. The fuzzy sets define the data with the low, medium, and maximum limit values that reflect the uncertainty rather than defining them strictly [40]. Fuzzy logic is used to convert the uncertain data to the available information with using fuzzy sets, membership functions and fuzzy numbers. Type-2 fuzzy sets were developed by Zadeh as an extension of type-1 fuzzy sets. This type of fuzzy sets have membership degrees which are type-1 fuzzy sets and this type of fuzzy sets is very useful in cases where are exact the membership function of a fuzzy set cannot be determined [41].The main characteristic of the type-2 fuzzy sets is to be fuzzy of their membership function. That means their membership values are a function that can take values between [0,1]. Thus type-2 fuzzy sets are three-dimensional. Third dimension provides extra flexibility in dealing with uncertainty. These kinds of fuzzy sets are especially very useful if you cannot fully determine the membership functions, such as modeling a fuzzy set with the words. With using type-2 fuzzy sets, we can get better results than the type-1 sets in environments where uncertainty exists [42].As a result we can say that there is no need to extraordinarily fuzzy circumstances for use of type-2 fuzzy sets. Type-1 fuzzy sets approach can be considered as the first order of uncertainty in real life [43].Type-2 fuzzy sets are useful to minimize the impact of variability. Using of type-2 fuzzy sets in decision-making problems, with respect to the use of type-1 fuzzy sets is provides flexibility. Power plant location selection is a decision problem that also incorporates many uncertainties. The qualitative criteria for location selection cause uncertainty in decision-making process and to cope with this uncertainty, the fuzzy sets are successfully applied. In this paper, we refer to type-2 fuzzy sets to better reflect the inherent uncertainty involved in the process. Type-2 fuzzy sets are applied to the MCDM methods these are AHP and TOPSIS.If there exist qualitative variables, or people are supposed to prefer the best among the many choices – when an analytical way to make a successful decision is needed – the analytical hierarchy process (AHP) is one of the best ways for deciding among the complex criteria structure in different levels [8]. AHP is a MCDM method developed by Thomas L. Saaty [44]. AHP takes into account qualitative criteria in the evaluation process and compares them with making the pairwise comparison approach. Thus criteria weights are calculated in an analytical way. In this paper, AHP method proposed by Buckley is developed in the framework of interval type-2 fuzzy sets for determining the criteria weights to better reflect the uncertainties. The steps of proposed interval type-2 fuzzy AHP method are as follows [14,45]:Step 1. Decision hierarchy of criteria and alternatives are created.Step 2. Scale used to evaluate the criteria is determined. The scale, which is used to convert to linguistic terms into interval type-2 fuzzy sets for this paper is shown as Table 1.The membership functions of this scale that is used for energy decision-making in this paper are shown in Fig. 1.Step 3. Pairwise comparison matrices in the hierarchy are created for all criteria. Fuzzy pairwise comparison matrix can be created as follows:(1)A˜˜=1a˜˜12……a˜˜1ma˜˜211……a˜˜2m⋮⋮……⋮⋮⋮……⋮a˜˜1na˜˜2n……1(2)a˜˜ij=1a˜˜jifor example,a˜˜31=1a˜˜13(3)a˜˜=((a11U;a12U;a13U;a14U;H1(aU);H2(aU),(a11L;a12L;a13L;a14L;H1(aL);H2(aL))So,(4)1a˜˜=(1a14U;1a13U;1a12U;1a11U;H1(a12U);H2(a13U),(1a14L;1a13L;1a12L;1a11L;H1(a12L);H2(a13L)Step 4. Defuzzification is made for all the comparison matrices and consistency index is calculated. Consistency ratio is calculated by the following formulas. If the consistency index (CI) is smaller than 0.1, then the pairwise comparison matrices are consistent.(5)CI=λmax−nn−1(6)CR=CIRI“n” is the is the number of criteria which are compared and RI is the random index which varies randomly according to the criteria numberStep 5. The geometric mean of each criterion is calculated.(7)r˜˜i=[a˜˜i1⊗a˜˜i2⊗…⊗a˜˜im]1/n(2.24)(a˜˜ij)1/n=((a˜˜i1U)1/n;(a˜˜i2U)1/n;(a˜˜i3U)1/n;(a˜˜i4U)1/n;H1(ai2U);H2(ai3U),(a˜˜i1L)1/n;(a˜˜i2L)1/n;(a˜˜i3L)1/n;(a˜˜i4L)1/n;H1(ai2L);H2(ai3L))Step 6. The criteria weights are calculated with normalization process.(8)wi=r˜˜i=[r˜˜1⊕r˜˜2⊕…⊕r˜˜n]−1Step 7. Defuzzify the fuzzy numbers for determining the degree of importance of criteria.The TOPSIS method aims to calculate the shortest distance from the positive ideal solution (PIS) and the farthest distance from the negative ideal solution (NIS) to determine the best alternative (Chen et al., 2015) [52]. In this sub-section, the extended version, interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS method is presented for handling fuzzy multiple attributes group decision-making problems based on interval type-2 fuzzy sets by Lee and Chen [40]. Assume that there is a set X of alternatives, where X={x1, x2, …, xn}, and assume that there is a set F of attributes, where F={f1, f2, …, fm}. Assume that there are k decision-makers D1, D2,… and Dk. The set F of attributes can be divided into two sets F1 and F2, where F1 denotes the set of benefit attributes, F2 denotes the set of cost attributes, F1∩F2=ϕ, and F1∪F2=F. The proposed method is now presented as follows [40]:Step 1. Construct the decision matrix Ypof the pth decision-maker and construct the average decision matrixY¯, respectively, shown as follows:(9)Yp=(f˜ijp)m×n=x1x2x3…xnf1f2⋮⋮fmf11p≈f12p≈f13p≈…f1np≈f21p≈f21p≈……f2np≈⋮⋮……⋮⋮……fm1p≈fm2p≈fmnp≈(10)Y¯=(fijp)≈m×n,wherefij≈=(fij1≈⊕fij2≈...⊕fijk≈/k),fij≈is an interval type-2 fuzzy set, 1≤i≤m, 1≤j≤n, 1≤p≤k, and k denotes the number of decision-makers.The scale used in the scoring of alternatives and criteria are shown in Table 2.Step 2. Construct the weighting matrix Wpof the attributes of the pth decision-maker and construct the average weighting matrixW¯, respectively, shown as follows:(11)Wp=(wip≈)1×m=w1p≈f1w1p≈f1…wnp≈fm,(12)W¯=(wi≈)1×m,wi≈=(wi1≈⊕wi2≈⊕...⊕wik≈)/k,wi≈is an interval type-2 fuzzy set, 1≤i≤m, 1≤p≤k, and k denotes the number of decision makers.Step 3. Construct the weighted decision matrixY¯w,(13)Y¯w=(v≈ij)m×n=x1x2x3…xnf1f2⋮⋮fmv≈11v≈12v≈13…v≈1nv≈21v≈22……v≈2n⋮⋮……⋮⋮……v≈m1v≈m1v≈m1,DefinitionThe ranking valueRank(A˜˜i)of the trapezoidal interval type-2 fuzzy setA˜˜iis defined as follows:Step 4. Based on Eq. (14), calculate the ranking valueRank(v≈ij)of the interval type-2 fuzzy setv≈ij, where 1≤j≤n. Construct the ranking weighted decision matrixY¯w*,(15)Y¯w*=(Rank(v≈ij))m×n,where 1≤i≤m and 1≤j≤n.Step 5. Determine the positive ideal solutionx+=(v1+,v2+,…,vm+)and the negative-ideal solutionx−=(v1−,v2−,…,vm−), where(16)vi+=max1≤j≤n{Rank(v≈ij)},iffi∈F1min1≤j≤n{Rank(v≈ij)},iffi∈F2and(17)vi−=min1≤j≤n{Rank(v≈ij)},iffi∈F1max1≤j≤n{Rank(v≈ij)},iffi∈F2where F1denotes the set of benefit attributes, F2denotes the set of cost attributes, and 1≤i≤m.Step 6. Calculate the distance d+(xj) between each alternative xjand the positive ideal solution x+, shown as follows:(18)d+(xj)=∑i=1m(Rank(v≈ij)−vi+)2,where 1≤j≤n. Calculate the distance d−(xj) between each alternative xjand the negative-ideal solution x−, shown as follows:(19)d−(xj)=∑i=1m(Rank(v≈ij)−vi−)2,where 1≤j≤n.Step 7. Calculate the relative degree of closeness C(xj) of xjwith respect to the positive ideal solution x+, shown as follows:(20)C(xj)=d−(xj)d−(xj)+d+(xj),where 1≤j≤n.Step 8. Sort the values of C(xj)in a descending sequence, where 1≤j≤n. The larger the value of C(xj) means the higher the preference of the alternative xj, where 1≤j≤n.Rapid increase in world population and the use of technology in all areas of life increased energy utilization rates. Turkey has adopted a policy which use of nuclear energy to meet the energy needs. Nuclear energy was put on the agenda of Turkey in 1962, but due to a series of economic and social barriers the establishment of a nuclear power plant in Turkey was failed [46]. However, the steps taken recently have made significant progress on behalf of nuclear energy and even two regions were identified to be installed as nuclear plants locations. According to information received from the Natural Resources [1] and Turkish Atomic Energy Authority [38], the alternative locations are Ankara-Nallıhan, Beyşehir-Seydişehir, Akçakoca-Ereğli, Kırklareli-İğneada, Kırıkkale-Nevşehir for the third nuclear power plant. Regarding all these information, we are looking for answers to the following questions in our paper:•Where is the best place to build a nuclear power plant in Turkey between selected alternatives?Do the country's current policies regarding the location of nuclear power plants match with the evaluations by experts?Third nuclear power plant will be opened, where it should be?In order to rank the nuclear power plant location alternatives the addressed issues must be investigated such as (i) what are the candidate nuclear power plant locations in Turkey, (ii) what are the criteria to be considered in the decision-making process for selection, (iii) what are the weights of the criteria according to experts, (iv) how does each nuclear energy power plant location alternative contribute to each criterion, (v) what is the rank order of the different energy resources, (vi) how does the rank order of the energy resources change if the criteria weights are changed [47].We used a combined MCDM technique to investigate the answers to all these questions. The basic flow of this structure based on interval type-2 fuzzy sets is given in Fig. 2.The criteria determined for the purpose of evaluating and ranking alternative locations are taken from the relevant literature [14,17,48] and experts’ opinion. The evaluation criteria grouped under five main categories such as technical factors, economic factors, reliability and safety factors, natural conditions, welfare-related conditions and named as “main criteria”. Then the sub-criteria are disposed to the groups that correspond to the main criteria. The main and sub criteria are priory shown in Table 3.The alternatives are determined by Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources and Turkish Atomic Energy Authority [1,38]. The hierarchical representation of MCDM problem is as shown in Fig. 3. Decision makers are selected as three academics from universities in Turkey who previously published a lot of paper in this area of nuclear power plant location selection. They named as DM1, DM2 and DM3 along the paper.Before starting calculation to obtain criteria weights, firstly, the questionnaire results, which sent to experts, are examined whether they are consistent or not. Consistency analysis is used to assure a certain quality level of a decision in the decision making process. In order to test the value of consistency of the comparison matrix depended on n (the number of criteria that exposed to pairwise comparison), the consistency rate (CR) have to be computed. The consistency ratio is a ration between the consistency of a consistency index (CI) and the consistency of a random consistency index (RI). Its value should not exceed 0.1 for a pairwise comparison matrix [37]. The final consistency ratios for all of decision makers in our case study are shown in Table 4.A pairwise comparison matrix in the AHP method is an excellent way of determining the weights of the criteria or the alternatives. A comparison matrix divides the problem into sub-problems in a way that humans can solve these easily [38]. With this way, we calculate the weights of the evaluation criteria and sub criteria by pairwise comparison. According to Table 2, all pairwise comparisons are emerged consistent. After obtaining scores and analyzing consistency of them, criteria weights are calculated with using interval type-2 fuzzy AHP methodology. The weights for each criterion are obtained as shown Table 5.According to obtained results of criteria's weights, the most important main criterion is determined as “reliability and safety factors” and the most important sub-criterion is “man-made accidents”. After calculating criteria weights with interval type-2 fuzzy AHP, interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS is used to rank the alternatives. The weights that obtained from the interval type-2 fuzzy AHP is multiplied with the normalized decision matrix obtained from interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS methodology to combine these two methods. The weighted normalized interval type-2 values for AHP-TOPSIS combined MCDM process is shown as Table 6.Table 7shows the final ranking of alternatives with their closeness coefficients.According to Table 7, the alternative, named Sinop is determined as the best alternative location for nuclear power plant in Turkey. Turkish Government already decided to build a nuclear power plant in this area. Second alternative is also determined as Mersin-Akkuyu region. These results are also acceptable because authorities have started to work for the establishment of a second plant in this region. In this respect, the proposed fuzzy MCDM methodology seems to be consistent with the real world decisions by authorities. Kırklareli-İğneada is the third alternative by a factor of 0.51. In the next years, this alternative should be considered as a priority while a new nuclear power plant will be established. This alternative is followed by Beyşehir-Seydişehir, Kırıkkale-Nevşehir, Ankara-Nallıhan and Akçakoca-Ereğli. Beyşehir-Seydişehir, Kırıkkale-Nevşehir and Ankara-Nallıhan regions have close closeness coefficients, so all can be preferred after the alternative Kırklareli-İğneada. The last alternative is Akçakoca-Ereğli. That means that this alternative should be considered in the last row while the idea of decision of a new nuclear plant establishment is raised.As the last calculation, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to analyze the rankings by changing main criteria weights. For this aim, different scenarios are obtained with changing the weights of the critical criteria, which can be mentioned as the most or the least important criteria. For example, in the first scenario the weights of the “technical factors” and “reliability and safety factors” criteria are changed to see the effects of criteria weights on results. In second scenario, the weights of “natural and safety factors” and “reliability and safety factors” criteria are changed. In third scenario, “technical factors” and “economic factors” and finally in the fourth scenario “natural and safety factors” and “welfare-related factors” weights are changed, respectively. The current results and results obtained by changing the weight of different criteria are compared in terms of ranking of alternatives. Table 8shows the closeness coefficients of alternatives. Fig. 4also summaries sensitivity results.The alternatives that found as the first and second usually stay in the similar in different scenarios. This inference indicates that weights of the criteria have an impact on the results but these two alternatives are the dominant alternatives compared to others. Ankara-Nallıhan, Kırklareli-İğneada and Kırıkkale-Nevşehir alternatives are more sensitive to the changes on criteria weights.Countries need to diversify energy sources that required sustaining economic and social development. Establishing of nuclear power plants for the countries that need energy much will meet the energy needs and it is suggested as a solution to reduce external dependency. Thus, Turkey's government has decided to the establishment of nuclear power plants to meet its future energy deficit. After deciding on the use of nuclear energy followed questions to be answered is where the potential nuclear power plant should be established. The answer to this question depends on several criteria such as technical, economic, sociological and safety. During the decision process about the location of nuclear power plants, all these criteria must be evaluated and taken into consideration to give a better decision. MCDM methods have been applied for all of these criteria can be used simultaneously in evaluation of alternatives. Because all of these criteria cannot be evaluated numerically, fuzzy sets can be applied to get more accurate decisions about the problem. In order to reflect the uncertainty, which is in the nature of the process, in best way; interval type-2 fuzzy sets are applied.This paper includes the location selection problem for the nuclear power plants in Turkey. Based on the fuzzy MCDM, we analyzed the determination of the best nuclear power plant region. For this aim, a combined fuzzy MCDM that is based on type-2 fuzzy sets and consists of AHP and TOPSIS is proposed. Interval type-2 fuzzy AHP has been used to determine weights of the criteria and interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS has also been used in obtaining the final ranking of the alternatives. Alternatives are determined by Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources and Turkish Atomic Energy Authority. As a result, it is analyzed whether the same nuclear power plant region is selected as the best alternative with adopted methodology with the planned one to be established in Turkey. In addition, in the stage of establishing a new facility, it is suggested that which the region is the best candidate or which region should be unfavorable candidate. Sensitivity analysis is also conducted the changes on rankings with changing main criteria weights.As a future suggestion, different MCDM methods can be applied to find the best nuclear power plant location or different extension of ordinary fuzzy sets can be applied to check the results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
