@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Database workload management through CBR and fuzzy based characterization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed research introduces a way to manage the database workload in the DBMSs on the basis of the workload type that may be either OLTP or DSS.The main goal of the research is to manage the workload in DBMSs through characterization, scheduler and idleness detection modules.The database workload management is performed by using the case based reasoning characterization; Fuzzy logic based scheduling and finally detection of CPU Idleness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Workload,Autonomic DBMS,Characterization,Scheduling,Idleness detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Database Management System (DBMS) is used as a data source with financial, educational, web and other applications from last many years. Users are connected with the DBMS to update existing records and retrieving reports by executing workloads that consist of complex queries. In order to get the sufficient level of performance, arrangement of workloads is necessary. Rapid growth in data, maximum functionality and changing behavior tends the database workload to be more complex and tricky. Each DBMS experiences complex workloads that are difficult to manage by the humans; human experts take much time to manage database workload efficiently; even in some cases it may become impossible and leads toward malnourishment. This problem leads database practitioners, vendors and researchers toward new challenges. To achieve a satisfactory level of performance, either Database Administrator (DBA) or DBMSs must have the knowledge about the workload shifts. Efficient execution and resource allocation of workload is dependent on the workload type that may be either On Line Transaction Processing (OLTP) or Decision Support System (DSS). The research introduces a way to manage the workload in DBMSs on the basis of the workload type. The main goal of the research is to manage the workload in DBMSs through characterization, scheduler and idleness detection modules. The database workload management is performed by using the case based reasoning characterization; Fuzzy logic based scheduling and finally detection of CPU Idleness. Results are validated through experiments that are performed on real time and benchmark workload to reveal effectiveness and efficiency.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Complexity in Database Management System increases due to various factors such as functionality demands from the users, complex data types, diverse workload and huge data volume which is increasing with the passage of time. These factors cause brittleness and unmanageability in the DBMSs. Today's DBMSs also have to work as a Data Warehouse (DW), i.e., providing summarized and consolidated reports; heterogeneous, complex and ad-hoc workloads that involve number of aggregations, table joins, sorts and concurrent I/O's. To handle the database tasks, organizations hire number of expert Database Administrators and spending lot of money to get expected improvement, throughput and response. Usually DBAs have to take care of all the database tasks such as making policy for workload priorities, memory and storage configuration and such other tasks. The cost of hardware is decreasing but the cost of management is increasing. Performing workload management activities manually, by hiring experts causes increase in Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) [1–3]. Moreover, with the advent of the distributed systems and DWs, it become difficult and even in some cases impossible for DBA to manually organize, optimize and configure all the database tasks. For efficient workload management various approaches are adopted like workload or queries may be stopped for a while and resumed later on. However, when queries will be stopped during their execution then the executed part will be stored for a while in memory and used later on.There are three units in workload management, which are workload, resources and objectives. All these are co-related with each other. The workload uses some resources to meet the objectives of an organization or resources are allocated through different approaches to workload which has some management objectives. The workload has been evolved through three phases, i.e., capacity planning, resource sharing and performance oriented workload [4]. Capacity planning workload management is based on cost sharing; the idea behind the resource oriented approach is maximum resource utilization while in performance oriented approach focus is on business goals and objectives. In workload management, the main functions are workload frequency patterns, composition, intensity and required resources.Identification of workload type is not an easy task due to change in size and type at the different spans of the day, week and months. For example, stock exchange experiences more DSS workload than OLTP workload at the start of the day, turns to more OLTP than DSS during mid of the day and finally once again tends to DSS overnight to observe the whole day analysis and reporting. In general, workload is detected through two methods that are performance monitoring and characterization. Former is the reactive approach that takes action when performance has been degraded while the later is proactive approach to track the workload changes.There are certain problems with previous characterization approaches. For example, Elnaffer's characterization model [5] is based on the decision tree where handling of large decision trees is difficult and often there is a need of tree pruning to get the result that may lead to inaccuracy and lastly these are also difficult to set up. The research discussed in [6] classifies the workload on the basis of status variables; but problem with the approach is that status variable's values are recorded during workload execution that slows down the classification process. Most of the previous techniques are based on the assumptions or taking values from the query optimizers rather than calculating their actual values. However, in reality there is a large difference between guessed and actual values. Moreover, in previous work, workload classification is performed with execution of workload while our approach completes this task before execution starts.Main focus of the proposed research is to design and develop an Autonomous Workload Management (AWM) framework that can manage the DB workload in an autonomic way without any human intervention by knowing itself (resources, limitations, operating environment etc.). The concept and importance of the Autonomic DBMS (ADBMS) is already recognized by the DB researchers, practitioners and vendors. The research proposes three components which are workload characterization, scheduler and idleness detector to handle the DB workload proactively. Unique features of the research are workload characterization technique based on the CBR and Fuzzy Logic that characterizes and classifies the workload without affecting the execution time; impact based scheduling that arranges the workload with respect to its type and importance; and finally the CBR based idleness detection mechanism to use the free CPU cycles. The proposed characterization works in parallel with the user input and saves the precious execution time that ultimately enhances the DBMS efficiency. None of the techniques for workload scheduling in DBMSs has identified the percentage of the OLTP and DSS workload through Fuzzy logic. According to our survey, there is no published research that elaborates the concept of the Autonomous Workload Management in DBMSs or DWs. The proposed research is initiated with the aim that it would be a milestone toward the development of Autonomous Workload Management in DBMSs and DWs. The proposed research is validated through various experiments over real-time industrial and benchmark workloads. These experiments are performed by executing the OLTP and DSS like workloads in MySQL.Rest of the paper is organized as: Section 2 presents related work that includes the workload characterization, classification, scheduling and other workload management techniques. Section 3 elaborates the proposed solution for workload management where detailed steps of the workload characterization, scheduling and idleness detection are discussed. Section 4 presents experiments and results that have performed on the proposed as well as other well known workload management technique. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper with key future directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
