@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An eye-tracking study of the Elaboration Likelihood Model in online shopping

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Peripheral cue moderates elaboration on eye movements but not purchase intention.Purchase intention is different between high and low elaborations under positive cue but not negative cue.Under positive cue, high elaboration is longer fixation duration than low elaboration.Under negative cue, low elaboration is longer fixation duration than high elaboration.The relationship between purchase intention and eye movement is more significant in high elaboration with negative cue and in low elaboration with positive cue.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM),Eye movement,Peripheral cue,Attribute framing,e-Commerce,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study uses eye-tracking to explore the Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) in online shopping. The results show that the peripheral cue did not have moderating effect on purchase intention, but had moderating effect on eye movement. Regarding purchase intention, the high elaboration had higher purchase intention than the low elaboration with a positive peripheral cue, but there was no difference in purchase intention between the high and low elaboration with a negative peripheral cue. Regarding eye movement, with a positive peripheral cue, the high elaboration group was observed to have longer fixation duration than the low elaboration group in two areas of interest (AOIs); however, with a negative peripheral cue, the low elaboration group had longer fixation on the whole page and two AOIs. In addition, the relationship between purchase intention and eye movement of the AOIs is more significant in the high elaboration group when given a negative peripheral cue and in the low elaboration group when given a positive peripheral cue. This study not only examines the postulates of the ELM, but also contributes to a better understanding of the cognitive processes of the ELM. These findings have practical implications for e-sellers to identify characteristics of consumers’ elaboration in eye movement and designing customization and persuasive context for different elaboration groups in e-commerce.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapidly expanding growth of e-commerce, how consumers process information and the factors affecting their purchase decision become crucial. Studies have focused on the influence of consumers’ personality traits based on motivation and/or ability and by external stimulus such as promotion messages and interface design. This area has been studied from three perspectives. First, the cognitive models of consumer behavior when consumers recognize, search, evaluate, and purchase products (Darley et al. 2010). Second, the Web flow or usability study of how web content and features influence the user attention and experience (Oinas-Kukkonen 2000, Konradt et al. 2012, Ehmke and Wilson 2007, Hasan et al. 2012). Lastly, the study of visual marketing on how top-down (originated from the consumer’s personality traits) and bottom-up (the perceptual features or marketing messages) factors influence consumers’ attention, how they process information, their preferences, and final decisions (Wedel and Pieters 2007, Bialkova and van Trijp 2011).The Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) of Petty and Cacioppo (1986) illustrates how the key factors of consumer’s personal traits and external stimulus influence information elaboration which determine perception and behavior in e-commerce (e.g. Pickard et al. 2012, Sicilia and Ruiz 2010, Tam and Ho 2005). The core of the ELM is that the elaboration continuum is based on a person’s motivation and ability to think about and assess the qualities of the issue-relevant information in the persuasion context (Petty and Cacioppo 1986). With high motivation and high ability, elaboration likelihood is high, i.e., consumers tend to make a deeper and more conscious analysis of the issue-relevant information directly relating to his/her behavior. On the contrary, with low motivation and/or low ability, elaboration likelihood is low and consumers usually form their attitude or decision by some simple or peripheral cues (Petty and Cacioppo 1986). When dealing with the low elaboration group, framing message becomes a peripheral cue. This theory however has not been proven with consistency in consequent research results. Therefore, the issue deserves further investigation.Information search in decision making activates human attention mechanism (Sandhusen 2008). The amount of information transmitted through the optic nerve often exceeds what the brain can process, so the brain has evolved mechanisms that only select a subset of relevant information for further processing (Wedel and Pieters 2007). Compare to a self-reporting questionnaire, eye tracker can be a more accurate instrument – it not only reveals cognitive processing but also helps in detecting potentially more subtle information-salience effects. Accordingly, this study used eye movement to lay the groundwork for examining the ELM in online shopping, i.e., this study explored the influence of the elaboration levels on information processing and purchase decision, and explored the effect of peripheral cue on the extent to which customer elaborate or process information. The findings of this study could be used to identify the characteristics of consumers’ elaboration using eye movement and applied to the design of customization and persuasive context for different elaboration levels in e-commerce.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
