@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cluster ensemble framework based on the group method of data handling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A cluster ensemble framework based on the group method of data handling was proposed.The components of the CE-GMDH can be chosen according to the target of the application.Three novel transfer functions in CE-GMDH were proposed.CE-GMDH outperforms the other cluster ensemble algorithms and frameworks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cluster ensemble,GMDH,Evolutionary algorithm,Least squares,CSPA,Semidefinite programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cluster ensemble is a powerful method for improving both the robustness and the stability of unsupervised classification solutions. This paper introduced group method of data handling (GMDH) to cluster ensemble, and proposed a new cluster ensemble framework, which named cluster ensemble framework based on the group method of data handling (CE-GMDH). CE-GMDH consists of three components: an initial solution, a transfer function and an external criterion. Several CE-GMDH models can be built according to different types of transfer functions and external criteria. In this study, three novel models were proposed based on different transfer functions: least squares approach, cluster-based similarity partitioning algorithm and semidefinite programming. The performance of CE-GMDH was compared among different transfer functions, and with some state-of-the-art cluster ensemble algorithms and cluster ensemble frameworks on synthetic and real datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that CE-GMDH can improve the performance of cluster ensemble algorithms which used as the transfer functions through its unique modelling process. It also indicates that CE-GMDH achieves a better or comparable result than the other cluster ensemble algorithms and cluster ensemble frameworks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clustering is a process of grouping objects into different groups, such that the common properties of data in each cluster is high, and between different clusters is low. Clustering has been studied for several decades in the areas of pattern recognition, machine learning, applied statistics, communications and information theory and so on [1,2]. It has also been widely applied in many real world application domains, such as data mining [3], image segmentation [4], marketing [5,6] and customer relationship management [7].Cluster ensemble algorithms have shown to be effective in improving the accuracy and stability of single clustering algorithms [8]. Consensus functions in the cluster ensemble algorithms play an important role in the modelling process. The most often used consensus functions are based on hypergraph, voting, mutual information, co-association and mixture model [9]. To the best of our knowledge, most of these consensus functions generate the final result by combining multiple labels of a given dataset in a direct approach (without iteration). Therefore, the final ensemble clustering results obtained by these direct approaches are usually inaccuracy compared with a given partition of the data (also called ground truth).In this paper, we proposed a novel cluster ensemble framework, cluster ensemble framework based on the group method of data handling (CE-GMDH), aimed at improving the accuracy of the cluster ensemble algorithms. This framework consists of three components according to the theory of the group method of data handling (GMDH), including initial solutions, a transfer function and an external criterion. The initial solutions in the consensus function are the clustering solutions generated by the basic clustering algorithms. The transfer function is used to combine the initial solutions to generate some middle candidate solutions. External criteria in the GMDH are measures which evaluate the quality of the middle clustering solutions.The contribution of this work is that a clustering ensemble framework based on the group method of data handling was proposed. With this framework, different base cluster analysis algorithms, transfer functions and external criteria can be used as its components to generate the final optimal ensemble through an iterative approach.The basic idea of the CE-GMDH is to start from the initial solutions, generate new candidate solutions in every layer through combining every two middle candidate solutions from the preceding layer, then utilise external criteria to evaluate and select middle candidate solutions. This process continues until a final solution has been found.According to different initial solutions, transfer functions and external criteria chosen, several CE-GMDH models can be built. In this paper, we proposed three CE-GMDH models based on different transfer functions: one based on the least squares approach, one based on the cluster-based similarity partitioning algorithm (CSPA) proposed by Strehl and Ghosh [8] and another one based on the semidefinite programming (SDP) [10].CE-GMDH was compared with cluster ensemble algorithms which used as the transfer functions, other well-known cluster ensemble algorithms and cluster ensemble frameworks on several synthetic and real datasets. The experimental results on these datasets demonstrated that the CE-GMDH can improve the performance of cluster ensemble through its special modelling process. Statistical test results also indicated that CE-GMDH achieved better performances than the other cluster ensemble algorithms and cluster ensemble frameworks in terms of the evaluation measures.The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature. Then, we introduce the mechanism of GMDH in Section 3. Details of the proposed cluster ensemble framework are provided in Section 4. Section 5 presents the experimental design, results and analysis, and finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a new cluster ensemble framework based on GMDH was proposed. CE-GMDH set the clustering solutions obtained from the basic clustering algorithms as the initial cluster solutions firstly. Then it generates new middle candidate solutions by combining pairs of middle candidate solutions of the preceding layer from the initial solutions. The external criterion values of middle candidate solutions are calculated to select some of the best middle candidate solutions as new inputs for the next layer. This process is repeated until the optimal consensus clustering has been found. Three cluster ensemble algorithms, i.e., CE-GMDH(LS), CE-GMDH(CSPA) and CE-GMDH(SDP), were proposed. The CE-GMDH was compared with the other cluster ensemble methods and the other cluster ensemble frameworks on synthetic and real datasets. The comparison demonstrates that CE-GMDH outperforms the other cluster ensemble algorithms and the cluster ensemble frameworks both in terms of CH, RI and NMI and in the runtime. In addition, statistical test results support the above conclusions.In the future, to improve the performance of the proposed framework, we will try other transfer functions and external criteria. The runtime of CE-GMDH can be much improved by generating the basic clustering solutions and the middle candidate solutions in a parallel approach.