@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using a hybrid method to evaluate service innovation in the hotel industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The process of evaluating perceptions (qualitative scale) and data from operations (quantitative scale) should be merged for service innovation analysis.Hybrid MCDM methods (TFNs, TODIM and Choquet integral) deal with dependence relations and the shortcomings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Choquet integral,Triangular fuzzy numbers,Quantitative scales,Qualitative scales,Service innovation,TODIM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study develops a hybrid method to improve selection decision making in service innovation. Because criteria for customer perceptions tend to be vague and conflicting, the process of evaluating perceptions (qualitative scale) and operational data (quantitative scale) should be combined. This study proposes the concomitant evaluation of qualitative and quantitative scales using a hybrid approach that combines fuzzy set theory, a discrete multi-criteria method based on prospect theory (known as TODIM in Portuguese) and the non-addictive Choquet integral. The study assumes that the criteria possess interdependent relationships. The advantages of the proposed hybrid approach, which exhibits a hierarchical structure, have been demonstrated throughout the hot spring hotel industry. The proposed method demonstrates that it can be extremely useful for recommending operational alternatives because it clearly identifies the main criteria of the expressed alternatives. The results indicate that the approach easily and effectively accommodates criteria with gain and loss functions and can help practitioners improve their performance and reduce overall service innovation risks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to significant growth during the 21st century, globalization of the service industry requires distinct assessments of value, service level and scalability features to guarantee sustainable growth for the hotel industry while simultaneously achieving a certain level of service quality. The traditional hotel industry faces a similar challenge of developing and promoting more responsive, cost-competitive and customer-focused services that continuously improve their business processes [1–4]. Hotels have historically focused on their resources, constraints and policies when making decisions and reducing costs. Due to intense competition and decreasing profit margins, this approach is no longer sufficient and current business practices are becoming increasingly interconnected. Service innovation and its associated dynamic capabilities are key concerns and key drivers of consistent high performance over time [5,6]. Some hotels now focus on improving customer service to achieve competitive advantages [7–10]. Service innovation provides assessments of service performance, service problems, and service delivery; such assessments serve as a basis for employee and corporate rewards. Service innovation also helps firms improve their service capabilities during the design stages to upgrade their service quality. Hence, service innovation is an important issue for improving their competitiveness in competitive markets [11].Zhou et al. [12] suggested that products with a higher degree of innovation tend to achieve higher sales and financial performance, which ultimately leads to greater overall business performance. In contrast, Berry et al. [13] indicated that service firms can also achieve greater business performance through less innovative services. Based on this perspective, different types of service innovations should be studied in greater detail to determine how they affect market orientation and performance. The contribution of market orientation to new product/service performance has been examined by a number of empirical studies [12,14,15]. For instance, some researchers have verified a direct contribution of innovation to business performance [16,17], whereas other researchers have found no evidence in support of innovation for performance improvement [18–20]. Some studies have demonstrated innovation as a mediated effect on market orientation to new product/service performance [9,21]. That is, market-oriented service firms are inclined to produce or service innovation first, which leads to new service levels. Hence, the service innovation has to involve criteria from various hotels that collaborate to identify the correct way to design and implement the new service [22]. However, empirical studies remain equivocal regarding service sectors, and there is limited numerical support of service innovation in the literature.Service providers are expected to assess the innovation of products or services. Service innovation criteria are usually presented in qualitative measures. Because the criteria tend to be subjective, qualitative, or described with linguistic information, they are encumbered with subjective perceptions. Thus, it is extremely difficult for decision makers to express their preferences using exact numerical values [20,23]. Nevertheless, a firm must satisfy service innovation criteria under the constraint of subjective human preferences (uncertainty); however, this phenomenon has not been thoroughly examined. Regarding service innovation and fuzzy sets, Chien and Tsai [24] employed the Hamming distance and the possibility model to evaluate service quality, which do not consider information aggregation in the assumption of equal importance of criteria [25]. Chang and Yeh [26] used fuzzy multi-criteria to evaluate perceived service quality in airline firms. The traditional TODIM is incapable of solving a multi-hierarchical decision-making structure [27,28]. This study incorporates service innovation and TODIM into the generalized Choquet integral, which differs from previous studies on service innovation. This study compensates for the shortcomings of TODIM, which include the inability to address hierarchical relationships in proposed aspects, criteria and alternatives. Service innovation is an important source of competitive advantage and is expected to remain an important component of future business strategies. How can managers select and justify operational criteria among vague and subjective criteria that are subject to uncertainty?Current studies offer several evaluation approaches for service provider selection based on service innovation criteria. Most studies assess service innovation based on its alignment with the objectives of the identified firm and fulfillment of a set of assessment criteria. An evaluation of the criteria is usually highly subjective and unstructured because it relies significantly on a manager's experience, knowledge, and intuition. However, managers cannot consider all relevant criteria due to their limited rationality and capacity for information processing [29–31]. Hence, the evaluation approach is often ineffectively implemented because managers do not effectively use their knowledge and experience with a previous service provider selection as an input to the prioritization of service innovation. As a result, managers are not confident that service provider selection is being studied and applied to a set of criteria that maximizes their firm's service innovation benefits. How can managers apply their knowledge of previous (successful and unsuccessful) service providers to support future decision making (i.e., to improve the quality of decisions)?To effectively and empirically advance theory, more attention must be directed toward employing multi-criteria evaluations, assessing the validity of criteria and modifying unacceptable criteria through extensive literature reviews. Numerous criteria have been integrated that can be used to evaluate service innovation [1,2,9,10,21]. Firms can benefit from the development of reliable and valid criteria, and practitioners can apply these criteria as benchmarks to ensure continuous improvement. However, managers always encounter uncertainties in the evaluation and selection process. Many studies have argued that the service quality process is consumer-oriented and innovation-based. MCDM tools can be applied to address uncertainties in the service provider selection process [29,31–34]. MCDM allows managers to modify decision-making patterns in response to significant events in business environments. This study proposes a hybrid approach to capture the uncertainties in a complex decision-making environment through service innovation analysis with gain and loss functions. Although this proposed approach has not been addressed in previous studies, it is useful for storing a firm's strategic information and provides facilities for quantifying qualitative features in future decision-making processes.The objective of this study is to create a mechanism that can aid managers in analyzing and selecting service providers for service innovation. The proposed mechanism allows managers to make decisions in a more systematic, clear and comprehensive manner; it also enable them to consider a more diversified set of main criteria that critically influence their choices and recommendations. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed hybrid multi-criteria analysis for facilitating the service innovation process, an evaluation of the hot spring hotel industry is conducted in which service innovation criteria, which are critical to the success of hot spring hotels, are frequently applied. Although the fuzzy integral measurement model does not assume independence of each alternative, nonlinear situations are assumed to be independent.This study is structured with three main sessions. First, the fundamentals of fuzzy set theory, TODIM, and the Choquet integral are introduced because the traditional TODIM does not address the hierarchical structure. Second, the proposed hybrid method is presented. This study presents a detailed development of service provider selection of service innovation in the hot spring hotel industry using the fuzzy TODIM-Choquet integral; the results are explained. Last, the feasibility of this approach is analyzed and discussed, and plans for further work are outlined.This session presents a multiple-criteria decision support approach that develops a ranking and best-choice recommendation from a set of alternatives. Service innovation, MCDM and proposed evaluation criteria are discussed.Service innovation is a concept for improving service that is taken into practice. A service innovation always includes replicable criteria that can be identified and systematically reproduced in industry. The replicable criteria can be the service outcome or the service process. It benefits both the service producer and the customers, improves its developer's competitive edge and is based on some technology or systematic method [35].Service innovation is increasingly considered a set of criteria for a firm's competitive strategy [9,15,31]. Its primary objective is to assist firms with improving their service capabilities during the design stages of service criteria development. Berry et al. [13] examined an innovation model that requires firms to innovate on two distinct service innovation fronts: (1) innovation in how service is delivered and (2) innovation of new offerings that satisfy the core benefits sought by service customers. Tsiotsou [36] discovered the evidence of a service innovation as a mediating contribution and implied that market orientation cannot directly impact a firm's performance without service innovation. Day indicated that developing capabilities is a bricolage in service innovation and competitive advantage and argued that value is created through service innovation as perceived by the service provider. The capabilities-based view suggests that a firm can achieve a competitive advantage through the distinctive capabilities of the firm. However, an evaluation of the capabilities-based view is always based on both qualitative and quantitative scales.Zetenyi [37] suggested that the mean value of fuzzy numbers is a more appropriate representation of fuzzy numbers for human understanding and that the process of the proposed generalization incorporates the concept of service quality. Fuzzy numbers are one of the methods used to study uncertainty and are superior in the theoretical analysis of system with imprecise information and incomplete samples. Service quality is measured to assess service performance, to diagnose service problems, and to manage service delivery. Moreover, firms must expand their existing services and service capabilities to address the fundamental needs of their customers. Firms must focus on service innovation in shared solutions with customers and create breakthrough service offerings and processes [1,2,4,10,21].Melton and Hartline demonstrated that service innovation incorporates knowledge from customers and frontline employees, which ultimately impacts sales, cost and competitive performance. They also suggested that integrating customers, employees, suppliers and partners in the innovation process is beneficial to a firm's service performance. Hence, service provider selection is essential to the process of developing competitive advantages. By contributing to novel ways of value creation for firms and their service providers, innovation is an effective way to accelerate growth and profitability in service firms. This study attempts to conceptualize service innovation criteria that examine service innovation implementation and the manner in which service firms create value through innovation, that is, customer-centric; this area has received scant empirical attention [4,9,31,38].The combination of fuzzy set theory, TODIM and the Choquet integral is a novel approach. TODIM is a discrete multi-criteria method founded on prospect theory. The TODIM method has been successfully used and empirically validated in different applications [32]. Although not all multi-criteria problems address risk, the shape of the value function of TODIM is identical to the gain and loss function of prospect theory. Gomes et al. apply TODIM to investigate and to recommend options for upstream projects in the natural gas reserves of the Mexilhão field in the Santos Basin of Brazil. Gomes and Rangel [27] presented an evaluation of residential properties with real estate agents in Brazil and defined a reference value for the rents of those properties using the TODIM method of multi-criteria decision. Tseng et al. [3] addressed fuzzy set theory and TODIM to assist managers in improving environmental performance and reducing overall risks of green supply chain management.The fuzzy TODIM evaluation criteria are subjective, qualitative, and described with linguistic information [39]. Fuzzy set theory provides a more desirable evaluation tool for managers. This theory addresses the vagueness of human thought and expression in decision making. In particular, fuzzy set theory tackles the ambiguities involved in the process of linguistic estimation and provides a beneficial method for converting these linguistic terms into triangular fuzzy numbers by incorporating defuzzification operations in the process. The defuzzification captures the importance of the criteria based on the opinions of decision makers [23,28]. However, no study has jointly considered fuzzy set theory and TODIM. By proposing a hybrid fuzzy set and TODIM approach, this study enables the qualitative measures to be presented in linguistic terms by TFNs and to be subsequently defuzzified into a crisp value for analysis. TODIM is applied to evaluate the alternatives using gain and loss functions. The service innovation implementation minimizes risks and costs. Hence, fuzzy TODIM is proposed in this study.The success of a fuzzy integral depends on the appropriate representation of fuzzy measures, which capture the importance of an individual criterion or a combination of criteria. The generalized Choquet integral is represented by intervals, whereas fuzzy measures are represented by real numbers. A Choquet integral is an extension of the standard fuzzy integral [40]. This holistic utilization of the fuzzy integral is an important component of related research that provides information on integration capability. Many studies have applied a Choquet integral in different situations. Chiang [41] demonstrated acceptable classification results using the proposed aggregator to integrate the memberships of several clusters in a complex unconstrained handwritten digit recognition domain. Chen and Tzeng [42] demonstrated that a suitable traffic assignment model can be a powerful tool for describing the characteristics of traffic behavior within a road network; the results explain more interactivity and uncertainty in traffic among links compared with a traditional model.This hybrid approach can assist professionals in service innovation to clearly evaluate alternatives using criteria defined by specialists. In general, TODIM can be used for qualitative and quantitative criteria. However, few studies have addressed this issue. Verbal scales of qualitative criteria are converted into cardinal scales, and both types of scales are normalized. The relative measure of dominance of one alternative over another alternative is determined for each pair of alternatives.In the modern dynamic business environment, service innovation is critical for establishing value-added content [11,43]. Various service innovation criteria have been proposed in the literature [44,45], including infrastructure capability (AS1), knowledge capability (AS2), process capability (AS3), market capability (AS4), R&D capability (AS5), innovation capability (AS6) and technology capability (AS7).Gold et al. [46] and Chuang [47] explained that infrastructure capability includes criteria of technology, structure, and culture, whereas process capability includes criteria of acquisition, conversion, application, and security. The latter three aspects are associated with thirteen criteria developed by Wang et al. [48], who suggested that the firm should collaborate with R&D, infrastructure, marketing and innovative decision capabilities. These capabilities would successfully accelerate service innovation.Camarinha-Matos and Afsarmanesh [49] implied that service innovation is based on value co-creation. In technology-oriented and technology-driven innovation, service innovation is the result of customization of new technologies for new service development in focal firms that generally do not possess all competences; they are established through diverse partnerships named collaborative networks. Hence, the innovative-driven organization (C2) makes a vast investment in information technologies (C1) and development of business culture (C3), (e.g., the culture may become paperless in the operational process) but invests little in acquisition knowledge management processes (C4), conversion knowledge (C5), application of innovative knowledge (C6) and security in operations knowledge (C7). Thus, the organization exhibits a strong infrastructure capability but exhibits a weak process capability. A firm's ability to promote and sell services and products is based on the understanding of the demands of their customers, which is primarily influenced by market share, service innovation competitiveness (C9), specialized marketing units (C10), monitoring market forces (C11), and the success rate of R&D products/services (C13); all of which were assessed subjectively [38,50].Spohrer et al. [51] defined a service system as a value co-production configuration of people, technology, internal and external service systems, and shared information. Hence, service systems have internal and external structures in which value is directly or indirectly co-produced with other service systems. Moller et al. [2] demonstrated that service innovation can be initiated by the customer and advocated by a service provider. In addition, R&D might help a firm to expand its existing technologies and improve its R&D function. To develop an interdisciplinary and intercultural approach to service research, Spohrer and Maglio [11] proposed the concept of “Service Science, Management and Engineering”. However, innovation processes differ slightly between service and manufacturing firms. Sheehan [52] explained that innovation in the service sector relies less on in-house R&D than on the manufacturing sector. The in-house R&D is primarily composed of self-generated innovative products/services (C13), products/services applications (C14) and innovativeness of R&D products/services (C15). These criteria involve participants from various firms who collaborate to identify the correct way to design and implement the new service [3,38].Innovative decision-making is the ability to execute new product/service decisions. This type of decision is composed of complex individual skills, assets and accumulated knowledge exercised through production processes and enables firms to coordinate activities and to utilize their resources [53]. This includes the intensity of collaboration with other firms or R&D centers (C16), R&D knowledge-sharing ability (C17), forecasting and evaluating technological innovation (C18), and entrepreneurial innovation initiatives (C19), which were assessed subjectively [34,38,50,54]. Moreover, innovative decisions are essential for establishing a firm's competitive advantage. Note that this study considers the collective evaluation results of service innovation; thus, the information of one criterion may be submerged by another criterion.Table 1presents the criteria used to evaluate service innovation. When using multiple criteria, the proposed analysis can assist evaluators in selecting the most appropriate alternatives from a finite set of suppliers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
