@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effect of perceived media capability on status updates in microblogs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study investigates status updates from impulsive and reflective mechanisms.We investigate the effects of microblogs’ capabilities on urge to update status.Capability for relieving negative emotion has no impact on urge to update status.All of the other capabilities have significant impacts on urge to update status.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Urge to update status,Media capability,Microblog,Sharing unique content,Strengthening positive emotion,Relieving negative emotion,Maintaining interconnectivity,Enhancing unidirectional relationship,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Compared with traditional information sharing in virtual communities, the status update in microblogs is more spontaneous and less rational. Users do not deliberately plan or arrange to update their real-time status but act in a sudden and unplanned manner. In this regard, purely rational theories, such as planned behavior and social exchange theories, are inappropriate in understanding status updates in microblogs. Hence, this study investigates status update behavior by integrating impulsive and reflective mechanisms. Specifically, a research model is built to investigate how microblog capabilities fulfill users’ media needs, including impulsive- and rational-oriented needs, and drive their urge to update their status. Online survey data from 523 microblog users in China are utilized to validate the proposed model and hypotheses. Results indicate that the urge of users to update their status is significantly influenced by the capabilities of microblogs to share unique content, strengthen positive emotion, maintain interconnectivity, and enhance unidirectional relationships. However, the capability of microblogs to relieve negative emotion does not significantly affect the urge of users to update their status.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A microblog is a social medium where users can instantly promote interaction with other users regarding various issues and contexts, such as personal experience, breaking news, and social awareness (Java et al., 2007). Compared with traditional blogs, microblogs allow individuals to exchange smaller elements of content, such as short sentences in 140 words, images, or video links, through web-based and mobile applications (Kaplan and Haenlein, 2011; Oh et al., 2013). Microblogs have experienced explosive development and popularity in recent years. For example, Twitter, the first microblogging service in the world, has more than 500 million registered users worldwide, among which 115 million are active users that post 58 million updates every day (Brain, 2013).The effectiveness of microblogs depends on users’ voluntary contributions, including original content generation (i.e., tweeting) and content diffusion (i.e., retweeting). This study investigates the antecedents of tweeting behavior, namely, status update, which is defined as individuals’ behavior of sharing their present feelings and experiences through microblogging (Lin and Qiu, 2013). Real-time status updates in microblogs are beneficial to social, economic, and political issues (Lee and Ma, 2012). For example, the importance of microblogging has been shown to promote awareness during a crisis (Tobias, 2011). A study has also found that Twitter is becoming a critical platform for companies to influence consumers’ opinions (Bulearca and Bulearca, 2010). However, anecdotal evidence has indicated that only a small proportion of microblog users actively post status updates after their initial use of the medium (Brain, 2013). On Twitter, 85% of all tweets are contributed by the top 15% of Twitter users (Richter, 2013). Extant research on microblogs has focused on the general adoption of microblogs (Günther et al., 2009; Zhao and Rosson, 2009); only a few empirical studies have investigated the underlying mechanism and antecedents of real-time status updates in microblogs. Therefore, understanding why users update their status in microblogs is important for both research and practice.Previous studies on information sharing behavior in traditional virtual communities (e.g., discussion forums, weblogs, and Wikipedia) are primarily based on rational cognitive theories, such as planned behavior and social exchange theories, which posit that individuals attempt to share information based on the anticipated benefits resulting from this behavior (e.g., reputation, reciprocity, and reward) (Kankanhalli et al., 2005). However, this rational perspective overlooks the impulsive determinants of information sharing behavior, particularly in terms of status updates. Strack et al. (2006) claimed that all human forms of behavior are determined by a joint function of reflective and impulsive mechanisms, and the relative contribution of these two mechanisms depends on personal and contextual circumstances. Similarly, Hofmann et al. (2009) proposed that the production of impulsive and deliberate forms of behavior is mainly due to the “structurally different systems of information processing” (p. 164). Compared with the reflective system acting in deliberate and controlled forms, the impulsive system typically operates in automatic and spontaneous forms and is created or strengthened by external stimuli (e.g., temporal or spatial stimulus input), affective reactions (e.g., positive or negative emotions generated from the organism), and behavior preparedness (e.g., the ability to quickly respond to the environment in conformity with one’s needs) (Hofmann et al., 2009). In other words, the impulsive system acts immediately and automatically with a corresponding urge to approach the specific time and space points, whereas the reflective system functions with deliberate evaluations, strategic plans, and stable intentions (West, 2007).Status updates in microblogs have been found to be motivated by the provision of real-time situational awareness during a crisis (Tobias, 2011), release of emotional stress (Zhao and Rosson, 2009), attainment of contact gratification (Chen, 2011), and formation of community associations (Java et al., 2007). While the first two aspects reflect the impulsive mechanism of status update behavior in microblogs in terms of spontaneity, emotionality, and unpredictability, the last two aspects imply the rational mechanism of status update behavior in microblogs on the basis of planned, deliberate, and reasoned actions. Hence, this study regards status updates in microblog as a joint function of reflective and impulsive mechanisms.However, the impulsive mechanism tends to be more salient in the process of status update in microblogs than information sharing in traditional online communities. This phenomenon is mainly due to the fact that the growth of smartphones and new technologies (e.g., 3G/4G mobile communications and mobile applications) has expanded opportunities for impulsive status update by increasing information accessibility and the ease with which sharing can be performed. A total of 78% of Twitter’s active users are on mobile (Twitter, 2014). In the mobile environment, users are encouraged to record and share content anytime and anywhere through the use of their mobile phones (Gaonkar et al., 2008). The convenient and easy-to-use mobile environment results in a relatively fast and parallel decision-making process as well as subjective bias with reduced cognitive assessment. In this case, users are likely to become vulnerable in the temporal and spatial sense, and decision making becomes increasingly exciting and irresistible (Rook and Gardner, 1993). Hence, the “urge to update status” (i.e., the desire of an individual to share in microblogs what he/she is doing or feeling at the present time and location) instead of the “intention to update status” (i.e., conscious or deliberate sharing of information in microblogs) is investigated in this study.Given that status update is more impulsive than rational, the use of purely rational cognitive theories (e.g., planned behavior and social exchange theories) may be inappropriate. Media needs theory, which highlights needs fulfillment and encompasses both impulsive and rational elements, may be suitable in understanding the underlying mechanism of real-time status update in microblogs. The impulsive mechanism functions when needs are spontaneous, emotional, and readily triggered by external cues (Hofmann et al., 2009), whereas the rational mechanism plays an important role when needs are intended, selective (often positively skewed) and deliberated (Shao, 2009). Previous studies have shown that users adopt short messaging services in the pursuit of their needs for affection, escape, convenience, and low cost (Leung, 2007) as well as their needs for relatedness and competence in the use of video games (Tamborini et al., 2010). In accordance with the assumption of real-time status update, media needs theory explains the behavior of users from an integrated perspective rather than a completely rational perspective (Ryan and Deci, 2002). Based on media needs theory, we posit that users are likely to update their status in microblogs in real time when they perceive that microblogs can provide various media capabilities to fulfill their media needs. In this case, we claim that the media capabilities of microblogs that can fulfill users’ related media needs would enhance the possibility of a user to engage in real-time status update.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the theoretical background of the study. Section 3 shows the development of the research model. The hypotheses derived from this model are tested with online survey data in this section, and the results are presented. Section 4 introduces the methodology, and Section 5 presents the data analysis and results. The last section, Section 6, provides a discussion of the findings and the study’s conclusions. The theoretical and practical implications and limitations of the study as well as directions for future research are also presented.A microblog is a type of social media through which individuals can create, exchange, share, and comment on information with other users (Java et al., 2007). Microblogs allow their users to broadcast activities, interact with others, build their reputation, and release their pent-up emotions in real time. Therefore, microblog users are more of information reporters and producers than audience and consumers (Brabham, 2008; Kaplan and Haenlein, 2011).Previous qualitative studies have investigated the features of real-time status updates in microblogs from different perspectives. Java et al. (2007) identified four categories of content generation in microblogs, namely, daily chatter, conversations, information sharing, and news reporting. Zhao and Rosson (2009) identified three types of content that people tweet, namely, regular life update, real-time information, and people-based RSS feeds. Mischaud (2007) found that the majority of microblog users have shifted from answering the question “what are you doing” to sharing news and publishing their personal thoughts and opinions. However, only a few studies have empirically investigated the underlying mechanism and antecedents of status update in microblogs.Status update in microblogs differs from information sharing in traditional virtual communities in at least two aspects. First, information- or knowledge-sharing behaviors in traditional virtual communities primarily relate to users’ previous experiences and knowledge, whereas status update in microblogs primarily relate to users’ present experiences and feelings. For example, status updates in microblogs are usually generated by affective reactions triggered by external stimuli, such as such as emergencies, special events, and breaking news (Tobias, 2011). This affective-oriented reaction can comprise positive or negative emotions that incite the wants, desires, and urges of an individual (Hofmann et al., 2009). Second, unlike intention-driven information sharing, status update behavior preparedness (e.g., the urge to update one’s status) is a spontaneous and automatic internal drive that does not involve prior consultation or evaluation. As a result, users tend to devote minimal time and effort to update their status deliberately. Utility-oriented theories based on stable intentions, such as the theory of planned behavior (Tohidinia and Mosakhani, 2010) and social exchange theory (Kankanhalli et al., 2005), may not be able to explain the less-rational nature of status update in microblogs. Media needs theory is believed to be appropriate in understanding the underlying mechanism of real-time status update in microblogs because it involves rational-oriented needs, such as control of others’ impressions and desire for fame in the use of user-generated media (Shao, 2009), and impulsive-oriented needs, such as the pleasure obtained from crowdsourcing (Brabham, 2008). In the following subsection, previous literature on media needs theory and the corresponding capabilities of microblogs to satisfy users’ various media needs in status update is reviewed.Media needs theory was initially developed by Katz et al. (1973) to explain the media behavior of individuals based on their psychological features, such as needs, desires, and urges. Referring to the social and psychological functions of media, Katz et al. (1973) proposed five types of needs that individuals aim to satisfy through media usage; these five are cognitive needs (the need to strengthen information, knowledge, and understanding), positive affective needs (the need to enhance pleasurable and emotional experiences), tension release needs (the need to escape or the need for emotion relief, which weakens the contact of individuals with themselves and their social role), personal integrative needs (the need to strengthen contact with family, friends, and the world), and social integrative needs (the need to strengthen confidence, stability, and status). These five classifications of needs have been reported in the use of various types of media, such as short message service for mobile messaging (Leung, 2007), crowdsourcing applications (Brabham, 2008), user-generated media (Shao, 2009), and Twitter use (Lee and Cho, 2011).Media needs theory involves impulsive and reflective determinants of human behavior. The first three media needs, namely, cognitive needs (i.e., sharing unique content in the context of this study), positive affective needs, and tension release needs can be viewed as impulsive-oriented needs (Brabham, 2008; Leung, 2007). Impulsive-oriented needs, also known as spontaneous needs (i.e., the needs buried deep in one’s mind), act as innate psychological features that provide the foundation of motivation and direction of the action (Deci and Ryan, 2000). Impulsive-oriented needs, serving as psychological feelings of “want,” “desire,” or “impulse,” are experienced without conscious awareness and promote the behavior of individuals with a degree of attraction (West, 2007). Hence, they cause individuals to engage in a behavior impulsively at a specific time. Given the experience of time constraint and psychological conflict in the process of real-time status update in microblogs, the current state of mind of users generated by external stimuli (e.g., temporal or spatial cues), emotional states (e.g., positive or negative emotions), and internal drives (e.g., the urge) serves as the impulsive force that impels the specific action (Hofmann et al., 2009). Evidence for this point has been provided by the finding that status update in microblogs provides situational awareness during a crisis (Tobias, 2011) and releases emotional stress (Zhao and Rosson, 2009). Hence, the satisfaction of these media needs is spontaneous, emotional, and readily triggered by external cues (Hofmann et al., 2009), which can explain the impulsive determinants of real-time status update in microblogs.In contrast to impulsive-oriented needs, rational-oriented needs (i.e., deliberate needs), including personal and social integrative needs, are relatively more stable, predetermined, rational, and conscious (Tamborini et al., 2010). Given that microblogs are utilized for information seeking and social interaction, they provide an avenue for individuals to satisfy their deliberate media needs (e.g., keeping in touch with friends and seeking help and opinions) (Zhao and Rosson, 2009). In this regard, when users experience a desire to update their status in microblogs, they are actually motivated to pursue their deliberate media needs through real-time status update to maximize their media utility. Therefore, users publish their present feelings and experiences to pursue rational-oriented media needs, thereby inducing the rational-based determinants of behavior. The satisfaction of these media needs is deliberate and can explain the rational determinants of users’ media usage.To summarize these two lines of reasoning, media needs theory that involves both impulsive and rational needs is more appropriate to explain the underlying mechanism of microblog status update as opposed to mainstream reasoned action theories.Basic needs, which represent the innate requirements rather than the acquired motives of an individual, can be gratified by external conditions (Ryan and Deci, 2002). For example, media capabilities positively influence social presence and user satisfaction (Tang et al., 2013). Similarly, the functional capability of the application service provider has a significant positive impact on perceived provider performance and satisfaction with this provider (Susarla et al., 2003). Given the increase in speed and the reduction in cost, IT infrastructure/IT support has also been found to have a direct and indirect effect on knowledge sharing behavior (Yang and Chen, 2007). Based on these findings, we claim that an individual’s urge to update his or her status in microblogs is sparked by the capabilities of microblogs to fulfill the individual’s different media needs.According to previous literature, the technological capability of the application service provider refers to users’ perceptions about such capability in terms of the functionality of the software (e.g., in supporting their needs) (Susarla et al., 2003). Despite the various capabilities of microblogs to access, retain, and deploy information, we focus on the media capabilities that facilitate real-time status update in microblogs. In this regard, we define media capabilities as users’ perceptions about the capabilities of microblogs to fulfill users’ media needs related to status update. Based on the five classifications of media needs proposed by Katz et al., (1973) and extant literature on microblogs, we propose five capabilities of microblogs that enable users to address their media needs through real-time status update.First, cognitive needs are satisfied by strengthening users’ information, knowledge, and understanding through media use. In the context of real-time status update, such cognitive needs are satisfied and strengthened primarily by sharing unique content in real time because of the mobility and pervasive access to microblogs (Zhao and Rosson, 2009). This capability, sharing unique content, is defined as the capability of a microblog to enable users to provide and share novel information (oftentimes in an unplanned and spontaneous manner). Unlike traditional media, microblogs act as seminal channels for users to function simultaneously as reporters and audience members. Posting a status update helps users satisfy their cognitive needs of “giving” in addition to “receiving” information. Users record and post valuable content or personal thoughts on their microblogs for further understanding and memorization (Zhao and Rosson, 2009). These personal benefits can be recast as “to develop good taste,” “to want to study,” “to understand what goes on in the world,” and “to obtain useful information for daily life” (Katz et al., 1973, p. 171).Second, microblogs help users fulfill their positive affective needs by strengthening positive emotions. This capability, strengthening positive emotions, is the capability of microblogs to strengthen the pleasurable and emotional experience of users in real time. Individuals can re-experience a pleasurable emotion by posting real-time status updates and emotional events (e.g., declarations of pleasure) incited by intuitive reactions to satisfy their positive affective needs (Thelwall et al., 2011). The visibility of information in microblogs reinforces the perceived positive emotion. Therefore, a microblog user can post status updates to “raise morale,” “experience beauty, “be entertained,” and “re-experience previous events” (Katz et al., 1973, p. 170).Third, microblogs allow users to relieve negative emotions or liberate themselves from feelings of tension to fulfill their tension release needs. This capability, relieving negative emotion, is the capability of microblogs to help users “leave” reality and abreact themselves (Verhagen et al., 2011). In other words, microblogs provide a platform for users to escape from and release negative feelings through real-time status updates.Fourth, personal integrative needs refer to the needs to strengthen relationships with other people who are perceived as important. Interpersonal relationship can be maintained by real-time status update in microblogs, such as information sharing with family and friends. This capability, maintaining interconnectivity, is defined as the capability of microblogs to maintain contact relationship with important others. Broadcasting of information in microblogs has been found to fulfill the relational needs of users, such as those related to their personal perception, common ground, and connectedness (Zhao and Rosson, 2009).Lastly, social integrative needs refer to the needs to achieve credibility, confidence, stability, and status within respective communities (Katz et al., 1973). In the context of microblogs, social integrative needs are fulfilled primarily by the positive evaluations or responses obtained from the microblogging community (e.g., obtaining followers, liking, commenting, replying, and retweeting). In other words, the reputation and social role of an individual user are built and reinforced based on the responses of other users, which in turn encourage active usage behavior (Davis, 2001). A user gains increased confidence, pride, satisfaction, and prominence when he/she receives positive responses from other users; this condition may eventually result in increased popularity of the user within the online community.Enhancing unidirectional relationship is an important capability to help users fulfill social integrative needs in microblogs (i.e., improving social status and reputation in the community) because peer reactions and evaluations are critical in achieving status within the microblog community. In the context of microblogs, the act of following is unidirectional, that is, a user may be followed by any number of others but do not need to follow back (Huberman et al., 2009). Hence, if a user posts interesting information in microblogs, other users can easily accept and approve the information by retweeting, forwarding, and commenting. These positive peer reactions and evaluations strengthen the credibility, stability, and status of a particular user within the microblogging community (Westerman et al., 2012).Table 1summarizes the abovementioned capabilities of microblogs to fulfill the media needs of users via real-time status update.This study investigates the antecedents of the urge of microblog users to update their status. Fig. 1shows the theoretical model of this study.Urge can be defined as “a state of desire experienced upon encountering an object in the environment” (Beatty and Ferrell, 1998, p. 172). Accordingly, we define the urge to update status as the desire of an individual to share in microblogs what he/she is doing or feeling at the present time and location. Urge emphasizes the dynamic and fluid nature of real-time behavior (e.g., to be active in a temporal and spatial sense), whereas intention focuses on the stable status of the behavior motivation (West, 2007). According to the literature on impulsive behavior, behavioral urge has been widely used to explain the antecedent state of impulsive behavior (Beatty and Ferrell, 1998; Verhagen and van Dolen, 2011). For example, Beatty and Ferrell (1998) noted that a strong, irresistible urge precedes the actual action and is positively related to the tendency of an individual to engage in the actual behavior. As individuals experience more urges, their likelihood to engage in the related behavior increases (Verhagen and van Dolen, 2011). Given the difficulty of capturing actual behavior at the appropriate time and setting (Beatty and Ferrell, 1998), we employ the behavioral urge to update status as a precursor of real-time status update and postulate that individuals experience a strong urge before posting a status update in their microblogs.According to media needs theory, the needs generated by external cues and emotional states are spontaneous needs because the needs deep within one’s mind are readily triggered when external stimuli is encountered (West, 2007). In the context of status update in microblogs, sharing unique content, strengthening positive emotion, and relieving negative emotion are proposed as the capabilities of a microblog to fulfill users’ spontaneous media needs.The capability to share unique content can allow users to strengthen their real-time information, knowledge, and understanding via status update in microblogs. Sharing unique content indicates that the information being shared is original, unique, and specific (Wang and Strong, 1996). Previous studies have investigated the relationship between unique content and behavioral response. For instance, Lerman and Ghosh (2010) found that the dynamism of information is essential in information dissemination. Unique information and particular goals are presented to motivate individuals into providing more contributions (Ling et al., 2005). Hence, an individual contributes more when the content is highly unique.In the microblogging context, an individual experiences an urgent desire to broadcast a unique event that he/she has just experienced for further acquisition, memorization, and understanding of such unique information (Zhao and Rosson, 2009). Given that microblogs allow for convenient access and high mobility, individuals can share unique content in microblogs anytime and anywhere. Therefore, we hypothesize that an individual experiences a strong urge to update his/her status in a microblog platform when his/her perception toward the capability of the microblog to share unique content in a timely manner is intensified. Therefore, the following hypothesis is established.H1The perception of users toward the capability of a microblog to share unique content in a timely manner is positively related with the users’ urge to update their status.Highly arousing emotions serve as driving forces of impulsive behavior (Verplanken et al., 2005). These emotions include not only positive moods, such as contentment, happiness, love, and pride (Verhagen and van Dolen, 2011), but also negative moods, such as anger, sadness, fear, and shame (Laros and Steenkamp, 2005); both moods subsequently lead to the urge to engage in actual behavior. Therefore, emotional processes are key determinants of final actions and responses (Thelwall et al., 2011).Strengthening positive emotion is related to the reinforcement of pleasurable and emotional experience, and relieving negative emotion is related to the release or escape from negative emotional experience (Katz et al., 1973). Based on previous literature (Beatty and Ferrell, 1998; Verhagen and van Dolen, 2011), we regard strengthening positive emotion and relieving negative emotion as drivers of urge. Therefore, the capabilities of microblogs to satisfy users’ emotional experiences by strengthening their positive emotions and relieving their negative emotions significantly influence the urge of users to post a status update. Therefore, the following hypotheses are established.H2The perception of users toward the capability of a microblog to strengthen positive emotion is positively related with their urge to update their status.The perception of users toward the capability of a microblog to relieve negative emotion is positively related with their urge to update their status.In addition to spontaneous needs, users also attempt to fulfill several deliberate or rational needs by updating their status in microblogs. Deliberate needs are pre-determined and stable needs that users attempt to fulfill by using media. In this study, we propose that personal and social integrative needs are deliberate needs that can be fulfilled by the capabilities of microblogs.As a social platform, a microblog offers a new means for social connection and helps maintain relationships within a specific community. The connection among microblog users is sustained via status update, which fulfills the users’ personal integrative needs to maintain relationships with their family, friends, and the world (Chen, 2011; Lee and Cho, 2011). Previous studies have demonstrated that the need of an individual to connect with other users positively influences his/her microblogging experience and duration (Chen, 2011). Similarly, the benefit provided by communication has been identified as a key determinant in the microblog adoption decision (Günther et al., 2009).Specifically, microblogs are designed to support direct and indirect information update to satisfy the personal integrative needs of their users. Direct update is for special populations, such as friends and family, whereas indirect update is publicly posted and can be read by any user (Huberman et al., 2009). In this manner, individuals can conceptualize an imaginary audience through their tweets (Marwick and Boyd, 2011). This direct–indirect system meets the media need of microblog users to be connected with their loved ones. To summarize, the interconnectivity of microblogs satisfies the personal integrative needs of individuals and motivates them to post real-time status updates in their microblogs. Therefore, we hypothesize that an individual experiences a strong urge to post a status update when his/her perception toward the capability of a microblog to maintain interconnectivity is intensified. Therefore, the following hypothesis is established.H4The perception of users toward the capability of a microblog to maintain interconnectivity is positively related with their urge to update their status.Microblogs provide their users the alternative of being unidirectional or bidirectional in their interactions. A microblog user can send and receive updates from their “friends,” whereas a “follower” is a user who can receive update from another user but cannot send updates back (Marwick and Boyd, 2011). A microblog user is not required to follow back their followers (Huberman et al., 2009). Under this condition, several users have more followers than friends. A low friends-to-followers ratio increases the perceived competence and trustworthiness of a particular user (Westerman et al., 2012). Therefore, the unidirectional relationships in a microblog enable users to strengthen their social role within the entire microblogging community.Furthermore, the lack of mutual restriction helps users realize their social integrative needs via positive evaluations from other users, which are reflected by the increase in the number of followers or responses from other users. Microblog users refer to these numbers to measure their self-worth, reputation, and social status (Westerman et al., 2012). For instance, an interesting status update results in significant retweeting, liking, and commenting. To achieve the desired social integrative needs (e.g., reputation, self-worth, and influence), individuals are likely to publish their own content on microblogs (Shao, 2009). This important role of enhancing unidirectional relationships to obtain social benefits, such as “I expand the scope of my associations with other members” and “I draw smooth relationships from my followers,” has been identified in previous studies (Ko, 2013). Therefore, the unidirectional relationships in a microblog provide a fundamental venue to satisfy social integrative needs and encourage individuals to post real-time status updates in their microblogs. Therefore, the following hypothesis is established.H5The perception of users toward the capability of a microblog to enhance unidirectional relationships is positively related with their urge to update their status.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
