@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A joint sparse wavelet coefficient extraction and adaptive noise reduction method in recovery of weak bearing fault features from a multi-component signal mixture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new intelligent bearing fault diagnosis method is proposed.Sparsity measurement is used as objective cost function for optimization.Parameters of a complex Morlet wavelet filter are optimized by simplex-simulated annealing.Sparse wavelet coefficients are extracted by optimal complex Morlet wavelet filtering.A new adaptive local maximum selection method is proposed to enhance cyclic impulsive features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cyclic spike detection method,Simulated annealing,Wavelet transform,Fault diagnosis,Rolling element bearing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rolling element bearings are widely used to support rotating components of a machine. Due to close space locations of components in the machine, a vibration signal caused by bearing localized defects is easily overwhelmed by other strong vibration signals. Extracting the bearing fault signal from a multi-component signal mixture is thus significant to detect early bearing fault features and prevent machine breakdown. In this paper, a bearing fault diagnosis method, named cyclic spike detection method, is proposed to extract the weak bearing fault features from a multi-component signal mixture. Firstly, the optimal center frequency and bandwidth of a complex Morlet wavelet filter are determined by a simplex-simulated annealing algorithm along with a maximum sparsity objective function. The filtered signal is then obtained by applying the optimal wavelet filter to the multi-component signal mixture. After that, a new adaptive local maximum selection method is proposed to make the filtered signal succinct. Only a few spikes are retained to reveal potential cyclic intervals caused by bearing localized defects. Two multi-component signal mixtures, including a simulated signal and a real vibration signal collected from an industrial machine, are used to validate the effectiveness of the proposed cyclic spike detection method. The results demonstrate that the proposed method can extract the weak bearing fault features from other strong masking vibration signals and noise.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rolling element bearings are frequently used in machines to provide the support of rotating components. One of primary reasons for machine breakdown is bearing failure. Detecting bearing faults, especially its early faults, is thus beneficial to prevent unexpected accidents and reduce unnecessary economic loss [1,2]. When the rolling element of a bearing strikes a localized defect occurring on the surface of either an outer race or an inner race, a shock is generated to excite resonant frequencies of the structure between the bearings and the transducers. In view of this modulation phenomenon, bearing fault signatures are prone to be found at a high-frequency band. On the contrary, bearing fault characteristic frequencies at a low-frequency band are hardly detected at the early stage of bearing faults because of the interruption of other strong masking low-frequency vibration sources and environment noise. For the enhancement of bearing fault signatures, a band-pass filter located at a high-frequency resonant frequency band is preferred to be designed prior to envelope demodulation analysis. Consequently, bearing fault signatures can be well isolated from other unrelated strong vibration signal components [3].Wavelet transform (WT) is a powerful mathematical tool to correlate natural transients with a series of wavelet basis functions. In many cases, WT has been successfully applied to diagnose bearing localized defects. Morlet wavelet is one of the most attractive wavelet mother functions for bearing fault diagnosis because the shape of Morlet wavelet with an exponentially decay is similar to the impulse-like features. Automatically setting appropriate parameters, i.e. center frequency and bandwidth of Morlet wavelet, is still a challenging problem. In the early work done by Lin and Qu [4], only the shape factor of Morlet wavelet was optimized by making the wavelet entropy minimum and the results showed that the optimal Morlet wavelet was consistent with the impulsive fault features. Similar idea could be also applied to extract the sound of some vehicle engines [5]. Following this work, the shape factor was optimized by minimizing the Shannon entropy of wavelet coefficients. The frequency band related with the optimal scale was determined by the measurement of the periodicity from singular value decomposition [6,7]. Nikolaou and Antoniadis [8] defined three criteria to select the parameters of the complex shifted Morlet wavelet. Bozchalooi and Liang [9] introduced a smoothness index, namely the ratio of geometric mean to arithmetic mean, to determine the optimal parameters of Morlet wavelet. Bozchalooi and Liang [10] also proposed a resonance estimation algorithm to choose the optimal scale and then used the smoothness index to select the optimal shape factor of Morlet wavelet. Sheen [11] designated the parameters of Morlet wavelet to filter out one of the resonance modes caused by bearing localized defects. Recently, some optimization methods were introduced to intelligently determine the parameters of Morlet wavelet. He et al. [12] employed the differential evolution algorithm to maximize the kurtosis of the signal filtered by Morlet wavelet and used sparse code shrinkage to get rid of in-band noise. They also used an adaptive Morlet wavelet filter to enhance the signal to noise ratio of the bearing fault signal prior to morphological analysis [13]. Su et al. [14] used the genetic algorithm with the minimum of Shannon entropy to select the appropriate parameters of Morlet wavelet; after that, they used the autocorrelation to enhance the bearing fault signal. In Refs. [4,6,7,14], researchers indicated that sparsity measurement of wavelet coefficients might be an effective way to guide the selection of the parameters of Morlet wavelet. In this paper, the sparsity function [15,16] used in non-destructive testing is introduced to serve as the objective function for the optimization of the complex Morlet wavelet parameters. To obtain the approximate global solution, simulated annealing (SA) is employed to find the global optimal sparsity. Simulated annealing was firstly proposed by Metropolis et al. [17] and then popularized by Kirkpatrick et al. [18]. By the analogy with physical process involving the heating and controlled cooling of a material, the problem on whether the current solution is updated by another nearby random solution is solved by a probability, which is calculated by the difference of the corresponding objective function values and the current temperature. At a higher temperature, the probability approaches to one. It means that a worse solution is possible to replace a better solution. As the temperature decreases and goes to zero, the probability approaches to zero. It means that only a better solution can be used to replace the current solution. It is obvious that the temperature and cooling schedule play a crucial role in simulated annealing. For the use of the simulated annealing, Lin et al. [19] developed a simulated annealing assisted method for the determination of parameters of support vector machine. Javadian et al. [20] applied simulated annealing to determine the capacity of the yard stations in railway industry. Their works demonstrated that the simulated annealing efficiently searched an acceptably good solution for the global optimization problem.Based on sparsity measurement and simulated annealing illustrated above, a cyclic spike detection method for bearing fault diagnosis is proposed in this paper. Firstly, simulated annealing is used to maximize the sparsity of the complex Morlet wavelet coefficients for determining the optimal center frequency and bandwidth of the complex Morlet wavelet. Then, a filtered signal is obtained by the optimal complex Morlet wavelet filtering. The filtered signal is further processed by a new adaptive local maximum selection method, which is designed for enhancing the cyclic impulsive features of the faulty bearing signal. At last, cyclic spikes are analyzed to identify the bearing fault characteristic period and determine the location of bearing localized defects.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the proposed cyclic spike detection method for recovering the weak bearing fault signal from a multi-component signal mixture. Section 3 validates the effectiveness of the proposed method using two vibration signals, including a simulated vibration signal mixture and a real vibration signal mixture collected from an industrial machine. Comparisons with two other methods are conducted to show the superior of the proposed method for extracting bearing impulsive cyclic features. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 4.When one of rolling elements strikes the defect on the surface of either an inner or outer race, an impact is generated to excite the resonant frequencies of the structures between the bearings and the transducers. Additionally, these impulses are repeated at an approximate fixed frequency, called bearing fault characteristic frequency. Moreover, the resonant frequencies are modulated by the bearing fault characteristic frequency. Here, a simplified mathematical model [9] for a defective bearing without considering the influence of roller slippage is built as follows:(1)f(t)=∑m=−MMAe−β(t−mT)cos(2πf0(t−MT))u(t−mT)+xs(t)+n(t),where the first term of the right side of Eq. (1) is the basic fault impulsive series; β is the damping coefficient; f0 is the resonant frequency; xs(t) denotes vibration signals caused by other machine components; and n(t) denotes Gaussian white noise. Bearing fault characteristic period [21], T, (the reciprocal of bearing fault characteristic frequency) can be one of bearing fault characteristic periods, including outer race fault characteristic period, TO, inner race fault characteristic period, TI, and rolling element fault characteristic period, TB, which are given in Eqs. (2)–(4).(2)TO=1Z×fs21−dDcosα,(3)TI=1Z×fs21+dDcosα,(4)TB=1D×fsd1−d2D2cos2α,where fs is the shaft rotation frequency in Hz, d is the diameter of rolling element, D is the pitch diameter, Z is the number of rolling elements, and α is the contact angle.The aim of bearing fault diagnosis is to recover the basic fault impulsive series from the multi-component signal mixture shown in Eq. (1). In this paper, wavelet transform, a powerful mathematical tool, is employed to extract the bearing fault induced impulses. A fundamental convolution process of wavelet transform and its fast calculation by Fourier transform are given as follows [22]:(5)Wf(u,s)=∫−∞+∞f(t)×1sψ*t−usdt=f(u)∗ψ′s(u)=F−1(fˆ(f)×sψˆ′s),(6)ψ′s(t)=1sψ*−ts,where u is translation parameter, s is scale parameter, * represents convolution operation; ()* takes the complex conjugate of a signal; F−1 is inverse Fourier transform; and()ˆis Fourier transform. Eq. (5) can be understood as a special filtering operation at different scales. Complex Morlet wavelet is one of the most popular wavelets used in bearing fault diagnosis. The temporal and frequency representations of complex Morlet wavelet are given as:(7)ψ(t)=wπexp(−w2t2)exp(j2πfct),(8)ψˆ(f)=exp−π2w2×(f−fc)2,where fc is the center frequency and w is the bandwidth. The frequency support of Eq. (8) is approximately constrained to the frequency bandfc−w/2,fc+w/2. The frequency response of complex Morlet wavelet transform can be determined by setting different center frequencies and bandwidths. In this paper, a pair of parameters (fc, w) is defined as one solution for complex Morlet wavelet transform. In order to clearly illustrate the band-pass property of complex Morlet wavelet, four different solutions, (fc, w), are depicted in Fig. 1, where it can be seen that the center frequency fc lets the frequency support of complex Morlet wavelet move along the frequency axis, while the bandwidth σ controls the size of the frequency support of complex Morlet wavelet.It should be noted that the complex Morlet wavelet must observe the admission condition (the integration of a wavelet over time should be equal to zero) [9,10,12,14]. The equivalent equation of the admission condition is given as:(9)ψˆ(0)=exp−π2w2×(0−fc)2=0.If fc/w>1.3, Eq. (9) is estimated:(10)ψˆ(0)≈0.As a result, complex Morlet wavelet transform with an appropriate solution can retain the basic fault impulsive series at a high-frequency band to enhance bearing fault features. In order to automatically select an optimal solution for the use of complex Morlet wavelet transform, an intelligent parameter optimization method is required to be designed. An objective function is necessary to be defined prior to other steps. The results in Refs. [4,6,7,14] indicated that the sparsity measurement of wavelet coefficients might be an effective way to guide the parameter selection of Morlet wavelet. In view of this point, the sparsity measurement used in non-destructive testing [15,16] is introduced here to solve the problem of complex Morlet wavelet parameter optimization. The objective function and its constraints are defined as follows:(11)S(fc,w)=∑n=1LWf(fc,w)(n)2∑n=1LWf(fc,w)(n)=Wf(fc,w)(n)2Wf(fc,w)(n)1,(12)0.1×Fs≤fc≤0.1×Fs,(13)6/TO≤fc≤0.2×Fs,whereWf(fc,w)(n)2andWf(fc,w)(n)1are L2 norm and L1 norm, respectively;Wf(fc,w)(n)is the real part of the signal obtained by the complex Morlet wavelet transform with parameters (fc, w); Fs is the sampling frequency and consequently the time evolution can be calculated by t=n/Fs; and L is the length of the original signal.Simulated annealing is a probabilistic metaheuristic to solve global optimization problem [18]. In this paper, simulated annealing is introduced to find good approximation to the global optimum of Eq. (11) under the constraints, i.e. Eqs. (12) and (13). The optimal solutionfcopt,woptis capable of maximizing Eq. (11). The procedure of simulated annealing is briefly described as follows:Step 1:Set an initial temperature,Ttempinit, cooling rate γ, termination criterion and an initial feasible solutionfcinit,winit.Calculate the sparsity value,S′fcinit,winit, using Eqs. (5) and (11).When the current temperature isTtempi, generate a new feasible solutionfci,wiand calculate its sparsity valueS′fci,wiusing Eqs. (5) and (11).Calculate the difference,ΔS′=S′fci,wi−S′fcinit,winit.If ΔS′>0, the solutionS′fcinit,winitis replaced by the solutionfci,wi.If ΔS′<0, the solutionfci,wiis considered as a potential solution accepted by Metropolis acceptance rule. Ifr<exp(ΔS′/Ttempi), the solutionfcinit,winitis replaced by the solutionfci,wi. Here, r is a random value between zero and one.Check the termination rules. If all of them are not satisfied, return to Step 2 and cool the temperature once; otherwise, the global optimal solutionfcopt,woptis obtained.From the above procedure, it can be seen that the temperature plays an important role in simulated annealing. When the temperature is high, the evolution of solution is sensitive to the coarser sparsity variations. On the other hand, when the temperature is low, the solution is sensitive to the finer sparsity variations. Simplex-simulated annealing algorithm developed by Cardoso et al. [23] is employed in this paper to seek the optimal solution for the complex Morlet wavelet. Compared with the traditional simulated annealing algorithm, the simplex-simulated annealing algorithm improves on two aspects. First, simulated annealing in the simplex-simulated annealing is used to accept wrong solutions as well as asymptotic convergence. Second, nonlinear simplex in the simplex-simulated annealing is used to generate new possible solutions. For a continuous optimization problem, the initial temperature is suggested by multiplying the absolute value of the objective function corresponding to the initial solution by a large positive value [23], which is set to 108 in this paper. The cooling schedule uses the value suggested in Ref. [23].(14)Ttempi+1=Ttempi1+Ttempi×ln(1+ρ)3σ,where ρ is cooling rate and is set to 0.9; σ is the standard deviation of all sparsity values at the current temperatureTtempi. The temperature decreases after 300 iterations within the nonlinear simplex algorithm is finished [23]. Once one of the following termination rules is satisfied, the simplex-simulated annealing algorithm stops.Termination rule 1: The difference between the best and the worst sparsity values in nonlinear simplex algorithm is smaller than 10−3.Termination rule 2: The maximum difference between the coordinates of the vertices in nonlinear simplex algorithm is less than 10−6.Termination rule 3: The maximum number of iterations is reached. Here, it is set to 5000.Once the optimal solution is determined, the optimal complex Morlet wavelet transform is performed to filter the original vibration signal mixture and obtain the bearing fault signal, which is an analytic signal Wfanal(n). The modulus Wfenv(n) of the analytic signal provides an envelope. In order to enhance the visual inspection in time domain, an adaptive local maximum selection method for in-band noise reduction is proposed in this paper to simplify the filtered signal obtained by the optimal complex Morlet wavelet filtering. Using this selection method, only a few of cyclic spikes are retained to indicate the potential cyclic impulsive features caused by the faulty bearing. In this method, the revised envelope signal,Wf′env(n), is defined as:(15)Wf′env(n)=Wfenv(n)−∑nWfenv(n)L−ε×σ,Wfenv(n)≥∑nWfenv(n)L+ε×σ0,otherswhere ɛ is a coefficient that varies from 0.1 to 4 (with an increasing step of 0.1), and σ takes the standard deviation of Wfenv(n). The detailed procedure of the adaptive local maximum selection method is illustrated as follows:Step 1:Set an initial coefficient, ɛ=0.1;Obtain the envelope signalWf′env(n)and identify the maxima of the signalWf′env(n).Calculate the interval numbers, nɛ, of the maxima of the signalWf′env(n).Increase the coefficient ɛ with the step of 0.1 and repeat Steps 2 and 3 until the coefficient ɛ reaches the pre-setting maximal value, i.e. ɛmax=4;Individually compare the interval numbers nɛwith the number of the fault impulses that is calculated as L/T, and find which interval number nɛapproximately closes to the number of the fault impulses. The corresponding coefficient ɛ is the optimal one.The flowchart of the proposed cyclic spike detection method for bearing fault diagnosis is shown in Fig. 2. In the following section, two vibration signals would be used to validate the performance of the proposed signal processing method.According to Eq. (1), a simulated bearing fault signal was generated to validate the performance of the proposed cyclic spike detection method. To degrade the cyclic impulsive signal with an exponential decay, two sinusoidal signals and a normally distributed random signal with mean 0 and variance 0.1 were added. The simulated bearing fault signal mixture is represented as follows:(16)y(t)=∑m=−MMAe−βkFs−mTcos2πf0kFs−MTukFs−mT+0.4×sin2πf1kFs+0.5×sin2πf2kFs+n(t),where β is equal to 900, T is the reciprocal of the modulating frequency and is equal to 10ms, Fs is the sampling frequency and set to 12kHz, f0 is the carrier frequency and equal to 3500Hz, f1 and f2 are the sinusoidal frequencies and equal to 125Hz and 350Hz, respectively. 2400 sampling points were generated by Eq. (16). The temporal waveform of the simulated signal and its frequency spectrum are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the sinusoidal periodic signals with large amplitudes dominate the whole frequency spectrum. Therefore, from the temporal waveform of the simulated bearing fault signal mixture shown in Fig. 3(a), it is difficult to identify 10ms potential cyclic impulsive intervals, which indicate the occurrence of the bearing localized defect.To recover the cyclic impulsive signal from the simulated signal mixture, the proposed cyclic spike detection method is used. The sparstiy measurement from Eq. (11) is used as the objective cost function and the simplex-simulated annealing is employed to optimize the parameters of the complex Morlet wavelet filter. The optimal sparsity value at each iteration is shown in Fig. 4(a). Using Eqs. (5) and (11) along with the simplex-simulated annealing, the approximate optimal solution (fc=3633Hz, w=1610Hz) for the complex Morlet wavelet transform is determined. The frequency spectra of the optimal Morlet wavelet and the corresponding filtered signal are shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c), respectively. The real part, imaginary part and modulus of the filtered signal are shown in Fig. 5(a)–(c), respectively. These results demonstrate that the proposed method can automatically isolate the bearing impulsive signal from other strong masking signals. To enhance the visual inspection in time domain, the new adaptive local maximum selection method is used to retain the potential cyclic spikes of the simulated bearing fault signal. The relationship between the coefficient ɛ and the local maxima based interval number is shown in Fig. 5(e), where the optimal coefficient ɛ is 1.5 that makes the number of local maxima intervals of the envelope close to the number of the cyclic impulses. The extracted bearing fault signal is finally shown in Fig. 5(d), where the intervals of 10ms are easily identified.A real vibration signal mixture collected from a commonly used industrial machine, a traction motor, was used to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method. The schematic diagram of the traction motor is shown in Fig. 6(a). The motor comprised a 250kg rotor supported by two rolling bearings. One was a single row deep groove ball bearing (SKF 6215) at the drive end. The other was a single row cylindrical roller bearing (NU 210) at the non-drive end. Fig. 6(b) shows the real picture of the traction motor. The motor was uncoupled from the gearbox throughout the experiment. The running speed of the motor approximates to 1498rpm (the rotation frequency is 25Hz). Raw vibration signals were collected by an accelerometer highlighted in Fig. 6(b) that was close to the bearing housing of the motor and was magnet-mounted onto the motor at the axial direction. Vibration signals from the sensors were amplified by a coupler (Kistler 5134), and a digital cassette recorder (Sony PC 204AX) was utilized to record the signals at the sampling rate of 48kHz for each of the channels. Then, the signals were transmitted to PC with a data acquisition card at sampling rate of 32.77kHz. The potential outer race fault characteristic periodic interval was around 9.3ms.There were two faults in the tested traction motor. One fault was a motor eccentric problem due to poor workmanship on the clearance between the rotor and the stator. Another fault was an outer-race defect that occurred in the bearing. The temporal vibration signal mixture and its frequency spectrum are shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. From the temporal waveform, it is difficult to identify the cyclic impulsive signal caused by the faulty bearing and its potential cyclic interval. The proposed cyclic spike detection method is applied to the vibration signal mixture as plotted in Fig. 7(a). The optimal sparsity values at each iteration and the frequency spectrum of the optimal complex Morlet wavelet filter are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b), respectively. The approximate optimal solution (fc=10,427Hz, w=2218Hz) is determined. The frequency spectrum of the filtered signal obtained by the optimal complex Morlet wavelet transform is shown in Fig. 8(c). It can be observed that only the high-frequency transient component is retained. The real part, imaginary part and modulus of the filtered signal are shown in Fig. 9(a)–(c), respectively. To enhance the visual inspection performance, the envelope signal is further simplified to a few spikes with intervals 9.3ms using the newly proposed adaptive local maximum selection method. The relationship between the coefficient ɛ and the local maxima based interval number is shown in Fig. 9(e). The optimal coefficient ɛ for this real vibration signal mixture is 2. The recovered signal is finally shown in Fig. 9(d), in which only a few spikes are retained to discover the 9.3ms potential cyclic impulsive intervals. The proposed method successfully extracts the weak bearing fault signal from the multi-component vibration signal mixture.In this paper, all computations were conducted by MATLAB installed on a desktop computer with 3.1GHz CPU and 4GB (3.24GB usable) RAM. The calculation time of the proposed method for processing the simulated signal mixture and the real signal mixture includes the time taken to reach the optimal solution. The MATLAB code was run six times and the corresponding calculation time is given in Table 1, where it is seen that the calculation time is fast. The reasons can be explained as follows. Firstly, we used a high-performance computer to run our MATLAB code. Secondly, recalling Eq. (5), it is seen that wavelet transform is calculated by the inverse Fourier transform of the dot product of the frequency spectra of two signals. It means that wavelet transform only involves fast Fourier transform and inverse fast Fourier transform. Therefore, the computation load is very small. Thirdly, the length of the data used for our analyses were not so long that the computation load can be further reduced. At last, because bearing fault signals are located in high-frequency resonant bands, the constraint conditions shown in Eqs. (12) and (13) can be used to reduce the time taken to reach the optimal solution. According to the above four explanations, it is not difficult to find that the proposed method has a fast bearing fault diagnosis ability.In this section, two methods reported in Refs. [9,14] are used to compare with the proposed cyclic spike detection method. These two methods are applied to process the same real vibration signal mixture shown in Fig. 7(a). Bozchalooi and Liang [9] mathematically demonstrated that the feasibility of complex Morlet wavelet filter to extract bearing fault features. A smoothness index minimization method was proposed to guide the selection of the parameters of the complex Morlet wavelet filter, that is, the smoothness index (SI) was taken as the object cost function as follows:(17)SI(fc,w)=exp1L∑n=1LlnWf(fc,w)(n)1L∑n=1L∑nWf(fc,w)(n).From Eq. (17), it is seen that the definition of smoothness index is the ratio of the geometric mean to the arithmetic mean of the modulus of the wavelet coefficients. The smoothness index is limited to the range of 0 and 1. The closer the value is to 1, the flatter the signal. Because the bearing fault signal has impulsive nature, the minimization of the smoothness index resulted in the optimal parameters of the complex Morlet wavelet filter. Su et al. [14] proposed a Shannon entropy minimization method to optimize the same parameters of the complex Morlet wavelet filter. It means that Shannon entropy (SE) is taken as the objective function. Shannon entropy is able to quantify the diversity of a signal and to measure the sparsity of the wavelet coefficients. Its mathematical definition is given as:(18)SE(fc,w)=−∑n=1LWf(fc,w)(n)∑n=1LWf(fc,w)(n)×logWf(fc,w)(n)∑n=1LWf(fc,w)(n).The autocorrelation function was then used to enhance the potential cyclic impulsive features.More details about these two methods, please refer to Refs. [9,14]. For fair comparisons, the simplex-simulated annealing is used in this section to find the approximate global optimal solution for the smoothness index minimization method and the Shannon entropy minimization method. Their results are shown in Figs. 10 and 11. In Fig. 10, using the smoothness index, the optimal center frequency and bandwidth for the complex Morlet wavelet filter are 11,109Hz and 861Hz, respectively. The envelope of the final signal filtered by the optimal complex Morlet wavelet is shown in Fig. 10(d). Although the minimization smoothness index method is effective to extract the cyclic interval related to 9.3ms, the visual inspection of the signal obtained by the method mentioned in Ref. [9] is not as good as that of the signal obtained by the proposed cyclic spike detection method in Fig. 9(d), in which only a few spikes are retained to clearly exhibit the fault cyclic characteristics related to 9.3ms. In Fig. 11, the optimal center frequency and bandwidth obtained by the Shannon entropy minimization method [14] are 11,018Hz and 2217Hz, respectively. The Shannon entropy minimization method is also effective to extract the high-frequency bearing fault signal. The final signal enhanced by the optimal complex Morlet wavelet and the autocorrelation function is shown in Fig. 11(d), where only some standing intervals related to 9.3ms can be identified and others are missing. The comparison between the signal obtained by the proposed cyclic spike detection method in Fig. 9(d) and the signal shown in Fig. 11(d) demonstrates that the proposed cyclic spike detection method can result in a better visual inspection for the extraction of the cyclic impulsive intervals. In conclusion, the proposed cyclic spike detection method has better visual inspection to display the cyclic impulsive characteristics than the methods designed in Refs. [9,14]. The performance comparisons of these three methods for processing the real multi-component signal mixture are summarized in Table 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper reported an intelligent bearing fault diagnosis method, named cyclic spike detection method, which consisted of complex Morlet wavelet filtering, sparsity measurement, simulated annealing, and a new adaptive local maximum selection method. Firstly, the simplified mathematical modeling of bearing fault signal mixture was introduced to illustrate that the bearing fault signal was commonly corrupted by other strong masking vibration signals and environment noise. Secondly, to extract the weak bearing fault signal from the multi-component vibration signal mixture, complex Morlet wavelet transform was introduced because it could be considered as one of potential candidates for extraction of cyclic impulsive features. The sparstiy measurement used in nondestructive testing was taken as the objective function for the parameter optimization of the complex Morlet wavelet. The simplex-simulated annealing was used to search the approximate global optimal parameters for the use of complex Morlet wavelet. After using the optimal Morlet wavelet filtering, the bearing fault signal could be filtered out from a multi-component vibration signal mixture. Finally, the new adaptive local maximum selection method was designed to make the filtered signal be a sparse representation, which simplified the bearing fault signal filtered by optimal Morlet wavelet filter and made the cyclic fault features easily identifiable. As a result, only a few cyclic spikes were retained to indicate the potential cyclic impulsive intervals of bearing fault signal. Two multi-component vibration signals, including a simulated bearing fault signal mixture and an industrial vibration signal mixture, were used to validate the proposed method. The results demonstrate that the proposed method has a good performance on the extraction of the bearing fault features from the multi-component vibration mixture. Moreover, the potential cyclic impulsive features caused by the bearing localized defects could be clearly identified from a few of standing spikes. The comparisons of the proposed method with two other methods, i.e. the smoothness index minimization method and the Shannon entropy minimization method, also demonstrate that the proposed method has a better visual inspection in time domain for the extraction of cyclic impulsive fault characteristics.