@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A simulation-based genetic algorithm approach for remanufacturing process planning and scheduling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider integrated process planning and scheduling for remanufacturing.Two potentially conflicting objective functions are considered simultaneously.A simulation-based genetic algorithm approach is developed.Key parameters of the algorithm have been fine-tuned.Extensive computational experiments and evaluations have been performed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Process planning and scheduling,Remanufacturing,Genetic algorithm,Multi-objective optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Remanufacturing has attracted growing attention in recent years because of its energy-saving and emission-reduction potential. Process planning and scheduling play important roles in the organization of remanufacturing activities and directly affect the overall performance of a remanufacturing system. However, the existing research on remanufacturing process planning and scheduling is very limited due to the difficulty and complexity brought about by various uncertainties in remanufacturing processes. We address the problem by adopting a simulation-based optimization framework. In the proposed genetic algorithm, a solution represents the selected process routes for the jobs to be remanufactured, and the quality of a solution is evaluated through Monte Carlo simulation, in which a production schedule is generated following the specified process routes. The studied problem includes two objective functions to be optimized simultaneously (one concerned with process planning and the other concerned with scheduling), and therefore, Pareto-based optimization principles are applied. The proposed solution approach is comprehensively tested and is shown to outperform a standard multi-objective optimization algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent decades, the negative environmental impact of manufacturing has come to the attention of the government, and consequently, manufacturers are urged to pay more attention to the sustainable aspects of production processes (e.g., energy consumption and pollutant emissions). Under this background, remanufacturing has been recognized as a promising way to achieve the sustainability goals [1,2]. In a remanufacturing process, a returned worn-out product is completely disassembled, and then the usable parts are cleaned and refurbished. Finally, these old parts (together with some new parts where necessary) are reassembled to produce a like-new product. In many countries, remanufacturing is currently a fast growing industry due to its potentially huge environmental and economical benefits [3,4]. A lot of research efforts have been made regarding pricing and other decision problems in the remanufacturing industry [5–7].However, the process planning and production scheduling for remanufacturing is considerably more challenging than for traditional manufacturing. As is well known, a remanufacturing system is often characterized by a high level of uncertainties, e.g., the uncertain timing and quantity of returned products, and the highly variable processing routes and processing times for handling the different-quality materials. Because of the inherent uncertainty or randomness in remanufacturing systems, the ordinary process planning and scheduling methods will mostly become ineffective, and thus it is required that new approaches should be designed specifically for the process planning and scheduling in remanufacturing environments.The existing research on process planning and scheduling for remanufacturing has been very limited, probably due to the complicating factors stated above. In terms of remanufacturing process planning, a mixed integer program is established in [8] for the optimization of a remanufacturing process and the evaluation of its economic feasibility. The objective is to maximize the profit of remanufacturing the incoming batch of products under the constraints of machine capacity and inventory levels. A case-based reasoning method is proposed in [9] for remanufacturing process planning. The method attempts to retrieve and reuse the solutions to previously solved process planning cases by analyzing a local similarity between the pending new case and the past cases stored in a history database. In a recent paper [10], the authors suggest an optimal reconditioning process sequence for the core components based on the conditions of these components. In terms of remanufacturing scheduling, a swarm intelligence algorithm called artificial bee colony has been proposed in [11] for solving a flexible job shop scheduling problem occurring in remanufacturing environments. The jobs must be scheduled in a way that complies with the no-wait constraint. A hybrid meta-heuristic algorithm called discrete harmony search is presented in [12] for solving the re-processing scheduling problem in pump remanufacturing. The algorithm aims at minimizing the makespan as well as the earliness and tardiness of product delivery. In addition, the research history of remanufacturing scheduling can be found in the review article [13].It should be noted that all the relevant publications treat remanufacturing process planning and remanufacturing scheduling as two separate problems. Process planning and scheduling are typically carried out in a separate and sequential manner (scheduling is performed after process planning has been completed), but in fact, the two decision problems are strongly correlated. If we do not take scheduling related factors into account when doing process planning, the obtained process plans may result in poor production performance eventually. For example, when a large number of parts follow the same process route in a job shop style remanufacturing system, the makespan performance will deteriorate considerably because of the increased waiting times spent before the bottleneck machines. Therefore, process planning and scheduling should be considered in an integrated manner in order to maximize the performance of remanufacturing systems. The integration of the two functions will lead to significant improvement of production efficiency through the elimination of scheduling conflicts, the reduction of flow time and work in process, and the increase of resource utilization.Although no existing publications have considered integrated process planning and scheduling (IPPS) for remanufacturing, IPPS has been studied for traditional manufacturing systems for several years. It has been found that the integration of process planning and scheduling always outperforms the situation where the two tasks are conducted separately. For example, a hybrid heuristic method combining genetic algorithm and fuzzy neural network is proposed in [14]. Meanwhile, multi-objective evolutionary algorithms have been used to solve IPPS with more than one objective functions [15,16]. A hybrid algorithm based on simulated annealing and tabu search is devised to solve IPPS with stochastic processing times [17]. An ant colony optimization algorithm based on AND/OR graph is described in [18] for the IPPS with makespan criterion. A new heuristic is presented for solving IPPS in reconfigurable manufacturing systems, which are based on reconfigurable machine tools [19]. A new approach consisting of four main modules (process plan selection, scheduling, schedule analysis and process plan modification) is introduced for IPPS [20], which is found to perform better than the conventional hierarchical approach.To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first attempt to study integrated process planning and scheduling for remanufacturing. We formulate a stochastic and bi-objective optimization model which captures the features of a typical remanufacturing system. Then, we develop a simulation-based multi-objective genetic algorithm to solve the problem effectively. The key parameters of the algorithm are fine-tuned based on extensive computational tests. Finally, the performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated by comparison with a standard algorithm on a set of benchmark instances. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the problem under study. Section 3 describes the proposed solution approach in detail. Section 4 presents all the computational results. Section 5 concludes the paper and points out future research directions.Since the conditions of the used parts (a.k.a. cores) acquired by a remanufacturer can be widely different, there often exists considerable uncertainty in some characteristics (such as surface quality, dimension and precision) of the jobs waiting to be processed. The high uncertainty on the input side suggests that process route selection is an important decision problem for the scheduling of remanufacturing systems.We assume that the parts to be remanufactured (i.e., the jobs) can be divided into C categories based on their quality conditions. For each category c∈{1, …, C}, the set of feasible process routes are represented by Rc, which means any route r∉Rccannot be applied to jobs belonging to category c. The candidate routes for each category are determined according to technological requirements and are supposed to be known in advance. Each router∈⋃c=1CRcis associated with a performance score φr(a smaller value is assumed better), which can be regarded as a measurement of the potential influences of choosing that route (e.g., the electricity consumption or the pollutant emissions). Therefore, we will attempt to minimize the sum of scores among all the selected routes (denoted as Φ). Once a process route has been selected for each job under the feasibility constraints, the subsequent decision problem is equivalent to the job shop scheduling problem (JSSP), and makespan (denoted as MS) is often considered as the performance indicator.Based on the above description, the studied problem can be summarized as follows: given n jobs and an estimated distribution of them (relating to the C categories), we need to decide the process routes for these jobs (final decisions are to be expressed in the form: “xlpercent of the jobs in category c should be processed in accordance with route rl∈Rc”), so that both Φ and MS are minimized. The problem is difficult to solve because of two complicating factors:•This is a stochastic optimization problem, since we do not know the exact number of jobs in each category during the process planning stage. The reason is that the quantity and quality of used parts are actually exogenous factors not controllable by the remanufacturer. Therefore, it is assumed that the category of a job will become clear only in the remanufacturing stage. When doing process planning, however, we need to rely on estimated data regarding the distribution of jobs (e.g., we may be informed that, in the current batch of 100 jobs, about 25% of jobs belong to category 1, about 15% belong to category 2, and so forth).This is a bi-objective optimization problem, since Φ and MS are two potentially conflicting objective functions. If we neglect the scheduling-related factors and only aim at the minimum Φ, we will end up selecting identical or similar process routes for different jobs. This will result in a long makespan due to severe job congestions on the bottleneck machines. In order to make full use of the machines’ processing capacities (and thereby to improve MS), the process routes of different jobs should be staggered instead of being aligned, although this will lead to a larger Φ. Clearly, a trade-off must be made between the two objectives to be minimized.Example 1A very simple example (in the deterministic sense) is given here to illustrate the rationale of considering process planning and scheduling simultaneously. Suppose there are two jobs waiting to be processed, each consisting of two operations which need to be processed on two machines. According to the classification scheme, job 1 is in category 1 and job 2 is in category 2. The set of feasible routes for category 1 is R1={r1, r2}={(M1(2), M2(3)), (M2(5), M1(4))}, which means a job in category 1 should be processed in either one of the two ways: (i) process the job first on machine 1 for 2 units of time and then on machine 2 for 3 units of time; (ii) process the job first on machine 2 for 5 units of time and then on machine 1 for 4 units of time. Likewise, the set of feasible routes for category 2 is defined as R2={r3, r4}={(M1(1), M2(5)), (M2(4), M1(2))}. The performance score associated with each route isφr1=72,φr2=33,φr3=55,φr4=29(these scores were generated from the uniform distributionU[1, 100] for this example).Obviously, there are 4 solutions to this problem. If route r1 is selected for job 1 and route r3 is selected for job 2 (solution S1), the total score is Φ=127 and the minimum makespan is MS=9 (Fig. 1(a)). If r1 is selected for job 1 and r4 is selected for job 2 (solution S2), the total score is Φ=101 and the minimum makespan is MS=7 (Fig. 1(b)). If r2 is selected for job 1 and r3 is selected for job 2 (solution S3), the total score is Φ=88 and the minimum makespan is MS=10 (Fig. 1(c)). If r2 is selected for job 1 and r4 is selected for job 2 (solution S4), the total score is Φ=62 and the minimum makespan is MS=11 (Fig. 1(d)). The three Pareto optimal solutions are: S2 with objective values (101,7), S3 with objective values (88,10) and S4 with objective values (62,11). The solution S1 is dominated by the solution S2, and thus S1 could be discarded.The above example shows that it is necessary to optimize process planning under explicit consideration of scheduling. In this way, we can obtain a series of Pareto optimal solutions which reflect the possible trade-offs between the process planning objective (represented by Φ) and the scheduling objective (represented by MS).The difference between this simplified example and the original problem discussed earlier is that no stochastic factors are involved in this example (i.e., we know exactly the category that each job belongs to). In the original problem that we aim to solve, the number of jobs in each category is not exact but estimated information and is thus subject to random errors. In this case, the objective values of a solution (i.e., route selection expressed in percentages of job numbers) cannot be calculated deterministically but must be evaluated by means of simulation. Therefore, a simulation-based optimization algorithm has to be designed to solve the problem effectively.For readers’ convenience, we present a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) model to formulate the studied problem under the assumption of deterministic job categorization (i.e., the category of each job is assumed to be known).(1a)minf1=MS,f2=Φs.t.MS≥tjl+pjl∀j=1,…,n;l=1,…,m(1b)Φ=∑j=1n∑r∈Rc(j)yjrφr(1c)∑r∈Rc(j)yjr=1∀j=1,…,n(1d)pjl=∑r∈Rc(j)πrlyjr∀j=1,…,n;l=1,…,m(1e)tjl+pjl≤tj(l+1)∀j=1,…,n;l=1,…,m−1(1f)tjl+pjl−M(1−xjlj′l′)≤tj′l′+Mzjlj′l′∀j,j′=1,…,n;l,l′=1,…,m(1g)tj′l′+pj′l′−Mxjlj′l′≤tjl+Mzjlj′l′∀j,j′=1,…,n;l,l′=1,…,m(1h)zjlj′l′=∑r∈Rc(j)∑r′∈Rc(j′)wjrj′r′Vrlr′l′∀j,j′=1,…,n;l,l′=1,…,m(1i)wjrj′r′≥yjr+yj′r′−1∀j,j′=1,…,n;r∈Rc(j);r′∈Rc(j′)(1j)wjrj′r′≤yjr∀j,j′=1,…,n;r∈Rc(j);r′∈Rc(j′)(1k)wjrj′r′≤yj′r′∀j,j′=1,…,n;r∈Rc(j);r′∈Rc(j′)(1l)tjl≥0∀j=1,…,n;l=1,…,m(1m)yjr,xjlj′l′,zjlj′l′,wjrj′r′∈{0,1}∀j,j′,l,l′,r,r′The notations used in the above formulation are summarized in Table 1. It is assumed that the number of jobs waiting to be processed is n and the number of available machines is m, and in accordance with the job shop setting, each job consists of m operations which need to be processed sequentially on each of the machines. Therefore, constraint (1a) defines the makespan (MS), which should be no less than the completion time of any operation. Constraint (1b) defines the total performance score (Φ), which is the second objective function to be minimized. Constraint (1c) states that only one process route could be selected for each job. Constraint (1d) specifies the processing time of the l-th operation of job j, which, by definition, should be equal to the processing time of the l-th operation in the selected route for that job. Constraint (1e) reflects the technological constraint, which requires that consecutive operations of the same job should be processed in sequence without any overlap in time. Constraints (1f) and (1g) reflect the machine capacity constraint (a.k.a. the disjunctive constraint), which is due to the fact that a machine can process at most one job at a time. The pair of constraints become effective only whenzjlj′l′=0, which means the l-th operation of job j and the l′-th operation of job j′ must be processed by the same machine. In this case, the order of processing these two operations needs to be decided. Ifxjlj′l′=1(constraint (1g) is then inactivated), the decision is that the l-th operation of job j should be processed first; ifxjlj′l′=0(constraint (1f) is then inactivated), the decision is that the l′-th operation of job j′ should be processed first. Under either situation, the two operations cannot overlap in time. Constraint (1h) defines the way of obtainingzjlj′l′: if route r is selected for job j and route r′ is selected for job j′, thenzjlj′l′should take the value ofVrlr′l′which is known in advance. Constraints (1i)–(1k) define the relationship betweenyjr,yj′r′andwjrj′r′to ensure thatwjrj′r′=1if and only ifyjr=yj′r′=1.It should be noted that the MILP model can only formulate the deterministic version of the integrated optimization problem. When the category of each job is not exactly known, which is the situation in typical remanufacturing systems, we need to resort to simulation-based optimization methods rather than traditional mathematical programming. This is also the motivation for this study, in which a simulation-based multi-objective evolutionary algorithm will be proposed for remanufacturing process planning and scheduling.In this paper, we develop a simulation-based multi-objective genetic algorithm (SMOGA) for solving the process planning and scheduling problem under uncertainty. The details for the implementation of SMOGA will be described in this section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
