@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A bandwidth sourcing and task allocation model in telecommunications under stochastic QoS guarantees

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bandwidth provider selection and task allocation problem is modeled from firm's perfective at managerial level.Delay and jitter are considered as random variables and integrated into model via chance constraints.A novel heuristic algorithm and a tight lower bound method are proposed.Firm's optimal strategies are investigated under different scenarios.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Telecommunications,Bandwidth sourcing,Quality of service,Stochastic constraints,Heuristic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we model bandwidth provider selection and task allocation problem as an expected cost minimization problem with stochastic constraints. Two important parameters of quality of service (QoS), namely delay and jitter are considered as random variables to capture stochastic nature of telecom network environment. As solution methodology, stochastic model is converted into its deterministic equivalent and then a novel heuristic algorithm is proposed to solve resulting non-linear mixed integer programming model. We analyze how different prices, quality and task distribution affect the optimal behavior of the firm. Finally, performance of solution procedure is tested by several randomly generated scenarios and by a relaxation of this problem as tight lower bound.In the real life firms run their businesses in a competitive environment in which they use data networks to perform and support their business operations such as video conferencing and web site updating. The obvious commonality is that these operations require network resources. A network resource is characterized by its capacity (bandwidth and duration) and quality of service (QoS) levels. In the network environment, the firm firstly lease the capacity (bandwidth) from the providers (bandwidth broker firms or network operators). After acquisition, planned tasks are allocated into leased capacity by considering QoS requirement of each operations. The firm generally uses networks in order to perform operations such as video conferencing, voice over TCP/IP and data applications, which are named as tasks [1].Generally, two types of tasks are performed using data networks. A task is time-fixed (real-time, size compressible) if its size can be changed without disrupting its completion but the transmission time cannot be compressed or extended. Most audio/video tasks are time-fixed. A task is size-fixed (time-compressible) if all bits have to be transmitted but the duration is not fixed. Most data applications such as file transfer, database transactions are of this category. Even though a more detailed breakdown of tasks and related QoS requirements is possible, the two-task type classification is sufficient for our purposes, and it provides a reasonably general representation of real-world applications [1].The current internet infrastructure provides satisfactory services for various applications, such as the email and file transfer. Nevertheless, the increase in real-time applications such as voice over IP, audio, and video streaming demand for a high QoS level that satisfies several constraints such as bandwidth, delay, jitter and packet loss [2]. For telecommunication networks QoS offered by providers are measured in terms of delay, jitter, lost rate and latency [3]. Delay specifies how long it takes for data to travel across the network from source to destination [4–6]. Jitter represents the variance in delay. The QoS requirements for various application vary significantly over a wide range of parameters. To illustrate, voice traffic application requires only 10–20kb/s bandwidth, while high-quality video may require 500–1000kb/s. On the other hand, voice and video conference traffics are intolerable to delay more than 200ms, while internet applications like file transfer protocol (FTP) can tolerate seconds of delay [7]. It is obvious that audio and video applications are quite sensitive to delay and jitter, whereas data services are insensitive to either of them. Furthermore, packet loss represents data dropped or irrecoverably damaged by the network. It typically stems from data collision and buffer overflows. Sudden changes in jitter may also cause packet loss [1,3]. In general, the receiver has two options when a packet is lost: it can (1) ignore the lost frames or (2) send a retransmission request to the sender. Ignoring lost frames is appropriate for real-time (time-fixed) applications such as videoconferencing as they are insensitive to small number of lost packets. All data applications, which we will call size-fixed, require the second action. For example, a file transfer task requires submitting all data. Table 1shows some example QoS parameters that have to be satisfied to meet the application requirement [2].In the telecommunications domain, service providers have Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with their clients and with peered providers that have to be strictly obeyed to avoid financial penalties [8]. Briefly, SLA is an electronic contract between a service user and a provider, and specifies the service to be provided, QoS properties that must be maintained by a provider during service provision, and a set of penalty clauses specifying what happens when service providers fail to deliver the QoS agreed [9].Different providers charge differently for the capacity they lease out. Different types of charging schemes are modeled as a function of the amount transmitted, the transmission rate, bandwidth and QoS in the literature [11]. For the pay-per-byte pricing policy, the total charge of a task is a function of the total number of packets successfully carried [12,13]. The total charge is a function of the duration of a connection and the total number of packets carried at pay-per-byte and usage time scheme [14,15]. Such a pricing scheme motivates the customer to reduce the duration of the connection and the amount of data sent. In the case of all-you-can-send pricing, firm will buy bandwidth at a fixed price (pay-per-resource) for a fixed amount of time [14,15]. This pricing structure encourages the firm to use as much bandwidth as possible in order to maximize his utility.Despite the different pricing strategies in the literature, still operators manage the excess capacity by selling it in bulk at reduced prices. Until the demand catches up with supply the all-you-can-send pricing may remain a popular option especially for the network operators. Hence, in our proposed model we consider the all-you-can-send pricing scheme. Besides, we also assume that the providers can offer any QoS and some capacity at competitive prices.In general, there are three types of costs associated with using data networks. The first one is the resource (i.e., bandwidth, capacity) acquisition cost. The second is the opportunity cost incurred due to insufficient transmission rate in performing certain tasks such as video conferencing. The third is the quality lost cost incurred due to not satisfying delay and jitter requirements of tasks which are defined in SLA. Given a heterogeneous set of tasks and resources that differ in bandwidth and quality requirements, it might be in the firm's best interest to use either multiple providers or sign multiple contracts with different bandwidth and quality requirements. For example, while resources with lower quality can be used for data applications, more expensive resources might be utilized for real-time applications with high QoS requirements. Therefore, the problem that the firm has to solve is a cost minimization problem that reflects a trade off between the cost of acquiring resources and the opportunity and quality costs in case of degradation in observed quality of tasks performed.In this setting, we wish to model the problem from the firm's point of view rather than network providers. We consider the firm's cost minimization problem in an environment in which the firm can acquire network capacity at competitive prices from different providers with different service quality. We also assume that the providers can offer any QoS and some capacity at competitive prices. In order to complete planned tasks the firm has to first acquire the bandwidth from providers then allocate the tasks into this capacity by taking into account QoS requirements of each task. Even though QoS requests of operations are known in advance (see Table 1), realized QoS levels of capacity providers may not satisfy promised QoS specifications that are set by SLAs due to the uncertainties involved in telecom network infrastructure. Thus, QoS parameters namely delay and jitter amounts guaranteed by network providers are denoted as random (stochastic) variables in order to handle the imprecise and uncertain nature of the telecommunications problems. By this modeling strategy, inefficient solutions obtained by expressing the QoS constraints with deterministic values are prevented, which is one of our motivations. Another motivation of the article is that event though there exist some research in literature related to routing and infrastructure by taking into account stochastic QoS parameters, to the best of our knowledge there is almost no study dealing with how stochastic QoS constraints effect network capacity acquisition and task allocation policies of firms.In conclusion, the imprecision of the network state seems to be always present and our best bet may be just to live with it [16]. For this purpose, a mathematical optimization model is suggested in order to provide decision support tool for telecom user firms to cope with bandwidth provider selection and task allocation under uncertain QoS parameters. Main contributions of this article are as follows:(i)Firm's point of view modeling approach rather than provider side modeling, which dominates the current telecommunications literature.Integration of stochastic QoS parameters to provider selection and task allocation model at managerial (macro) level of rather than network infrastructure (micro) level such as in routing and network topology design problems.From methodological point of view, the contributions could be explained as developing very efficient novel heuristic algorithm to solve obtained non-linear mixed integer programming model with chance (stochastic) constraints, which is shown to be asNP-Hard complexity after transforming stochastic model (including minimization of expected cost and probabilistic constraints) into a deterministic model and, providing very tight lower bounds for proposed heuristic algorithm.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief literature survey about mainly stochastic modeling of QoS parameters. Section 3 presents problem definition, notation and the proposed non-linear mixed integer programming model with chance constraints. Heuristic algorithm is summarized in Section 4 to unravel the problem. Results of computational studies are also demonstrated in this section. Finally, Section 5 drowns conclusions and describes future research directions, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
One of the most challenging subjects for a firm that uses telecommunications network is bandwidth sourcing and task allocation. The problem of choosing capacity providers to lease bandwidth gets harder to solve when QoS levels offered by providers are not known in advance. The main contribution of this article is the development of a methodology for solving complex sourcing and allocation problems under non-deterministic infrastructure conditions of networks.We investigated single period and single objective offline cost optimization problem that a firm encounters when acquiring and using bandwidth at telecom market environment in which there exist several backbone providers offering different QoS levels. In addition, two important QoS parameters namely delay and jitter that are offered by network providers were modeled as random variable in order to handle the non-deterministic nature of telecommunications environment. Mentioned QoS parameters were integrated into proposed novel mathematical model via stochastic (chance) constraints. The deterministic equivalent of the suggested model turned out to beNP-Hard complexity. Hence, very effective heuristic algorithm was developed. The solution quality of heuristic tested by provided lower bound method which relaxes integer decision variable and allows prorating. Finally, several problem instances ran by using heuristic algorithm in order to provide computational and managerial insight to the discussed sourcing and allocation problem.Some of the important results of this research can be summarized as follows: (i) when the ratio of number of time-fixed tasks over size-fixed tasks increases, the solution quality of H−DESP decreases. This observation is pointed out by increasing ratio of zH−DESP/LB from 1.070 to 1.081 in Table 6. (ii) Among the cost terms that are tried to be minimized, capacity leasing cost constitutes the highest portion followed by opportunity and expected quality lost cost, respectively. The average shares of each cost component for 720 test instances are: 84.87% for capacity leasing, 10.05% for opportunity and 5.08% for expected quality loss cost. (iii) When there exists a dominating (price wise) bandwidth provider in the market, the more bandwidth sourced from dominating supplier compared to other suppliers by firm (see Fig. 6). (iv) H−DESP provides more than 98% capacity utilization under any circumstances.As a future research direction, it would be interesting to analyze firm's behavior and effectiveness of heuristic algorithm under different delay and jitter probability distributions such as log-normal or Weibull. In addition, it would be worthwhile to examine the effect of varying confidence level probabilities on sourcing and task allocation. Another interesting future reach would be studying multi-objective problem for firm such as cost and capacity loss minimization under uncertainty.