@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel design of high-sensitive fuzzy PID controller

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid model is designed by combining the GA, RBF-NN and Sugeno fuzzy logic approaches.Our simulation provides high sensitive response (∼0.005s) of an AVR system compared to the RGA, LQR method and GA.The RBF-NN is used to enhance the PID parameters obtained from GA to design Sugeno fuzzy PID controller tuned by excitation parameter (Ke, τe).The GNFPID controller possess preferable features such as easy implementation, stable convergence characteristic, good computational efficiency and high-quality solution that keeps the system-error closer to zero.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
AVR system,GA,PID controller,RBF-NN,Rule base,Sugeno fuzzy logic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A hybrid model is designed by combining the genetic algorithm (GA), radial basis function neural network (RBF-NN) and Sugeno fuzzy logic to determine the optimal parameters of a proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller. Our approach used the rule base of the Sugeno fuzzy system and fuzzy PID controller of the automatic voltage regulator (AVR) to improve the system sensitive response. The rule base is developed by proposing a feature extraction for genetic neural fuzzy PID controller through integrating the GA with radial basis function neural network. The GNFPID controller is found to possess excellent features of easy implementation, stable convergence characteristic, good computational efficiency and high-quality solution. Our simulation provides high sensitive response (∼0.005s) of an AVR system compared to the real-code genetic algorithm (RGA), a linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) method and GA. We assert that GNFPID is highly efficient and robust in improving the sensitive response of an AVR system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The AVR is utilized for controlling the terminal voltage by regulating the exciter voltage of the generator, while the AVR system optimal control is performed by the PID inside the AVR. The AVR system has differential, proportional, and integral coefficients [1]. Minglin proposed a method for designing PID-like fuzzy controller with FPGAV. The feed forward fuzzy PID controller has been used to [2] improve the performance of high pressure common rail system. The performance of current hybrid fuzzy PID controller is somewhat poor and the changes in the system parameters require a new adjustment variable of PID controller. To overcome this difficulty, Sinthipsomboon et al. [3] developed a hybrid system of fuzzy and fuzzy self-tuning PID controller. An improved fuzzy PID controller is employed [4,5] to control brushless DC motor speed. An adaptive-network-based fuzzy logic power system stabilizer (PSS) is proposed by [6,7]. In this research a novel power system stabilizer for damping both local and global modes of an interconnected system based on neuro fuzzy (hybrid) system is developed [8]. This paper is concerned with the application of an adaptive fuzzy logic controller to both single and multi-machine power system simulations. The PLC is further used to develop a fuzzy PID controller for the problem of a set point pressure control in the collecting main pressure system [6]. Jinwook et al. [9] proposed the design and stability analysis of Takagi–Sugeno–Kang (TSK)-type full-scale fuzzy proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller. The fluctuations in temperature is further improved by self-setting fuzzy PID control algorithm [10]. An improved fuzzy PID controller algorithm based on DSP is introduced [11]. Computational techniques such as GA and fuzzy logic are used for analytic solution [5,9–11] which resulted the control field for implementing the real time manipulation based on the neural network.The PID is incharge of the optimal control of AVR system possessing differential, proportional and integral coefficients. The real-coded genetic algorithm (RGA) is applied to generate the optimal PID parameters for the formulation of the fuzzy rules [12]. Zhang et al. [13,14] designed a new algorithm of vehicle stability adaptive PID control with single neuron network. Kun et al. [15] used radical basis function (RBF) to develop an optimal PID controller called direct-drive permanent magnet linear synchronous motor (PMSM). It is established that RBF-NN has the ability to approximate any continuous function with any arbitrary accuracy [12–15]. Using bio-inspired and evolutionary methods it is proposed that the optimization of the gains of a PID controller can stabilize the inertia wheel setup (IWP) [16]. Particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithms are employed to find the best gain values of the PID controller. A hybrid PSO-GA optimization technique for automatic design of fuzzy logic controllers (FLC) to attenuate the steady state error of a plant's response are proposed [17]. The chase downside for the dynamic model of a unicycle mobile robot is also addressed [18]. A novel optimization technique impressed on the chemical reactions applied to solve this motion problem by integrating a kinematic and a torque controller supported fuzzy logic theory. A novel technique is designed for dynamic parameter adaptation in particle swarm optimization (PSO) IS [19]. PSO may be a metaheuristic impressed in social behaviors that is extremely helpful in optimization issues and improvement to the convergence and variety of the swarm in PSO mistreatment fuzzy logic. A novel hybrid approach is planned for mathematical relation optimization combining Particle Swarm optimization (PSO) and Genetic Algorithms (GAs) using fuzzy logic to integrate the results [20]. Fuzzy logic is employed to mix the results of the PSO and GA within the best approach possible. A new hybrid approach is developed for the improvement combining particle swarm optimization (PSO) and Genetic Algorithms (GAs) exploitation mathematical logic to integrate the results of each ways and for parameters standardization [21]. The new improved methodology combines the benefits of PSO and GA to provide an improved FPSO+FGA hybrid approach. Another hybrid technique is followed for mathematical relation optimization combining particle swarm optimization (PSO) and genetic algorithms (GAs) mistreatment fuzzy logic to integrate the results [22].A linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) method is implemented to improve the PID controller for a universal second-order system [23] which required a good selection of weighting functions for accep Table performance. An effective and powerful technique is proposed to appropriately calculate best PID controllers for AVR systems [24]. This is an improved version of the distinct Action Reinforcement Learning Automata (DARLA), where a discrete probability functions (DPF) of the planning variables do not seem to be thought of freelance. A PID controller is also designed for an AVR system in order to quickly settle the rated voltage ensuring the stability[25]. AVR is a closed loop control system compensated with a PID controller. The transient stability enhancement of the power system interconnected with wind farm by generalized unified power flow controller (GUPFC) having grid frequency switching similar multi-pulse converters is demonstrated [26]. The application of fuzzy system proposes a replacement of the PI controller by fuzzy logic controller to improve the transient performance of the DC link under fast load variations [27]. Valizadeh and Gaing [28–30] suggested a new design method for determining the PID controller parameters of the AVR system using the particle swarm optimization (PSO) method. PSO is a population-based optimization technique, which is enthused by social performance patterns of organisms such as bird flocking and fish schooling.The main objective of the AVR is to control the terminal voltage by adjusting the generator exciter voltage, while the AVR system optimal control is performed by the PID inside the AVR. The drive of the approach is to design of high sensitive fuzzy PID controller and insert instead of traditional PID controller of AVR depends on a hybrid model designed by combining the GA, RBF-NN and Sugeno fuzzy logic. This keeps track of the generator terminal voltage all the time and under any load condition. It maintains the voltage within pre-established limits for enhancing the transient response of synchronous generator under severe disturbances.We report the design of a novel method by integrating the Sugeno fuzzy system rule base and the AVR system fuzzy PID controller (GNFPID) for enhancing the system sensitive response. The paper is organized as follows. Section “Radial basis function networks” represents the concept of RBF-NN applied to PID parameters Kp, Kdand Kithose are automatically readjusted by on-line learning algorithm of RBF-NN to keep the system error, e(k) zero. Section “Automatic voltage regulator” elucidates the concept of AVR system modeling and optimization of the control parameters. Section “Proposed GA” illustrates the proposed GA for solving the PID controller parameters optimization. The utilization of Sugeno fuzzy system concept for determining the PID controller parameters under various operating conditions is presented in section “Sugeno fuzzy model”. Section “Design of PID controller methodology” describes the design methodology of fuzzy PID. Detailed simulation results are presented in section “Simulation results”. Transient response calculations and comparison are made in section “Transient response calculations and comparison”. The data analysis, validation and comparison with other findings are summarized in section “Comparison with other findings”. The conclusion is presented in final section.In a synchronous generator, an AVR is used to keep the terminal voltage constant at different levels. The AVR system comprised of four main components such as amplifier, exciter, generator and sensors. The outer loop is a self-tuning PID voltage controller based on the radial basis function neural network to provide the ability to adapt for uncertain load and system conditions. Moody et al. [31] proposed a feed-forward two-layered RBF neural network with one single hidden layer to mimic the systematic arrangement of restrictive readjustment in the human mind. Whereas the RBF neural network produces the strongest response near the center of the Gaussian kernel function where each hidden node in the input data space can be regarded as a local detector [32–34] and the RBF neural network is deliberative as local estimation model for the controlled processes. Furthermore, the input samples for RBF neural network do not require a special distribution. In addition, RBF possess an on-line learning and quick converges. Consequently, the control field for implementing the real time manipulation concentrates on the neural network. The RBF is exploited to achieve the best parameters of the controller to maintain the system error zero [35]. The schematic of radial-basis function neural network is shown in Fig. 1.The updating algorithm for the adaptive PID based RBF can be formulated as,(1)Δkp=μ⋅e(k)⋅ep(k)⋅∑j=1mwjhjcj3−u(k)σj2(2)Δki=μ⋅e(k)⋅ei(k)⋅∑j=1mwjhjcj3−u(k)σj2(3)Δkd=μ⋅e(k)⋅ed(k)⋅∑j=1mwjhjcj3−u(k)σj2The PID parameters Kp, Kdand Kiare automatically readjusted by RBF on-line learning algorithm to maintain the e(k)=0 (1–3). Two commands offered by Matlab are used to design the RBF neural network viz. Newrb and newrbe. Newrb adds neurons step by step until the goal is hit with long training time with minimal error. While, newrbe designs a network very quickly with zero error [36,37]. In the training process, the achieved steps are: (i) neurons number in the hidden layer, (ii) the coordinates of the center of RBF function (iii) and the radius (spread) of each RBF functions in each dimension.In a synchronous generator, the terminal voltage is kept constant at different levels by using an AVR. The AVR system consists of four major components namely exciter, amplifier, generator, and sensor as shown in Fig. 2. The transfer function of the AVR components is summarized in Table 1.An increase in the generator reactive power load is accompanied by a drop in the terminal voltage. A PID controller is used to minimize the error and to achieve improved dynamic response. The PID controller consisting of proportional, integral and derivative manage devices are efficiently used together to place the manipulated variable at the set point. The transfer function of the PID controller is given by,(4)G(s)=Kp+Kis+KdsEq. (5) represent the transfer function of AVR systems with PID control. The AVR excellence affects the voltage level through steady-state process and diminishes the voltage oscillations during fleeting periods moving the overall stability of the system.(5)ΔVt(s)ΔVref(s)=(s2Kd+sKp+Ki)(KaKeKg)(1+sτs)s(1+sτa)(1+sτe)(1+sτg)(1+sτs)+(KaKeKgKs)(s2Kd+sKp+ki)The accepTable operation of the system is determined by the selection of the best PID controller parameters. Moreover, the selection problem of the PID controller parameters is considered as an optimization problem. The objective function yields,(6)MinF(Kd,Kp,Ki)=(1−e−β)(Osh+Ess)+e−β(ts−tr)The Min(Kp, Kd, Ki) uses a combination of transient response counting rise time overshoot, settling time and steady-state error. The satisfaction of the designer needs can be achieved by choosing suiTable value of the weighting factor β. Therefore, the optimization problem boils down to the following constraints,(7)Kpmin≤Kp≤Kpmax,Kimin≤Ki≤Kimax,Kdmin≤Kd≤KdmaxRGA is applied to optimize the controller parameters values and the proposed GA is introduced.GA is recognized as an effective and efficient technique to solve the optimization problems. In comparison to the optimization techniques, such as random search and simulated annealing, GA performance is superior that avoids local minima considered as a key issue in nonlinear systems [38,39].The genetic algorithms are based on the natural selection mechanism that allows survival of the fittest and generate estimated solutions by exchanging informations to attain the optimum solution. After generating the initial population, the GA discovers new individuals by producing offsprings using the reproduction, crossover and mutation operators, which replace the old generation members and form the new generation. Once several generations are produced, the algorithm finds the best chromosome that represents the optimum or near optimum solution. The major operators of GA explicitly the crossover, the reproduction and the mutation are exploited. The convergence speed is controlled by applying various probabilities on these operators. The design of the crossover and mutation operators are carefully managed due to their immense impact on the performance of genetic algorithm [38,39]. The details of the genetic operators used in the proposed GA are illustrated in Table 1.In the process of reproduction, individuals are selected depending on their fitness function, the higher the fitness is, more chance for an individual to be selected for the next generation. Three main selection methods such as ranking method, fitness balanced selection and tournament selection are utilized [12]. In this work, we employ the tournament selection method, where ‘n’ individuals are randomly selected from the population and the best vale is chosen for additional genetic processing. This process is repeatedly performed until the mating pool is filled.The property of global search in GA is mostly determined by the crossover operator, which is the combination of two-parent chromosomes that produce a new one. The range of the selected probability is typically between 0.6 and 1.0. One of the interesting features of the crossover operators is the relation between the generated chromosome and the location of both the parents. The generated new chromosome remains close to the parents in case both the parents are close to each other. Conversely, the search is more likely to be random [12].In the mutation process new chromosome inserted into the population. Mutation randomly makes insignificant change in the chromosome information. In inconsistent mutation, the variable takes a consistent random number between the lower and upper limits. In this study ‘Uniform mutation’ operator is used.The optimum PID controller parameters are obtained via GA tuning of PID. In this process, two major themes are used, namely the (i) Symbol of the choice variables and (ii) Arrangement of the fitness function.The solutions of all candidates are generated in the genetic population. The solution elements of PID controller-tuning problem include the integral gain (Ki), the proportional gain (Kp) and the derivative gain (Kd). The direct representation of the solution variables reduces the computer space for storing the population. The values of the parameter (Kp, Kd, Ki) obtained from direct tuning of GA into the RBF program for the optimum tuning of the PID controller parameter are substantial for the thematic factory operation of AVR system.The solution for the performance of every candidate in the population is evaluated based on its fitness which is defined as a non-negative value to be maximized. Fitness is associated in a straight line with the value of objective function. The parameter set of the individual evaluation can be determined using Eq. (6) for the performance criteria. The value of individual fitness is calculated by the outcome of the presentation criteria via mutual computation. The fitness function is the presentation of mutuality criterion F(Kp, Kd, Ki) given in Eq. (6). Thus, the minimization of performance criteria in Eq. (6) can be transformed to the maximization of the fitness function as,(8)Fitness=kF(Kd,Kp,Ki)*ITAEwhere k is constant, ITAE is a time integral multiplied by the absolute error value. This is used to amplify the value of 1/F, which is generally small, so that, the chromosome fitness value occur in a wider range.Recently, Devaraj et al. [12] used fuzzy set theory, in which a variable is a member of one or more sets, with a membership specified degree. They expressed the fuzzy rule as,(9)IfxisAandyisBthenz=f(x,y)where A and B are fuzzy sets in the antecedent, x and y are input variables and f(x, y) is a crisp function in the consequent. Each variable fuzzy sets are represented by suiTable membership functions. The core of the fuzzy logic system is formed by a set of such rules. For an exact input signal condition, the fuzzy system defines the rules to be fired and then calculates the efficient output in two steps. Firstly, the minimum of the membership functions input (wi) is obtained for each rule, where this value is the firing value for a particular rule. Secondly, the overall output is calculated by a weighted average of individual rule outputs given by,(10)z=∑i=1Mωizi∑i=1MωiThe PID controller parameters under various operating conditions is determined by the Sugeno fuzzy system.The optimum PID parameters for real-time operation are obtained by developing Surgeon fuzzy logic model, where, Keand τeare the inputs and Kp, Kdand Kiare the outputs. Eight fuzzy sets for instance ‘very low (VL)’, ‘low (L)’, ‘medium low (ML)’, ‘medium (M)’, ‘medium high (MH)’, ‘high low (HL)’, ‘high medium (HM)’ and ‘high (H)’ are defined for the variable Ke. Likewise, the fuzzy sets defined for the variable τeare ‘very low (VL)’, ‘low (L)’, ‘medium low (ML)’, ‘medium high (MH)’, ‘high (H)’ and ‘very high (VH)’. They are linked with overlapping triangular membership functions. To formulate the Table for fuzzy rule, the values of Keare varied from 2.0 to 9.0 in steps of 1.0 and τeare varied from 0.5 to 1 in steps of 0.1. For each combination of Keand τe, the proposed RBF tuning via GA is applied to obtain the optimal values of Kp, Kdand Kiin each times whereas, integrated model is developed by combining GA, RBF-NN and Sugeno fuzzy logic approaches for the design of novel fuzzy controller of AVR system, RBF-NN is used to enhance the PID parameters obtained from GA and develop the rule base of the Sugeno fuzzy system. The Table for the fuzzy rule is formulated for Kp, Kdand Kiand is summarized in Tables 2(a)–(c), respectively. During real-time operation, corresponding to the current operating conditions, the values of Keand τe, are determined. Using these values of Keand τe, the optimal value of Kp, Kdand Kiare calculated by the fuzzy rule Table and the FIS editor sugeno inference system explained in section “GA implementation for optimizing PID parameters of AVR”. Depending on the initialization (FIS editor), the inputs of the fuzzy logic controller are Ke, τeand the outputs are (Kp, Kdand Ki). The system with three fuzzy logic controllers (Kp, Kdand Ki) with rule viewer are set in which each controller has two inputs (Ke, τe) and each input has fuzzy set associated with it. The output has 144 fuzzy set rules for Kp, Kdand Ki, and 48 rules for each one parameter as depicted in Fig. 3. The input range for Keis 1<Ke<10 and τeis 0.4s<τe<1s. The output of Kp, Kdand Kidepend on the variation of Kewith respect to τethrough the output setting rule based on Tables 2(a)–(c). Fig. 3 shown the discretization of the membership functions to appreciate the structure of novel fuzzy controller (GNFPID) whereas, the controller has two inputs (Ke, τe) with 8mfs for Keand 6mfs for τeand three output has 144 fuzzy set rules for Kp, Kdand Ki, and 48 rules for each one parameter as depicted in rule editor, rule viewer and surface viewer.The best result are obtained with the following control parameters for GA: number of generation=50, population size=30, crossover=0.6, mutation probability=0.001 and β=1. MATLAB programming is used for the proposed RBF and GA executed on a Intel core (TM) 2 Duo CPU 5550@1.83GHz and 3GB RAM laptop. The optimal solution of GA is achieved in the duration of 23.79s. The MATLAB-Simulink model of Electrical Power Generation System along with Surgeon fuzzy PID controller is shown in Fig. 4and the Sugeno fuzzy PID controller used with the excitation system is shown in Fig. 5.A step reference voltage of 13,800volt is applied. The Sugeno fuzzy PID controller has the ability to hold back the oscillations in the terminal voltage and provide high-quality damping characteristics. The test system includes a generator excitation system, as shown in the appendix, connected by 500kV lines of 650km length and a 300MVA–500/230kV transformer feeds a 230kV–250MW load. The transmission line is split into two lines. The first line is 350km length connects between buses B1, B4, and the second one is 300km length connects between buses B4 and B5. The two circuit breakers of line 1 are CB1 and CB2 and discrete 3-Phase PLL block measures the frequency, whereas the PLL drives two measurement blocks considering the variable frequency. The first block computes the essential value of the positive-sequence load voltage. The second block computes the active load and reactive powers. The terminal voltage response of excitation system with Sugeno fuzzy PID controller is found to be highly sensitive to a small time change (ms) as displayed in Fig. 4. This demonstrates the suitability of the proposed approach to obtain the optimal PID gains during system real-time operation.It is observed that the system response with new fuzzy PID controller designed by Sugeno fuzzy model rule that obtained from RBF tuning by genetic is highly sensitive to a very small change (time response 0.05 and 2s) as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b).Our proposed method renders better performance in the rise time, peak overshoot and the steady state error. The responses observed from the present controller have a slight overshoot, which can be improved considerably by increasing the rules number. We establish that the PID controller has better performance in comparison to conventional controller.The active and reactive power variation are shown in Fig. 7. A three-phase to ground fault on the 500kV bus is evidenced at t=1.0s.The scope block clearly reveal the tracking of the system frequency change by PLL. The frequency of the system at moment of fault steps down to 59.9997, at t=1.0s when the fault is cleared the frequency steps up to 59.99997at t=1.1s. Conversely, at t=1.0s when three-phase to ground fault occurs on same bus, and the system voltage at moment of fault swing between 1.378*104 and 1.38*104, at t=1.1s when fault is cleared, the voltage swings between 1.3788*104 Volt and 1.3796*104, until reaching the steady state 13,790 volt at t=1.2s and frequency 60Hz at t=1.42 as shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 9displays the response of the terminal voltage under 3 phase ground fault with Sugeno fuzzy PID controller.To analyze the performance of the AVR system under severe fault, 3-phase to ground fault is applied at the generator terminal and the response of system is recorded. The GNFPID is able to suppress the oscillation in the terminal voltage and improves the transient response with excellent damping characteristic. Furthermore, our simulation shows that the GNFPID performs better than the conventional controller such as LQR [23], PSO [29,40], RAG and Binary-coded GA [12] by keeping the system error minimum as furnished in Table 3. The delay time Td, rise time Tr, peak time Tp, maximum overshoot Mp, settling time Ts, and transient response for signal showing the response of the proposed GNFPID are calculated and comparison is made with LQR [23], PSO [29,40], RAG and Binary-coded GA [12] as furnished in Table 3. Meanwhile, the transient response of a practical control system often exhibits damped oscillations before reaching steady state. Fig. 12 illustrates the transient response specifications. The transient response is specified using delay time which is the time require for the response reach 50% of the final value, the rise time is defined as the time for the waveform to go from 0.1 to 0.9 of its final value, settling time is defined as the time for the response to reach and stay within 2% (or 5%) of its final value, the peak time is the time required to reach the first or maximum peak and finally the percent overshoot is the amount that the waveform overshoots the steady-state or final value at the peak time, expressed as a percentage of the steady-state value.Table 3 is furnished to compare the results obtained from proposed method with the previous one and information explanation. The information explanation of the proposed approach, background, parameterization sets, simulation results are summarized also in Table 3.The reliability of the proposed GNFPID controller parameters and the AVR system is verified and compared with existing literatures as mentioned [26,41–43]. The novel approach relies on a hybrid model by combining the GA, RBF-NN and Sugeno fuzzy logic to determine the optimal parameters of PID controller. The RBF-NN is used to enhance the PID parameters obtained from GA to design Sugeno fuzzy PID controller tuned by excitation parameter (Ke, τe). This approach used the rule base of the Sugeno fuzzy system to propose of high sensitive fuzzy PID controller to improve the response of AVR system for transient fault. Therefore, the proposed Sugeno fuzzy PID can achieve numerical convergence easily. Simulation results demonstrate that this is faster and computationally less expensive in terms of time and demonstrate high sensitivity to tiny change (0.005) variation of an AVR system with novel fuzzy controller compared to the RGA, PSO, LQR and GA as shown in Figs. 10 and 11. The proposed approach has superior features including easy implementation, stable convergence characteristic, good computational efficiency keeping the system error closer to zero. This algorithm effectively searches for a high-quality solution and improves the transient response of the AVR system. The proposed methodology gives good performance in the rise time, peak overshoot and the steady state error. Our results are compared with LQR [23], PSO [29,40], RAG and binary-coded GA [12] values as summarized in Table 3. The proposed method is found to produce better performance in the rise time, peak overshoot and the steady state error, settling time and delay time than LQR [23], PSO [29,40], RAG and binary-coded GA [12] as depicted in Figs. 11 and 12 and Table 3.The newly designed GNFPID controller improves the transient response by mimizing the time response to reach the system steady state value during 0.0025s (time for the waveform of transient response to go from 0.0 to reach steady state value as shown in Fig. 12) by mimizing the terminal voltage between the up and down swing wave and keeps the system stable. This observation are in good agreement with Devaraj, Ching-Chang, M.S. Rahimian and N. Madinehi [12,30,40,44]. The responses observed from the current controller have a slight overshoot, which can further be improved by increasing the number of rules. Moreover, GNFPID is able to suppress the oscillation in the terminal voltage and provide good damping characteristics. In our system, the appearance of the simulation error closer to zero suggests that the performance of the present controller is much superior than the LQR, RAG, PSO and binary-coded GA [12] and other conventional one. The present technique automatically averts the over fitting problem detrimental for many optimizations and learning algorithms. Furthermore, by training the combined GA, RBF-NN and Sugeno fuzzy logic with the normalized inputs, the performance reaches the goal perfectly as evidenced from the results. The optimal values of Kp, Kdand Kiobtained by combining Keand te, indicates that the neural network recognizes the inputs with approximately 95% accuracy to achieve improved Sugeno fuzzy PID and PSO PID characteristics [12,30].The result is reliable because the fuzzy rule table test response acquires high sensitivity with system error approaches to zero. Moreover, the new Sugeno fuzzy PID controller exactly tracks the set point with small oscillation because the prime mover speed is a variable to start with it. Finally, the prime mover speed reaches the rated speed 3000rpm that induces a higher voltage than the rated voltage in the beginning in consistent with Faraday's Law [45]. The only limitation is the higher value of the convergence time (0.61039s) of FFB-NN [34] that originates from the slow convergence of the training process associated with the updating algorithm. In comparison to the method of WRBF-NN our Sugeno fuzzy PID is capable of attaining simultaneous updating of the parameters and elimination of the need for the previous updating values. It is established that the proposed novel Sugeno fuzzy PID can achieve numerical convergence. Besides, the RBF-NN applies a local searching mechanism and is efficient, while the FFB-NN applies a global searching method, which may easily be trapped into a local minimum. Consequently, the estimation and minimization of errors under the same system parameters in the FFB-NN model is more difficult in comparison to RBF-NN model. In the new GNFPID, the parameters enhance by RBF-NN to obtained the optimal value to design it therefore, can achieve numerical convergence easily. This algorithm effectively searches for design high sensitivity Sugeno fuzzy PID controller to improve the transient response of the AVR system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
