@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel multi-agent approach to identify faults in line connected three-phase induction motors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Present a novel multi-agent approach to identify stator, rotor and bearing faults in three-phase induction motors.Proposed methodology uses the current amplitudes signal in time domain as the inputs of the multi-agent system for fault diagnosis.The multi-agent system incorporates pattern recognition techniques with better results for each type of fault.Experimental results gathered from three-phase induction motors operating with different load conditions and fed under unbalance voltage are provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Three-phase induction motor (TIM),Pattern recognition,Motor faults,Faults diagnosis,Multi-agent system (MAS),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three-phase induction motors (TIMs) are the key elements of electromechanical energy conversion in a variety of productive sectors. Identifying a defect in a running motor, before a failure occurs, can provide greater security in the decision-making processes for machine maintenance, reduced costs and increased machine operation availability. This paper proposes a new approach for identifying faults and improving performance in three-phase induction motors by means of a multi-agent system (MAS) with distinct behavior classifiers. The faults observed are related to faulty bearings, breakages in squirrel-cage rotor bars, and short-circuits between the coils of the stator winding. By analyzing the amplitudes of the current signals in the time domain, experimental results are obtained through the different methods of pattern classification under various sinusoidal power and mechanical load conditions for TIMs. The use of an MAS to classify induction motor faults allows the agents to work in conjunction in order to perform a specific set of tasks and achieve the goals. This technique proved its effectiveness in the evaluated situations with 1 and 2hp motors, providing an alternative tool to traditional methods to identify bearing faults, broken rotor bars and stator short-circuit faults in TIMs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Three-phase induction motors (TIMs) consume over 60% of the electrical energy in the industrial sector [1] and are the primary means of energy transformation in mechanical drives [2–4]. Like any other electrical machine, these motors require proper maintenance, as breakdowns can impact on productivity and cause substantial losses in industrial processes. While profitability depends on various factors, equipment maintenance is one of the most important. According to [5], all these factors justify increased efforts to develop new techniques to detect possible motor faults with enough time for proper and planned maintenance procedures.Malfunctioning is divided into two major groups: electrical faults and mechanical faults. The most common failures are related to electrical problems in the stator winding, rotor winding, broken rotor bars, broken rotor rings, and connections, among others [6]. Mechanical failures are derived from problems such as wear and tear on the bearings and couplings, eccentricity, and misalignment. According to the research conducted by [7], over 80% of unwanted downtime in electrical motors is related to rotor, stator, and bearing problems.To contribute to the study and development of electric machine fault identification, this paper proposes the implementation of a multi-agent computer system, based on computational intelligence, which identifies faults in the stator, rotor, and bearings of TIMs, where the input parameters are the amplitudes of three-phase currents of power supply to the machine, considering the occasional asymmetrical unbalancing of the voltages and covering a wide range of mechanical loads applied to the machine shaft. The early identification of faults is designed to bring greater security to the decision-making process, with the possibility of reducing maintenance costs and increasing the operating availability of the motor. The use of the proposed architecture for MAS provides the opportunity to explore its parallelism, extensibility, redundancy and robustness, also combining the usage of different pattern identification methods. In the case of the need to monitor a network with many motors which requires a higher computational power. It is possible to distribute the processing of the motor fault recognition system on different hardware and even the construction of a system with different classifier types that could better adapt to a specific fault type, although the system may require more information processing power compared to traditional systems found in the literature.This paper is divided into six sections. Section 1 presents the introduction and a review of related research in the field. Section 2 briefly discusses previous works. Section 3 presents the methodology of the study. Experimental results appear in Section 4, while Section 5 presents findings in comparison with previous works. Section 6 presents the conclusion and final discussions.Induction motors play an important role in industry, a fact which underscores the importance of accurate diagnosis and classification of faults in these motors in the early stages of their evolution. Accordingly, in this work, motor faults are diagnosed by MAS with intelligent pattern classification methods, considering a pre-processing method based on the time domain, by the discretization of the stator current signals for rotor, bearing and stator fault classification.When assessing incipient problems in TIMs, bearing-related issues have been the subject of considerable research, due to the high percentage these components occupy in the classification of motor faults. Bearing faults, according to [7], can account for over 40% of the problems that typically occur in electric motors. Several methods are used to detect these types of faults, such as analyzing mechanical vibration, spectral frequency of the stator current and axial flux. Several techniques are used to identify these faults, as demonstrated in the research presented by [8], where a methodology for monitoring bearing defect conditions by using voltage and stator current signals was developed. This system diagnoses various types of bearing defects in a 0.5hp motor, considering different loading conditions. The strategy presented by [9], considers a model based on the entropy permutation of the vibration signal that is calculated to detect problems in the bearing during motor operation. In case of bearing failures, the vibration signal is decomposed into a set of intrinsic mode functions by means of the decomposition set in an empirical way. The authors used a variation of the support vector machine (SVM) method to classify and determine the severity of the studied defect.Rotor faults in TIMs account for approximately 10% of the problems presented [7]. Such faults can generate thermal stress, electromagnetic forces, electromagnetic noise and vibrations and are caused by centrifugal forces, environmental stresses (abrasion) and mechanical stress [10]. Several related research projects are ongoing, such as observed in the work presented by [11], where the authors proposed a new approach to identify broken rotor bars in induction motors under different load conditions based on wavelet coefficients of the stator current in a specific frequency range. In case of faults, by increasing the number of broken bars and load levels, the amplitude of some particular components of the stator current sideband will also increase. The quantities – stator current, rotor speed and torque – are used to show the relationship between these parameters and the broken rotor bar severity. An induction motor with 1, 2 or 3 broken rotor bars is used under adversities of load variation on the motor shaft. Finally, this work also evaluates the severity of rotor faults based on data originated from stator current and rotor speed. In the work of [12] an experimental analysis of an induction motor driven at different speeds and load levels was performed. The main objective was to study experimentally the ability of the method by using the motor current signature analysis to diagnose the occurrence of broken rotor bars. In [13], a method for identifying broken rotor bar defects was also presented, based on the transformed stator current Wavelet in a specific frequency range. The method allows diagnosis of the occurrence and determination of the number of broken bars at different loads. Also, due to the properties of Wavelet transform during transient conditions, it is possible to detect the defect during motor start-up. Experimental results show data concerning motors with 1, 2, 3 and 4 broken bars with the motor operating at rated load. The motor operating with four broken bars was also tested with no load, 33%, 66%, 100% and 133% of load torque. In addition, the authors considered the finite element method to model broken bar defects.Stator coils are subject to various anomalies which can cause different responses in the equipment. Changes in the stator winding can manifest themselves in several ways, including overheating of the motor, electrical overload, and faults in the coil insulation. The stator is subjected to critical situations in the operation of a TIM, such as thermal, electrical, mechanical and environmental, all of which can severely affect the stator condition and lead to breakdowns. As faults in the stator can cause problems with the operation of the motor, several studies to identify these faults are proposed in the literature, such as the work of [14] where the authors presented the analysis of the signature instantaneous active and reactive power in the frequency domain for diagnosing stator faults in motors driven direct on line and also considering an inverter-fed situation. The experimental and simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. The severity of the conditions is tested and the behaviors of frequency ranges are observed for the detection of stator faults. In the work presented by [15] the authors carried out a comparative study considering the evaluation of SVM/SMO, multilayer perceptron (MLP) and fuzzy ARTMAP network classifiers to diagnose the severity of stator short-circuit faults. Recently, the work of [16] presented a method considering FFT at the pre-processing stage and an MLP network to classify the severity of stator short-circuit faults in a permanent magnet synchronous motor. Breakdowns related to the stator are responsible for approximately 37% of undesired stoppages in TIMs [7].The most common methods used in the detection and diagnosis of incipient faults in TIMs are those based on models, specialized systems and intelligent systems that simulate biological models. The diagnosis of such faults can be accomplished through spectral analysis, analysis in the time domain, finite elements, and by means of intelligent systems, as mentioned in the work of [10]. Intelligent systems in this context are presented in various topologies and procedures such as artificial neural network (ANN), fuzzy logic, and hybrid systems. On the other hand, there are few works on distributed artificial intelligence related to recognition of faults in TIMs. According to [17], distributed artificial intelligence is classified by distributed problem solving (DPS), multi-agent systems (MAS) and parallel artificial intelligence (PAI).For over a decade, the proposed use of MAS to address engineering challenges has been reported in several instances in the literature. The use of MAS appears in works on the diagnosis of energy systems related to protection [18], systems monitoring [19], restoration of the power system [20], control [21,22] and automation [23]. For example, the work of [24] employed an intelligent agent methodology for the reconfiguration of power systems. The research conducted by [25] discussed reconfiguration for the restoration of power systems using an MAS. The authors also mentioned that the majority of approaches for restoration found in the literature are centralized solutions which lead to the single point of failure. Additionally, the research conducted by [26] proposed an MAS for fault detection and system reconfiguration for power distribution. Another related study was performed by [27], who designed a MAS integrated with fuzzy systems in order to control reactive power in a distribution system. In the area of protecting power systems, the work developed by [28] proposed an MAS to help protect distributed electricity generation systems, the main features of which are detection and troubleshooting. The research conducted by [19] proposed an intelligent MAS to monitor the operating conditions of power transformers.The proposal for an intelligent multi-agent architecture presented in this paper is designed to explore the capability of autonomy and encapsulation inherent in the architecture, which leads agents to offer distinct behavior patterns, based on classifier standards, which can be applied collaboratively to present motor fault diagnosis.As presented by [29,30], the traditional classification for multiple faults in TIMs is essentially composed of the existence of the combination module, which requires all the outputs of the classifiers in order to generate the final output. Accordingly, a multi-classifying system can become an inflexible system, as the decision making becomes a centralized process or even a model created from training a dataset with multiple faults, which can generate too many rules on a centralized basis.The purpose of this work is to remove the layer of decision and allow entities to make the classification interactively, concurrently and independent of the platform, whereby the classifiers can decide the best output from the system, as shown in Fig. 1. The structure features a communication system composed of autonomous entities, in which an input is presented to every entity. These entities produce their respective outputs and can communicate by agreeing over the output, which reinforces the behavior of an MAS. Each classifier is an intelligent agent which behaves in order to recognize patterns.MAS are a common means of exploring the potential ability of agents and combine many agents in an individual system. Each agent has incomplete information and is unable to solve an entire problem on its own, but together, the agents form a system with enough information and ability to solve the problem. Fig. 1 shows the flowchart of the proposed MAS.The experimental data of the three-phase stator currents are obtained directly from the motor by using the laboratory test bench shown in Fig. 2. The specifications of the motors used in this study are provided in Table 1. The tests, where the motors produce signals due to faults in the bearings, rotor, and stator, are also characterized by applying a range of load torque and voltage unbalance conditions, as shown in Table 2. During the acquisition, the load torque was varied from 0.5Nm to 6Nm with intervals of 0.5Nm. For each load torque condition, the voltage is unbalanced between phases up to ±10% with intervals of 2%, the voltage unbalance occurring exclusively in the phase “a” with phases “b” and “c” balanced, an overvoltage in phase “a”, undervoltage in phase “b” and balanced phase “c” was also considered, as well as experiments with all phases properly balanced.The test data were acquired using a National Instruments USB-6221 signal conditioning board as well as Matlab software, operating at 25,000 samples per second. The stator current signal is suitable for the acquisition system, which uses a Lem Hall sensor to condition the signals in the range of ±10V. More information about the test bench can be found in recent papers such as [2,3].In the data processing module the data set with signals from the currents of each phase (Ia,b,c) are selected from motors operating in steady-state. For each test, half a wave period from each phase is selected from the currents in the time domain. The data are then organized and discretized in ten points per half cycle of the current waveform for each phase before being normalized by the peak value of the signal [2,31], thus creating vectors with 30 points (absolute values) for use as input in the MAS. Each point represents a value of the normalized amplitude of an instant of time for each phase current and the behavior of these 30 values refers to the standard sample.After the treatment phase of the signals, when the intelligent multi-agent classifier module is activated, the standard classifier model of each specialist agent has already been determined. When the system receives the sample to be identified, the main class processes the data and activates the operation of the multi-agent platform. All the agents register availability in the system through the directory facilitator (DF) agent, available in Jade platform. The coordinating agent then processes the initial input information and verifies if the TIM is operating under normal conditions, sending a message to the non-defective motor classifier agent. The functionality that checks whether the motor signal sample is under standard operation conditions with no fault comprises the usage of an ANN method of MLP type trained with data collected from a 1hp motor covering stator, rotor and bearing faults with a negative classification standard (0) and data gathered from a healthy motor with positive classification standard (1).The learning rate value is defined as 0.3, the momentum term receives 0.2, and the maximum number of epochs for training the network is 500. The ANN architecture is composed of fifteen neurons which are used in the single hidden layer, empirically defined. For the hidden layer, the activation function is hyperbolic tangent, and as for the output layer linear function is used.After the system is satisfied with the accuracy of the data received, it terminates processing of the sample and returns the result. Otherwise, the coordinator agent calls for sample evaluation from the agents responsible for the identification of bearing, stator or rotor faults. Based on statistical methods in accuracy and errors, provided in the validation of previously trained classifier models, agents communicate with each other to determine the acceptable threshold to diagnose the fault.The initial activation of the proposed MAS causes specific agents to register with the DF agent and at the same time train their respective predetermined models. While the agents are active together with the platform, it is possible to validate any samples that are in the organizational pattern of the system. This pattern is related to a vector line with 31 positions, where positions 1 through 10 represent the sinusoidal current of phase “a”, positions 11–20 represent the current signal of phase “b”, while positions 21–30 show the current of phase “c” of a specific sample that represents the motor test. In position 31, the sample pattern is determined.According to [32], for an initial evaluation based on the results shown in Fig. 3, classification tests of samples acquired through the testing bench were performed using 5 classification methods to obtain information to define the best behavior of each agent responsible for fault identification in the MAS proposed in this paper. All methods were tested for each type of observed failure through the cross-validation method, with 10-folds for training and validation.Based on the results presented in Table 3the agent responsible for identifying bearing faults is based on the SVM/sequential minimal optimization (SMO) [33,34] and k-NN [35] methods. The classifier behavior for the agent responsible for identifying rotor faults is based on the ANN/MLP [36] and k-NN methods. The behavior classifier for the agent that identifies stator faults is based on the k-NN and ANN/MLP methods.For all situations, the configuration of the k-NN classification method for executing the tests uses only three neighbors, while the search algorithm is based on the calculation of the Euclidean distance method. The basic settings of the SVM/SMO method defined in this paper are: a rounding error rate value of 1012, the core function of the SVM/SMO is the Polynomial Kernel [37], and an error tolerance parameter of 0.001. The ANN/MLP configurations are: learning rate value defined as 0.3, the momentum term receives 0.2 and the maximum number of epochs for training the network is 500. Fifteen neurons are used in the single hidden layer, defined empirically. For the hidden layer, the hyperbolic tangent activation function is used, and one linear function is used in the output layer.Each classification method is added to the behavior of the previously trained agents, and the respective models are adjusted to the 960 sample signals gathered from the 1hp motors (Motors 1 and 2). A third motor (Motor 3) of 2hp was used exclusively in the validation stage aiming to verify the robustness of the proposed model. These samples, composed from signals of defective stator, rotor, and bearings, as well as from the motors without faults, are organized where each specialized agent recognizes its respective standard classification. For stator faults, short-circuits were created in the stator of Motor 1, considering severity levels of 1%, 3%, 7%, and 10%, and 1%, 3%, 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% for Motor 2. As for Motor 3, the following stator short-circuit severity levels were used; 1%, 3%, 5%, and 10%. Fig. 4shows an illustration of a 1hp motor, 4 poles, manufactured by WEG, which was rewound with winding derivation taps. When these keys are driven, a short-circuit occurs between the turns of the same coil, according to the selected percentage.As for the faulty rotor bars, it is possible to emulate the occurrence of one, two, and four consecutive bars, as well as two consecutive broken bars in opposite sides of the rotor. Fig. 5presents an image with the insertion of holes on the rotor. These rotor faults are performed by drilling, using a drill bit with a diameter sufficiently larger than the bar. This procedure results in a set of rotors with artificially created defects.For testing motors with bearing faults, a summary of reproduction of these faults, in which the data were acquired for testing in this work, can be seen in Fig. 6, based on the distributed and localized conditions, which emulate the operating conditions in the industrial environment. Faults were introduced in bearings related to excessive wear (distributed), grooves, inner and outer tracks, electric shock and defect in the spheres (located). Excessive wear defects were reproduced in order to evaluate the similarity of the bearing degradation process through excessive use, lack of lubrication and excessive load on the shaft. After cleaning the bearing, the lubrication was replaced by an abrasive slurry used for grinding parts and the motor run again for 30min in order to degrade the bearing. After this process, the bearings were cleaned and lubricated again for proper data acquisition. The insertion grooves in the inner and outer races were held with the help of a mini grinding machine. Faulty tests considering the electric discharge in the bearings were carried out by using a controlled discharge generated by an arc welding machine, performed on a clean, dry bearing, with its inner ring grounded and the electrode promptly applied on the outer race.One example of how the system operates is the condition of the agent responsible for identifying stator faults. In this case, the training data is prepared using samples from all the faults in this study, as well as samples from motors operating under normal conditions. For this agent, all samples are determined with a classification value of 0, except for the samples with stator faults, which are given a value of 1. Using this logic, the training data prepared for the classifiers inherent to the behavior of the agents belonging to the system are also organized.The Java Agent Development Framework (JADE) environment [38] is adopted in this project in order to develop the proposed MAS designed to address the implementation of applications based on agents, using FIPA specifications for the interoperability between MAS.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
