@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid evolutionary neuro-fuzzy approach based on mutual adaptation for human gesture recognition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Focus is placed on development of a gesture recognition system.A framework of mutual adaptation for neuro-fuzzy system is proposed.Natural evolution strategy is used in structural optimization.The regularization technique based on DropOut is applied.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gesture recognition,Mutual adaptation,Neuro-fuzzy system,Evolutionary approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the most important techniques in human-robot communication is gesture recognition. If robots can read intentions from human gestures, the communication process will be smoother and more natural. Processing for gesture recognition typically consists of two parts: feature extraction and gesture classification. In most works, these are independently designed and evaluated by their own criteria. This paper proposes a hybrid approach based on mutual adaptation for human gesture recognition. We use a neuro-fuzzy system (NFS) for the classification of human gesture and apply an evolution strategy for parameter tuning and pruning of membership functions. Experimental results indicate the effectiveness of mutual adaptation in terms of the generalization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Gesture recognition is notably one of the most important techniques for human machine interfaces and robots, as bodily expressions convey important and effective information. In this study, we focus on the development of a recognition system for upper body gestures in face-to-face communication. A number of works in human gesture recognition have been published in the literature [1,2]. The most commonly used approach is vision based recognition. Vision based devices can deal with information properties such as color and depth to realize gesture recognition. However, visual image is very sensitive to background and lighting conditions.Vision based recognition have to overcome occlusion problems due to postural change and movement of body parts. Various types of pose estimation techniques have been discussed in terms of application to human motion analysis. Pose estimation is divided into three general categories based on usage of human body model: model-free, indirect model, and direct model [3–5]. In model-free approach, no prior model is needed, and body parts are detected and combined in 2D or 3D images. Indirect model approach focuses on direct reconstruction of model shape and movement from the visual-hull, without prior model in order to recover human body model and motion pattern. In general, approaches based on direct model, a human body model that has a person's kinematics, shape, and appearance is used in an analysis-by-synthesis method.With release of the Microsoft Kinect sensor in late 2010, the 3D image sensor has been applied to many applications of human monitoring [6–8]. While being a low-cost sensor, it not only takes color images but also depths of images. The Kinect sensor resolves privacy issues as the sensor supports a pose estimation system as a skeleton tracking system to provide joint orientation information in real-time. We therefore use the 3D image sensor to estimate human poses in this paper.Some researchers have used Kinect sensor for human gesture recognition and behavior analysis. In [9], the depth histogram in region of interest (ROI) is used for the feature extraction, and support vector machine (SVM) is applied to the classification of human gestures. The hidden Markov model (HMM) is also an effective technique. Cell occupancy features and silhouette features are used for hand gesture recognition by HMM [10]. Linear discriminant analysis is applied in [11] to dimension reduction of features extracted by using the histograms of skeleton joint locations, and built HMM for human action recognition.In this paper, we apply a neuro-fuzzy system (NFS) for classification of human gesture. Neural networks, fuzzy systems, and evolutionary algorithm are the three big soft computing paradigms for computational intelligence [12]. Integration of neural networks and fuzzy systems is a hybrid approach to system modeling. Fuzzy systems are typically used to present knowledge expression with linguistic form such as human reasoning, while neural networks can automatically adjust their weights to optimize their behavior as pattern recognizers, decision makers, system controllers, and predictors.The adaptation of neuro-fuzzy system results in a solution of two optimization problem: structural optimization and parametric optimization. Generally, structural optimization is conducted to obtain an optimum structure. After structural optimization, parametric optimization is performed to find an optimum subset of system parameters from the parametric space. However, the solution may fall into local minima. To overcome this, evolutionary algorithm can be adjunctively applied to the adaptation of neuro-fuzzy system. Previous researches have discussed neurogenetic approach as an effective method to optimize neural network structures [13]. However, it is said that the optimizations may lead to overfitting to training data, where it performs nicely on known patterns but performs very poorly unknown patterns [14].The main contribution in this paper is to develop a method of mutual adaptation in solving the generalization problem, which includes how to sustain the generalization ability in the structural and parametric optimizations. In this paper, we apply a regularization technique based on a concept of Dropout proposed by Hinton et al. [15]. We use an evolutionary strategy to modify the membership parameters and the structures. The chromosome is composed of three parameters: center position and width parameters of a Gaussian membership function, and binary mask to select the proper membership functions. The originality of this paper is to realize a novel mutual adaptation method to perform the structure and parameter optimization and generalization improvement at the same time.The organization of this paper is as follow. Related works are described in Section 2. Section 3 explains the measurement system and details the NFS for gesture recognition. The proposed method of mutual adaptation is explained in Section 4. Experimental results are discussed in Section 5. Concluding remarks and future research directions are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a method of mutual adaptation for tuning parameters and structure of the membership functions in a neuro-fuzzy system is proposed. We first defined the importance of mutual adaptation for system modeling. Next, we explained the measurement system and described details of the proposed method. Experimental results and effectiveness in terms of the maximum number of generations in NES and frequency of interrupt processing are discussed. In most cases, the proposed method achieves around 90% accuracy of the recognition. This showed the proposed mutual adaptation is a promising method to solve the structure and parameter problem in a neuro-fuzzy system. In future work, we will investigate a proper strategy for interrupt processing. In addition, we will consider some methods and learning structures to reduce the computational cost to apply the concept of mutual adaptation more practically.