@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact of service quality on user satisfaction: Modeling and estimating distribution of quality of experience using Bayesian data analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Quality of experience (QoE) perceived by users plays a crucial role in attracting and retaining customers.Opinion score distribution (OSD) is a better representation of the QoE of users than previous metric measures such as the mean opinion score (MOS) which wrongly assumes that QoE data are metric while they are ordinal categorical.We use Bayesian data analysis to estimate the posterior distribution of QoE, considering available prior quality of service (QoS) data and user ratings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Consumer behavior,Customer satisfaction,Bayesian data analysis,Generalized linear model,Opinion score distribution,Experimental methods,QoS,QoE,Delay,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Quality of experience (QoE) plays a crucial role in attracting and retaining users of interactive Internet applications. In this work, the relation between quality of service (QoS) perceived by users and the satisfaction level of users is carefully studied. In our experiments, users encountered certain latencies while using a photo viewing service on their mobile phone; we used the experience sampling method (ESM) to record the satisfaction level of these users on a scale of one to five. The user opinion data are ordinal; therefore, it is not meaningful to treat the data as metric. To address this issue, we used Bayesian data analysis with a generalized linear model (GLM) to estimate the overall satisfaction of the users in the form of the posterior distribution of opinions. We propose that the quality of experience of users can be represented by opinion score distribution (OSD) instead of the mean opinion score (MOS).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the early 1990s, Mark Weiser, a computing pioneer, wrote his vision of radical changes in the future computing systems; Weiser (1991) predicted that personal computing will evolve such that computing systems will be present everywhere, at all times, calling the new paradigm “pervasive computing”. He described this new computing environment as “The deepest and most enduring technologies are those that disappear. They dissipate in the things of everyday life until they become indistinguishable”.Nearly 25years after the emergence of the new vision of Mark Weiser, a new generation of computing systems—in the form of pervasive computing and the Internet of Things (IoT)—has found its way into people’s lives, thus making his prediction a reality. These new systems, by creating smart spaces, have entered the computing environment in people’s daily lives; the significant amount of research in this area and the related hardware and software developments demonstrate the imminent prevalence of the new computing systems.Interaction with pervasive systems completely differs from interaction with desktop computers; pervasive computing systems provide dynamic context-aware responses when interacting with humans, thus differing from desktop computers that provide computing services in a static environment to a user sitting at a desk.In 1999, the objective of using computers was to perform simple tasks such as creating documents and sending text emails. However, today, we expect pervasive computing systems to be part of a smart environment. For example, smart homes providing user services adopt a completely different approach from desktop personal computers performing computational operations.The use of network-connected computing systems in daily life is increasing considerably; however, to satisfy user needs in an acceptable manner, pervasive computing systems must consider, in addition to functional properties of the services, non-functional properties and quality of them. Furthermore, pervasive computing systems should provide these services according to user needs.Although system-level aspects of quality of service, such as delay, throughput and jitter, can be used to determine and improve the quality of service (QoS), the important factor for a user is the overall acceptability of the service. Quality of experience (QoE) is a measure of this acceptability and can be used to compare the service quality from the user viewpoint. A better quality of experience can guarantee more users for the system and more revenue for the service provider because QoE is a direct measure of user satisfaction with the service. Anderson et al. (2004), Clark (2007) have provided new approaches for stock value estimation of companies that provide services to people. They have used customer satisfaction as a measure of the stock efficiency of the company; these approaches demonstrate the importance of measuring, modeling and predicting user satisfaction.Previous studies in this area generally used the mean opinion score (MOS) as the sole measure of user satisfaction with a service. However, user opinion is an ordinal variable; therefore, the calculation of distance for these data is not meaningful, and similarly, other arithmetic operations-such as calculating the mean, variance and ratio for these data, as well as calculating MOS-are invalid operations. Owing to this important statistical consideration, in our work, we propose the use of the discrete distribution of user opinions (opinion score distribution or OSD) as a measure of service acceptability. However, to use opinion distribution, we must overcome certain technical difficulties because it is not possible to calculate OSD using the linear regression method, which is used for calculating MOS. We adopted a Bayesian analysis of regression using a generalized linear model (GLM) of ordinal data to study the relation between QoE and the QoS attribute, delay. This method can generate the complete posterior distribution of user satisfaction for a known range of quality of service values in a certain context of usage.Our main research questions can be specified as follows:1.What are the shortcomings of the popular mean opinion score (MOS), and what are the possible measures that can be defined and used to overcome these shortcomings?What are the main parameters that affect the QoE for a user, and how can we model and evaluate these parameters? Are the system-level parameters of QoS and QoE based on user opinion correlated, and do they have a particular relationship? Can the relationship be used to forecast QoE based on the previous QoS log of the user’s service usage?Is this satisfaction subjective? Can different people have completely different opinions about the same level of QoS?How can we estimate the discrete distribution of user satisfaction using available data related to quality of service? Is this forecast a point forecast or a probability distribution?The main contribution of this research is that it studies the statistical properties of QoS and QoE data and their relation; it provides provide a means of calculating user QoE from perceived QoS as a discrete distribution of user satisfaction level and parameters of the relation between QoS and user QoE. The calculation of this distribution (OSD) provides a new measure of the overall satisfaction of the users; therefore, the distribution of user opinions (OSD) is suggested as a replacement for MOS.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
