@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of integrated soft computing techniques for optimisation of hybrid CO2 laser–MIG welding process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three soft computing based integrated models such as, ANN–GA, ANN–SA and ANN–Quasi Newton have been developed.Those models predicted and optimised welding strength during hybrid CO2 laser–MIG welding process.Best ANN architecture (3-11-1 network) predicts welding strength with mean absolute percentage errors less than 2%.ANN–GA shows best optimisation performance with only 0.09% experimental validation error.Welding speed shows maximum influence on welding strength and an increase in welding speed decreases welding strength.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Integrated soft computing model,Artificial neural networks,Genetic algorithm,Simulated annealing,Hybrid CO2 laser–MIG welding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, artificial neural networks (ANNs), genetic algorithm (GA), simulated annealing (SA) and Quasi Newton line search techniques have been combined to develop three integrated soft computing based models such as ANN–GA, ANN–SA and ANN–Quasi Newton for prediction modelling and optimisation of welding strength for hybrid CO2 laser–MIG welded joints of aluminium alloy. Experimental dataset employed for the purpose has been generated through full factorial experimental design. Laser power, welding speeds and wires feed rate are considered as controllable input parameters. These soft computing models employ a trained ANN for calculation of objective function value and thereby eliminate the need of closed form objective function. Among 11 tested networks, the ANN with best prediction performance produces maximum percentage error of only 3.21%. During optimisation ANN–GA is found to show best performance with absolute percentage error of only 0.09% during experimental validation. Low value of percentage error indicates efficacy of models. Welding speed has been found as most influencing factor for welding strength.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hybrid laser–MIG welding process is carried out through simultaneous application of laser beam as primary heat source and conventional metal inert gas (MIG) as secondary heat source, in the same process zone. This method combines advantages of the laser beam welding such as high welding speed, deep weld penetration and minimal distortion by heat, with advantages of conventional MIG welding process such as large gap bridging ability, cost effectiveness and ease to weld reflective materials to device a more efficient tool. The method is therefore being increasingly employed in the automotive and shipping industries [1].Hybrid laser welding is influenced by a large number of controllable process parameters including laser power, welding speed, distance from laser beam spot to welding torch, welding torch inclination (in degrees), focal position of laser beam, wire feed rate, welding current etc. Proper control and optimisation of such parameters ensure the better output characteristics such as welding strength, penetration depth, weld bead geometry, heat affected zone and other metallographic properties. But till date very little studies have been observed on development and employment of mathematical tools for optimisation of its process parameters. Initial researches were mainly focussed on influence of process parameters on microstructure and mechanical properties [2–7], weld bead characteristics [3,8] and welding strength [9].Statistical techniques based on different systematic and scientific design of experiment methodology (DOE) require lesser number of experimental runs for optimisation of process parameters. Those DOE based methods have been employed for determination of optimal stability condition [10] and optimal weld penetration depth [11] in CO2 laser–MIG hybrid welding process. But complex non-linear relationships among the process parameters indicate a possible application domain of soft computing tools for process modelling and optimisation. Soft computing methods like artificial neural networks (ANNs), fuzzy set theory, genetic algorithm (GA), simulated annealing (SA) etc. are biologically inspired models that can predict and optimise process parameters in environment of uncertainty and imprecision. But scanty researches have been reported so far on soft computing application of hybrid laser welding.Canyurt et al. [12] have developed a GA based model for estimation of welding strength during Nd:YAG laser–MIG hybrid welding of 6K21-T4 aluminium alloy. A regression model developed on connecting input parameters with welding strength has been employed as objective function for the proposed model. Input process parameters are wire type, shielding gas, laser energy, laser focus, travelling speed and wire feed rate.Recently Ghosal and Chaki [13] have developed an ANN–Quasi Newton optimisation hybrid model to predict and optimise penetration depth of CO2 laser–MIG hybrid welding used for 5005 Al–Mg alloy. The input welding parameters are power, focal distance from the work piece surface, torch angle and the distance between the laser and the welding torch. The best ANN architecture is found to show much better prediction capability compared to a regression model developed from the experimental data.In the present research, an extensive experimentation based on DOE is carried out on CO2 laser–MIG hybrid welding of aluminium alloy sheet. Tensile strength of welded joint is measured and analysed as output quality characteristic. Three integrated optimisation models such as ANN–GA, ANN–SA and ANN–Quasi Newton are developed and employed in the present work for analysing experimental input–output dataset. Back propagation neural networks (BPNN) with Bayesian regularisation (BR) [14] is used for ANN modelling. It is particularly suitable for modelling small and noisy dataset. It eliminates the problem of slow convergence and low prediction performance by conventional BPNN in presence of noisy data. Application of conventional BPNN are found in laser cutting [15,16] and laser welding [17–19].During the application of integrated optimisation models an ANN trained using BPNN with BR is used to predict the objective function value during optimisation. Therefore, these models eliminate the need of closed form objective function. Upon optimisation the models determine optimum welding strength with corresponding process parameters. A schematic diagram of the proposed models is given in Fig. 1.Experiments are carried out using a hybrid welding system combining diffusion cooled slab 3.5kW CO2 laser welding system (Rofin Slab: CO2 laser) with a torch of MIG welding system. Fig. 2shows a schematic diagram of a hybrid laser–MIG welding arrangement. Laser power (P), welding speed (Vw) and wire feed rate (FR) are considered as controllable input process parameters. The other controllable parameters are kept fixed for the present experiment. The distance between laser beam and arc is kept 2mm. Focal plane of the laser is kept 1mm below the job surface. Stand-off distance of the welding torch is 12mm from the work piece and the torch angle is maintained at 53° with the job surface. A mixture of Helium and Argon in equal proportion is used as shielding gas with an operating pressure of 2.5bar.Hindalco (India) made cold rolled AA8011 grade Aluminium alloy (0.6–1.00% Fe, 0.50–0.90% Si, 0.05% Mg, 0.20% Mn, 0.10% Cu, 0.20% Zn, 0.08% Ti, 0.05% Cr and rest Al) plate of thickness 3mm is used as job specimen. In order to perform the butt welding experiments, 100mm×75mm specimens have been cut from a sheet of aluminium alloy by a machining process. A square butt joint configuration was prepared to fabricate joints. The filler material used for MIG welding has been ER4043 that contains 5.5% Si, around 0.4% other alloying materials (0.007% Mg, 0.17% Fe, 0.08% Cu, 0.005% Mn, 0.04% Ti, 0.0016% Be, 0.02% Sr) and rest Al. The feed wire diameter is 3.15mm.Feasible operating regions for the process parameters are selected through an exhaustive set of pilot experiments. Table 1furnishes the numerical values of control factors at different levels. 27 experiments are designed and conducted based on 3 factor 3 level full factorial experimental design without replication. Welding strength (WS) of the joint is considered as output parameter and it has been measured from tensile tests carried out in 8801 microprocessor-controlled 10 Tonne INSTRON universal tester with an accuracy of ±0.4%. Out of 27 experimental datasets, 22 sets have been used for ANN training and the rest for ANN testing. Training and testing datasets are furnished in Table 2. Thus input vector (X) and output vector (D) for the present problem is given by,(1)X=PVwFR,D=WSThe integrated ANN–GA, ANN–SA and ANN–Quasi-Newton models (Fig. 1) developed in present work complete training, prediction and optimisation of the operational parameters of hybrid laser–MIG welding process by running a single program in MATLAB 7.0 environment using Pentium 4, 3GHz and 512MB PC. The program works in two steps. In step I, different single hidden layer ANN architectures are trained by BPNN with BR algorithm and subsequently tested. Prediction capability of the architecture with maximum prediction accuracy is considered as best ANN. In step II, the program calls the subroutine of a particular optimisation program (GA/SA/Quasi-Newton) and starts iteration with the initial values. Then program control switches to ANN module in the main program and best ANN generates the value of objective function corresponding to initial values. The program control then returns to the particular optimisation subroutine and the cycle continues up to the point of appropriate convergence. Working of ANN and optimisation algorithms for the present problem is furnished very briefly as follows.Input vector (X) and output vector (D) in Eq. (1) consists input layer and output layer for BPNN architecture, as shown in Fig. 3. Number of hidden layer neurons is considered as design parameters and varied from 5 to 15 in the present work. Initialisation of weights and normalisation of dataset (Xnor, Dnor) have been carried out for better training performance. Activation functions for the hidden layer and output layer neurons are considered as sigmoidal and linear respectively. Output values (O) computed by ANN are compared with desired normalised output value Dnor to determine error. BPNN with BR model minimises a term Ф, a linear combination of sum of the squared errors and sum of the squared weights. If the computed Ф satisfies convergence criterion, training stops. Otherwise, network weights are updated for next iteration through back propagation of errors using Levenberg Marquardt algorithm [20]. In the present study, mean squared error (MSE) at the point of convergence is considered as performance index for a network and calculated by(2)MSE=1Q∑i=1Q(Dnori−Oi)2where Q is total number of training data.Prediction capability [21] of the trained ANN is tested by feeding five sets of test input dataset that were not used (i.e. unknown to ANN) during training. The resulting ANN output is compared with corresponding known experimental output to determine the prediction error and is measured by MSE. Out of 11 architectures so trained and tested, the network with least MSE during prediction (3-11-1) is known as best ANN. It further interfaces with optimisation subroutine of the model for optimisation (Fig. 1).Maximisation of the welding strength is the objective of the present optimisation problem. But as the algorithms are meant for finding out the minima of a function, the present maximisation problem is converted into minimisation problem and the basic objective function can be written in generic form as,The objective functions:Minimise:−WS (P, Vw, FR)Subject to the constraints:(3)Pmin≤P≤Pmax,Vwmin≤Vw≤Vwmax,FRmin≤FR≤FRmaxwhere P, Vw, FR are the welding input parameters and WS represents the welding strength as output. Maximum and minimum values of P, Vwand FR can be obtained from Table 1.Present method has employed trained ANN for computing objective function value. As ANN, trained with normalised dataset can compute and predict output only within the range of 0 and 1, the input range of constraining variables has also been normalised between 0 and 1. The objective function detailed in Eq. (3) is thus modified for optimisation as follows:The objective functions:Minimise:J=−WS/WSmaxSubject to the constraints:(4)0≤P,Vw,FR≤1Maximum value of WS can be obtained from Table 1.The present model employs GA after completion of ANN training and testing. GA is a derivative-free stochastic optimisation method and derived from concept of natural selection and genetics [22]. In the present work, initially population of size N is randomly generated. Every string of population contains three substrings that indicate the constraining variables like P, Vwand FR. The WS corresponding to substring values are predicted by a trained ANN to determine objective function value J (Eq. (4)). Basic steps of GA involve scaling, selection, crossover and mutation operators. Scaling of objective function J determines fitness function values. Selection determines multiple copies of good solutions. Crossover generates new strings or children on swapping the part of random pairs of parent strings along with crossover fraction p. Mutation further generates new strings by small random changes in the individuals with mutation rate m. When best fitness value (fbest) does not get improved over a certain number of consecutive iteration cycles (stall generations) then computation stops. At Stall generation optimum welding strength WS and corresponding operational parameters of welding i.e. P, Vwand FR are determined.GA optimisation performance is closely dependent on proper selection of GA parameters such as, selection function, crossover fraction (p), mutation rate (m), size of population (N) and number of stall generations (g). In the present work, tournament selection function is used, as it is computationally faster than both the fitness based as well as rank based proportionate selection scheme and it incorporates possibility for a good string to be copied in the mating pool more than once [23]. Generally, crossover fraction (p) is kept near to 1.0 so that almost all the parents can participate in crossover. While, mutation rate (m) is kept to low value to avoid random search. In the present work, near optimal GA parameters [23] have been selected using the following steps:(i)GA parameters p, m, N and g have been varied in the ranges of 0.5–1, 0.001–0.015, 25–225 and 5–45 respectively.Initially, p is varied keeping other parameters m, N and g fixed at their mid values such as 0.008, 125 and 25 respectively. Minimum value of objective function J is found at p=0.85 and shown in Fig. 4(a).Further, p, N and g values are fixed at 0.85, 125 and 25 respectively and m is varied between 0.001 and 0.015. Minimum value of J is obtained for m=0.006 (Fig. 4(b)).Next, p, m and g values are fixed at 0.85, 0.006 and 25 respectively and population size is varied between 25 and 225. Minimum J value is obtained at population size of 150 (Fig. 4(c)).Finally, p, m and N are set at 0.85, 0.006 and 150 respectively and tests are conducted for number of stall generations (g). Minimum value of J is obtained at 20 stall generations (Fig. 4(d)) and any further increase in g is found to increase computational time only without improving the optimisation performance.Thus optimal GA parameters are found to be as follows: p=0.85, m=0.006, N=150 and g=20.Finally, values/options for GA operators used in the present study are furnished below:Size of populations (N): 150Number of stall generations: 20Fitness function: rank scalingSelection function: tournamentTournament size: 2Crossover function: two pointCrossover fraction (p): 0.85Mutation function: uniformMutation rate (m): 0.006SA is a random search technique that simulates cooling phenomenon of the molten metal in annealing process using the concept of the Boltzmann probability distribution and is given by P(J)=exp(−J/T). J represents energy/objective function value to be minimised for attainment of equilibrium state while T is a controllable temperature-like parameter [22].SA begins optimisation with initial point N[0] for N (P, Vw, FR) and ANN predicts corresponding WS. Objective function J is computed using Eq. (4). In the present problem initial point for N (P, Vw, FR) is taken asN[0]=[000]i.e. lower bound of normalised constraints. A random point N[1] is created in neighbourhood. J[1] is evaluated for N[1]. If difference in energy/objective function ΔJ=Jt+1−Jt<0, the new point N[1] is accepted and program control shifts to next iteration. Else if ΔJ≥0, a random number (r) is created between 0 and 1. On satisfying r<exp(−ΔJ/T) program control goes to next iteration. Else a new point is generated and the steps as explained are repeated. T is updated as Tt+1=k×Ttwhere k is cooling rate. In the present work in order to maintain slow cooling, cooling rate k is set at 0.95. Initial temperature T is taken as 200°C, as results of initial test runs indicated that, any temperature more than 200°C only increases optimisation time with out improving the performance. That phenomenon has been indicated in Fig. 5.The computation stops, when no improvement in the best function value is observed over a certain number of consecutive iteration cycles (stall iterations). Number of stall iterations in the present work has been set through test runs. On convergence, J, WS and corresponding P, Vw, FR are obtained.Options for SA in the present work are given below:Initial temperature (T): 200°Cooling rate (k): 0.95Number of stall iterations: 50Quasi Newton search algorithm is one of the most favoured gradient-based optimisation techniques that efficiently compute the Hessian matrix (H) by an approximation method that increases the computation speed and convergence. Algorithm starts with initial point Yold(P, Vw, FR) and determines WS from ANN. Initial point Yoldis taken asYold=[000]i.e. lower bound of normalised constraints. Objective function value (Jold) is computed using Eq. (4). Then algorithm locates the next point by(5)Ynew=Yold+H−1(gnow−gold)whereY=[PVwFR], H is the Hessian matrix which consists of second derivative of J(X), g represents the gradient vector. Inverse of Hessian matrix (H−1) is approximated by Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfrad–Shanno (BFGS) [24] updating formula.Objective function, (Jnew (Y)) is recalculated for Ynew. Optimisation terminates when Jnew>Jold and Jold becomes the optimised value of objective function.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper, welding strength has been successfully predicted and optimised using integrated ANN–GA, ANN–SA and ANN–Quasi Newton model for laser–MIG hybrid welding of thin sheet of aluminium alloy. Following conclusions can be drawn on the basis of results obtained:(i)3-11-1 ANN architecture, trained using BPNN with BR algorithm results minimum MSE (3.24E−04) during prediction of welding strength and is considered as best ANN. Low mean absolute error of 1.72% indicate high prediction accuracy of best ANN.ANN–GA is found to show best optimisation performance compared to ANN–SA and ANN–Quasi Newton models, as it incurs lowest absolute percentage error of 0.09% during experimental validation. Operational time of model is reasonably low (93.77s). Therefore, present ANN–GA model can be used for prediction and optimisation of operational parameters of any experimental dataset with reasonable accuracy.ANN–GA optimisation result indicates that, maximum welding strength of 119.299MPa can be achieved if welding is conducted with laser power=2.01KW, welding speed=2.03m/min and wire feed rate=4.045m/min.As ANN–Quasi Newton model require least computation time (almost 9 times lesser that ANN–GA) with comparatively poor prediction capability, it may be successfully employed for applications where moderate prediction accuracy is sufficient.Welding speed has maximum influence on welding strength in the operating range of process parameters. An increase in welding speed results significant decrease in welding strength. The process parameters like, laser power and welding speed influences each other at their lower range of operating zone.