@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bidding strategies in online auctions with different ending rules and value assumptions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We divide the auction process into two stages and then use backward induction to study various online auctions.In second-price online auctions it is dominant to report true value for all customers.That when to bid is independent of hard-close and soft-close for first-price online auctions under PV.Late bidding is dominant under CV, but only in first-price online auctions with hard-close under PV.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online auctions,Ending rule,Late bidding,Private value,Common value,Backward induction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Compared with traditional auctions, online auctions (used by, e.g., eBay and Yahoo) have several distinguishing features, including different ending rules (hard-close and soft-close), sequential arrival of customers, and random numbers of customers, all of which make bidding behavior more complex. The phenomenon of late bidding has been reported in the literature and, although the origin of this behavior has been analyzed theoretically, it is still not clear. Here, we study both first- and second-price online auctions with either hard- or soft-close ending rules and assume either private value (PV) or common value (CV). By dividing the auction process into two stages and then using backward induction, we find that late bidding is dominant under CV, but under PV late bidding dominates only in first-price online auctions with hard-close. Moreover, for second-price online auctions the dominant strategy for customers is to report their true value immediately upon arrival under PV but near the end of the auction under CV, irrespective of ending rules. Finally, we find that the timing of customer bidding is the same for hard- and soft-close except for first-price online auctions under PV.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online auctions are widely used by eBay, Yahoo (Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Japan), Taobao, etc., and were ever used by Amazon. The main difference among online auctions used by various webs is their different ending rules: one is the so-called “hard-close” with a fixed deadline; that is, auctions end at a scheduled time, most often in seven days. The other one is the so-called “soft-close” ending rule under which auctions are automatically extended if necessary past the scheduled ending time. They only end when ten minutes pass without any bid being submitted. Auctions on eBay and Taobao use hard-close ending rule, those on Amazon used soft-close one, while those on Yahoo use both hard- and soft-close ones.Besides the ending rule, online auctions are distinguished from traditional auctions by other features (see Easley and Tenorio 2004 for a summary). In an online auction, customers sequentially arrive at the auction website and may not know the number of customers that have preceded them or that follow them, even though each customer arrival is recorded by the website. Thus, for each customer, the number of competitors is random in online auctions. So the customers’ strategy consists of determining only when and how much to bid.Many papers on online auctions, especially empirical papers, are available in the literature (e.g., Pinker et al. 2003). Roth and Ockenfel (2002) and Bajari and Hortacsu (2003) empirically document an interesting phenomenon called “late” bidding (or last-minute bidding), which practitioners call “sniping” (that is, many bids are submitted very close to or just at the end of auctions). Late bidding is more prevalent in hard-close auctions than in soft-close auctions. The authors also present several possible explanations for the phenomenon of late bidding.Many authors have theoretically analyzed late bidding. Using the rate equation approach, Yang and Kahng (2006) demonstrate that late bidding is a rational and effective strategy for a hard-close auction. However, Chiang and Kung (2005) find that late bidding is used only when bids are intense. In other work, several authors use experiments to study late bidding and ending rules. Houser and Wooders (2005) report the results of a controlled field experiment on late bidding behavior; however, they do not consider whether late bidding is an equilibrium or dominant strategy. Ariely et al. (2006) find through laboratory human-subject experiments in second-price online auctions in a private value (PV) environment that hard-close promotes late bidding whereas soft-close does not. They assume the number of customers to be constant. By using finite automata to model bidding strategies, Duffy and Unver (2008) develop a model of online auctions to understand how ending rules (i.e., hard- or soft-close) affect bidding behavior. They report results from simulations involving populations of artificial customers who use a genetic algorithm to update their strategies.However, the results obtained in the papers cited above are derived from different models or frameworks. Yang and Kahng (2006) use the rate equation approach, Ariely et al. (2006) and Houser and Wooders (2005) use experiments, and Duffy and Unver (2008) use finite automata and simulation. Moreover, all studies mentioned above are for second-price auctions and consider only whether late bidding is equilibrium; that how much to bid is not considered, and the number of customers is either not considered or assumed constant.The most related paper to ours is Ockenfels and Roth (2006), who model a second-price online auction conducted over time, where a nonzero probability exists for very late bids to be rejected. They make many assumptions including that the number of customers is predetermined and that all customers arrive at the beginning of the auction. They show that, for hard-close auctions, late bidding is one of multiple equilibria (another possibility is for all customers to bid early) under PV and is an equilibrium in an example under uncertain, dependent values (or common values; CVs); for soft-close auctions, late bidding is not an equilibrium.To bring theory closer to practice, the present study considers both first- and second-price online auctions with hard- or soft-close ending rule under PV or CV (so there are eight specifications). We present a simple but general method: First, we divide the auction process into two stages. The first stage is the period before the end of the auction (called the normal period) where customers arrive one after another and determine when and how much to bid. The second stage is near the end of the auction (called the ending period). We use backward induction to derive equilibrium bidding strategies. We find that late bidding is dominant under CV, but only in first-price online auctions with hard-close endings under PV. For second-price online auctions it is dominant to report true value for all customers, immediately upon arrival under PV but near the end of the auction under CV, irrespective of ending rules. Finally, the time at which customers bid does not depend on the ending rule (i.e., hard- or soft-close) except for first-price online auctions under PV.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the model. Sections 3 and 4 derive the equilibrium bidding strategies for first-price online auctions with a hard- or soft-close, respectively, under PV. In Section 5, we extend the study to other settings, including first-price online auctions under CV, and second-price online auctions with either hard- or soft-close under PV or CV. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.Consider a seller with a single indivisible object to sell through an online auction. Before the auction begins, the seller announces a starting bid q. Thus, the first bid should not be less than q. On the web, the current bid (denoted by b) is the highest bid made by previous customers, and changes each time a new bid is entered. Assume that the minimum bid increment isε>0; that is, a new bid can be accepted if and only if it is greater than or equal tob+ε, the current bid plus the increment.Customers arrive one after another on the web; no assumption restricting the arrival process is required. In fact, we only care about the number of arrivals, which is denoted byξ+1, and ignore the order in which the customers arrive. We assume that all customers have valuations greater thanb+ε; otherwise they can be ignored. Let the probability distribution of ξ be(1)p(n)=P{ξ=n},n⩾0.That the number of customers isξ+1means that at least one customer participates in the auction. This is necessarily true when one customer is considering its bid, facing ξ customers. Otherwise discussing the bidding behavior is unnecessary. Thus, each customer faces competition from ξ other customers in the auction.Each customer values the object at an amount of v, known only to herself. The seller and the other customers are uncertain about this valuation, and it appears to them to be a random variable. We consider two types of customer valuations: The first is PV which means it is common-knowledge among all customers and the seller that everyone views other customer valuations as independent draws from a common distribution functionF(x)over[0,∞]withF(0)=0andF(∞)=1for which there exists a positive, continuously differentiable probability density functionf(x). That is, everyone agrees that the prior probability that v is less than x is given byF(x), and everyone knows that everyone knows this, ad infinitum. The second type of valuation is CV which means all customer valuations are related; see Bajari and Hortacsu (2003) for details. Assume furthermore that all customers are risk neutral; in this case, their objective is simply to maximize their own expected profits.The seller considers two alternative ending rules to sell the object: hard- and soft-close. Under hard-close, the auction lasts a time[0,T]and closes exactly at T. Soft-close also imposes a predetermined ending time T but adds another predetermined time interval δ. A soft-close auction closes if and only if no new bid is placed during a time period with length of δ after the epochT-δ. That is, the auction closes at T only if no new bid occurs during[T-δ,T]; If a new bid occurs atT-δ′for someδ′<δ, then the auction will be prolonged to[T-δ′,T-δ′+δ]to see if another new bid occurs during this time interval. In contrast to the hard-close ending, the soft-close ending means the duration of the auction is random. In general, δ is far less than T. For example, T may be 7days whereas δ may be only 10min.Armed with the above information regarding the auction, we now describe the dynamics of the online auction. When a customer arrives at the auction site, she observes the current bid b. If its valuation is greater than or equal tob+ε, then she can bid immediately, bid later, or bid near the end of the auction. Suppose she bids x when the current bid is b. Of course,x⩾b+εmust be satisfied. Thus, the current bid becomes x and the customer becomes the high bidder (who holds the current bid). The high bidder at the end of the auction will win the object and is called the winner. In a first-price online auction, the winner pays her bid; whereas in a second-price online auction, the winner pays the second highest bid (This is consistent with those for sealed-bid auctions given in Klemperer (2000)).Combining first- or second-price online auctions, PV or CV, and soft- or hard-close endings generates different games among customers, with each customer having to decide when and how much to bid as a function of her valuation of the object. Given that customers are symmetric, it is natural to focus on symmetric sequential equilibrium bidding strategies. At symmetric sequential equilibrium, each customer bids an amount that is some function of her own valuation (denoted byB(·)) such that, given that everyone else determines their bids in the same way, no individual customer can do better by bidding differently. Assume thatB(·)is increasing in valuation, as is well-known in the auction literature (e.g., Maskin and Riley 1987, p. 415, McAfee and McMillan 1987, Riley and Samuelson 1981, p. 383).The motivations to study first-price online auctions are as follows. First, a hard-close auction in eBay can be divided into two parts: one is a first-price auction and the other is the proxy (i.e., automated bidding). In fact, the winner pays his bid presented in the web by the proxy (please see the details in Section 5.3). So, without the proxy, hard-close auctions in eBay are first-price auctions. In our methodology, the first step is to study first-price auctions, and then to study what will happen if the proxy is added to a first-price auction. Moreover, first-price auctions and second-price auctions are the two main auction mechanisms used in practice (off-line) and studied in the literature.Before deriving the equilibrium bidding strategy for first-price online auctions with hard-close endings in Section 3.2, we first discuss in Section 3.1 (traditional) first-price sealed-bid auctions where the number of customers is random and all customers arrive before the beginning of the auction.In this section, we study a first-price sealed-bid auction with a random number of customers. The seller fixes a reserve price b on the object auctioned and announces b at the beginning of the auction. Thus, b is, in fact, the starting bid.Assume at least one customer exists. Letξ+1be the number of customers where ξ is a non-negative random variable. We denote byη(n)the maximum valuation of n customers. Without loss of generality, we consider the decision of a typical customer with valuation v. Whenξ=n, the customer with bid x will win the auction if and only if x is greater than the maximum of all other bids, i.e.,x>B(η(n)), with the probabilityFn(B-1(x)). Based on Eq. (1), the customer’s expected profit is(2)μ(x,v)=(v-x)∑n=0∞p(n)Fn(B-1(x)),x∈[b,v].The customer’s objective is to choose x from[b,v]to maximizeμ(x,v). We denote byη(ξ)the maximal valuation of all ξ bidders. Its distribution function and density function are, respectively,(3)Fξ(x)=P{η(ξ)⩽x}=∑n=0∞p(n)Fn(x),and(4)fξ(x)=∑n=0∞p(n)nFn-1(x)f(x).Then, Eq. (2) can be rewritten as(5)μ(x,v)=(v-x)Fξ(B-1(x)).Thus, by solving the bidder’s optimization problemmaxxμ(x,v), we obtain the following theorem (proof given in Appendix).Theorem 1In a first-price sealed-bid auction withξ+1customers and starting bid b, the symmetric equilibrium bidding strategyB(v)is uniquely given by(6)B(v)=v-1Fξ(v)∫bvFξ(s)ds,v⩾b.It is assumed in Section 2 thatB(v)is strictly increasing in v. We claim that this dependence is indeed true since, by Eq. (6), the derivative ofB(v)in v isB′(v)=fξ(v)(Fξ(v))2∫bvFξ(s)ds>0.Again by (6),B(v)depends also on b and its partial derivative in b is∂B(v)∂b=Fξ(b)Fξ(v)∈(0,1),v⩾b.Therefore,B(v)is increasing in b but its rate of increase is less than 1 (i.e.,b-B(v)is decreasing in b). Moreover, each customer’s expected profit and its derivative are, respectively,μ(B(v),v)=∫bvFξ(s)dsand∂μ(B(v),v)∂b=-Fξ(b)<0.Therefore, we obtain the following corollary.Corollary 1B(v)is increasing in b andB(v)∈(b,v)forv>b. Moreover,μ(B(v),v)is increasing in v but decreasing in starting bid b.Corollary 1 is intuitive because higher valuations or lower starting bid result in a greater expected profit for the customer. Moreover, the bidding strategy here is not reporting true value.Matthews (1987) and McAfee and McMillan (1987) are the first to study traditional auctions with random numbers of customers. They focus on the effects of the seller revealing information to customers regarding the actual number of customers. Later Bag (2003) proves that, to maximize her revenue, the seller should reveal this information to customers. However, those studies do not consider equilibrium bidding strategies. Harstad et al. (1990) derive an analytical expression for the symmetric equilibrium bidding strategy for both first- and second-price auctions under either PV or CV. The model proposed herein differs from that of Harstad et al. with respect to the number of customers: ξ+1 here and ξ in that of Harstad et al. Our assumption is valid when a customer is considering her bid. In the next section, we find that the expression for the bidding strategy for an online auction is simpler forξ+1customers than for ξ customers.When ξ is a deterministic integer (denoted by N), we denote the bidding strategy given in Eq. (6) byBN(v). Thus,(7)BN(v)=v-1FN(v)∫bvFN(s)ds,which is exactly the same as the bidding strategy (5) in McAfee and McMillan (1987).In this section, we study first-price online auctions with a hard-close ending under PV, which is similar to what we discussed in the previous section except that all customers arrive sequentially at the auction within a time horizon of length of T. We use backward induction to prove that late bidding is a dominant strategy for customers.First, we consider the ending period of the auction near the end time T, e.g., in[T-δ,T]for some smallδ>0such that each customer can bid at most once before the auction closes at T. Hereinafter, we refer to this type of auction during[T-δ,T]as an ending auction. If b is the current bid atT-δ, then all customers whose valuations are greater than or equal tob+εwill place their bids. The starting bid of the ending auction is denoted byb′=b+ε.Because the end of the online auction is near, customers have no time to respond to other bids. Thus, the ending auction is, in fact, a standard first-price sealed-bid auction for all customers. Because any customer arriving during the normal period can place no bid, one bid, or multiple bids, no customer can know exactly how many customers are participating in the ending auction. Thus, the ending auction is a first-price sealed-bid auction with a random number of customers studied in the previous section, and we already have the results shown in Theorem 1 for the ending auction during the time interval[T-δ,T].Next, we consider the behaviors of customers during the normal period of the auction (i.e., during the time interval[0,T-δ]). By Corollary 1, the expected profit of each customer in equilibrium is decreasing in the current bid b atT-δ. Because any customer’s bid in the normal period will increase the current bid b atT-δ, no customer has an incentive to bid during the normal period. Thus, the current bid during the normal period remains constant and is equal to the starting bid set by the seller at the beginning of the auction. This reasoning shows that the late bidding strategy is optimal for each customer. These results are summarized in the following theorem.Theorem 2In first-price online auctions with hard-close endings under PV, late bidding is the dominant strategy for each customer. Moreover, the equilibrium bidding strategy near the end of the auction is given by Eq.(6).We divided the online auction into two stages: the first stage is the normal period and the second stage is near the end. Thus, the bidding strategy also consists of two stages: the late bidding strategy is for the normal period and Eq. (6) gives the strategy for the ending period. That is, customers arriving at the auction do not bid until near the end of the auction, at which point they bid according toB(v).The late bidding strategy shown in Theorem 2 agrees with the empirical observations reported by Roth and Ockenfel (2002) and Yang and Kahng (2006). However, they did not discuss how much to bid in the ending period.In the following, we consider the bidding strategyB(v)for the ending auction for a special case where ξ is a Poisson random variable with rate λ, i.e.,(8)p(n)=λnn!e-λ,n⩾0.This type of random variables is well known in the auction literature (e.g., Lu and McAfee 1996, Haviv and Milchtaich 2010, Caldentey and Vulcano 2010). Given this assumption, the distribution function of the maximum valuation of ξ customers is(9)Fξ(x)=e-λ(1-F(x)),x⩾0.From Eqs. (5) and (6), the equilibrium bidding strategy and customers’ expected profits are, respectively,(10)B(v)=v-1eλF(v)∫bveλF(s)ds,and(11)μ(B(v),v)=∫bve-λ(1-F(s))ds=e-λ∫bveλF(s)ds.Example 1Assume that ξ is a Poisson random variable and that F is uniformly distributed over[0,1], i.e.,F(x)=xforx∈[0,1]. We find that, in first-price online auctions, bids from a random number of customers may be more conservative than bids from a fixed number of customers. In fact, sinceFξ(x)=e-λ(1-x)forx∈[0,1], by Eqs. (10) and (11), we haveB(v)=v-1λ+1λe-λ(v-b),μ(B(v),v)=1λe-λ(eλv-eλb),0⩽b⩽v⩽1.Using the superscript n+1 to indicate the case of a fixed numbern+1of customers and replacingFξ(x)byxnin Eq. (7), we get the equilibrium bidding strategy:Bn+1(v)=v-1n+1v-bn+1vn,0⩽b⩽v⩽1.We considerb=0. Then, it is easy to show that whenn+1>λ(1-e-λ)-1,B(v)<Bn+1(v)for all v. This means that bids for the case of a random number of customers is lower than those for a predetermined numbern+1of customers. Thus, when the number of customers is random, customers bid more conservatively. □Enlightened by Example 1, we derive the following theorem (proof given in Appendix).Theorem 3Assume that ξ is a Poisson random variable with rate λ. In this case, the bidding behavior near the end of the auction is more conservative than if a fixed number of customers are participating in the auction. Moreover,B(v)is increasing in λ whereasμ(B(v),v)is decreasing in λ.It is easy to see thatBn(v)is increasing in n; that is, having more customers increases their bids. The theorem above tells us that customers react conservatively when faced with a random number of customers; that is, they bid less than they would in an auction with a predetermined number of customers.Since λ represents the competitive degree of bidding in an auction, Theorem 3 tells us that more severe competition leads to higher bids and lower expected profits for customers.Thus far, an important assumption is that at least one customer is participating in the auction. We now discuss whether the bidding behaviors change if this assumption is not true.Similar to the derivation of Theorem 2, we use backward induction to derive the equilibrium bidding strategy for this situation. Suppose that all customers arriving during the auction place a bid near the end of the auction if their valuation is greater than or equal to the current bid plus the increment. All of their bids can be accepted by the online auction, even if they are all submit simultaneously near the end of the auction. The number ξ of customers arriving during the auction follows the Poisson distribution (8) (note that, if customers arrive according to a Poisson process with rateλ0and the duration of the online auction is T, thenλ=λ0T).For an ending auction with current bidb-ε, we consider a typical customer whose valuation is greater than the current bidb-εplus ε. The customer knows that, except for herself, the probability that n other customers are participating in the auction is(12)p(n)=P{ξ=n+1|ξ⩾1}=1eλ-1λn+1(n+1)!,n⩾0.Thus, the distribution function of the maximum valuation of all other customers is(13)Fξ(x)=∑n=0∞p(n)Fn(x)=∑n=0∞1eλ-1λn+1(n+1)!Fn(x)=1(eλ-1)F(x)[eλF(x)-1],x∈[b,v].Note that Eq. (13) is more complex than Eq. (9).The number of bidding customers participating during the ending period depends on the current bid b, because a rational customer will place a bid if and only if her valuation is greater than b, with the probabilityF¯(b)=1-F(b). Thus, the number of bidding customers, denoted byξb∗, during the ending period is drawn from a Poisson distribution with rateλb=λF¯(b), i.e.,P{ξb∗=n}=e-λbλbnn!,n⩾0.Note that the typical customer who bids during the ending period is included in the total numberξb∗. Thus, as discussed with respect to Eqs. (12) and (13), the probability distribution of the number of competitors ispb(n)=P{ξb∗=n+1|ξb∗=n}=1eλb-1λbn+1(n+1)!,n⩾0,and the conditional distribution function of valuations of bidding-customer valuations isFb(x)=F(x)-F(b)F¯(b),x⩾b.Thus, the distribution function of the maximum valuation of all other bidding customers isFbξ(x)=1(eλb-1)Fb(x)[eλbFb(x)-1]=F¯(b)(eλF¯(b)-1)(F(x)-F(b))[eλ(F(x)-F(b))-1],x⩾b.Fbξ(x)is no longer equal toFξ(x)in Eq. (9). This is the main reason behind the change in bidding behavior. Therefore, Eq. (6) leads to the equilibrium bidding strategy given by(14)B(v)=v-F(v)-F(b)eλ(F(v)-F(b))-1∫bveλ(F(s)-F(b))-1F(s)-F(b)ds,v⩾b.From Theorem 1, we then get the following result.Corollary 2Assume that the number of customers is a Poisson random variable with rate λ. For any b, the equilibrium bidding strategyB(v)during the ending period of the online auction is given by Eq.(14). Moreover,B(v)∈(b,v)forv>b.The bidding strategy (14) is more complex than Eq. (10). The reason behind this complexity is that Theorem 2 assumes that at least one customer participates the auction. This difference seems very small, since the error in the total number customers is less than or equal to 1. But this little gap leads to different results: late bidding is no longer the dominant strategy for customers during the normal period[0,T-δ]of the online auction.In fact,B(v)andμ(B(v),v)in Corollary 2 are no longer monotonic in b. From Eq. (14), the expected profit of each customer is(15)μ(B(v),v)=∫bvFbξ(s)ds=F¯(b)eλF¯(b)-1∫bveλ(F(s)-F(b))-1F(s)-F(b)ds.In order to get the derivative ofμ(B(v),v)with respect to b, we denote for convenience byI(y,a)=1-ay-a·eλ(y-a)-1eλ(1-a)-1,y∈[a,1],withI(a,a)=limy→a+I(y,a)=λ(1-a)eλ(1-a)-1.The derivative ofI(y,a)with respect to a is given byIa′(y,a)=(1-y)(eλ(1-a)-1)(eλ(y-a)-1)-λ(1-a)(y-a)(eλ(1-a)-eλ(y-a))(y-a)2(eλ(1-a)-1)2>0.Then, Eq. (15) can be rewritten asμ(B(v),v)=∫bvI(F(s),F(b))ds.Thus,(16)∂μ(B(v),v)∂b=-λ(1-F(b))eλ(1-F(b))-1+f(b)∫bvIa′(F(s),F(b))ds.On the right hand side above, the first term is negative and the second term is positive. Here,λ(1-F(b))eλ(1-F(b))-1is increasing in b, and reaches its minimumλ/(eλ-1)atb=0and its maximum 1 atb=∞. Thus, when v is sufficiently large,∂μ(B(v),v)∂bmay be positive for sufficiently small b, which implies that customers have an incentive to increase the current bid. However,∂μ(B(v),v)∂b<0when b approaches v, which implies that, for any customer with valuation v, she would not be willing to increase the current bid when it is close to her valuation. In this case, customers have no incentive to increase the current bid. On the other hand, when v is not large,∂μ(B(v),v)∂b<0for all b. An illustration for the above discussions is given in Example 2 below.Example 2Assume that F is a uniform distribution over[0,1], i.e.,F(x)=xforx∈[0,1]. Then, by (15),μ(B(v),v)=λ(1-b)eλ(1-b)-1∫0λ(v-b)1y(ey-1)dy,0⩽b⩽v⩽1.Supposeλ=1. Whenv=0.8,μ(B(v),v)is increasing in b from 0.11972 atb=0to the maximum 0.12286 atb=0.19, and then decreasing in b to 0 atb=0.8. This is shown in Fig. 1(b). Thus, when the current bidb<0.19, customers have an incentive to increase the current bid; otherwise, the opposite is true. In Fig. 1(a) with reservev=0.5,μ(B(v),v)is always increasing in b. □The results shown in the example above imply that, during the normal period of online auctions, the late bidding strategy is dominant if the current bid is higher; otherwise, it is not dominant.In this section, we study first-price online auctions with soft-close endings under PV (Note: Please see the definition of soft-close endings given in Section 2). We again use backward induction. First, we analyze the situation at times near the predetermined ending time T of an online auction.Suppose the current bid atT-δis b. Let B be the set of customers whose valuations are greater than or equal tob+∊atT-δand call them the “active customers” atT-δ. If B contains only the high customer (who has the highest valuation), then the online auction closes at T and the winning bid is b. Otherwise, each customer in B except the high customer has a chance to place, if desired, a new bid before T. If no bid is placed, then the customer receives nothing. If the customer bids before T, then she receives a positive expected profit. Thus, any active customer in B (except the high customer) should place a bid.No matter how much the customers in B place their bids, the current bid atT-δwill increase, for example, to someb′withb′⩾b+∊at some time epochT′∈(T-δ,T]. At this time, the situation will be similar to that atT-δand will repeat itself. Iterating the above logic, we conclude that, at some time epochT∗>T-δ, the current bid is someb∗and there remains only one customer whose valuation is greater thanb∗. In fact, this customer is precisely the high customer, who wins the auction and paysb∗. Letξ1andξ2be the highest and the second highest valuations, respectively, among the customers in the set B, and furthermore letbi=b+ξi-bεεfori=1,2, where[x]is the largest integer that is not greater than x. Certainly,b1=b2orb1⩾b2+ε. Then,b∗=b2+ε,ifb1⩾b2+εb2=b1,otherwise.If the increment ∊ is sufficiently small, thenb∗=b2is in fact the second highest valuation of all customers. For convenience, we assume hereinafter that ε is sufficiently small.What does this conclusion imply? With soft-close endings, a first-price online auction becomes a second-price sealed-bid auction near the end of the online auction, i.e., the ending auction is equivalent to a second-price sealed-bid or Vickrey auction with reserve price b.A fact missing from the discussion above is that with soft-close ending, more customers participate in longer online auctions, so the competition in such auctions will be more severe. Thus, any customer who arrives beforeT-δhas no incentive to postpone the online auction. If we further consider that all customers incur some cost by staying online to bid later, then it is optimal for them to submit their bids immediately upon arriving at the auction.However, the online auction is a first-price auction, and a customer arriving at the auction with current bid b would not bid her true valuation but would only bidb+εand re-submit her bid later when the current bid increases. Therefore, first-price online auctions are, in fact, English auctions.The above discussion is summarized in the following theorem.Theorem 4First-price online auctions with soft-close endings under PV are strategically equivalent to English auctions with a reserve price.From Theorem 4, we know that, under the assumption of PV, first-price online auctions with soft-close endings are strategically equivalent to English auctions. That is, the bidding strategy for customers and then the seller’s expected revenue are the same in a first-price online auction as in an English auction. Specifically, each customer submits a bid equal to the current bid plus the increment if her valuation is greater than her bid and re-submit her bid later when the current bid increases. This behavior continues until the current bid exceeds her valuation or she wins the auction. Hence, the rule of soft-close endings differs from that of hard-close endings in that, with soft-close endings, no bid occurs near the end of the auction whereas with hard-close endings, all customers bid near the end. Moreover, the online auction closes at the predetermined time T except if a new customer arrives during the time interval[T-δ,T]with valuation greater than the current bid atT-δ.In practice, a soft-close ending auction may extend the closing time only once. Then, the results in Theorem 4 are still true and the auction after its extension becomes a hard-close ending auction.The reason behind Theorem 4 may be that there is no deadline for customer bidding in first-price online auctions under soft-close and in English auctions, and this distinguishes from Theorem 2 for first-price online auctions with hard-close (which has a deadline for customer bidding).In this section, we apply the method used in the previous sections to first-price online auctions under PV to study other settings of online auctions.We first analyze second-price online auctions under PV. For hard-close endings, then a second-price sealed-bid auction occurs near the end of the online auction, and it is well known that each customer will report her true valuation. In this case, any customer is indifferent between bidding her true valuation at her arrival and at the last minute. In practice, there is time cost of consumers waiting in the web, and so we conclude that each customer will report her true valuation immediately upon her arrival at the auction. This result is still true if there is random rejection of bids bidding at the last minute in practice, as discussed in Ockenfels and Roth (2006).For soft-close endings, then by following the same analysis as in the last section, we conclude that the ending auction is also a second-price sealed-bid auction. Thus, similar to the discussion above, in a second-price online auction with a soft-close ending, customers will also report their true valuation immediately upon their arrival at the auction.Therefore, in a second-price online auction under PV the strategy of reporting their true valuation immediately upon their arrival is dominant for all customers, irrespective of the ending rule.The above results are shown in Table 1.We now turn our attention to online auctions under CV (i.e., customer valuations are correlated). From Bajari and Hortacsu (2003), we know that no customers would place a bid before the end of the auction since such a bid would reveal information about the customer’s own valuation and would finally lead to zero expected profit for the customer. Thus, the late bidding strategy is dominant during the normal period of the online auction.Therefore, with a hard-close ending, if the original online auction is a first-price auction (or a second-price auction), then the ending auction is also a first-price (or second-price) sealed-bid auction where the equilibrium bidding strategy isB(v)given in Eq. (6) (or the customers report their true valuation).But what happens during the ending auction with soft-close endings under CV? According to the discussion in the previous paragraph, no bid occurs before the end of the online auction, no matter whether the online auction is first- or second-price. Near the end of the auction, i.e., during the ending auction, if only one customer is present then she should place a bid equal to the starting bid (since no bid is placed during the normal auction, the current bid is just the starting bid). If more than one customer is present, then suppose one customer (named customer A) places a bid. In this case, two situations occur: one situation is that the customer reveals her valuation and receives zero profit, and the second situation is that the auction is postponed for δ. These two possibilities imply that other customers can use the information customer A revealed and place bids after her bid. Thus, any customer prospecting this conclusion would not place a bid, even near the end of the auction. But if all customers take this strategy, then the auction will closes at T as per the soft-close ending rule, and no customer can win the auction. Overall, near the end of the auction, each customer will bid if she perceives that no other customer is in the auction (i.e.,P{ξ=0}>0), otherwise the customer will either bid or not bid and receive nothing. Since the knowledge about ξ is common and symmetric among customers, ifP{ξ=0}>0then all customers submit bids near the end of the auction; however, ifP{ξ=0}=0then it is indifferent for customers to bid or not bid and so some customers bid and the others would not bid. Therefore, in summary, the ending auction of a first-price (second-price) online auction becomes a first-price (second-price) sealed-bid auction.Now, we get the following theorem on bidding strategies.Theorem 5The bidding strategies (when and how much to bid) for different online auctions are given inTable 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We conclude with a short summary that highlights the main contribution of the paper. We presented a uniform method to study equilibrium bidding strategies in various online auctions (eight specifications, which differ by the pricing rule (first-price vs. second-price), value type (private value vs. common value) and the ending rule (fixed ending vs. flexible ending)). The method consists of first dividing the auction process into two stages and then using backward induction (backward induction is crucial in deriving the equilibrium bidding strategies). While in the literature, only some specifications are studied in many papers by different frameworks or methods.We find that the dominance of late bidding depends not only on the ending rule (hard-close or soft-close) but also on the value assumption (PV or CV) and the type of online auctions (first-price or second-price). More precisely, late bidding is the dominant strategy under CV, but only for first-price online auctions with hard-close under PV. For second-price online auctions with either hard- or soft-close, the dominant strategy is for all customers to report true value immediately upon arrival under PV and near the end of the auction under CV. Thus, when customers bid is independent of the ending rule (hard-close or soft-close) except for first-price online auctions under PV. Finally, the late bidding strategy is dominant for hard-close auctions (irrespective of PV or CV) and for soft-close auctions under CV, but the strategy of “reporting true value upon arrival” is dominant for soft-close auctions under PV.Although researchers have proposed several different types of online auctions such as online group buying auctions (Chen et al. 2002) and online auctions with buy price (Budish and Takeyama 2001), the optimal online auction for sellers is still an open question. Other topics for future research are to use the bidding strategy obtained in this paper to study sequential online auctions (see, e.g., Hendricks et al. 2012) and competing online auctions (see, e.g., Stryszowska 2013), which are also widely used in practice. In practice, customer valuation may be a mix of PV and CV. In such a setting, a customer with PV may take bidding strategy under PV, but how about a customer with CV?.