@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Glowworm swarm optimization algorithm with topsis for solving multiple objective environmental economic dispatch problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new glowworm swarm optimization (GSO) algorithm with TOPSIS is proposed and applied to multiple objective environmental economic dispatch problem.In the proposed GSO with TOPSIS (GSO–T) approach the TOPSIS is employed as an overall fitness evaluation tool.The proposed GSO–T approach is implemented on four different test cases.Results obtained by the GSO–T approach are compared with own coded weighted sum method incorporated GSO (WGSO) and also with other methods reported by various researchers.The results conclude that the proposed GSO–T approach produce better results over other algorithms. It can be applied to a wide range of optimization problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Glowworm swarm optimization,TOPSIS,Environmental economic dispatch,Valve point loading effect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new glowworm swarm optimization (GSO) algorithm is proposed to find the optimal solution for multiple objective environmental economic dispatch (MOEED) problem. In this proposed approach, technique for order preference similar to an ideal solution (TOPSIS) is employed as an overall fitness ranking tool to evaluate the multiple objectives simultaneously. In addition, a time varying step size is incorporated in the GSO algorithm to get better performance. Finally, to evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed combination of GSO algorithm with TOPSIS (GSO–T) approach is examined in four different test cases. Simulation results have revealed the capabilities of the proposed GSO–T approach to find the optimal solution for MOEED problem. The comparison with own coded weighted sum method incorporated GSO (WGSO) and other methods reported in literatures exhibit the superiority of the proposed GSO–T approach and also the results confirm the potential of the proposed GSO–T approach to solve the MOEED problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The classical economic dispatch (ED) problem is to allocate generation among the committed units, while minimizing the fuel cost. Even, today the world major electric power demand is supplied with the help of fossil fuel power plants. This fossil fuel power plant produces atmospheric emission, whose nature and quantity depend on the fuel type and its quality. Particularly, coal fired thermal power plants produce gaseous pollutants such as carbon oxides (COx), sulphur oxides (SOx) and oxides of nitrogen (NOx) [1]. The U.S. clean air act amendments of 1990 and the increasing public awareness towards environmental protection have forced the generation companies to change their operating strategies. This insists the generation companies to minimize the gaseous emission of thermal power plants in addition to the conventional fuel cost minimization [2]. Various algorithms are presented and discussed to minimize the emission along with fuel cost by modifying the conventional ED problem into environmental economic dispatch (EED) problem [1,2]. Several techniques have been reported in the literatures to solve the EED problem. Combining the emission objective with fuel cost objective, combine economic emission dispatch (CEED) problem is formulated as a single objective problem and is solved by stochastic approach [3]. The bi-objective CEED problem is converted in to a single objective problem using a price penalty factor approach and weighted sum method, respectively, in [4,5] and both are solved by evolutionary programming (EP) algorithm.Some researchers have formulated the CEED problem as MOEED Problem. A trade-off curve between the multiple objectives, known as Pareto Front has been found for the MOEED problem with the help of multi objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA). In Ref. [6], non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm–II (NSGA-II) has been proposed to solve the MOEED problem. In this work, the author has solved the MOEED problem as a bi-objective problem and also a three objective problem by simultaneously optimizing the fuel cost, SOxand NOxas objectives. To provide a compromised solution for the decision maker, a fuzzy membership function is used to identify the best compromise solution (BCS) from the Pareto optimal solutions [6]. Strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA) has been proposed to solve MOEED problem and compared with classical techniques such as linear programming and multi objective stochastic search technique [7]. Many MOEAs like NSGA, Niched Pareto genetic algorithm (NPGA) and SPEA have been successfully applied to MOEED problem and the results are compared with each other [7–9]. The author claims that the SPEA is superior in finding the uniformly distributed Pareto front compared to other MOEAs [7,8]. Further, the NSGA-II has been applied to MOEED problem and compared with other MOEAs like NSGA, NPGA and SPEA [9]. This work proves the superiority of the NSGA-II over the other MOEAs for solving MOEED problem.In Ref. [10], particle swarm optimization (PSO) has been successfully implemented to solve the EED problem by considering the non-linear characteristics of a generator such as valve point loading. Abido proposed the multi objective PSO (MOPSO) for the MOEED problem and demonstrated its superiority compared with SPEA [11]. Hota et al. [12] proposed a fuzzy based modified bacterial foraging algorithm (MBFA) and applied it for the single objective EED problem. Multi-objective differential evolution (MODE) algorithm is proposed and applied to solve the MOEED problem with competing and non-commensurable objectives of fuel cost, emission and system loss [13]. Basu claimed that the MODE is better than NSGA–II and SPEA 2 for solving MOEED problem [14]. With the interest of combining the advantages of both PSO and differential evolution (DE) algorithm, a hybrid method called multi objective optimization algorithm based on PSO and DE (MO-DE/PSO) has been proposed for solving the constrained MOEED problem [15]. Hybrid DE with biogeography-based optimization (DE/BBO) has been proposed to solve the single objective EED problem and found that it outperforms the other method like PSO [16,17].With the intention of developing a better algorithm to solve the ED & EED problem, various new heuristics search algorithms have been proposed in the literature. Those are firefly algorithm [18], Opposition based harmony search algorithm [19], gravitational search algorithm [20], biogeography based optimization (BBO) technique [21] and charged system search algorithm [22]. Each of this newly developed algorithm claims that they have the supreme qualities like finding the global optimal solution, minimum computation time and large scale power system applications.Recently, a novel algorithm, to find the optimal points in the multimodal functions, glowworm swarm optimization (GSO) has been proposed by Krishnanand and Ghose [23,24]. This algorithm shares a few features with some well-known swarm intelligence based optimization algorithms such as ant colony optimization and PSO. The performances of the GSO on various benchmark multi model functions are analysed and the results prove that the GSO outperforms PSO [25]. Presently, some improvements have been proposed in GSO [26]. GSO has been applied for sensor deployment scheme in wireless sensor networks [27].This paper presents the combination of GSO algorithm with TOPSIS (GSO–T) to solve the MOEED problem. In the proposed approach, a multi-criteria decision making method called TOPSIS is proposed as a fitness evaluation tool. In this work, TOPSIS is utilized as an overall ranking tool, since the TOPSIS continues to work satisfactorily across different application areas in evaluating, assessing and ranking alternatives across diverse industries [28,29]. A time varying step size is also incorporated in GSO to improve its performance. The proposed GSO–T approach is implemented on four different standard test cases to explore its capability and effectiveness. Results of the proposed GSO–T approach are compared with own coded WGSO approach and also with other leading algorithms, which are reported by various researchers.The rest of the paper is organised as follows: The MOEED problem formulation is presented in the “Problem formulation” section. Detailed concept of GSO algorithm is described in the “Glowworm swarm optimization algorithm” section, followed by description about TOPSIS in the “TOPSIS” section. Implementation of proposed GSO–T approach for MOEED problem is illustrated in the “Implementation of GSO–T for multiple objective EED problem” section. In the “Numerical examples and simulation results” section”, numerical examples and simulation results are presented. Finally, conclusions are drawn in the “Conclusion” section.Conventionally, the MOEED problem is formulated to minimize the two competing objective function such as fuel cost and emission, while satisfying the system equality and inequality constraints. Here, the problem is formulated as described below:Similar to the classical ED problem, the simplified form of the total fuel cost function of the system can be stated as follows [30]:(1)F1=FCPG=∑i=1NGaci+bciPGi+cciPGi2$/hwhereFCPGis the generator fuel cost function; aci, bciand cciare the cost coefficients of the ith generator; NGis the number of committed generators in the power system; PGiis the power output of the ith generator.To involve the valve point loading effect, a sinusoidal function can be added to the quadratic cost function given in Eq. (1)[31]. Now, the total fuel cost function with valve point loading can be stated as follows;(2)F2=FCPG=∑i=1NGaci+bciPGi+cciPGi2+eci×sinfci×PGimin−PGi$/hwhere eciand fciare the valve-point loading effect coefficients of the ith generator;PGiminis the minimum power output limit of the ith generator.Inclusion of valve point loading effect in the fuel cost function increases the number of local optima in the problem, which widen the complication of finding global or near global optimal solutions.The emission function can be formulated in two different approaches. In the first approach, the SOxand NOxemission objectives are considered as separate quadratic functions [1]. They are given in the following equations:(3)F3=ESOXPG=∑i=1NGαsi+βsiPGi+γsiPGi2t/h(4)F4=ENOXPG=∑i=1NGαni+βniPGi+γniPGi2t/hwhereESOXPGis the SOxemission function;ENOXPGis the NOxemission function; αsi, βsiand γsiare the SOxemission coefficients of the ith generator; αni, βniand γniare the NOxemission coefficients of the ith generator.In the second approach, the emission function is formulated as a combination of both the SOxand the NOxemission objectives as given in [11]. The total emission of these pollutants can be expressed with both quadratic and exponential functions as stated below.(5)F5=EPG=∑i=1NG10−2×αi+βiPGi+γiPGi2+ξiexpPGiλit/hwhereEPGis the emission function; αi, βi, γi, ξiand λiare the emission coefficients of the ith generator.The total power generation of the system must satisfy the total demand plus the real power loss in the transmission lines [30]. This loss objective can be stated as follows:(6)F6=PLPG=∑i=1NGPGi−PDMWwherePLPGis the transmission line real power loss function; PDis the total system demand.In this proposed work, any combination of minimization objective functions given in Eqs. (1) to (6) can be optimized. All the incorporated objective function values are evaluated with TOPSIS. The TOPSIS rank will be considered as an overall fitness value. Higher value of TOPSIS rank indicates that the corresponding solution is better than others. This can be expressed as follows:(7)Overallfitness=MaximizeTOPSISRankF1,F2,...,FNobjwhere, Nobj is the number of objective functions considered in the MOEED problem. Which means that, any number of objective function can be handled with TOPSIS ranking process. The detailed explanation towards handling this overall fitness function is given in the “Implementation of GSO-T for multiple objective EED problem” section.The real power output of any generator is bounded between its maximum and minimum limits as follows.(8)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimaxwherePGiminandPGimaxare the minimum and maximum power output limit of the ith generator.The total real power generation of any power system should satisfy its predefined power demand plus the total real power loss in the transmission lines. This can be stated as:(9)∑i=1NGPGi−PD−PL=0where PLis the total transmission line loss, which can be expressed as a function of all the generators including the dependent generator (i.e. slack generator). It can be represented as(10)PL=∑i=1NG∑j=1NGPGiBijPGj+∑i=1NGB0iPGi+B00MWwhere B, B0andB00 are the power loss coefficients.Assume that, the power allocation for the first NG−1 generators are specified, then the power allocation for the dependent generator (PDG) is stated by the following equation:(11)PDG=PD+PL−∑i=1NG−1PGiMWExpanding and re-arranging Eq. (11), the dependent generator power allocation can be calculated using standard algebraic method.Glowworm swarm optimization (GSO) algorithm is one of the newest nature inspired heuristics algorithms for optimization problem. GSO algorithm is developed by Krishnanand and Ghose [23]. GSO algorithm is proposed for the simultaneous computation of multiple optima of multimodal functions [24]. In the GSO algorithm, a swarm of agents (particles or glowworms) is initially deployed randomly in the solution space. These agents are modelled based on glowworms, which belong to a family of beetles. This glowworm emits bioluminescent light to attract its mates or prey. The brighter the glow, the more is the attraction. The glowworm emits light, whose intensity is proportional to the associated luciferin value and it interacts with other glowworms within a variable neighbourhood. This glowworm characteristic is imitated in the GSO algorithm to find the multiple optimal points in the solution space. Accordingly, the agents carry a luminescence quantity called luciferin along with them. Each agent selects a neighbour that has a luciferin value more than its own (within the local decision range) and moves towards it using a probabilistic mechanism.As mentioned earlier, the GSO algorithm starts by placing a population of particles (glowworms) randomly in the solution space. Primarily, each glowworm is initialised with equal value of luciferin l0. The remaining part of GSO algorithm is described in three consecutive phases. Those are luciferin update phase, movement phase and neighbourhood range update phase (or) local decision range update phase. They are explained as follows:Even though all the glowworms start with equal luciferin values, these values change according to each glowworm fitness value at their current position. In case of optimization problem, this luciferin value changes based on the problem's overall fitness value. The luciferin update rule is described with the following equation:(12)ljt+1=max0,1−ρljt+γJjt+1where ρ is the luciferin decay constant (0< ρ <1); γ is the luciferin enhancement constant,ljtrepresents the luciferin value associated with jth glowworm at time t andJjtrepresents the problem objective function value of the jth glowworm at time t.As a first step in the movement phase, each glowworm identifies a set of neighbours using the rule given in the following equation:(13)Nit=j:dijt<rdit;lit<ljtwhereNitrepresents a set of neighbours for the ith glowworm at time t;dijtrepresents the euclidian distance between the ith and jth glowworm at time t;rditrepresents the local decision range value of the ith glowworm at time t, which is bounded by radial sensor range rs0<rdi<rs.In the second step of movement phase, probabilistic mechanism is used to identify a unique neighbour from the set of neighbours. For every glowworm i, the probability with respect to its jth neighbour is calculated using the following equation:(14)Pijt=ljt−lit∑k∈Nitlkt−lit,wherej∈NitwherePijtis the probability of moving the ith glowworm towards the jth neighbour at time t. As a third step in the movement phase, each glowworm i identifies jth glowworm as its unique neighbour with maximum probability value as a selection criteria and it is calculated using Eq. (14). Now as a core part of movement phase, each glowworm moves towards its own unique neighbour using the following equation:(15)xit+1=xit+Sxjt−xitxjt−xitwhere xi(t) is the location of glowworm i at time t,is the Euclidean norm operator and S is the step size which changes according to Eq. (16), as given below:(16)S=Smax−Smax−SminMaximumnoofiterations×iterationwhere Smax and Smin are the boundaries for the step size S.In the optimization problems, this movement phase updates each glowworm towards the optima.The neighbourhood range of each glowworm is adaptively updated using the following equation:(17)rdit+1=minrs,max0,rdit+βnt−Nitwhererditis the neighbourhood range (or) local decision range of the ith glowworm at time t; rsis the luciferin sensor radial range; β is a constant parameter; ntis the neighbourhood threshold;Nitis the number of neighbours in the neighbourhood set of the ith glowworm at time t.TOPSIS is a multi criterion decision making method, which was developed by Hwang and Yoon [28]. TOPSIS attempts to choose the alternatives that simultaneously have shortest geometric distance from the positive ideal solution and farthest geometric distance from the negative ideal solution. To make use of this technique, attribute values must be numeric and monotonically increasing or decreasing. TOPSIS makes use of attribute information fully and provides a cardinal ranking for all the alternatives. The TOPSIS procedure can be expressed in the following steps [29].Step 1: Calculate the normalized decision value matrix from the original decision value matrix with the help of the following equation:(18)Rij=xij∑xij2fori=1,2,...,m;j=1,2,...,nwhere xijand Rijare original and normalized decision value matrix. m is the number of alternative solutions and n is the number of objective values (criteria).Step 2: Calculate the weighted normalized decision value matrix with weights, as given by the decision maker, as stated in the following equation:(19)Vij=WjRijwhere Wjis the weight for the jth objective value and Vijis the weighted normalized decision value matrix.Step 3: Identify the positive ideal and negative ideal solutions from the weighted normalized decision value matrix. The positive ideal value solution can be represented as given in Eq. (20) and the negative ideal value solution can be represented with the following equation:(20)A*=V1*,...,Vn*,whereVj*=maxVijifj∈J;minVij⁡ifj∈J′(21)A′=V′1,...,V′n,whereV′j=minVijifj∈J;maxVijifj∈J′Step 4: Calculate the separation measures for each alternative. The separation from the positive ideal value solution can be calculated using Eq. (22); similarly, the separation from the negative ideal value solution can be derived using the following equation:(22)Si*=∑Vj*−Vij21/2fori=1,2,...,m(23)S′i=∑V′j−Vij21/2fori=1,2,...,mStep 5: Get the TOPSIS rank by calculating the relative closeness to the ideal value solution using the following equation:(24)Ci*=S′iSi*+S′iwhere0≤Ci*≤1Higher value of TOPSIS rank indicates that the corresponding solution is very close to the ideal solution.In this section, a new swarm based heuristic algorithm named as GSO algorithm along with TOPSIS (GSO–T) is proposed for solving the MOEED problem. Its implementation for the MOEED problem is as follows:Step 1: Initialize the GSO algorithm parameters. (Elaborate details are given in the “Parameters for the proposed GSO–T approach” section.)Step 2: Initialize a set of glowworm in the solution space. The number of glowworms is predefined in the initialization process of the algorithm parameters. The initial set of glowworm comprises combination of only the candidate solutions which satisfy all the problem constraints. Each glowworm consists of the power outputs of the generating units, which are randomly generated within the generator minimum and maximum limits.Step 3: Evaluate all the glowworm by the MOEED problem objective functions. Any combination of objective functions can be simultaneously used to evaluate the glowworms as stated in the problem formulation. Now, all the evaluated objective function values are simultaneously processed through the TOPSIS ranking process as explained in the “TOPSIS” section. In the TOPSIS ranking process, the number of glowworms will be considered as the number of alternative solutions (m) and the number of objective functions will be considered as number of criteria (n). Suppose, if one of objective function alone needs to be minimized among the multiple objectives, the weight for that particular objective function is fixed as one in the TOPSIS. Weights for the remaining objective functions are fixed as zero. Similarly, if all the objective functions need to be minimized simultaneously, then weights for all the objective functions are fixed as 1/n. This means that all the objectives are given equal importance in TOPSIS to find the BCS among the various objectives considered. Finally, the TOPSIS rank corresponds to each glowworm will be considered as its overall fitness value in the GSO algorithm. Now, initialize the GSO algorithm iteration.Step 4: Update the initial luciferin value of each glowworm as per Eq. (12). Here, the objective function value is nothing but TOPSIS rank corresponds to each glowworm.Step 5: Select a set of neighbourhood solutions for every glowworm with the constraints given in Eq. (13).Step 6: Calculate the probability for total set of neighbourhood solutions belongs to every glowworm, using Eq. (14).Step 7: Identify a unique neighbourhood solution for each glowworm with the probability value calculated in step 6. Unique neighbourhood solution is selected based on the higher probability value of the corresponding glowworm among the each set of neighbourhood solutions.Step 8: Each glowworm is updated towards the optima based on its own neighbourhood glowworm's position in the solution space. Eq. (15) is used to update each glowworm. This means that, the power outputs of each generator correspond to each glowworm is updated towards its own neighbourhood. Now after updating each glowworm, elements of the glowworm may violate the constraint Eq. (8). This violation is corrected as follows:(25)PGi=PGimax,ifPGi>PGimaxPGimin,ifPGi<PGiminSimilarly, if the power output of the dependent generator violates its limit, it is fixed as follows:(26)PDG=PDGmax,ifPDG>PDGmaxPDGmin,ifPDG<PDGminAfter limiting the power outputs of any generator, as per Eq. (25) or (26), a penalty term will be introduced in all the problem objective functions to penalize its fitness value. When this process is done, the problem objective functions given in Eqs. (1)–(6) are modified with the following generalized form:(27)minFt+ϕPGi−PGiLimit2,wheret=1,2,...,Nobj.where Ftindicates any one defined objective function given in Eqs. (1)–(6), ϕ is a penalty coefficient.Now, evaluate the updated glowworms with predefined combination of objective functions as stated in step 3. While doing this step, evaluate all the objective functions with modified Eq. (27). After evaluating all the glowworms, TOPSIS ranking process is done as elaborated in step 3.Step 9: Update the neighbourhood range values of each glowworm based on the relation given in Eq. (17). Update the algorithm iteration value and repeat the steps 4 to 9. After completing the predefined number of iterations, the highest TOPSIS ranked glowworm will be considered as the optimal solution for the MOEED problem.Finally, the computational flow of proposed GSO–T algorithm can be briefed with help of flowchart given in the in Fig. 1.The proposed GSO–T approach and WGSO approach have been applied to four different test cases to access its potential and efficiency for solving MOEED problem. Both GSO–T and WGSO programs have been written in MATLAB 7 language and executed on a 2.2GHz Intel core 2 Duo, personal computer with 1GB RAM. For the purpose of comparison, 30 separate optimization trial runs are made for both the proposed GSO–T approach and WGSO approach and their statistical results are obtained.The GSO algorithm parameters to be selected are, initial luciferin vales for all glowworms (lo), constant parameter (β), luciferin enhancement constant (γ), luciferin decay constant (ρ), boundaries for step size (Smax, Smin), neighbourhood threshold (nt), radial range of the luciferin sensor (rs), neighbourhood range (rd), and the population size (m). The appropriate values for these quantities have been determined based on the guidance given in [24,25]. In all test cases while initializing the neighbourhood range, it is made equal to its radial range of the luciferin sensor value. Since a time varying step size is introduced in the GSO–T approach, the boundary values for the step size are fixed on trial and error basis. In GSO algorithm, the population size is the important one, which decides the algorithm performance and that is chosen based on the extensive experiments on all the test cases. In the proposed GSO–T approach for the MOEED application, these quantities are fixed after careful experimentation and that are given in Table 1. For the purpose of comparison, the GSO parameters in WGSO approach are also set alike in GSO–T approach.A three generator system with fuel cost, SOxemission and NOxemission functions with the representation of Eqs. (1), (3) and (4), respectively, are considered as first test case. Minimizations of these functions are considered as three different criteria in TOPSIS ranking process. All the objective functions in this test case are quadratic in nature and the corresponding system data including loss coefficients have been adopted from [6]. The load demand is 850MW. The minimum fuel cost, minimum SOxemission, minimum NOxemission and BCS obtained from the proposed GSO–T approach, WGSO, NSGA-II [6] and DE/BBO [17] are given in Table 2. Convergence characteristics for minimum fuel cost, minimum SOxemission and minimum NOxemission in case of GSO–T and WGSO approaches are shown in Fig. 2. While obtaining the BCS by GSO–T, nature of the fuel cost, SOxemission and NOxemission profiles are depicted in Fig. 3.The IEEE six generator 30 bus test system with fuel cost function given in Eq. (1) and emission function given in Eq. (5) are considered as two different objectives in this test case. The system demand is 2.834p.u. on a 100MVA base. In this test case, the fuel cost function is quadratic in nature. The emission function is of second order polynomial function and the respective system data have been taken from [9]. The loss coefficients are adopted from [15]. Table 3presents the minimum fuel cost, minimum emission and BCS obtained by the proposed GSO–T as compared to WGSO, SPEA [8], NSGA-II [9], PSO [10], MOPSO [11], MBFA [12], MODE [13], MO-DE/PSO [15] and BBO [21]. Convergence characteristics for minimum fuel cost and minimum emission yielded by the proposed GSO–T and WGSO approaches are presented in Fig. 4. Fuel cost and emission variation profiles while getting the BCS by GSO–T are shown in Fig. 5.The test system considered here is same as test case 2. But, minimization of system loss represented in Eq. (6) is considered as third objective in this test case 3. These three function values are considered as criteria for TOPSIS ranking process. The minimum fuel cost, minimum emission, minimum system loss and BCS obtained by the proposed GSO–T approach are compared with WGSO and MODE [13] and the results are tabulated in Table 4. Convergence characteristics for minimum fuel cost, minimum emission and minimum system loss are shown in Fig. 6. The fuel cost, emission and system loss variations with respect to each iteration, while obtaining the BCS by the GSO–T approach, are shown in Fig. 7.To further investigate the effectiveness of the proposed GSO–T approach, the IEEE six generator 30 bus test system with valve point loading effect is considered as test case 4. For the purpose of comparing the obtained results, the generating unit data, fuel cost with valve point loading effect, emission and loss coefficients are adopted from [10]. The system demand is 2.834p.u. on a 100MVA base. The fuel cost function given in Eq. (2) and emission function given in Eq. (5) are considered in this test case 4. Minimizations of fuel cost and emission values are considered as two criteria for TOPSIS ranking process. The minimum fuel cost and minimum emission obtained by the proposed GSO–T approach, WGSO, PSO [10] and DE/BBO [17] are given in Table 5. BCS obtained by the proposed GSO–T approach, WGSO, PSO [10] and DE/BBO [17] are presented in Table 5. The fuel cost and emission convergence are shown in Fig. 8. To ensure the obtained BCS with GSO–T approach, the fuel cost and emission variation with respect to iterations are plotted in Fig. 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
