@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Neural Network Analysis for the detection of glaucomatous damage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the detection problem of glaucomatous damage.We propose a neural network approach coupled with the optical coherence tomography.We found that the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve can be improved significantly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Neural network,Glaucoma,Optical coherence tomography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Glaucoma is a major cause of blindness and is prevalent among Asian populations. Therefore, early detection is of paramount importance in order to let patients have early treatments. One prominent indicator of glaucomatous damage is the Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer (RNFL) profile. In this paper, the performance of artificial neural network models in identifying RNFL profile of glaucoma suspect and glaucoma subjects is studied. RNFL thickness was measured using optical coherence tomography (Stratus OCT). Inputs to the neural network consisted of regional RNFL thickness measurements over 12 clock hours. Sensitivity and specificity for glaucoma detection will be compared by the area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AROC). The results show that artificial neural network coupled with the OCT technology enhances the diagnostic accuracy of optical coherence tomography in differentiating glaucoma suspect and glaucoma from normal individuals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glaucoma is a degenerative process characterized by progressive and irreversible loss of retinal ganglion cells and nerve fiber bundles resulting in gradual worsening of visual field. It has been shown that loss of 25–35% retinal ganglion cells can occur before visual field defect detected by automated static perimeter [1]. While evaluation of Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer (RNFL) plays an important role in the diagnosis and monitoring of glaucomatous damage, clinical assessment of RNFL was essentially qualitative and subjective until the advent of modern imaging technologies like scanning laser polarimetery, confocal scanning ophthalmoscopy and optical coherence tomography (OCT), which is an optical signal acquisition method for biological tissue. These imaging devices provide quantitative and objective measurement of RNFL thickness in a global average or sectorial fashion. However, large individual variation of RNFL thickness limits its usefulness in detection of glaucoma. Using OCT, the mean peripapillary RNFL thickness was reported in the range from 80 to 147μm [2–5]. Furthermore, since defects in the RNFL can occur in a diffuse, localized or combined fashion in glaucoma [6], mean or sectorial RNFL thickness measurement may not be sensitive enough to identify early localized defect.Analysis strategies like Fourier analysis-based linear discriminant functions have been investigated to enhance the detection of glaucomatous changes in a mathematical modeling approach. Using scanning laser polarimetry, Medeiros et al. [7] reported improved performance to discriminate glaucomatous from healthy eyes by combining Fourier analysis of RNFL thickness and analyzed the data with a linear discriminant function. A recent study by Essock et al. [8] also demonstrated the linear discriminant function based on the output from a Fourier analysis of RNFL data resulted in better diagnostic capability with both optical coherence tomography and scanning laser polarimetry. This analytical approach translated the quantitative measurements of RNFL into a more sensitive diagnostic marker for glaucoma detection. However, the classifier's performance in linear discriminant function is limited by assuming the data in different groups are linearly separable. If the assumption is invalid, the performance for discrimination will be affected.The normal RNFL profile has a double hump pattern with peaks over the superior and inferior regions reflecting a thicker layer of nerve fiber layer found over the superior and inferior quadrants. Localized or diffuse loss of nerve fiber layer will be manifested as an alteration in the pattern of the nerve fiber layer profile. Therefore, an alternative way to detect glaucomatous nerve fiber layer damage is to devise an algorithm that can recognize the changes from normal pattern. The application of artificial neural network has been reported in classification and interpretation of visual field [9], assessment of visual field progression [10] and identification of glaucomatous damage using optic nerve and visual field variables [11].In assessing the performance of a detection method, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) is often used for binary classifiers. Accuracy can be measured by the area under the ROC curve (AROC), which is used to assess the ability of a network to differentiate glaucoma suspect or glaucoma subjects from normal subjects. AROC of 1.0 represents perfect discrimination whereas AROC of 0.5 represents chance discrimination and the test is worthless. The using artificial neural network in improving the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of glaucoma has been applied to other measuring techniques [12].The goal of the present study is to devise and train artificial neural network systems to recognize the peripapillary RNFL thickness pattern associated with glaucomatous damage. The RNFL thickness profile, based on measurements from 12 clock hours, served as input variables. The performance of the artificial neural networks in diagnosing glaucoma suspect and glaucoma individuals is evaluated. To assess the importance of individual input variable, relative importance chart was evaluated for each trained neural network by calculating the degradation in the network performance after a particular input is removed and not used by the network. We found that the area under the AROC curve can be enlarged sufficiently by employing simple artificial neural network models. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report using OCT measured RNFL profile as inputs to neural network systems to differentiate glaucoma and glaucoma suspect subjects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
