@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance of artificial neural networks in nearshore wave power prediction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the wave energy potential in nearshore coastal areas.We assess the wave energy potential by means of ANNs.An ANN model is developed using 13 years of buoy records.The performance of the ANN model is compared with spectral modelling.The ANN model developed forecast wave energy potential with great accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wave energy,Artificial intelligence,Neural network,Numerical model,Wave propagation,SWAN,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper the assessment of the wave energy potential in nearshore coastal areas is investigated by means of artificial neural networks (ANNs). The performance of the ANNs is compared with in situ measurements and spectral numerical modelling (the conventional tool for wave energy assessment). For this purpose, 13 years of records of two buoys, one offshore and one inshore, with an hourly frequency are used to develop an ANN model for predicting the nearshore wave power. The best suited architecture was selected after assessing the performance of 480 ANN models involving twelve different architectures. The results predicted by the ANN model were compared with the measured data and those obtained by means of the SWAN (Simulating Waves Nearshore) spectral model. The quality in the predictions of the ANN model shows that this type of artificial intelligence models constitutes a powerful tool to forecast the wave energy potential at particular coastal site with great accuracy, and one that overcomes some of the disadvantages of the conventional tools for nearshore wave power prediction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fossil fuels, energy dense and relatively inexpensive, supply nowadays the majority of the global energy consumption. Nevertheless, it is clear that, in the short to medium term, they should be replaced to a great extent by carbon-free renewable sources [1]. While wind and solar energy exploitation have matured over the last decades and are increasingly being installed today, ocean wave energy exploitation is still unproven at a commercial scale. However, its enormous potential explains the intensive research currently dedicated to the development of wave energy conversion systems [2–8] and to the assessment of the wave resource in various regions [9–11].In spite of their importance, the technological considerations are not the only factor to be considered in bringing wave energy to a commercial stage. Another crucial aspect is the spatial and temporal variability of the resource, which is particularly significant in the nearshore – the area with the greatest practical interest; thus, the first step to exploiting wave energy is understanding the resource and being able to perform a thorough and accurate assessment of the energy available at a site of interest [12].There exist different methodologies and data sources to carry out a wave resource assessment which have been implemented in different coastal regions. Wave buoy data are indeed very useful, but the wave buoys may be too expensive to maintain for the periods of time needed for long-term wave climate assessment. The back-scattered signal from satellite altimeters can provide relatively cheaply [13] enormous amounts of wave data with nearly the same accuracy as a wave buoy if correctly interpreted [14]. These data, together with data obtained from global wind-wave models, are an effective approximation to the wave power in deepwater. However, they provide a poor estimate of the wave power at nearshore locations, where the complex bathymetry and coastline gives rise to shoaling, refraction and diffraction and thus to significant variations in the distribution of wave energy over small areas.Currently, spectral numerical models are the most popular tool to investigate these wave transformations and thus the available wave energy resource in the nearshore. These models compute accurately the propagation of swell in nearshore areas [15–17] without the need of an important investment of resources as it is the case of in situ measurements. However, they have some critical disadvantages, they are very time consuming, need of care and expertise when implementing the model, and are very sensitive to different parameters (as it may be the bathymetric data). For these reasons, in the last years, different attempts have been made to supplement or replace numerical results with other techniques [13,18,19].In this paper, a new approach to characterising the wave energy resource at a particular coastal point based on Artificial intelligence (AI) is presented. In particular, the AI tool developed is an Artificial neural network (hereafter ANN) model, which is capable of predicting wave power at a nearshore location. Artificial neural networks have proven to be a very powerful technique capable of resolving complex physical problems [20–23]. Indeed, they have already been applied to other Coastal engineering problems with excellent results, such as the forecasting of wind and wave climate time series [13,24], wave reflection at submerged breakwaters [25], floating boom performance [26], headland-bay beach planforms [27–29] or rubble-mound breakwater stability [30]. These works have shown that ANN modelling presents key advantages such as computational efficiency or potentially predictive power, but without the need of testing numerous physical and numerical parameters or to obtain detailed geographic information [31].The final aim of this work is to assess the performance of the ANN model and its suitability for nearshore wave power prediction. For this purpose the model results are compared with those obtained from in situ measurements and from a state-of-art spectral numerical model.The data used in this work were obtained from two types of buoys operated by Spain's State Ports: one offshore (Vilán-Sisargas) and one nearshore (Langosteira) (Fig. 1), covering nearly 13 years (from 13/5/1998 to 8/4/2011) with an hourly frequency. The offshore and nearshore buoys are located at water depths of 386m and 40m, respectively.The data records from the buoys present gaps of different nature. First, there exist an important number of small gaps of a few hours which are presumably due to errors in the transmission of the data, maintenance issues or specific device failures. Another more important type of gaps are those spanning longer periods of time, from days to, in some cases, months. These gaps occur predominantly during winter months, when high energetic sea states prevail, leading to permanent failures and unfavourable climatic conditions for repair operations. Owing to this fact and the need for simultaneous data records from both buoys – a key point towards the validation of the ANN and spectral wave models – a previous step towards the development of the ANN model was to apply a filter to the original wave records of each buoy with the objective of identifying the gaps and selecting only the time periods in which both buoys were operating simultaneously. As a result of this process a total number of 72,747 valid datapoints were finally selected.The fundamental parameters for wave energy characterisation which can be obtained from buoy records were the significant wave height (Hm0) and the energy period (Te) at both the offshore and nearshore buoys and the mean wave direction (θm) at the offshore buoy. The nearshore wave power at the Langosteira buoy corresponding to each sea state is determined according to:(1)JBuoy=ρg16Hm02cg=ρg16Hm02cnwhere ρ is the seawater density, g is the gravitational acceleration, cgis the group velocity, c is the phase velocity and n is the ratio c/cg. Both c and n are calculated following linear wave theory as,(2)c=LT=gT2πtanh(kh)(3)n=121+2khsinh(2kh)where L is the wave length, k=2π/L is the wave number and h the local water depth.The above equations were solved for each sea state recorded by the nearshore buoy.An ANN [32,33] is an information-processing system based on neural biology capable of storing observed knowledge related to some physical problem and making it applicable to new cases. It consists of a certain number of artificial neurons linked by means of interneuron connections simulating the structure of a human brain. An ANN learns from its environment through a training process and stores the acquired knowledge in the interneuron connections by means of synaptic weights in the same way as a human brain does.In this work a specific type of ANN called multilayer feedforward neural network is used [34]. It consists of several layers of artificial neurons (input layer, hidden layers and output layers) linked by means of feedforward connections, permitting the transmission of the information only on a layer-by-layer basis, without feedback or information exchange between neurons of the same layer.Within each neuron, the information received is modified by means of a transfer or activation function before being transmitted to the following layer. The activation function must be continuous and differentiable [33], being selected in this case the hyperbolic tangent sigmoid and the linear function as transfer functions for the neurons of the hidden layers and linear layer respectively.Two different processes have to be conducted in order to develop an ANN model: the training or learning process and the testing process. During the training process the model acquires the knowledge about the problem in question. The method commonly used to train this kind of ANN is a gradient descent technique known as the backpropagation algorithm [35]. This method minimises the error of the model through an iterative procedure which adjusts progressively the synaptic weights of the ANN model. Each iteration consists of two basic steps: first, the error between the desired output (the target) and the actual output provided by the model is computed; and second, the error obtained is propagated backward from the output layer to the input layer, adjusting the synaptic weights. This process is repeated over and over until either a maximum number of iterations or a satisfactory error level is reached. In this case, the error function used during the training process was the mean square error (MSE). However, in order to select the most appropriate ANN architecture for this application (Section 4.1) the normalised mean square error (NMSE) was used to carry out a representative comparison among the ANN architectures considered.In addition, with the objective of ensuring over-fitting or under-fitting the technique called Early Stopping was used. The data used for training is divided into two subsets: the training subset used to determine the best parameters of the ANN model and the validation subset. During the training process the errors on the training subset and validation subset are monitored. Initially, the validation error decreases as the training error does. When the ANN model begins to over-fit the data the validation error typically increases. When the validation error increases during a certain number of iterations the training process is automatically stopped, being the parameters of the ANN model returned to the values corresponding to the minimum validation error.Once the model has been trained, a subsequent testing process is carried out with the objective of assessing its capability to generalise the knowledge acquired during the training process to unknown cases.A crucial step in the development of an ANN model is the selection of the input and output variables. In this case, the objective is to predict the value of wave power at a nearshore point and therefore it must be considered as the output variable of the model. As regards the selection of the input variables, it is necessary to keep in mind that the wave power at a specific coastal location is determined, in addition to the local bathymetry, by the offshore wave conditions in front of the coastal region of interest. Conventional models (spectral numerical models) being currently implemented to assess the wave power at a certain coastal location, compute the nearshore wave power by propagating the spectrum of the offshore wave conditions defined by means of the following parameters: the significant wave height (Hm0), the energetic period (Te) (or the peak period), and the mean wave direction (θm), which are in turn the most representative parameters defining a given wave spectrum. Taking this fact into account, these parameters are also selected as input variables of the ANN model so as to conduct a reliable comparison between the results obtained by the ANN model and conventional models.The next step in the process consists in dividing the total data into two different datasets: the training dataset and the testing dataset, in order to carry out the training and the testing process. Each of the 72,747 hourly wave data provides one data point (xj, yj), consisting of an input vector xj=(Hm0, Te, θm)jof offshore wave conditions and an output vector yj=Jjof nearshore wave power (the super index j designates hourly wave data).These data were distributed into a training dataset with 48,746 datapoints (67% of the total data) corresponding to the period between 13/5/1998 and 31/12/2006, and a testing dataset with 24,001 datapoints (33% of the total data) recorded from 1/1/2007 to 8/4/2011.The conventional tool to assess the wave patterns and thus the wave energy resource at a particular coastal location is the spectral numerical model. In this case, the SWAN model (simulating waves nearshore) [36] is used to determine the wave power at the nearshore point of interest (Langosteira). This model computes the evolution of the wave spectrum by using the action balance equation, which reads:(6)∂∂tN+∇⋅(C→N)+∂∂θ(CθN)+∂∂σ(CσN)=Sσwhere N is the wave action density (N=E/σ), σ the relative frequency, C the propagation velocity in the geographical space (C→=C→g+U→, withU→as the ambient current), Cθthe propagation velocity in the θ-space and Cσthe propagation velocity in the σ-space. Finally, the term S on the right-hand side is the source term representing the effects of generation, dissipation and wave–wave interactions.In this case, the model was implemented on a Cartesian grid covering a coastal area in the north-western corner of the Iberian Peninsula, from Cape Touriñan to Ria de A Coruña (Fig. 2). The grid had 18,872 cells (M=242; N=109) with a varying size, approximately 600m offshore and 200m nearshore. The water depth was digitised and interpolated onto the numerical grid from nautical Charts 927, 928 and 412 of the Spanish Hydrographic Institute and Chart 1111 of the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office. The resulting bathymetry is shown in Fig. 3.The offshore records at Vilán-Sisargas buoy were used as boundary conditions. After running the model, the wave power for each sea state at the grid point closest to Langosteira buoy (M=43, N=71) is computed from:(7)JSWAN=ρg∫02π∫0∞E(f,θ)Cg(f,h)dfdθ

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, an ANN model for predicting the nearshore wave power has been developed. It uses as input three offshore parameters: significant wave height, energy period and mean wave direction. In order to select the most appropriate ANN architecture for this specific problem, a thorough experimental study involving twelve different architectures with one and two hidden layers was conducted. The performance of each architecture was characterised in terms of minimum NMSE obtained after 40 training processes with the training and testing dataset. The best result was provided by the architecture [3-4-4-1], with three input neurons, two hidden layers with four neurons per layer, and one output neuron. An excellent agreement between the field data and the results of the ANN model was achieved, with very high correlation coefficients for both training and testing data (R=0.96 and R2=0.91).A sensitivity analysis was also carried out in order to study the effect of each input on the output predicted by the ANN model. The results showed that the significant wave height Hm0 is the most important input variable with a contribution of 53.2% to the output, while the energetic period Te and the mean wave direction θm contribute with 25.4% and 21.4% respectively.Finally, the performance of the ANN model was compared with a state-of-the-art spectral model (SWAN model). For this purpose a period of time covering a wide range of wave conditions was selected. The results obtained show that the ANN model is capable of yielding very accurate wave power predictions (R=0.93; NMSE=0.23), even more precise than a conventional spectral wave model. Furthermore, during the more energetic sea states (Hm0=2–5m; Te=9–14s) the ANN model showed an excellent behaviour, reproducing the nearshore wave power calculated from the buoy measurements very precisely.The ANN model developed in this work constitutes a powerful tool to compute quickly and with great accuracy the wave power at a nearshore coastal location without the computational cost associated to a spectral wave model. Furthermore, the results obtained indicate that the ANN model can be used to determine the actual wave power output of a WEC at the coastal point of interest with nearly the same (or even the same) accuracy as with a wave buoy, for the bulk of the energy is provided by sea states for which the behaviour of the ANN model is almost perfect, but without the high costs associated to the maintenance of the buoy.