@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An analysis of popularity information effects: Field experiments in an online marketplace

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analyzing empirically the effects of the popularity information on sales.Presenting the results from controlled field experiments in an online store on Tmall.Identifying causality using difference-in-differences and propensity score matching.Presenting the hit list effects varying over subgroups of price and category.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-commerce,Field experiment,Hit list,Popularity information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Popularity information is identified as one of the important factors for businesses in the online marketplace and is normally expected to strengthen sales performance. At the same time, the effects of popularity information are found to vary across product types. In this study, we attempt to identify the effects of popularity information on product sales through an analysis of the subgroups of category and price. Two sequential field experiments in an online apparel store on Alibaba’s Tmall, the most dominant online brand marketplace in China, are conducted to capture the causal effects of the popularity information on sales. After observing the possible existence of popularity information effects through a pilot test of 17 products, we conduct the main experiment with 290 products, recording the daily sales for each by posting selected products on the hit list. The difference-in-differences method and propensity score matching are used to analyze the effects. The results show that once the products are displayed on the hit list, product sales increase by an average of 1.3units per day. One subgroup of the niche product category is found to be influenced more significantly by hit list information than are other subgroups in the broad appeal category. Furthermore, after the hit list information is presented, more units of mid-price products are likely to be sold than units of products with high and low prices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Popularity information is understood to be one of the crucial factors of success in the online marketplace, as such information is known to alleviate the issues of information asymmetry that result in consumers having a limited amount of information with which to identify what to purchase. The effects of popularity information differ across product types. We have undertaken field experiments in order to capture the causal effects of popularity information on product sales through an analysis of the subgroups of category and price in the context of the electronic marketplace in China.Online shoppers are likely to require a significant amount of knowledge and time to make an optimal buying decision from a selection of products. Theories regarding observational learning and herding present a social learning mechanism (Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandani et al., 1992). These theories state that, because individuals make decisions with incomplete and inaccurate information, they refer not only to information that they possess but also to the actions of predecessors, without any knowledge of the predecessors’ decision making process. According to the informational cascades theory, referring to the choices of others could be efficient and rational (Li, 2004; Duan et al., 2009). Because popularity information is expected to alleviate information asymmetry, most online marketplaces provide popularity information based on past sales performance.Popularity information likely plays an important role in the rapidly growing Chinese electronic market. The growth of the online marketplace is outstanding in the case of China’s e-commerce market (Zhang et al., 2013). Over the past five years, online sales in China have increased 15 times over, amounting to RMB 1.8 trillion (US$288 billion) in 2013 (The Business Times, 2014). The Boston Consulting Group predicts that the size of China’s flourishing e-commerce market will surpass that of the U.S. in 2015 and will become the next e-commerce mover in the world (Walters et al., 2011; Mozur, 2013). The leading online marketplaces of the Alibaba Group have annually 255 million active buyers, eight million active sellers, and 12.7 billion orders (Alibaba Group Holding Limited, 2014). Obviously, in such an active market, consumers have difficulties in finding the right merchants for them. Furthermore, rapid quantitative expansion of the online marketplace has resulted in a number of issues including information asymmetry and trust. Previous literature notes that one of the unique characteristics of e-commerce is the separation of buyers and sellers with limited experiences of products; consequently, consumers are exposed to a high degree of uncertainty, which results in trust issues (Ba et al., 2003; Lucking-Reiley, 2000; Pavlou et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2006). Furthermore, electronic commerce in China has been rife with counterfeit goods (Tejada, 2015).Moreover, apparel and accessories account for 68% of electronic commerce in China (CNNIC, 2011) and thus are likely to be popular. According to a Bain & Company report (Hoffmann and Lannes, 2013), apparel is one of the top three categories with the deepest digital penetration, and Chinese online consumers tend to be “repertoire” shoppers and bargain hunters rather than loyal to a single brand. In this light, Chinese e-commerce vendors should find a promotion mechanism through which to expose their products to online consumers who keep changing their minds. Considering this reality, popularity information is likely to be useful for both consumers and e-commerce vendors. The online apparel and accessory malls in Alibaba’s Tmall provides an effective context through which to study the effects of popularity information, as they display hit list information in order to promote to potential consumers the products that are in vogue. The hit list is a kind of board displaying a list of the popular products with product names, images, and prices. The users who are interested in the popular products may click through the icon image of hit list at the very front page of the website, to reach the webpage of the hit list. This hit list information will represent early adopters’ choices and will likely influence followers. Therefore, the online marketplace provides an ideal environment for peer influence on consumers’ choice due to the easy availability of information on others’ choices, or popularity information.Hence, our study primarily investigates the causal effects of popularity information, or hit lists, on sales through field experiments. We seek to address the following research questions:•How much do product sales increase when products are displayed on a hit list?How different is the popularity information effect across product groups?To answer these questions, we conduct an initial pilot test with 17 products and a subsequent experiment with 290 products, recording the daily sales for each by posting selected products on the hit list. The purpose of this study is to clarify the causal relationship between the hit list information and product sales through the analysis of the subgroups of category and price and to provide practical implications regarding the importance of the hit list information presented on e-commerce websites in relation to business performance. Even though there have been many studies on popularity information, it is difficult to empirically identify the effects of this information. The equation we obtain by regressing sales quantity according to whether or not products are listed in popularity information such as ranking charts cannot identify the direction of causality, as sales and popularity information are likely to influence bi-directionally as well as to be influenced by external factors such as the network effect and word-of-mouth (WOM) (Yoo and Kim, 2012). This study sets up two experiments to identify the causal effects of the distinction between the treatment and control groups while avoiding the issue of identification by using the difference-in-differences method. To make another precise estimation and to verify the accuracy of results from the difference-in-differences method, this study also implements propensity score matching. These methods enable us to identify the pure impact of popularity information on sales.Our results indicate that popularity information plays a significant role in online users’ purchasing decisions. The finding that popularity information has an increasingly positive impact on seasonal apparel sales also indicates that people are likely to refer to popularity information more when buying seasonal products as opposed to when buying products for everyday use. This finding provides an additional explanation for the results found in the literature that niche products are more influenced by popularity information than are products with wide appeal. Furthermore, more units of mid-price products are likely to be sold than units of products with high and low prices.Our study is closely related with the work of Tucker and Zhang (2011) identifying the moderating effects resulting from the variation in vendor’s breadth of appeal for popularity information effects. They confirm the reinforcement effects of popularity information and, more importantly, popularity information may be greater benefit to narrow-appeal products than broad-appeal products. While our work complements previous research, it also differentiates itself by analyzing the empirically micro-transactional data set of a rapidly growing online marketplace and by identifying how the effects of popularity information on sales vary over product types in an online marketplace using the methods of difference-in-differences and propensity score matching. This research not only identifies the causal reinforcement effect of popularity information but also adds to the existing IS research by offering a new perspective – namely, that popularity information effects vary across product characteristics, including price. We identify the mitigating effects over subgroups of category and price. Furthermore, the empirical analysis in the context of the fast-growing Chinese online marketplace provides practical implications for the industry. Online stores reap benefits by manipulating the hit list information to maximize profits after taking our research team’s advice.This article is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the related theoretical backgrounds and presents the research hypotheses. The data and methods are presented in Section 3. Section 4 reports the results from the field experiments. Finally, Section 5 discusses the findings and concludes.The literatures of observational learning help us understand the characteristics of popularity information. Classic studies in this area find that decision makers have tendency to follow peers’ decisions as they may infer product quality from what the peers have chosen (Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandani et al., 1992). A number of studies examine popularity information, herding and social learning in the online marketplace (Duan et al., 2009; Ghose and Yang, 2009; Burtch et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014). As herding exists in a traditional financial market, online consumers are also likely to exhibit herding behaviors (Simonsohn and Ariely, 2008). Traditionally, scholars have explained the usefulness of popularity information in terms of the theories of information asymmetry, trust, reputation, and compensation structure. Moreover, network externalities influence a product’s value, while WOM throughout the network reflects a product’s reputation. Kauffman et al. (2000) use network externalities to explain online herding behavior.The informational cascades theory describes a common phenomenon in situations in which a consumer makes a decision among multiple products. The consumer has two kinds of information sources. On the one hand, she has her own accumulated knowledge and the information she gets from the website; on the other, she has the information that she derives from the decisions of others. The consumer reviews the information from the two sources together; however, the sources may contradict each other. Though informational cascades are recognized as a particular type of herd behavior, a significant difference between them exists. In the case of herding, individuals choose to perform the same action, but they may act differently when the realization of their signals differs. On the other hand, in an informational cascade, individuals follow others’ decisions regardless of their signals (Celen and Kariv, 2004; Li et al., 2014). Our work complements previous literature confirming the reinforcement effects of popularity information and at the same time it differentiates itself by identifying how the effects of popularity information on sales vary over product characteristics.The popularity information normally reinforces current sales trends by encouraging customers to choose popular products; consequently, it has a tendency to be self-reinforcing (Salganik et al., 2006; Zhang, 2010; Wang and Xie, 2011). For example, a book’s appearance on the New York Times bestseller list results in modest growth in sales of that book, as shown in Sorensen (2007)’s empirical analysis. An experiment with a bestseller list on a menu in a Chinese restaurant shows that the demand for a popular dish increases when the dish’s popularity ranking is revealed to customers (Cai et al., 2009).Popularity information can influence product adoption, especially on the Internet, where an overabundance of information is provided to online users (Shapiro and Varian, 1998). The product information available is virtually unlimited, as the online marketplace provides a platform for countless vendors. In such cases, referring to popularity information is one of the most efficient and rational ways for consumers to make decisions.Previous literature in the fields of information systems and marketing has found that the effects of popularity information differ across product types. Our article is related to three previous works that study how popularity information or a ranking chart impacts consumers’ online behavior – Duan et al. (2009), Ghose and Yang (2009), and Tucker and Zhang (2011). Duan et al. (2009) empirically analyze the data on software downloads to find that ranking information positively influences consumers’ choice of downloads. Ghose and Yang (2009) investigate the monetary value of positions resulting from keyword searches in the context of online advertising. Tucker and Zhang (2011) find that popularity information may have a greater effect on the sales of niche products with narrow appeal than on products with broad appeal, conducting a field experiment at the web site listing wedding service vendors. They identify the moderating effects resulting from the variation in vendor’s breadth of appeal for popularity information effects by having random assignment at the category level, while we have random assignment at the product level. Furthermore, Tucker and Zhang (2011) have the dependent variable of clicks while we have the results of actual sales for every product. Our work differentiates itself from the work of Tucker and Zhang (2011) by deepening the understanding how the impacts of popularity information vary across the product characteristics such as product types and prices.While observational learning, herding and information cascades may help consumers make purchase decisions, the consumers’ final purchase depends on the quality of the product. Herding can be seen in many cases, and consumers may imitate purchase decisions made for peculiar reasons. For example, restaurant patrons may choose to go to a busier restaurant with the expectation of higher quality. Herding is found to be a factor in non-diagnostic decisions in the context of online auctions (Simonsohn and Ariely, 2008). Thus, it can be inferred that the products that a greater number of consumers have already chosen have a higher probability of being chosen if products are listed on a hit list. In this light, we hypothesize as follows:•H1 (Reinforcement Effects): Consumers’ purchase decisions are significantly affected by hit list informationi.Popularity information has been used as an online promotional tool that reinforces the dominance of broad appeal products. Conceptually, e-commerce vendors are likely to believe that broad-appeal products will sell in high volumes, resulting in herding purchases. However, Tucker and Zhang (2011) find that popularity information is more effective for the sales of niche products with narrow appeal. We expect that the broadness of product appeal for apparel products will vary across categories (e.g., shirts, T-shirts, cardigans, knits, etc.). Thus, we hypothesize as follows:•H2 (Category Moderation Effects): Hit list information effects vary over the category subgroups of products.Tucker and Zhang (2011) identify the moderating effects across the breadth of appeal for each popularity level. It is obvious that the products characteristics influence the impacts of popularity information. As the characteristics of clothes will vary across categories, say, where and when to wear, the moderating effects of categories likely influence the degree of population effects. In terms of a representative characteristic of products, price is examined for the hit list information effects. Price-sensitive consumers are likely to weigh information from those who have already made purchase decisions differently from that of price-insensitive consumers. In order to identify the effect of hit list information on high-, mid-, and low-price products, we hypothesize as follows:•H3 (Price Moderation Effects): Hit list information effects vary over the price subgroups of products.Fig. 1illustrates how we formulate our hypotheses and extend the existing literature through our research.We analyze micro-transactional data sets acquired from the online store after conducting our experiments in the context of an online shopping mall in Alibaba’s Tmall. According to the Wall Street Journal (Winkler, 2014), Alibaba’s Taobao and Tmall are the world’s largest online marketplaces, accounting for 80% of all Chinese e-commerce transactions in 2013. Alibaba recently disclosed in its IPO filing that Taobao had RMB 1.173 trillion (US$ 191 billion) in sales from Q1 2013 to Q1 2014, while Tmall recorded RMB 505 billion (US$ 82 billion) in sales for the same period (Alibaba Group Holding Limited, 2014). Tmall is a fast-growing marketplace for major brands, whereas Taobao is a C2C (consumer-to-consumer) market.The Tmall store on which we conducted our field experiments is the single biggest distribution channel of Korean apparel in China. It is a clothing retailer allied with online apparel merchants in Korea, distributing shirts, T-shirts, cardigans, knits and many other types of clothing, mostly for women, in various prints and colors. In recent years, the store’s sales have increased with the popularity of South Korea’s TV dramas and the ‘Korean wave,’ or Hallyu (Yang, 2012).Our experiment is conducted to identify the effects of hit list information provided on the front page of the online store. The website visitors are presented with a category menu, promotional products, and hit list information on the front page (Appendix 1). At the upper right side of the screen, the icon of hit items is presented. If a user clicks on either category menu or hit list, she will be presented with a list of products as well as brief descriptions and photos. The products on the hit list can be sorted by price and recentness of product registration. Moreover, a user is able to query hit list information from the past several weeks (Appendix 2). Once she chooses one of the products, she will be able to acquire detailed information on the product, including many high-resolution images. The hit list information on the front page represents previous users’ evaluations and eventual choices, as the online marketplace updates the cumulative number of sales for each product and the hit list landing page every day.Fig. 2presents a comparison of the experimental flow. Out of 290 products, 45 products were selected randomly with the assumption that both control and treatment group have homogeneous characteristics. Our experimental treatment imposes the additional listings of the treatment group at the hit list. That is, the treatment group of 45 products is listed both in hit list as well as product list. Meanwhile the control group of remaining 245 products is listed in product list only. This treatment allows us to identify the impacts of the hit list information on consumer behavior. Ultimately, we attempt to assess how beneficial the hit list information is to both merchants and online intermediary.Normally, products are listed according to the time they are registered. However, products added to the hit list are listed prominently in a separate section in order to draw attention to the trendiest products. In our study, we assume that there are two paths for consumers to locate the product: either by browsing the classified menu or by choosing from the hit list.As described earlier, we conducted the pilot test and main field experiment sequentially. We conducted the pilot test to identify how popularity information affects sales preliminarily. Some of the vendors could be sensitive to this kind of experiment, and we needed a proof of concept before conducting the main experiment. For the pilot test, 17 products from three vendors that are “friendly” to the online marketplace were selected by the marketing team manager. Nine products were assigned to the hit list, while eight products were observed as a control group between August 22 and September 23, 2012. For each product, the number of daily sales was recorded. The description of the variables is presented in Appendix 3.We compared the cumulative sales for the five days before and the five days after the treatment, as some of the products in the treatment group were sold out after five days. We used this length of time because all of the products in the treatment group remained in the hit list for the entire period. We assume that this selection prevents the potential endogeneity which might occur when the length of time on the hit list is different for each product. We chose to use the cumulative sales rather than the daily sales after examining the distributions of the data. As we can infer from the statistics of cumulative sales (Appendix 4), the daily sales data are skewed to the left and zero-truncated. We would not want to remove the data of products for which the sales grew from zero to many, as we have heard from the staff in the company that some of the apparel products show good performance from a certain day on. Based on the cumulative sales, we assume that the hit list treatment may increase the total number of sales eventually, though the price levels of the two groups are not significantly different.Fig. 3illustrates a rough estimate of the impact of hit list information on cumulative sales. This bar chart presents the average cumulative sales on each day after the hit list information was presented and, thus, increased far more compared to the average level of cumulative sales that were unaffected by the hit list information. The chart graph clearly shows that the products that were listed in the hit list (treatment group) had more cumulative sales than the products that were not listed in the hit list (control group). These results verify the appropriateness of using the difference-in-differences method, as described in the following methodology section. This graph lends preliminary support to the hypothesis of reinforcement effects. The reason the cumulative sales of treatment and control groups decrease after day 29 is that some of the treatment group products get sold out.In the main experiment, 290 products were selected from eight vendors. A total of 45 products were chosen for the treatment group, while 245 products were observed as a control group from October 9 to December 7, 2012. Table 1provides descriptive statistics of observations for our main experiment.Total sales refers to the total number of products sold during the sales period, which typically lasts around 45days (as most of the products have seasonality). Cumulative number of sales refers to how many products are sold during the experiment period of 10days. The distributions of two variables can be inferred to be left-skewed, as the deviations between maximum and mean are much larger than those between minimum and mean. In this sample, the prices of products vary from RMB 79.05 (or US$ 12) to RMB 893.41 (or $US 142) with a mean of RMB 260 (or US$ 40). Fig. 4illustrates the price distribution of the products. Note that there are several spiky bars in the histogram. This is because they have odd pricing under round even numbers (e.g., RMB 199 instead of RMB 200). These distribution patterns enable us to have discrete groups for subgroup analysis.We have 19 product categories defined by the online store, as shown in Fig. 5. The figure illustrates the dispersions of mean prices and total sales by categories. Comparing the categories, the mean prices of cotton padded, jacket, and overcoat are high, while the mean total sales of culottes is very high and the mean price of culottes is relatively low. For subgroup analysis of the categories, we consider the distribution of price, total sales, and the number of products in the experiment settings.This study focuses on the experiment data set of 290 products. As described above, the manager was asked to randomly assign the 45 products to the treatment group in order to eliminate any potential selection bias in the main experiment. The remaining 245 products are observed as the control group. The detailed descriptive statistics of products used in the main experiment are presented in Appendix 5.For the propensity score matching, this study used the same data from the prior analysis. There are 45 products in the treatment group (i.e., on the hit list) and 245 products in the control group (i.e., not on the hit list). The propensity score was calculated according to the records and characteristics of these products, while matching algorithms were used to estimate the effects of the hit list in order to compare with the results of the prior analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
