@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of firefly algorithm for multi-stage transmission expansion planning with adequacy-security considerations in deregulated environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Optimized a complete planning framework for TEP problem.Firefly algorithm has been applied to solve dynamic TEP problem.Comprehensive comparison between proposed algorithm and GA, PSO, SA and DE has been presented.Market ability with regard to LMP has been evaluated.Minimizing congestion cost has been applied to TEP problem for increasing competition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Firefly algorithm,Local marginal prices,Optimization in power system,Transmission expansion planning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electric energy is the most popular form of energy because it can be transported easily at high efficiency and reasonable cost. Nowadays the real-world electric power systems are large-scale and highly complex interconnected transmission systems. The transmission expansion planning (TEP) problem is a large-scale optimization, complicated and nonlinear problem that the number of candidate solutions increases exponentially with system size. Investment cost, reliability (both adequacy and security), and congestion cost are considered in this optimization. To overcome the difficulties in solving the non-convex and mixed integer nature of this optimization problem, this paper offers a firefly algorithm (FA) to solve this problem. In this paper it is shown that FA, like other heuristic optimization algorithms, can solve the problem in a better manner compare with other methods such genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), Simulated Annealing (SA) and Differential Evolution (DE). To show the feasibility of proposed method, applied model has been considered in IEEE 24-Bus, IEEE 118-Bus and Iran 400-KV transmission grid case studies for TEP problem in both adequacy and security modes. The obtained results show the capability of the proposed method. A comprehensive analysis of the GA, PSO, SA and DE with proposed method is also presented.suceptance of the circuits in right-of-way i–jactive load in Bus iinitial active load in Bus iinitial maximum active power generation at Bus iminimum active power generation at Bus icoefficient of bid function of Bus imaximum capacity of branch (i−j)discount factora large penalty factornode-branch incidence, if i connected to j then sij=1 else sij=0total planning horizoninvestment cost to build a line in the right-of-way i–j ($/year)load factorgeneration factoractive power flow in the right-of-way i–jactive power flow in the right-of-way i–j while a line in right-of-way m-n is out of serviceactive power generation in Bus ivoltage angle at Bus ivoltage angle at Bus i while a line in right-of-way m–n is out of servicecurtailed load at bus k in normal operationcurtailed load at bus k while a line in right-of-way m–n is out of servicenumber of new circuit added to the right-of-way i–j (integer variable)vector of Lagrange multipliers for inequality and equality constraintBus indexset of load Busesnumber of available branches in corridor ℓmaximum number of new added branchesnumber of generatorsset of all new right-of-ways

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An electric power system can be subdivided into four major parts that are generation, transmission, distribution and load. The purpose of a transmission system is to transfer electric energy from generating units at various locations to the distribution systems that ultimately supply the load. Transmission lines that also interconnect neighboring utilities permit economic power dispatch across regions during normal conditions as well as the transfer of power between regions during emergency. Over the past few decades, the amount of electric power energy to be transferred from generation sites to major load areas has been growing dramatically. Due to increasing costs and the essential need for reliable electric power systems, suitable and optimal design methods for different sections of the power system are required. Transmission systems are a major part of any power system therefore they have to be accurately and efficiently planned. In this research, electric power transmission systems are studied with regard to optimizing the transmission expansion planning (TEP) problem. Electric power transmission lines are initially built to link remote generating power plants to load centers, thus allowing power plants to be located in regions that are more economical and environmentally suitable. As systems grew, meshed networks of transmission lines have emerged, providing alternative paths for power flows from generators to loads that enhance the reliability of continuous supply. In regions where generation resources or load patterns are imbalanced, transmission interconnection eases the requirement for additional generation. Additional transmission capability is justified whenever there is a need to connect cheaper generation to meet growing load demand or enhance system reliability or both. TEP has always been a rather complicated task especially for large-scale real-world transmission networks. First of all, electricity demand changes across both area and time. The change in demand is met by the appropriate dispatching of generation resources. As an electric power system must obey physical laws, the effect of any change in one part of network (e.g. changing the load at a node, raising the output of a generator, switching on/off a transmission line or a transformer) will spread instantaneously to other parts of the interconnected network, hence altering the loading conditions on all transmission lines. The ensuing consequences may be more marked on some transmission lines than others, depending on electrical characteristics of the lines and interconnection. The electric transmission expansion planning problem involves determining the least investment cost of the power system expansion and operation through the timely addition of electric transmission facilities in order to guarantee that the constraints of the transmission system are satisfied over the defined planning horizon. The transmission system planner is entrusted with ensuring the above-stated goals are best met whilst utilizing all the available resources. Therefore the purpose of transmission system planning is to determine the timing and type of new transmission facilities. The facilities are required in order to provide adequate transmission capacity to cope with future additional generation and power flow requirements. The transmission plans may require the introduction of higher voltage levels, the installation of new transmission elements and new substations. Transmission system planners tend to use many techniques to solve the transmission expansion planning problem. Planners utilize automatic expansion models to determine an optimum expansion system by minimizing the mathematical objective function subject to a number of constraints. The primary goal of TEP in power systems is to determine an optimal strategy to expand the existing transmission network to meet the demand of possible load growth and the proposed generators, while maintaining reliability and security performance of the power system [1]. Nowadays modern electric power systems consist of large-scale and highly complex interconnected transmission systems, thus TEP is now a significant power system optimization problem. The TEP problem is a large-scale, complex and nonlinear combinatorial problem of mixed integer nature where the number of candidate solutions to be evaluated increases exponentially with system size. The accurate solution of the TEP problem is essential in order to plan power systems in both an economic and efficient manner. Therefore, applied optimization methods should be sufficiently efficient when solving such problems. In recent years a number of computational techniques have been proposed to solve this efficiency issue. Such methods include algorithms inspired by observations of natural phenomena for solving complex combinatorial optimization problems. These algorithms have been successfully applied to a wide variety of electrical power system optimization problems like linear programming [1–3], dynamic programming [4], non-linear programming [5], benders decomposition [6] and mixed integer programming [7]. A review of various computational intelligence techniques for TEP has come in [8–10]. The heuristic methods are the current alternative of mathematical optimization models. The term “heuristic” is used to describe all those techniques that, instead of using a classical optimization approaches, go step-by-step generating, evaluating and selecting expansion options, with or without the user's help. However, they cannot guarantee to achieve global solution. The TEP has been solved using meta heuristic models, for example, harmony search algorithm (HSA) [11], simulated annealing [12,13], tabu search [14,15], genetic algorithm (GA) [16–22], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [23–26] and ant colony optimization (ACO) [27]. The TEP problem has been also solved using object-oriented models [28], game theory [29,30], expert systems [31–34], fuzzy set theory [35] and greedy randomized adaptive search procedure (GRASP) [36]. Based on the treatment of planning horizon, TEP can be traditionally classified into two categories, namely static (single-stage) and dynamic (multi-stage) planning. In static planning, only a single time period is considered as planning horizon. In contrast, dynamic planning considers the planning horizon by separating the period of study into multiple stages [10]. For static planning, the planner searches for an appropriate number of new circuits that should be added into each branch of the transmission system and in this case, the planner is not interested in scheduling when the new lines should be constructed and the total expansion investment is carried out at the beginning of the planning horizon [37]. Many research works regarding the static TEP are presented in [12,38–46] that are solved using a variety of the optimization techniques. In contrast various stages are considered in dynamic planning while an optimal expansion schedule or strategy is considered for the entire planning period. Thus, multi-stage TEP is a larger-scale and more complex problem as it deals with not only the optimal quantity, placement and type of transmission expansion investments but also the most appropriate times to carry out such investments. Therefore, the dynamic TEP unavoidably considers a great number of variables and constraints that consequently require huge computational effort to obtain an optimal solution, particularly for large-scale real-world transmission systems. Many research works regarding the dynamic TEP have been reported [3,5,13,37,46–50]. Restructuring in the power networks imports new objectives and requirements in TEP. Separation of generation and transmission sector causes an increase competition to TEP. In general the purpose of TEP is to provide a network development plan to meet economical power so that the plan maintain or improve the level of network reliability. The purpose of meeting economical power is to minimize investment costs of lines and to go beyond restrictions of transmission network in economic operation of power grid. In the past, economical operation in power grid meant minimizing production cost and in deregulated power grids it means to create a competitive market to exchange electric energy. If the transmission network is not developed adequately, competition which is the main characteristics of electricity markets is failed. The model of TEP that applied and modified to this paper has been presented in [11,51]. In this paper a mathematical model and a dynamic transmission expansion methodology is applied using an optimization framework. Investment cost, reliability (both adequacy and security), and congestion cost are considered in this optimization. To overcome the difficulties in solving the non-convex and mixed integer nature of the optimization problems, this paper offers a firefly algorithm. FA is a meta-heuristic algorithm developed by Dr. Xin-Shi Yang [52]. This algorithm is based on the natural behavior of fireflies which is based on the bioluminescence phenomenon. Fireflies produce flashes of lights by using this phenomenon. This light helps them to communicate with each other and attract prey or other fireflies. This peculiar swarm intelligence pattern observed in applied into an algorithm know as firefly algorithm. In this algorithm the main concept is one firefly is attracted towards other if the latter one emits higher light intensity.In [53], FA has been used in TEP but the models applied to this problem is incomplete, for example the model is static while the TEP nature problem is dynamic, adequacy and security constraints have not been included in it and also it has not been explained that how the alpha parameter has been selected. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.Section 2 presents the applied objective function in deregulated environment. Section 3 presents the proposed optimization technique and Section 4 conducts the numerical simulations and presents a comparison among FA and GA, PSO, SA, DE, and eventually, concluding remarks are discussed.Several targets have been introduced for the development of TEP. Some of these objectives have been used in classical methods and regarding their importance, they still exist in the new methods. Alongside these objectives, new objective functions have also been introduced which only are conceived in restructured networks. All of objective functions have not equal importance or do not apply in restructured networks. The model that applied and modified to dynamic model to this paper has been proposed in [51]. Due to high volume of investment required for lines and lack of financial resources in infrastructure sector, which is the problem of almost all countries and transmission companies, minimizing investment costs (IC) of lines have always been noticed as the most important objective in TEP. The construction cost can be formulated as:(1)IC=∑(i,j)∈ΩCijnijCongestion is a situation when the demand for transmission capacity exceeds the transmission network capabilities. Overload of the branches in deregulated power system is not a new issue but in this environment, in addition to technical problems, reduces competition in the electricity market. Congestion in transmission lines makes an imperfect market which means reduction of social welfare and imposing additional costs on the users of the network. According to [11,54] the performance of a market is measured by its social welfare. Social welfare is a combination of the cost of the energy and the benefit of the energy to society as measured by society's willingness to pay for it. If the demand for energy is assumed to be independent of price, that is, if demand has zero price elasticity, then the social welfare is simply the negative of the total amount of money paid for energy. It can be shown that a perfect market has maximum social welfare. Real markets always operate at lower levels of social welfare. When a generator is a price taker, it can be shown that maximizing its profit requires bidding its incremental costs. When a generator bids other than its incremental costs, in an effort to exploit imperfections in the market to increase profits, its behavior is called strategic bidding. If the generator can successfully increase its profits by strategic bidding or by any means other than lowering its costs, it is said to have market power. The obvious example of market power is a non-regulated monopoly with a zero elasticity demand, where the generator can ask whatever price it wants for electric energy. Market power results in market inefficiency. There are many possible causes of market power, among them congestion. Consider a simple example of a two zone system connected by an interface, shown in Fig. 1.Let each zone have a 100-MW constant load. Zone A has a 200 MW generator with an incremental cost of 10$/MWh. Zone B has a 200 MW generator with an incremental cost of 20$/MWh. Assume both generators bid their incremental costs. If there is no transfer limit between zones, all 200 MW of load will be bought from generator A at 10$/MWh, at a cost of 2000$/h, as shown in Fig. 1(a). If there is a 50MW transfer limit, then 150 MW will be bought from A at 10$/MWh and the remaining 50 MWh must be bought from generator B at 20$/MWh, a total cost of 2500$/h. Congestion has created a market inefficiency of 25% of the optimal costs, even without strategic behavior by the generators. Congestion has also created unlimited market power for generator B. B can increase its bid as much as it wants, because the loads must still buy 50 MW from it. Generator B's market power would be limited if there was an additional generator in zone B with a higher incremental cost, or if the loads had nonzero price elasticity and reduced their energy purchase as prices increased. In the real power system, cases of both limited and unlimited market power due to congestion can occur. Unlimited market power is probably not socially tolerable. The creation of market inefficiency due to congestion in an otherwise perfect market is not a bad thing, as the cost of market inefficiency can be traded off against the cost of improving the transmission system and thus serves as an economic signal for transmission reinforcement. Even the creation of limited market power can be viewed in this framework. However, unlimited market power, and market power arising from factors other than congestion or the number of generators in a congested zone, such as loopholes in market rules, exploitation of technical parameters, or conflict of interest (such as if generator B were permitted to schedule maintenance outages of the interface), does not provide useful economic signals. With regards to local marginal prices (LMPs) based market, the congestion cost (CC) can deterministically be calculated as follows [55]:(2)CC=∑(i,j)∈AllCorridorsfij(LMPj−LMPi)where LMPimeans local marginal price at bus i. The LMPs are obtained from the following optimization:(3)min∑i=1ngpGi(aipGi+bi)(4)s.t:sijγij(δi−δj)−PGi+PDi=0(5)−f¯ℓ≤γij(δi−δj)≤f¯ℓ(6)pGimin≤PGi≤pGimaxThe constraint (4) represents the DC power flow equations. The constraint (5) represents the line flow limits of the network. The constraint (6) represents generation limit. Power losses are ignored in this method. Linear programming methods like simplex can be used for solving this optimization problem.The Lagrangian is formulated as:(7)L(PGi,λ,η,φ,γ,ς)=∑i=1ng(pGi×(aipGi+bi))−λi(γij(δi−δj)−PGi+PDi)−ηi(γij(δi−δj)−f¯ℓ)−φi(−γij(δi−δj)−f¯ℓ)−σi(PGi−pGimax)−ςi(−PGi+pGimin)That, λi, ηi, φi, σiand ζiare vector of Lagrange multipliers of the associated constraints that are obtained from Karsh Kuhn Tucker (KKT) conditions [56–58].LMP of a bus is defined as the amount of the additional cost for providing 1 MW power in the same bus, hence it can be written:(8)∂L(PGi,λi,ηi,φi,γi,ςi)∂PDi|optimal point=λ∗for all BusesAccording to the above definition, LMP of bus i is equal to the shadow price of power flow equation of bus i. One of the major reasons of network expansion in practice is maintaining and enhancing network reliability. Single contingency security (N−1) is the most applied criteria for evaluating reliability of transmission network, which has also been accepted by NERC [59]. According to this criterion, power system, in addition to normal mode at the time losing components have to meet the user's needs without any overload, unauthorized voltage drop and load curtailment. So, the mathematical formulation of the reliability, providing static security, is as follows [11,51]:(9)(W0+W1)(10)W0=∑k∈Γrk,W1=∑mn∈Ω∑k∈ΓrkmnNote that the formulation presented in Eq. (9) has two advantages: first, the optimization problem will be always feasible due to the presence of the loss of load and second, defining the reliability criteria as an objective will allow the decision maker to run a cost-benefit analysis.The objective function that has been shown by Eq. (11) is applied to minimize the total discounted line investment cost and the total discounted congestion cost and maximizing reliability over the entire planning horizon.(11)min∑t=1TPL∑(i,j)∈ΩCij×nij(t)(1+D)(t−1)+∑t=1TPLCC(t)(1+D)(t−1)+pf×∑t=1TPL∑k∈Γrk(t)+∑t=1TPL∑mn∈Ω∑k∈Γrkmn(t)where the first term represents the total planning costs, the second term represents the congestion cost and the third term represents the cost of network reliability in the planning horizon.Transmission network expansion planning has been done in two stages. In first stage different options of transmission network expansion with simple model like DC power flow as reinforcement and expansion plans obtained. The reinforcement plans like adding lines to circuits and expansion plans like constructive a new line. In second stage the options that obtained from first stage evaluated in accuracy consideration like AC power flow in different levels of loads, short circuit and reliability analysis. Since at this paper and many journals, TEP has been done in first stage so the constraints of the above optimization problem are mainly those of DC optimal power flow in normal and contingency operating conditions as follows:(12)sijfij(t)+PGi(t)+rk(t)=PDi(t)for all Buses(13)fij(t)−γij(nij0(t)+nij(t))(δi(t)−δj(t))=0for all corridors(14)fij(t)≤(nij0(t)+nij(t))f¯ij(t)for all corridors(15)0≤PGi≤PGimaxfor all Buses(16)0≤rk(t)≤PDk(t)k∈Γ(17)0≤nij(t)≤n¯ij∀(i,j)∈ΩConstraint (12) represents the conservation of power in each node. This constraint models Kirchhoff's Current Law (KCL) in the equivalent DC network. Constraint (13) is an expression of the Ohm's Law for the equivalent DC network and so Kirchhoff's Voltage Law (KVL) is implicitly taken into account and these constraints are non-linear constraints. Constraint (14) represents the amount of upper and lower bounds of power flow of candidate line in corridor i–j in time period t. Constraint (15) represents the amount of upper and lower bounds of generated active powers by generators in time period t. Constraint (16) represents the amount of upper and lower bounds of load curtailment in time period t. Constraint (17) represents the amount of upper and lower bounds of number of new circuit added to the right-of-way i–j in time period t. The constraints of the modified network topology related to outage of every branch in Ψ must be added to the previous constraints. The constraints of the modified network topology related to the outage of line are as follows:(18)sijfijmn(t)+PGimn(t)+rkmn(t)=PDi(t)for all Buses(19)fijmn(t)−γij(nij0(t)+nij(t)−1)(δimn(t)−δjmn(t))=0for all corridors&ij=mn(20)fijmn(t)−γij(nij0(t)+nij(t))(δimn(t)−δjmn(t))=0for all corridors&ij≠mn(21)fijmn(t)≤(nij0(t)+nij(t)−1)f¯ij(t)for all corridors&ij=mn(22)fijmn(t)≤(nij0(t)+nij(t))f¯ij(t)for all corridors&ij≠mn(23)0≤PGimn(t)≤PGimaxfor all Buses(24)0≤rkmn(t)≤PDk(t)k∈ΓIn above formulation:(25)PDi(t)=(1+LF)t−1×d(0)PGimax(t)=(1+GF)t−1×PGimax(0)Above constraints are similar to constraints ((12)–(17)) with the difference that variables with subscript mn denote the modified branch susceptances and bus voltage angles after outage of one of the lines in right-of-way mn. These lines can be selected as credible contingencies using a contingency screening method. For calculating the amount of load shedding, the priority of load buses for load curtailment has been considered the same in the network. Load will be curtailed if the re-dispatching of generators cannot eliminate overloads in transmission system.The flashing light of fireflies is an amazing sight in the summer sky in the tropical and temperate regions. There are about two thousand firefly species, and most fireflies produce short and rhythmic flashes. The pattern of flashes is often unique for a particular species. The flashing light is produced by a process of bioluminescence, and the true functions of such signaling systems are still debating. However, two fundamental functions of such flashes are to attract mating partners (communication), and to attract potential prey. In addition, flashing may also serve as a protective warning mechanism. The rhythmic flash, the rate of flashing and the amount of time form part of the signal system that brings both sexes together. Females respond to a male's unique pattern of flashing in the same species, while in some species such as photuris, female fireflies can mimic the mating flashing pattern of other species so as to lure and eat the male fireflies who may mistake the flashes as a potential suitable mate. We know that the light intensity at a particular distance r from the light source obeys the inverse square law. That is to say, the light intensity I decrease as the distance r increases in terms of I∝1/r2. Furthermore, the air absorbs light which becomes weaker and weaker as the distance increases. These two combined factors make most fireflies visible only to a limited distance, usually several hundred meters at night, which is usually good enough for fireflies to communicate. The flashing light can be formulated in such a way that it is associated with the objective function to be optimized, which makes it possible to formulate new optimization algorithms. In the rest of this paper, we will first outline the basic formulation of the FA and then discuss the implementation bas well as its analysis in detail. Now we can idealize some of the flashing characteristics of fireflies so as to develop firefly-inspired algorithms. For simplicity in describing our new FA, we now use the following three idealized rules [60]:(1)All fireflies are unisex so that one firefly will be attracted to other fireflies regardless of their sex.Attractiveness is proportional to their brightness, thus for any two flashing fireflies, the less brighter one will move towards the brighter one. The attractiveness is proportional to the brightness and they both decrease as their distance increases. If there is no brighter one than a particular firefly, it will move randomly.The brightness of a firefly is affected or determined by the landscape of the objective function. For a maximization problem, the brightness can simply be proportional to the value of the objective function. Other forms of brightness can be defined in a similar way to the fitness function in GA. Based on these three rules, the basic steps of the FA can be summarized as the pseudo code shown in Fig. 2.In certain sense, there is some conceptual similarity between the FA and the bacterial foraging algorithm (BFA) [61]. In BFA, the attraction among bacteria is based partly on their fitness and partly on their distance, while in FA; the attractiveness is linked to their objective function and monotonic decay of the attractiveness with distance. However, the agents in FA have adjustable visibility and more versatile in attractiveness variations, which usually leads to higher mobility and thus the search space is explored more efficiently. In the FA, there are two important issues: the variation of light intensity and formulation of the attractiveness. For simplicity, we can always assume that the attractiveness of a firefly is determined by its brightness which in turn is associated with the encoded objective function. In the simplest case for maximum optimization problems, the brightness I of a firefly at a particular location x can be chosen as I(x)∝f(x).However, the attractiveness β is relative; it should be seen in the eyes of the beholder or judged by the other fireflies. Thus, it will vary with the distance rijbetween firefly i and firefly j. In addition, light intensity decreases with the distance from its source, and light is also absorbed in the media, so we should allow the attractiveness to vary with the degree of absorption. In the simplest form, the light intensity I(r) varies according to the inverse square law I(r)=Is/r2, where Isis the intensity at the source. For a given medium with a fixed light absorption coefficient γ, the light intensity I varies with the distance r. That is I=I0e−γr, where I0 is the original light intensity. In order to avoid the singularity at r=0 in the expression Is/r2, the combined effect of both the inverse square law and absorption can be approximated using the following Gaussian form as in (26):(26)I(r)=I0e−γr2The distance between any two fireflies i and j at xiand xj, respectively, is the Cartesian distance as in Eq. (27):(27)rij=xi−xj=∑k=1d(xi,k−xj,k)2where xi,kis the kth component of the spatial coordinate xiof ith firefly. In 2-D case, the distance as in Eq. (28):(28)rij=(xi−xj)2+(yi−yj)2The movement of a firefly i is attracted to another more attractive (brighter) firefly j is determined by following equation:(29)xi=xi+β0e−γrij2(xj−xi)+α(rand−12)where the second term is due to the attraction while the third term is randomization with α being the randomization parameter. The rand is a random number generator uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. For most cases in this implementation, β0=1. Furthermore, the randomization term can easily be extended to a normal distribution N(0,1) or other distributions. In addition, if the scales vary significantly in different dimensions such as −105 to 105 in one dimension while, say, −0.001 to 0.01 along the other, it is a good idea to replace α by αSkwhere the scaling parameters Sk(k=1, …, d) in the d dimensions should be determined by the actual scales of the problem of interest. The parameter γ now characterizes the variation of the attractiveness, and its value is crucially important in determining the speed of the convergence and how the FA behaves. In theory, γ∈(0, ∞], but in practice, γ=O(1) is determined by the characteristic length γ of the system to be optimized. Thus, in most applications, it typically varies from 0.01 to 100. As many optimization problems involve a number of constraints that the decision solutions need to satisfy, the aim of constrained optimization is to search for feasible solutions with better objective values. Generally, a constrained optimization problem is to find x so as to:(30)minf(x),x=(x1,…,xn)∈Rnwherex∈F⊆SThe objective function f is defined on the search space S⊆Rnand the set F⊆S defines the feasible region. The search space S is defined as an n-dimensional rectangle in Rn. The variable domains are limited by their lower and upper bounds:(31)li≤xi≤ui,1≤i≤nwhereas the feasible region F⊆S is defined by a set of m additional constraints (m≥0):(32)gj(x)≤0,forj=1,…,qhj(x)=0,forj=q+1,…,mFor an inequality constraint that satisfies gj(x)=0, we will say that is active at x. All equality constraints hj(regardless of the value of x used) are considered active at all points of F. Both the objective function and the constraints can be linear or nonlinear.We incorporated the three simple selection criteria based on feasibility into the firefly algorithm to guide the search to the feasible region.1.When comparing two feasible solutions, the one with the better objective function is chosen.When comparing a feasible and an infeasible solution, the feasible one is chosen.When comparing two infeasible solutions, the one with the lower sum of constraint violation is chosen.The sum of constraint violation for a solution x is given by:(33)CV(x)=∑j=1qmax(0,gj(x))+∑j=q+1mhj(x)Hence, the decision what firefly is more attractive is made according these feasibility rules. The FA does not start with the feasible initial population, since initialization with feasible solutions is hard and in some cases impossible to achieve randomly. During running process of FA, the feasibility rules direct the solutions to feasible region.In every iteration, a variation of the feasibility-based rule was applied to compare the solution associated with every individual firefly i with every other firefly j. The rule is given below.1.If both fireflies are at feasible positions and firefly j is at better position than firefly i then firefly i moves towards firefly j.If firefly i is at an infeasible position and firefly j is at a feasible position then i moves to firefly j.If positions of firefly i and firefly j are infeasible and number of constrains satisfied by firefly j are more than that of firefly i then firefly i moves to firefly j.Once the position of the firefly is updated using above rules 1–3, if the updated position of the firefly i presents improved solution over the solution associated with its previous iteration position, then firefly i accepts its current solution, else retains its previous iteration solution.In order to improve the FA search ability as well as reducing the local optima trapping possibilities, an adaptive modified firefly algorithm (AMFA) is presented [62]. There exist two main ideas in this modification. First, improving the population diversity by the aid of two mutations and three cross over operations. Second, encouraging the total firefly population to move toward the best promising local or global individual. Furthermore, in each iteration the total firefly population should be improved as explained in the following paragraph.AssumeXBestIterandXworstIteras the best and the worst individual of the firefly population in each iteration, respectively. For the ith firefly in the population, three fireflies Xq1, Xq2 and Xq3 are selected from the fireflies’ population randomly such that q1≠q2≠q3≠i. Two new individuals will be generated as:(34)XMute1=Xq1+Δ×(Xq2−Xq3)XMute2=XMute1+Δ×(XBestIter−XworstIter)where Δ is a random number laying in the range of [0, 1]. The following fireflies are generated by utilizing the XMute1 and XMute2. Now by the use of the XMute1 and XMute2 the following five fireflies are produced:(35)XBest,1=χBest,1,χBest,2,...,χBest,dχImprove1,j=χMute1,jκ1≤κ2χBest,jκ1>κ2(36)χImprove2,j=χMute1,jκ3≤κ2χjκ3>κ2(37)χImprove3,j=χMute1,jκ4≤κ3χjκ4>κ3(38)χImprove4,j=χMute1,jκ5≤κ4χMute2,jκ5>κ4(39)XImprove5=ψ×Xworst+ζ×(XBest−XWorst)where κ1, κ2, κ3, κ4, κ5, ψandζ are random values laying in the range of [0, 1]. The objective function is calculated for all of the above generated fireflies. The ith firefly will be replaced by the firefly with the smallest objective function. If the objective function value of the ith firefly is smaller than the best obtained firefly, then there will not be any replacement. The randomization parameter (α) is utilized in Eq. (29) in order to control the algorithm for a random search while the neighboring fireflies are not seen by the given firefly. In fact, α manages the random movement of each firefly chosen randomly in the range of [0, 1]. The large values of α result in the optimum solution search through the faraway search space, while a small α facilitate the local search. Thus, an appropriate value for the randomization parameter (α) leads to a satisfying balance between the global and the local search. To achieve this task, an adaptive control procedure is introduced in this paper to improve the total ability of the algorithm for both local and global search. Therefore, in this paper an adaptive control procedure is introduced to improve the ability of the algorithm for both the local and the global search. Moreover, this algorithm has been run several times and a different heuristic function for each iteration is obtained as follows:(40)αIter+1=12kmax1/kmaxαIterwhere Iter is the iteration number and kmax is the maximum number of iterations. This function is employed during the optimization process to provide a sufficient balance between the local and global search by changing the value of α.In this section, some simulation results of the proposed model are reported. The first case is the IEEE 24-Bus test system and the second one is the IEEE 118-Bus test system. The lower bounds of all generators are set to 0. It is assumed that Generators bid functions (incremental costs) will not change during the planning horizon.The TEP algorithm was applied to the IEEE 24-Bus test system shown in Fig. 3. This system has 24 Buses, 34 existing branches, 10 generation units (ng=10) connected at 10 Buses, and 15 loads. Network data for this system can be found in [63,64]. It was assumed that the system should be expanded for an operation horizon 10 years with load and generation factor 8% (LF=GF=%8) and discount rate of %15 (D=%15). It was also assumed that the candidate branches can be constructed in all 34 existing right-of-ways plus ten new right-of-ways which their data can be found in the Table 1. Also, Generators and load data for this system have been shown in Table 2. Parameters of new branches in the existing right-of-ways are the same as the parameters of the existing branches in their right-of-ways. In this case, for solving TEP problem, the number of integer variables, real variables, equality constraints and inequality constraints in each time is 34, 2670, 2030 and 2204 respectively.The IEEE 118-Bus test system has 118 Buses, 186 existing branches, 54 generators (ng=54), and 91 loads. The initial topology is shown in Fig. 4. All the system parameters data can be found in [65]. Notice that in the previous case study, every corridor in which a line exists is considered as a valid corridor for building another line. However in actual power systems, due to physical and regulatory limits it is often impractical to consider building a line in every corridor [1]. In this case study, seventeen lines have been selected as the candidate lines without loss of generality. Thus the number of decision variables is 17. The complete candidate lines set and the related information have been provided in Table 3. Table 4shows the data of generators and load for this case study and Table 5shows the data of existing lines in this case study. It has been assumed that the system should be expanded for a 10 year operation horizon with load and generation factor %8 (LF=GF=%8) and discount rate of %10 (D=%10). In this case, for solving TEP problem, the number of integer variables, real variables, equality constraints and inequality constraints in each time is 34, 83,794, 56,848 and 61,914 respectively.Here, the proposed algorithm is applied to the Iran 400-kV transmission grid. This system is comprised of two voltage levels [66]: 230-kV and 400-kV, in which the 400-kV is used for the long distance transmission lines. The under studied simplified network is shown in Fig. 5, which has 52 Buses and 101 lines. The state-owned TAVANIR Company is the owner and the planner of EHV grid. The network is operated by the Iran Grid Management Company (IGMC) which was established in 2003 as an independent system operator (ISO). IGMC established the open access system to ensure the non-discriminative accessibility to the national grid for all market participants [67]. In this figure, solid lines/circles represent the existing 400-kV lines/substations and dashed lines/circles stand for the new corridor/substation candidates. The interested readers are referred to [68] for more information associated to this system. Currently, the generation sector of Iranian power system is comprised of thermal, combined cycle, gas turbines, and hydro units. Natural gas with a regulated price is used by almost all generation companies as the main fuel [67]. It has been assumed that the system should be expanded for a 10 year operation horizon with load and generation factor %15 (LF=GF=%15) and discount rate of %30 (D=%30). In this case, for solving TEP problem, the number of integer variables, real variables, equality constraints and inequality constraints in each time is 26, 16,227, 10,662 and 12,176 respectively.The proposed model has been successfully applied to the test cases. In order to show the impact of important control parameter in finding the optimum solution of the problem, α parameter changes within its permissible range. For implementation of FA, first sensitivity analysis on the α parameter was done while the β and γ parameters set to value 1 because of the FA that applied in many researches, the β and γ parameters set to value of 1. The number of iterations for simulation is considered 10,000. To obtain optimal values for each parameter, the algorithm has been implemented 50 times and the best values of the objective function with its, mean and standard deviation has been presented in relevant tables. In this analysis, the IEEE 24-Bus test system without considering security, IEEE 24-Bus test system with considering security, IEEE 118-Bus test system without considering security, IEEE 118-Bus test system with considering security, Iranian 400-KV test system without considering security and Iranian 400-KV test system with considering security have been shown by number of (1)-(6) respectively. According to Table 6(a, b, c, d, e, f), the best value for α parameter for systems (1)–(6) is 50, 20, 10, 20, 20 and 20 respectively. In this analysis the penalty factor (pf) that applied in Eq. (11) has been set to 10,000.This problem was also implemented using GA, PSO, SA and DE. Fig. 6shows the codification of solutions that has been used in this study [46,47].Every numeric value of each gene in a chromosome corresponds to the number of new added lines. The number of the right-of-ways gives the length of the chromosomes. In this codification, each solution is represented by a t×l matrix corresponding to t planning stages and l right-of-ways (existing and new right-of-ways). The matrix values show the number of new lines added to the corresponding right-of-way. For example, Fig. 6 shows that two new circuits are added in right-of-way 1–2 in stage one, and one circuit is also added to this right-of-way in stage two [11,51]. Objective function is considered as the fitness function. Since each chromosome represents a network expansion plan, a higher fitness is equal to better design. In this paper the crossover operator is performed in such way that each child (child 1 and child 2) produced from parents as in Eq. (33):(41)child1=C.parent1+(1−C).parent2child2=C.parent2+(1−C).parent1where C is a random number in the range between zero and one..Operator is bracket function. Mutation operator is to be performed that if the corresponding scheme of a chromosome is overload, a mutation gene whose value is less than its maximum is randomly chosen and its gene value is increased, i.e., adding lines. Otherwise, a mutation gene whose value is more than zero is selected and its gene value is decreased, i.e., reducing lines. For the application of algorithms to transmission expansion planning problem a program in MATLAB language has been improved. The standard FA can be considered as a generation to PSO, DE and SA. From Eq. (29), one can see that when β0 is zero, the updating formula becomes essentially a version of parallel SA, and the annealing schedule controlled by α. On the other hand, if we set γ=0 in Eq. (29) and set β0=1 (or more generally, β0∈ Uniform(0,1), FA becomes a simplified version of DE without mutation, and the crossover rate is controlled by β0. Furthermore, if we set γ=0 and replace xjby the current global best solution g*, then Eq. (29) becomes a variant of PSO, or accelerated PSO, to be more specific. Therefore, the standard FA includes DE, PSO and SA as its special cases. As a result, FA can have all the advantage of these three algorithms. Consequently, it is no surprised that FA can perform very efficiently. This program has been operated on a computer with Intel Core Duo2, 2.53 CPU and 6 GB RAM. In this paper for calculating LMPs, MATPOWER toolbox [69] has been used. There was no need to code an optimal load flow block, that it was the advantage of using this toolbox. The best results of the FA and GA, PSO, SA and DE have been presented in Tables 7–9for IEEE 24-Bus system, IEEE 118-Bus system and Iran 400-KV transmission grid, respectively.Table 10shows the comparison of computational time between AMFA, FA, GA, PSO, SA and DE for case studies.In Fig. 7(a–f), the rate of change of the objective function versus number of iterations has been illustrated for systems (1)–(6), respectively. According to obtained results the proposed algorithm has a less investment cost rather than the GA, PSO, SA and DE. It is worth mentioning that the proposed method is a better algorithm regarding its convergence rate.Table 11compares different methods for solving this problem. Simulation results show that the proposed approach is accurate and efficient, and has the potential to be applied to large scale power system planning problems.For the planned system, a lower and flatter locational marginal price (LMP) profile is usually expected, and this is observed for most cases. However, notice that the objective of power system planning is to maximize the social welfare, not to minimize the LMP. Therefore the planned system does not necessarily lower the LMP at every Bus. The DC model based LMP profile of the initial network without additional lines, the planned network at the end of Year 10, are plotted and compared in Fig. 8(a–c) for systems (1), (3) and (5), respectively using Matpower 4.0, a MATLAB based power system simulation package. One can observe in Fig. 8, that the LMPs for the planned system at the end of year 10 are much flatter than the initial network.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
