@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A chaotic time series prediction model for speech signal encoding based on genetic programming

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We get a speech signal model on a reconstructed phase space by chaotic time series.We use GP algorithm and model standardization for speech signal preprocessing.We get a set of explicit expression models for model analysis and classification.A standard nonlinear model for the selected samples has been obtained.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chaotic time series prediction,Genetic programming,Nonlinear coding model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a novel solving method for speech signal chaotic time series prediction model was proposed. A phase space was reconstructed based on speech signal's chaotic characteristics and the genetic programming (GP) algorithm was introduced for solving the speech chaotic time series prediction models on the phase space with the embedding dimension m and time delay τ. And then, the speech signal's chaotic time series models were built. By standardized processing of these models and optimizing parameters, a speech signal's coding model of chaotic time series with certain generalization ability was obtained. At last, the experimental results showed that the proposed method can get the speech signal chaotic time series prediction models much more effectively, and had a better coding accuracy than linear predictive coding (LPC) algorithms and neural network model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Linear Prediction Coding (LPC) has been widely used in speech signal processing field. It is based on the correlation between the speech samples, using a linear model, with the past p sample values to predict the sample values present or future. Then, a large number of studies on non-linear characteristics of speech signal found that speech signal and the discrete speech signal sequence showed a very complicated nonlinear process and obvious chaotic characteristics [1–4]. Nonlinear science inspired the study of speech signal which can be analyzed by non-linear methods. The research of nonlinear models for speech signal coding became a hot spot of speech signal processing, and using chaos theory to research speech signal has made some achievements [4–6]. It is proved that the reconstructed speech signal helped to analyze its characteristics deeply and accurately [6]. Therefore, the introduction of chaotic time series analysis theory has very important theoretical and practical values for not only researching the chaos characteristics and the processing methods of speech signal, but also constructing nonlinear speech signal processing models.The neural network model is the most commonly used method for nonlinear speech signal processing, and has some achievements [7–9]. It has been applied to speech recognition [10], speech transmission [11], etc.Thyssen et al. [12] hold that the speech signal was the combination of linear and nonlinear function. Linear prediction method has been used for modeling the linear part. They proved that the residual signal has obvious nonlinear characteristics, and used Volterra and neural network methods to modeling the residual part which is nonlinear part of the signal. The combination of those linear models and nonlinear models has improved the accuracy of coding. Atthew K. Luka established a local ethnic languages recognition system through the neural network technology [13]. This system uses Mel-frequency Cepstral Coefficients of the speech signal that extract from Mel filter banks as the input of the multilayer neural network. They combined the conjugate gradient backward propagation algorithm with neural network to improving the convergence rate, which shows good recognition ability. Using chaos theory to analyze speech signal, Lee and Tong [14] and Aina et al. [15] applied the traditional local linear and radial neural network to the analysis of chaotic time sequence and achieved two kinds of nonlinear speech coding predictors. The result showed that the predictor established in the reconstructed phase space had significantly improved compared with the linear predictor.The neural network model has been successfully used in the speech signal coding and also provides a structured prediction model. In recent years, it has made some achievements in the nonlinear prediction of the speech signal sequence. But the structure of the neural network model is based on the optimization of the weights; it is not conducive to the speech signal's analysis and processing as it cannot provide the fixed structure for the models to describe the speech signal like LPC, and it needs to rebuild for different samples. So its practical application has been limited. To solve these problems, this paper introduces GP (Genetic Programming) as solving method for the speech signal prediction models. Compared to neural network method, GP can obtain the explicit model structure which can facilitate its analysis and application. As early as 1998, Conrads et al. [16] used GP in speech; they found that GP could find programs to discriminate certain spoken vowels and consonants. Xie and Zhang [17,18] did a series of research in rhythmic stress detection in spoken English using GP. Later, GP was proposed to construct nonlinear speech coding models [19].GP is a special optimization algorithm developing from GA (Genetic Algorithm) [20]. It uses hierarchical structure to describe programming problems. Issues in different fields are attributed to computer program that searches for solutions to meet fixed constraint conditions. GP algorithm can take advantage of limited samples to discover parallel estimate of the model structure and its parameters. In recent years, it has been widely used in nonlinear system modeling [21], data analysis [22] and other areas.Based on the following four reasons GP can be used to solve the problem of speech signal processing. Firstly, compared to LPC, GP highlights the non-linear characteristics. Secondly, compared to the Artificial Neural Network, it can obtain the explicit model structure, which is facilitated for its analysis, optimization and application. Thirdly, compared to other non-linear models, using GP models, we can achieve the overall modeling without considering the linear or non-linear part. Finally, compared to the Volterra model, it overcame the weakly nonlinear problem of the models, and it is more streamlined and more efficient.Considering chaotic characteristics of the speech signal, this paper provides an improved genetic programming algorithm to establish the non-linear model of the speech signal; through the model analysis, a model structure which has generalization ability can be chosen. By optimizing parameters, speech signal encoding could be achieved and it provides a new model for speech signal's nonlinear analysis.Compared to other algorithms, the GP algorithm can better gain a nonlinear model with minimum error, and it does not need any prior knowledge. The evolutionary process changes the structure of the model automatically through crossover and mutation, calculates the fitness of new individuals by the constructed fitness function and keeps the optimal one, to make the evolution direction toward the better target. As the model that is produced by GP algorithm has explicit structure, it can intuitively describe the problem to be solved to a large extent, so it is widely used in the problem of nonlinear modeling, especially in time series prediction model [14,23].Lee and Tong separated complete time series into linear and nonlinear parts according to the analysis of the time series’ composition, built the prediction model of linear part using ARIMI algorithm and a nonlinear model with the GP algorithm for the residual sequence [14]. The nonlinear model that describes the time series is obtained and it is effectively improved than linear method. It benefits the combination of these two kinds of models. Wagner et al. separated the time series environment into static environment and dynamic environment, and applied the GP algorithm to the dynamic environment (DyFor GP), because they believe that the traditional GP algorithm does not consider the dynamic factors in the environment when predicting time series [22]. In the evolutionary process, the method changes and adjusts the order dynamically depending on the different environments to make the model be more optimized. Estevez et al. [24] researched the identification of the speech signal and noise signal using GP, the function set contains some logical operators such as AND, OR, NOT, GT (greater-than). The composition of Terminator set is the constant R and the terminator defined in ITU-T G.729B VAD standard. Finally, the judgment method of speech signal was presented. Compared to standard G.729B, the judgment of speech signal and non-speech signal by using the method is more accurate.GP algorithm solves the nonlinear problems effectively, and its explicit model structure is more conducive for data analyzing and processing. This paper works on the speech signal coding model with GP for getting more valuable model structure.The speech signal is a chaotic system that produces orders and laws from disorder and complexity. The chaotic attractor is one of the chaotic characteristics indicating the regularity of a chaotic system. The inherent regularity of the chaotic system shows that it is predictable. This paper uses chaos system's internal regularity, combined with nonlinear prediction method (GP) to predict and build models of the speech signal.In this paper, the speech signal processing flow chart, as shown in Fig. 1, includes five contents:(1)Process the speech signal, enhance high-frequency part of the speech signal through the pre-emphasis, and then use the phase space reconstruction technique to reconstruct the discrete sequence.According to the characteristics of the nonlinear model of the speech signal to improve the GP algorithm, and solve the “best” non-linear model of each frame speech signal by using the improved GP algorithm.Summarize and analyze the prediction model in the different samples, and get a model structure with good generalization ability.On the basis of model structure, use DUPSO optimization algorithm to solve the prediction parameters of each frame of data.Evaluate the coding model in this article by experiments.On the basis of the speech signal's chaotic characteristics, this paper provides a method for solving speech signal's nonlinear model by improved GP algorithm. As a result of the limitations of samples used in the modeling process, the model structure may only apply to the limited features speech samples. Other speech samples may have different characteristics which need different models to describe their structure, this study tries to make the model for the sample has adaptive capacity (generalization ability). But more samples still need a different classification for models. Therefore, it is a problem which needs further study to build classified model for speech sample characteristics, and needs more scientists to participate in. With the development of research, better description for the nonlinear model of speech signal will be found and applied.As using the traditional linear prediction model for speech coding, the model structure is fixed. The encoding and decoding of speech signal can only transmit different parameters which will be decoded at the receiver.Wu and Yang [19] make improvements in two ways on the GP algorithm. First, in the initialization of the population, a variety of groups are used, in order to increase the diversity of solutions and improve the global search capability. Second, the hill-climbing algorithm is introduced for further optimizing model parameters which are based on structural optimization, so the GP algorithm gets more objective evaluation of the model structure in the evolutionary process.In this paper, after the speech signal pre-processing and reconstruction phase space, we use that improved GP algorithm to modeling each frame data, and then analyze the structure of the model, select one or a group of standardized models with better generalization ability. Finally, optimization algorithm is used to optimize the parameters of the selected model in each frame of speech data. Then the coding of the speech signal is finished.The sound produced by vocal fold vibration is called speech, otherwise it is called speechless. Speech includes all vowels and some consonants, and part of the consonants included in speechless. In this paper, we only consider speech in the signal while establish the model of the speech signal by the GP algorithm.For the average power spectrum of the speech signal is influenced by the glottal excitation and Oronasal radiation, high frequency more than about 800Hz drop with 6dB/octave, so it needs the pre-emphasis in the pretreatment. The purpose of pre-emphasis is to enhance the high frequency part and make the spectrum of the signal more flat, so that it is easier spectrum analysis. In this paper, we make Pre-emphasis after the A/D conversion. Realize by the first-order digital filter which has the improved frequency characteristic with 6dB/octave, as Eq. (1) shows:(1)H(z)=1−μz−1The de-emphasis works in the decode stage of the speech signal. A frequency characteristic of 6dB/octave decreased is used to restore the original characteristics.The phase space is a space used to describe all the possible states of a system; each point represents the entire physical state, including all the details of the system (position and momentum coordinates of each particle of the system). For speech signal, firstly, recover its phase space using phase space reconstruction theory, and then use the improved GP algorithm to construct non-linear model of speech signals. In this paper we use the delay method to reconstruct the phase space:(2)Xk=[xk,xk+τ,…,xk+(m−1)τ]Txkis the discrete variable of the system, τ is time delay, m is the embedding dimension. According to the Takens embedding theorem, as long as the embedding dimension m meets m>2n, n is the fractal dimension of system attractor.Traditional methods of calculating the embedding dimension mainly include false nearest neighbor method (FNN) [25], Cao method [26], singular value decomposition (SVD) [27], etc. And the methods calculating the time delay mainly include C-C method [28], the auto correlation function method [26], the average displacement (AD) [29], mutual information method [30], etc. In this paper, Cao method and mutual information method are used to calculate embedding dimension and time delay.λ is Lyapunov exponent which is the effective feature for describing the nonlinear dynamic characteristics. When λ≤0, the trajectory of phase space contracts, system is not sensitive to initial conditions, and there is no chaos. When λ>0, the trajectory of phase space is separated, long time dynamic behavior is sensitive to initial conditions, and this is the chaotic state. This paper uses the small-data method to calculate Lyapunov exponent [29]. Table 1shows the four samples’ embedding dimension, the time delay and the value of Lyapunov exponent.Fig. 2(a) is the original speech time series waveform graph of [ɔ:] and Fig. 2(b) is its corresponding two-dimensional phase space graph (we only made 300 samples in its trajectory).Assume x(t), t=1, 2, …, N is the discrete-time sequence of the speech signal, the form of state transition of the m-dimensional phase space is:(3)Y(t+1)=f(Y(t))where Y(t) is the point in phase space, τ is time delay and(4)Y(t)=(x(t),…,x(t+(m−1)τ))Expand Eq. (4)(5)(x(t+1),...,x(t+1+(m−1)τ))=f(x(t),...,x(t+(m−1)τ))Using the improved GP algorithm for solving nonlinear model of the speech signal is the process of looking for mapping function f of Eq. (3). The process uses the previous one or several vectors that were reconstructed as input to predict the latter vectors. In forecasting process, through continuous evolution, crossover and mutation, we make the final mapping function f more effectively in predicting the reconstructed vectors.In the reconstructed phase space, the former m−1 components of vector number n+τ are the latter m−1 components of vector number n (τ is the time delay, m is the embedding dimension). For example, the time series is {1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10}, assuming the embedding dimension is 4, the time delay is 2,then its reconstructed phase space's vectors are shown in Table 2. In Table 2, the former three components of vector X3are the latter three components of vector X1, the first three component of vector X4are the former three components of vector X2. In this paper, the initial vectors of the system are the τ vectors of the previous, and each components of the former vector as input, GP algorithm randomly generated individuals as the prediction model to predict the last component of vector τ+1, and then used the second vector as input to predict the last component of vector τ+2, and so on. Until reach the required prediction steps. Finally, according to the fitness of each prediction model, the best one is selected as the final prediction model.Transform Eq. (5), get the function y(6)x(t+mτ)=y(x(t),x(t+τ),…,x(t+(m−1)τ))After pre-processing the speech signal, the nonlinear prediction model for each frame of data is built based on the improved GP algorithm. For each frame of data, GP algorithm is able to obtain a model with the optimal prediction accuracy. By comprehensive analysis of these models considering their structural features, the more concise structure and similar models are selected for normalization. Eqs. (7)–(9) are the best models for the selected samples (aiis coefficient, xiis input variables).(7)y=sin(a1x8)+sin(a2x9)+a3x0+a4x1+a5x3+a6x6+a7x3sin(a8x1)(8)y=sin(a1x1)+sin(a2x3)+sin(a3x5)+sin(a4x8)+a5x2+a6x7+a7x8+a8x9(9)y=sin(a1x3)+sin(a2x5)+sin(a3x7)+sin(a4x7+a5x1)+a6x4+a7x8+a8x9Observed above three formulas, the basic form of the prediction model is not only composed of sin(aixi) and aixi, but also includes heterogeneous structures such as the formula (7) and formula (10): ajxjsin(aixi) and sin(aixi+ajxj). In this paper, the embedding dimension is m, the complex structures of the prediction model are approximately equivalent to the reference model structure as follows by replacing with sin(aixi) and aixi:(10)y=∑i=1m(sin(aixi)+am+ixi)After testing the sample data and optimizing the model coefficients, the results show that compared with Eqs. (7)–(9), Eq. (10) has similar or even better description ability, by selecting the optimal model coefficients ai, the better speech signal's nonlinear encoding model could be obtained.In this paper, as the model structure has been fixed, the PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization) algorithm can be used to optimize the parameters for different speech samples. The PSO algorithm is derived from the simulation of the preying behavior of birds, and potential solutions in the D-dimensional space can be described as massless particles with no volume, and “flight” in the solution space has a certain speed. During the iterative process, each particle remembers the optimal position found by itself, the particle swarm or the limited neighbors. Then track these two extreme by the position to update the formula by searching space in order to obtain a better solution.In the iterative process of the traditional PSO algorithm, the particles gather together for the rapid flow of information in particles, resulting in decreased diversity of the population and got into a local optimal solution. While the population evolute to equilibrium, the evolutionary process will be stagnant. Xie et al. proposed DPSO (Dissipative Particle Swarm Optimization), which is used for exclusion process, repositioned the particle position and velocity information in accordance with a certain probability. It improved the diversity of particles, and has good results in the inhibition of precocious particle group [30]. For the extreme value distribution of this model is non-uniform, in this paper we use UPSO (Uniform Particle Swarm Optimization) to optimize the coefficients of the model [31]. By defining the searching center of the particle, and calculating the uniformity value in the process of local optimum and global optimum, the UPSO gets the optimization process of uniform search particle swarm algorithm, in Eq. (11), r is a random number between 0 and 1, c is the learning coefficient, piis the optimal position that is found by the memory of particle i, pgis the optimal position that is found by the limited neighbors of particle i.(11)vi(t+1)=w*vi(t)+c*[r*pi(t)+(1−r)*pg(t)−xi(t)]xi(t+1)=xi(t)+vi(t+1)Formula (13) is used to update the speed of particles and location information. Space dimension D is equal to the number of parameters which need to be optimized in the model structure, and the location xi(t). In this paper, Eq. (9) is used to update the speed of particles and location information. We use DUPSO algorithm to globally optimize the prediction parameters. Space dimension D is equal to the number of parameters which need to be optimized in the model structure. Meanwhile, the location fitness of improved GP algorithm is equal to the minimum mean square error.Use DUPSO to optimize the model, coding all the parameters of the model, and constitute a D-dimensional space vector. As in formula (10), the number of input variables is m, so we need to optimize parameters of 2m, to get D dimension space. It is clearly that D=2m. The particle of DUPSO is described as a D dimension vector and aiis described as the position information as Fig. 3.Suppose there are N reference samples. There are several steps to evaluate the fitnessvof the population. Firstly, put the current position information of the particles into the formula (12) as the model coefficients, to get predicted valuexˆ, where y is determined by formula (10).(12)xˆi=xii<Dxˆi=y(xˆi)i≥N(13)v=∑i=0i<N(xi−xˆi)2Then, calculate the predicted value by formula (12), according to formula (13), the fitness v of the particle at the present location can be obtained.After searching, select the particle which had the minimum fitness value as the local optimization value. Particles continually update their location information according to formula (13), thus the algorithm search in the global extent. At last, the optimal solutions are the optimal parameters of the model.The determination of model parameters is one of the most important conditions for the evaluation of model. The algorithm used in this paper is only used for model validation. The solution for specific applications needs further study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
