@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new Bollinger Band based energy efficient routing for clustered wireless sensor network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Used “Grid Based Method” to create clusters.Derived cluster head selection method based on Bollinger Bands (BB) that is a technical trading tool.Simulation results shows significant improvement in the network life time that is measured using First Node Dies (FND), Half of the Nodes Alive (HNA) and Last Node Dies (LND).Proposed algorithm is compared with seven different algorithms using three different node deployment pattern and two different positions of Sink.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor network,Cluster head election,Bollinger Bands,Energy efficient routing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Designing of scalable routing protocol with prolonged network lifetime for a wireless sensor network (WSN) is a challenging task. WSN consists of large number of power, communication and computational constrained inexpensive nodes. It is difficult to replace or recharge battery of a WSN node when operated in a hostile environment. Cluster based routing is one of the techniques to provide prolonged network lifetime along with scalability. This paper proposes a technique for cluster formation derived from “Grid based method”. We have also proposed a new decentralized cluster head (CH) election method based on Bollinger Bands. Bollinger Bands are based on Upper Bollinger Band and Lower Bollinger Band, both of these bands are extremely reactive to any change in the inputs provided to them. We have used this property of Bollinger Bands to elect CH. Simulation result shows significant improvement in the network lifetime in comparison with other decentralized and ant based algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The technological improvement in wireless communication techniques and sensing devices made it possible to provide low cost multi-functional wireless sensor nodes. A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) consists of a large number of nodes having sensing ability. These nodes communicate with each other using wireless medium. The objective of WSN is to monitor one or more phenomenon in a particular area called “Field of Interest” or “Region of Interest” (ROI) [1,2]. Generally, this ROI is unattainable by humans once WSN nodes are deployed [3]. These nodes collect information about interested phenomenon from the ROI and send it to the remote Base Station (BS). Since, sensor nodes are densely deployed, BS gets highly redundant data with high sensing resolution. WSN is used for applications like forest fire detection, habitat monitoring, structural health monitoring, health care, etc. as shown in [4–10].Energy is the most scare resource for WSN nodes. Hence, to enhance the lifetime of these nodes, long distance transmissions should be avoided if possible [3,11,12]. Cluster based routing techniques is one of the possible solutions to enhance network lifetime by reducing long distance transmissions [13]. It also provides scalability [14]. In the cluster based routing, nodes are divided into small groups called clusters. One of the nodes within a cluster works as cluster head (CH). CHs collect data from other nodes within their cluster called member nodes. Highly co-related data received by CHs from the member nodes as clusters are spread over a small geographical region. CH fuses these data to reduce the number of transmissions and send it to BS directly or through other CHs using multi-hop communication. In a cluster based routing techniques, member nodes within the cluster are required to transmit over a short distance; while CHs are required to transmit over a longer distance compared to member nodes. Also, transceiver of CHs remain in active (transmit or receive) state for a longer duration as compared with member nodes. Both of these results into the faster energy depletion for CH nodes. Hence, role of the CH should be on a rotational basis to achieve uniform energy depletion and load balancing.In this paper, we have proposed a new cluster based routing scheme based on Bollinger Bands. We have also made use of “grid method” for our proposed routing scheme to route the packet without specifying destination node's address. “Grid method” also helps to improve coverage [15]. The major objective of our proposed approach is to enhance the network lifetime. We have also compared our proposed approach with existing cluster based routing algorithms with extensive simulations.We can summarize our contributions briefly as under:•We have shown how “grid method” can be used for cluster formation for a given ROI.We have proposed a new approach to elect cluster head once the clusters are formed. This approach is based on Bollinger Bands. It is a technical trading tool developed by John Bollinger in 1980 [16].We have also shown that how the selection of the “next hop” should be done in a multi-hop communication with the help of proposed grid based method.We have proved our proposed approach by extensive simulations using realistic radio parameters to get simulation results closest to the test bed. We have also compared our results with other seven existing protocols.The remaining paper is broadly organized as follows: Existing clustered based routing algorithms are presented in Section 2; Grid based cluster formation technique is described in Section 3; Introduction to Bollinger Bands are given in Section 4; Cluster head election using Bollinger Bands is discussed in Section 5; Simulation strategy and results are presented in Section 6; Concluding remarks are given in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
