@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
User-system cooperative evolutionary computation for both quantitative and qualitative objective optimization in image processing filter design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A cooperative optimization method between a user and system (CEUS).Application to image filter design (IFDCEUS).Based on a combination of user evaluation prediction and integration of IEC and non-IEC.CEUS with a non-naïve user enhances initial global search.IFDCEUS can design image filters on the basis of users’ preferences and heuristics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interactive evolutionary computation,Genetic network programming,Genetic algorithm,Image filter design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study proposes a cooperative evolutionary optimization method between a user and system (CEUS) for problems involving quantitative and qualitative optimization criteria. In a general interactive evolutionary computation (IEC) model, both the system and user have their own role in the evolution, such as individual reproduction or evaluation. In contrast, the proposed CEUS allows the user to dynamically change the allocation of search roles between the system and user, resulting in simultaneous optimization of qualitative and quantitative objective functions without increasing user fatigue. This is achieved by a combination of user evaluation prediction and the integration of interactive and non-interactive EC. For instance, the system performs a global search at the beginning, the user then intensifies the search area, and finally the system conducts a local search in the intensified search area. This study applies CEUS to an image processing filter design problem that involves both quantitative (filter output accuracy) and qualitative (filter behavior) criteria. Experiments have shown that the proposed CEUS can design image filters in accordance with user preferences, and CEUS interacting with a non-naive user enhanced the initial global search so that it converged and found a reasonable solution more than four times faster than a non-interactive search.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Designing a good fitness function is crucial for finding good solutions to real-world problems with evolutionary computation (EC) algorithms. A function based on the ideal model may not be sufficient to solve such real-world problems, and ambiguous complemental subfunctions may be necessary to obtain practical quasi-optimal solutions. Such additional criteria are not always apparent in advance, and it is intractable to redesign the fitness function during the search.Interactive EC (IEC) provides a way to solve problems that require implicit human preferences and emotions to evaluate solutions [29]. In IEC, solutions are evaluated by a human, and explicit fitness functions are not used in general IEC models. Various IEC applications have been proposed, such as computer graphics [8,10,30] and musical composition [2,5,31].Most of real-world problems essentially require optimization based on both explicit and implicit criteria. Although some studies on IEC have been conducted to estimate user preferences and reduce user fatigue in evaluating solutions [18,20,1], only a few attempts have been made so far at optimization based on both explicit and implicit criteria.In addition, for EC-based problem-solving systems, there is a strong demand for allowing users to control the search more flexibly and effectively incorporate human heuristics into the search. For instance, a user may want to let the system conduct a global search at the beginning, manually select a few promising solutions during the search, and then let the system conduct a local search of the area near the selected solutions. Alternatively, a user may want to manually construct a solution at the beginning of the search and then let the system search for better modified solutions. Originally, EC allows the user to modify the search result manually and then reuse the modified result as an initial population. Such operations are conducted implicitly and naturally outside EC systems. Most EC applications allow users to choose a solution from those solutions obtained by the optimization only after the search. This study considers such temporal user operations in EC and IEC as dynamic search role changes. Usually, a system and its user have fixed roles, such as in general IEC models, the system reproduces solutions and the user evaluates them in every generation. However, a combination of temporal, dynamic search role changes, and learning based on user operations should allow non-interactive EC (Non-IEC) to incorporate user preferences and implicit heuristics into the search and IEC to reduce the user's solution estimation workload.This study proposes a cooperative EC method between a user and system (CEUS11CEUS is an acronym for Cooperative Evolution between a User and System.) for problems involving explicit and implicit optimization criteria. The proposed CEUS allows the user to dynamically change the allocation of search roles between the system and user, resulting in simultaneous optimization of qualitative and quantitative objective functions without increasing user fatigue. For instance, CEUS allows the user to evaluate solutions or perform a genetic operation at any time. It also allows the user to carefully redesign solutions or evaluate them in every generation.These advantages of CEUS are achieved by a combination of user evaluations predictions and integration of IEC and Non-IEC. CEUS estimates user preferences with Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) [21,23]. Although some methods have already been proposed for using predictions to alleviate user fatigue, these methods require a certain amount of training data and cannot handle changes in user preferences and intuitive conditions. CBR allows predicting user preferences only from a few user operations that are acquired as cases, and it manages changes in user preferences by forgetting old cases when conflicts between cases would occur.This study focuses on image filter generation, where the problem is to approximate an unknown image filter from a combination of known primitive filters. In previous studies [3,16,24], an image filter was automatically designed without user interactions. However, for professional users, automatic design is not always useful because it requires significant processing time and does not accept user operations or requests during the search. In addition, automatically designed filters may not be amenable to user changes in their structure or parameters; revising just a small part of such a filter can damage its function or performance. Therefore, user operations should be accepted during rather than after the search. However, general IEC requires the user to evaluate solutions in every generation. Since many generations are necessary to find a good solution in image filter design, using IEC for image filter design is not realistic.This study proposes an image filter design method IFDCEUS that uses both explicit and implicit criteria corresponding to filter quality and behavior, respectively, and is based on CEUS. IFDCEUS allows users to switch search roles between the system and user, which incorporates user preferences and implicit knowledge into the search while avoiding an increase in user fatigue. For instance, users familiar with image processing can directly edit the solution structure, while other users can choose appropriate solutions by examining the output images.Our experiments show that IFDCEUS can respond to various user demands for cooperative search. In particular, IFDCEUS allows the user familiar with computer graphics to design a filter of reasonable quality on the basis of the user's preferences or heuristics more than four times faster than Non-IEC.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a survey of IEC and the image filter design problem. An image filter design method based on user-system cooperative evolution is proposed in Section 3. Section 4 provides experimental results and discussions. Finally, Section 5 presents our conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study proposes CEUS, a method for user-system cooperation in EC, and its application system IFDCEUS for image-processing filter design. CEUS simultaneously optimizes both qualitative and quantitative objective functions by combining user evaluation prediction and integrated IEC and Non-IEC. IFDCEUS  allows users to switch the search roles between the system and user; therefore, it incorporates user preference and implicit knowledge into the search while avoiding an increase in user fatigue.Experiments in image filter design problems have shown that IFDCEUS allows users to design image filters on the basis of their preferences and implicit heuristics. In addition, IFDCEUS  enabled a non-naive user to find a reasonable solution 4.7 to 15 times faster than a Non-IEC search. This indicates that CEUS performed global search well at the initial stage of the search because of the advantage of CBR and search role changes. On the other hand, the effect of CEUS in long-term searches should be enhanced even in situations with a strong trade-off relationship between qualitative and quantitative criteria.In the future, we plan to utilize multi-objective optimization in order to produce a set of solutions distributed on the Pareto-front between qualitative and quantitative objective functions instead of solutions optimized on the basis of a weighted sum of the functions. There is some possibility that searching for Pareto solutions helps retaining various filter behavior even in problems with a strong trade-off relationship between qualitative and quantitative criteria. From the perspective of image processing, utilizing more practical filters such as DFT and the keypoint detector, enhancing internal parameter optimization, and developing a visualization technique for graph-structured filter behavior are important to develop a practical image filter design system.