@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
E-WOM from e-commerce websites and social media: Which will consumers adopt?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We discussed how consumers choose eWOM from E-commerce websites and social media.EC-eWOM usefulness and credibility negatively influence the adoption of SM-eWOM.EC-eWOM adoption negatively impacts SM-eWOM adoption.EC-eWOM adoption mediates the relationship between usefulness and SM-eWOM.EC-eWOM adoption mediates the relationship between credibility and SM-eWOM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adoption,Credibility,E-commerce,Electronic word of mouth,Social media,Social commerce,Word of mouth,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The influence of user generated content on e-commerce websites and social media has been addressed in both practical and theoretical fields. Since most previous studies focus on either electronic word of mouth (eWOM) from e-commerce websites (EC-eWOM) or social media (SM-eWOM), little is known about the adoption process when consumers are presented EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM simultaneously. We focus on this problem by considering their adoption as an interactive process. It clarifies the mechanism of consumer’s adoption for those from the perspective of cognitive cost theory. A conceptual model is proposed about the relationship between the adoptions of the two types of eWOM. The empirical analysis shows that EC-eWOM’s usefulness and credibility positively influence the adoption of EC-eWOM, but negatively influence that of SM-eWOM. EC-eWOM adoption negatively impacts SM-eWOM adoption, and mediates the relationship between usefulness, credibility and SM-eWOM adoption. The moderating effects of consumers’ cognitive level and degree of involvement are also discussed. This paper further explains the adoption of the two types of eWOM based on the cognitive cost theory and enriches the theoretical research about eWOM in the context of social commerce. Implications for practice, as well as suggestions for future research, are also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past decade, Internet technology has considerably altered people’s lifestyle. In terms of online shopping, e-commerce has experienced rapid development, and online shopping has become a popular method for purchasing goods. In 2013, Amazon’s sales reached US$74.4 billion, while Taobao.com, the biggest C2C website in China, exceeded US$179.2 billion. In terms of sharing content online, social media use has increased in recent years and become one of the most important platforms of communication. For example, the average number of active users per month on Twitter and Facebook has reached 0.27 and 1.28 billion, respectively. In China, Weixin, the most popular social media platform, has attracted around 0.5 billion users since its launch in 2011.With the emergence of Web 2.0, user generated content (UGC) on networks are increasing. As an important form of electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), online reviews provided by e-commerce websites (referred to as EC-eWOM hereafter) have played an important role in helping consumers make decisions (Cheung and Thadani, 2012; Davis and Khazanchi, 2008; Duan et al., 2008). According to a survey, 91% of participants said they use online reviews, blogs and other forms of UGC before purchasing a new product or service, and 46% of participants indicated that these comments influenced their decision (Cheung and Thadani, 2012). Online reviews can reduce the risks perceived by consumers (Cheung et al., 2009b; Park and Kim, 2009) and improve their degree of satisfaction (Liang et al., 2007), as well as their efficiency in making decisions (Cheung et al., 2009a). It has been proved that the volume of online reviews is significantly related to sales. The volumes of both positive and negative reviews impact the consumer’s decisions (Chatterjee, 2001; Cheung et al., 2009a; Kamins and Assael, 1987; Berger et al., 2010), while negative reviews have a greater impact than positive reviews (Park and Lee, 2009a,b; Herr et al., 1991).Meanwhile, eWOM in social media (referred to as SM-eWOM hereafter) has taken on a greater role in promoting online shopping nowadays, especially with the emergence of social commerce. These days, shoppers are turning to social media to share their thoughts about the quality of goods or services they purchased, or about their shopping experience. This form of SM-eWOM includes consumer’s posts on Twitter, Facebook, Weibo and so on, as well as comments on others’ posts. SM-eWOM impacts consumers from the aspects of impression-management, emotion regulation, information acquisition, social bonding, and persuasion (Berger, 2014). According to a report from the China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC) in 2012, 43.1% of users experience consumption impulses when they receive recommendations from friends on social media, 38.3% of users will refer to SM-eWOM before making shopping decisions, and 37.2% of users will like to share their comments with friends on social media. Social media has been used to figure out user preferences, and has attracted attention from enterprises as a marketing tool.In the research of Cheung and Thadani (2012), information adoption is defined as a process in which people purposefully engage in using information. In this paper, eWOM adoption means that consumers agree with the content of eWOM and intend to make purchases based on it.Currently, the quality of EC-eWOM varies greatly. When consumers visit e-commerce websites, they usually know little about the authors of the EC-eWOM (Cheung and Thadani, 2012). So not all EC-eWOM have an equal impact on consumers. Consumers need to decide whether or not to adopt EC-eWOM based on their own judgment. When consumers cannot make shopping decisions based on EC-eWOM, they need to refer to alternative types of information, such as SM-eWOM. Despite SM-eWOM currently being less efficient than EC-eWOM, Internet companies have started noticing its increasing impact and worked towards improving its usability. For example, Sogou (www.sogou.com provides a function to search information on social media ‘weixin.qq.com’. Sogou also provides open API for programmers to develop more applications to fully utilize social media content. Another example is from Xiaomi. (www.mi.com). Xiaomi, one of the leading tech firms in China, manufactures the popular Redmi and Mi smartphones. The company attracts many young users and they share content about Xiaomi’s products on social media. In return, Xiaomi provides links to this content for consumers to easily access more information about its products (e.g., www.linkedin.com/company/xiaomi-technology). This makes both sharing and browsing comments about Xiaomi’s products convenient.Specifically, this research focuses on the following scenario. People browse for goods on e-commerce website, and consumer’s comments about the goods are available directly on the site, including links to social media, such as Twitter. At first, consumers use EC-eWOM. If they can’t make shopping decisions based on EC-eWOM, they turn to SM-eWOM. In reality, this sequence could be reversed, meaning consumers use SM-eWOM first, and then EC-eWOM. However, this scenario is not the focus of this paper and could be studied in another research.Regarding EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM, there’s lots of research demonstrating the individual impact each has on consumer decisions. However, little is known about the consumers’ decisions when they are simultaneously facing both types of eWOM. To our knowledge, this is one of the first studies focusing on how consumers choose between EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM. In addition, previous studies have revealed that the cognitive level and involvement of consumers moderates the impact of eWOM (Cheung et al., 2009b; Park and Kim, 2009; Gupta and Harris, 2010). This research will also verify the moderating effects of these factors on the adoption of the two kinds of eWOM.This research addresses the following questions: (1) which kind of eWOM will be chosen by consumers when they are facing EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM simultaneously? And (2) how does the cognitive level and involvement of consumers moderate the adoption process for the types of eWOM?Overall, this research clarifies the mechanism of consumer’s adoption of EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM from the perspective of cognitive cost theory. The contributions include the following three aspects: Firstly, it introduces a research model that analyzes the impacts of multiple channels of eWOM on consumers’ decisions. Attitudes towards EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM are not separated but interact with each other. Second, the findings show that the EC-eWOM adoption is not the end of consumers’ information gathering, but instead, a mediating variable that may affect SM-eWOM adoption. Third, the results demonstrate the influence of cognitive cost on consumers’ utilization of online information from different channels. The research also provides practical implications regarding the management of eWOM on different types of online platforms in the age of social commerce.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a review about the related literatures. Section 3 proposes the research model and hypotheses. Empirical analysis is presented in Section 4. Conclusions and research limitations are outlined in Section 5.Word of mouth (WOM) has been acknowledged for many years as a major influence on what people know, feel and do (Buttle, 1998). It has been described as an informal communication directed at other consumers about the ownership, usage, or characteristics of particular goods and services or their sellers (Berger, 2014). EWOM is comments about a product or service provided by customers via networks (Hennig-Thurau et al., 2003). It has a direct impact on consumers’ trust and purchasing behavior (Dellarocas et al., 2007; Duan et al., 2008). It can overcome the limitations of traditional WOM, so therefore has been widely analyzed in the field of e-commerce, information systems and marketing.With the development of Web 2.0, social media has become more and more popular. According to a report by CNNIC, as of June 2014, there were 275-million microbloggers in China. The contents on social media have become an important information source to help consumers make decisions. Consumers increasingly use comments posted on Facebook, Twitter, etc., to valuate products and services prior to making a purchase (Yan et al., 2014a). Carleen (2009) pointed out that many patients use social media to discuss medical services and their doctors in order to optimize treatments. Social media content can also influence destination attractiveness in consumers’ early travel decision-making stage (Shu and Scott, 2014). The companies can use social media as an additional customer service and communication tool to gain insight into consumers’ needs, wants, concerns and behaviors in order to serve them better (He et al., 2013).The elaboration likelihood model (ELM) is an important information processing theory (Park and Lee, 2009a,b; Cheung et al., 2008; Chu and Kamal, 2008; Gupta and Harris, 2010; Lee et al., 2008; Petty and Cacioppo, 1986), which explains how individuals are influenced by the received messages in persuasive communication (Shih et al., 2013). The model defines two routes for processing: the central route and the peripheral route. The central route is used when the message receiver is able to understand the message without being distracted by any other superficial information. The central route emphasizes high relevance of the message to the individual. The greater the relevance and the more interest that the individual shows in the subject of the message, the higher the chances that they will think or elaborate on the message (Morris et al., 2005). The peripheral route occurs when the message receiver is unable or unwilling to engage in much thought about the message. The message receiver decides whether to agree with the message based on other cues besides the strength of the arguments or ideas in the message.Previous researchers have empirically confirmed the validity of ELM in eWOM context. Argument quality (Cheung et al., 2009a; Chu and Kamal, 2008; Park et al., 2007; Zhang and Watts, 2008) and decisive information (Cheung et al., 2009b, 2012; Kamins and Assael, 1987) have been considered as the most significant central route factors; and source credibility (Cheung et al., 2008; Zhang and Watts, 2008), information consistency (Zhang and Watts, 2008), information volume and rating (Cheung et al., 2009b, Duan et al., 2008; Park and Kim, 2009) are usually considered as the typical peripheral route factors (Luo et al., 2014).Previous studies about eWOM can be divided into two groups: population aspect and individual aspect. The former mainly focuses on the relationship between eWOM and product sales based on panel data collected from electronic commerce websites (Chen and Xie, 2005; Cheung et al., 2012; Chevalier and Mayzlin, 2006; Clemons et al., 2006; Dellarocas et al., 2007; Duan et al., 2008). The latter treats eWOM as an interactive process between consumers. The communication between the senders and receivers of eWOM finally influences the decision of receivers (Cheung et al., 2009b; Park and Kim, 2009; Zhang and Watts, 2008). Our research focuses on the adoption of eWOM during a consumer’s decision-making process.There have been numerous studies about the factors that may impact the adoption of eWOM. Nonaka (1994) addressed information adoption as a process of information transformation and internalization. Consumers make decisions based on eWOM because of its informative and persuasive nature (Goh et al., 2013). According to the theory of reasoned action (TRA) and the technology acceptance model (TAM), usefulness is one of the key factors that impact the acceptance of certain technology or behavior. Sussman and Siegal (2003) extended the research about usefulness to the field of information adoption. They addressed usefulness as a key antecedent factor of the acceptance of information. Cheung et al. (2009a) and Liu and Zhang (2010) proved that the usefulness significantly affects the adoption of eWOM. Cheung et al. (2008) also pointed out the usefulness of eWOM is affected by its relevance, timeliness, accuracy and integrity. Baek et al. (2012) found that the consistency of ratings, the count of vocabularies, and the proportions of negative contents also affect the usefulness of eWOM. Sussman and Siegal (2003) highlights the assessment of information usefulness as a mediator of the information adoption process.Meanwhile, Cheung et al. (2009a) pointed out that the consumers’ trust contributes to the adoption of eWOM. The research of Kamins and Assael (1987) proved that the integrity of WOM also impacts the perceived credibility of consumers. Mcknight et al. (2002) argued that only when consumers believe the received information is credible, will they adopt the eWOM to help them make decisions. In contrast, it is less likely for consumers to adopt eWOM if they consider the information unbelievable, thus the impacts of the eWOM decrease correspondingly (Cheung et al., 2009b). Cheung et al. (2009a) also proved that online information credibility positively impacts the adoption. Further, previous research showed that the credibility of information is influenced by its source. Information is more credible when users are more familiar with its source. Self (1996) proved that a difference exists between the impact of information from sources with higher or lower credibility. Regarding online shopping, consumers perceived credibility of eWOM was more critical for their subsequent shopping intention and behavior, because they could not touch the physical goods (Fan et al., 2013).The cognitive cost model plays an important role in understanding consumer decision-making (Punj and Moore, 2007). The cognitive cost perspective in behavioral decision theory indicates that consumers undertake cost-benefit tradeoffs when going through a decision-making task (Todd and Benbasat, 1992). The cognitive cost model theorizes that consumers display limited cognitive abilities, and thus, their actions during decision-making tasks depend on the associated cognitive costs (Payne, 1982). For consumers, more information is not always better. If the information load exceeds a certain threshold, it will decrease the consumers’ decision quality and negatively impact the consumers’ shopping experience (Malhotra and Lagakos, 1982; Meyer, 1998; Scammon, 1977). A recent study also pointed out that information overload is a main cause of SNS fatigue (Lee et al., 2016).Payne proposed a cost-benefit framework of cognition, which was subsequently supported by other researchers (Bettman et al., 1990). As per this framework, consumers continue to search for additional information only until the benefit from additional information is equal to or greater than the cognitive cost of the search. Maity and Dass (2014) studied the cognitive cost caused by the different media richness in e-commerce and mobile commerce environments, and addressed its influences on consumer’s behavior.Kuksov and Villas-Boas (2010) has shown that information overload and search costs can discourage decision makers from evaluating choices, leading to a scenario where they make no choices at all. Ghose et al. (2014) also proved that providing more information can actually lead to fewer purchases. Regarding the problems in our research, the overflow of online information increases the cognitive costs to consumers, so they will not accept all eWOM without considering the cognitive costs. The cognitive cost is one of the underlying consideration of online information adoption in the age of information explosion.Based on the above-mentioned literatures, information usefulness is considered to be a key antecedent factor of information adoption (Cheung et al., 2009a; Sussman and Siegal, 2003), which has also been proved in the context of eWOM. Meanwhile, researchers also use credibility theory to study online information spreading, proving that credibility is another crucial antecedent factor of eWOM adoption (Cheung et al., 2009b; McKnight and Kacmar, 2007). Thus, our research deduces that usefulness and credibility are two factors influencing eWOM adoption.Partially based on the work of Cheung and Thadani (2012), we figured out the independent variables that impact the eWOM usefulness and credibility, as illustrated in the conceptual model of our research (Fig. 1). Consumers’ characters (cognitive level and involvement degree) moderate the effects of independent variables on eWOM usefulness and credibility (Park and Kim, 2009; Gupta and Harris, 2010; Lee et al., 2008; Doh and Hwang, 2009). Our model diverges from previous work by including SM-eWOM adoption as a new dependent variable.Compared with EC-eWOM, SM-eWOM is usually scattered among the messages generated by social media users. SM-eWOM displays a more unstructured data source. The rating and volume of SM-eWOM are harder to measure than that of EC-eWOM. In addition, according to the cognitive cost model, when consumers browse e-commerce websites, they usually refer to SM-eWOM only when EC-eWOM is not helpful enough to make decisions. Thus, in this paper, we study the adoption of SM-eWOM from the aspects of perceived usefulness and credibility of EC-eWOM.Based on the information adoption theory, information influences users’ behavior according to users’ judgment about the usefulness of information itself. As a special online information, the usefulness of EC-eWOM impacts the adoption of EC-eWOM (Cheung et al., 2009a; Liu and Zhang, 2010; Cheung et al., 2008). According to cognitive cost theory, although EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM exist simultaneously on the Internet, consumers do not always consider both every time, in order to reduce the cognitive cost (Salant, 2011; Liu et al., 2011; Brenčič, 2014). When shopping on e-commerce websites, consumers refer to SM-eWOM only when they cannot make shopping decisions based on the EC-eWOM alone. Thus, we propose the following hypotheses:•Hypothesis 1a. Perceived EC-eWOM usefulness positively influences the EC-eWOM adoption.Hypothesis 1b. Perceived EC-eWOM usefulness negatively influences the SM-eWOM adoption.With ELM, when the message receiver is unable or unwilling to engage in much thought about the message, he decides whether to agree with the message based on other cues, besides the strength of the arguments or ideas in the message. Information volume (Cheung et al., 2009b, Duan et al., 2008; Park and Kim, 2009) is usually considered to be one of the typical peripheral route cues. Past studies have proved the positive relationship between online review volume and product sales (Liu, 2006; Dellarocas et al., 2007; Duan et al., 2008; Park et al., 2012). Duan et al. (2008) argued that the volume of EC-eWOM reflects a sense of presence for products, which arouses the awareness effect among consumers.Reading numerous EC-eWOM by others can reduce consumers’ anxiety when making a purchase decision because consumers reason that many others have also purchased the product. A higher volume of EC-eWOM means the more sales of products (Duan et al., 2008; Davis and Khazanchi, 2008; Liu, 2006), which in turn attracts even more consumers. So from the perspective of consumers, the volume is a predictor of product quality and impacts the judgment of EC-eWOM usefulness for consumers (Berger et al., 2010; Duan et al., 2008). In addition, Berger et al., (2010) also empirically illustrated that even negative publicity can increase purchase likelihood and sales by increasing product awareness. Here we have the following hypothesis:•Hypothesis 2. EC-eWOM volume positively influences the perceived EC-eWOM usefulness.Most e-commerce websites provide rating mechanism. The EC-eWOM rating means the overall scores given by other consumers about on a product. Previous research has shown that the EC-eWOM rating (Cheung et al., 2009b; Duan et al., 2008; Park and Kim, 2009) has effect on the decision making process of consumers as a typical peripheral route clue (Luo et al., 2014). The impacts of EC-eWOM rate on consumers’ shopping decisions and products sales are also discussed in many literatures (Dellarocas et al., 2007; Ye et al., 2009; Lee and Lee, 2009; Öğüt and Onur Taş, 2012; Yan et al., 2014b). Higher rates encourage consumption while lower rates discourage shopping behavior (Baek et al., 2012). Compared with medium rates, higher rates and lower rates may impress consumers more strongly (Cheung et al., 2009b; Mudambi and Schuff, 2010). While medium rate usually means an ambiguous attitude towards a product, it may cause consumers feeling confused and increase the difficulty to make purchase decisions. In this research, we use rate extremism to represent that the overall rate given by other consumers about a product is biased. We propose:•Hypothesis 3. EC-eWOM rate extremism positively influences the perceived EC-eWOM usefulness.Regarding online shopping, consumer’s perceived credibility of eWOM was more critical for their subsequent shopping intention and behavior, because they could not touch the physical goods (Fan et al., 2013). When consumers consider the EC-eWOM to be credible, they have the confidence to adopt it for assisting decision making and do not spend any more energy on other sources of information, to reduce the cognitive cost (Salant, 2011; Liu et al., 2011; Brenčič, 2014). Otherwise, consumers will not adopt it for the purpose of risk-reduction (Cheung et al., 2009b). When consumers consider the EC-eWOM to be unreliable, they refer to other sources of information, such as SM-eWOM, to assist decision making. Thus, we propose the following hypotheses:•Hypothesis 4a. Perceived EC-eWOM credibility positively influences the EC-eWOM adoption.Hypothesis 4b. Perceived EC-eWOM credibility negatively influences the SM-eWOM adoption.Integrity means that the EC-eWOM should include both positive and negative information, covering the pros and cons of a product or service. It impacts the credibility of EC-eWOM. Although positive EC-eWOM should be helpful in promoting positive attitudes toward the products, a few negative messages within the majority of positive messages are not critically harmful (Doh and Hwang, 2009). This is likely due to consumers’ suspicion that the set of pure positive EC-eWOM stems from corporate unethical behavior such as stealth marketing activities. Because some companies reportedly try to manipulate and manage the voice of general consumers with intentional interruptions in online user-to-user communication, some participants did not trust the sincerity of perfect sets with all positive EC-eWOM. This suspicion might influence the results regarding the attitude toward the credibility of eWOM. In other words, Integrity enhances the persuasion power and makes EC-eWOM more credible (Kamins and Assael, 1987; Doh and Hwang, 2009). The following hypothesis is proposed:•Hypothesis 5. EC-eWOM integrity positively influences the perceived EC-eWOM credibility.Source credibility is defined as the perceived ability and motivation of the message writer to produce accurate and truthful information (Li and Zhan, 2011). It means the extent to which one perceives a recommendation or review as believable, true, or factual (Cheung et al., 2009b). According to ELM, source credibility significantly impacts individual’s attitude through the peripheral route (Petty and Cacioppo, 1986), and it is a key factor in assisting a consumer to judge online information (Wathen and Burkell, 2002). Fan et al. (2013) pointed out that source credibility is fairly consistent with trustworthiness and expertise. In an online environment, consumers rarely touch the product or recognize the eWOM sender. Source credibility is a vital predictor in the early stage when a consumer is choosing a website, and it contributes to the perceived credibility of messages on the site (Dabholkar, 2006; Fan et al., 2013). Awad and Ragowsky (2008) suggested that perceived credibility is a prime determinant in a consumer’s decision-making process, and reduces uncertainty in both social and business interactions. Messages from sources with high credibility have greater influence on recipients (Hovland and Weiss, 1951). Source credibility plays an important role in consumer trust in eWOM and positively influences the perceived eWOM credibility (Chih et al., 2013). Thus, we propose this hypothesis:•Hypothesis 6. EC-eWOM source credibility positively influences the perceived EC-eWOM credibility.The effects of eWOM vary for different individuals. Regarding the same eWOM, consumers may have different responses because of their different cognitive level, experience and involvement degree (Chaiken, 1980). Researchers widely agree that consumer-related factors, such as consumer’s cognitive level and involvement degree, greatly influence eWOM effects (Doh and Hwang, 2009; Park and Kim, 2009; Fan et al., 2013; Cheung et al., 2009b). According to ELM, when the involvement degree of consumers is low, eWOM mainly works through the peripheral route, whereas the central route. Park and Kim (2009) pointed out that cognitive level has obvious influences on consumers’ use of online reviews, meanwhile, customers with high expertise are able to evaluate information according to their own experience and knowledge. Doh and Hwang (2009) pointed out that consumers’ involvement and prior knowledge partially moderate the relationship between the ratio of messages and the eWOM effect.Consumers tend to expand their information gathering as their involvement with the product is increased. A higher involvement may cause consumers to become suspicious about the positive messages, and the effect of negative messages will thus be increased. Fan et al., (2013) argued that consumers with higher involvement have more motivation to understand products and are more likely to read others’ opinions to gather more information. Research of Cheung et al., (2009b) showed that involvement significantly moderates the relationship between recommendation consistency and perceived review credibility. They additionally pointed out that different types of prior knowledge (on the review topic, on the discussion forum) moderate the impact of different determinants on eWOM credibility. For example, the higher the consumer’s prior knowledge of the review topic, the less the source credibility will affect perceived review credibility. Doh and Hwang (2009) also proved that consumers with higher prior knowledge can be more sensitive to negative messages than consumers without prior knowledge.In this article, we summarize the moderating factors in prior research as the degree of involvement and the cognitive level. For consumers with higher involvement degree and cognitive level, they will have stronger intentions to have a comprehensive decision-making process, and they will have a stronger ability to make the purchase decision based on their own expertise, and not only on the EC-eWOM. Thus, the following two groups of hypotheses are proposed:•Hypothesis 7a. The cognitive level of consumers negatively moderates the effects of EC-eWOM volume and rate extremism on the perceived EC-eWOM usefulness.Hypothesis 7b. The degree of involvement of consumers negatively moderates the effects of EC-eWOM volume and rate extremism on the perceived EC-eWOM usefulness.•Hypothesis 8a. The cognitive level of consumers negatively moderates the effects of EC-eWOM integrity and source credibility on the perceived EC-eWOM credibility.Hypothesis 8b. The degree of involvement of consumers negatively moderates the effects of EC-eWOM integrity and source credibility on the perceived EC-eWOM credibility.EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM are not processed separately. Information from different channels impacts consumers together (Munar and Jacobsen, 2013; Xu et al., 2014). According to studies about cognitive cost, consumers undertake cost-benefit tradeoffs when going through a decision-making task (Todd and Benbasat, 1992). Because of limited cognitive abilities, consumers continue to search for additional information only until the benefit from additional information is equal to or greater than the cognitive cost of the search. They will not accept all eWOM without considering the cognitive costs. Mitchell and McGoldrick (1996) pointed out that when facing the uncertainty of information, individuals may refer to information from social network sources for the purpose of risk reduction. Social media has now become a platform for eWOM communications (Chu and Kim, 2011).In our research scenario explained in the introduction section, consumers access EC-eWOM first when they browse e-commerce websites. When they cannot make shopping decisions based on EC-eWOM, they refer to SM-eWOM to get more information and/or to reduce risks. In more detail, when the perceived usefulness and credibility of EC-eWOM decrease, the intention to adopt EC-eWOM will also decrease. That means consumers may find difficulty making decisions merely based on EC-eWOM. Under this circumstance, consumers may refer to SM-eWOM. If EC-eWOM is enough for consumers’ to make shopping decisions, they will not refer to SM-eWOM for the purpose of cost-reduction. Thus, the adoptions of EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM are not isolated processes. The consumers’ attitude towards EC-eWOM may influence their attitude towards SM-eWOM. We propose:•Hypothesis 9a. EC-eWOM adoption negatively influences SM-eWOM adoption.Hypothesis 9b. EC-eWOM adoption mediates the effect of perceived usefulness on SM-eWOM adoption.Hypothesis 9c. EC-eWOM adoption mediates the effect of perceived credibility on SM-eWOM adoption.Our model differs from previous studies because it focuses on the adoption of SM-eWOM. Although the independent variables and mediating variable are all about the EC-eWOM, we emphasize how the changes of these variables may finally influence the adoption of SM-eWOM, through the mediating effects of EC-eWOM adoption.The empirical data were collected through a questionnaire survey. The questionnaire includes three parts. The first describes the survey so the respondents understand the questions. The second is about the demographic information of the respondents. The third is the main body of the survey which includes 30 items. To ensure the content validity of the data, all the items for the theoretical constructs are adopted from previous studies, with elaborate adjustment, as illustrated in Table 1. The questionnaire uses a 5 point Likert scale, with 1 for “strongly disagree” and 5 for “strongly agree.”According to a survey conducted by CNNIC in March 2013, 63.4% of Internet users in China are of 18–30years old and 41% have a bachelor’s degree or above. Students account for more than a quarter of Internet users. Based on the overall characteristics of Internet users in China, our survey mainly aimed at college students. It was conducted through an online survey website (www.sojump.com). A total of 300 questionnaires were collected, and after eliminating those with incomplete information, 289 samples were used for this empirical analysis.The demographic characteristics provided in Table 2. According to the results, 140 respondents were male and 149 were female (48.4% vs 51.6%). Most of the people samples were young people, with 77.9% of the respondents between 21 and 25years of age. We used ANOVA to verify if the demographic characteristics of the samples impact the usefulness and credibility of EC-eWOM. According to Tables 3 and 4, the values of p are all bigger than 0.05. There is no difference about the usefulness and credibility of EC-eWOM among samples with different demographic characteristics.We utilized Cronbach’s alpha, average variance extracted (AVE) and composite reliability (CR) for each construct to assess the convergent validity (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). As shown in Table 5, the values of Cronbach’s alpha for all of the constructs are above 0.7, all of the AVE values are above 0.6, and the composite reliability values are above 0.8. These results confirmed the convergent validity of the data.We performed correlation and regression analysis with SPSS 20.0. As shown in Table 6, there are significant positive correlations between volume, rate extremism and the usefulness of EC-eWOM, with Pearson coefficients of 0.877 and 0.571, respectively. The results in Table 6 confirm H2 and H3. We performed multiple regression to test the effects of volume and rate extremism on the usefulness of EC-eWOM. As shown in Table 7, the model is significant, with F=544.6 and p<0.01, the adjusted R2 is 0.791. The volume and rate extremism positively impact the usefulness of EC-eWOM, thus H2 and H3 are supported, and the impact of volume is stronger than that of rate extremism.We also performed correlation analysis to test the relation between EC-eWOM credibility and its antecedent factors. As shown in Table 8, there are significant positive correlations between integrity, source credibility and the EC-eWOM credibility, with Pearson coefficients of 0.871 and 0.910. The results in Table 8 confirm H5 and H6. We performed multiple regression to test the effects of integrity and source credibility on the EC-eWOM credibility. As shown in Table 9, the model is significant, with F=750.9 and p<0.01, the adjusted R2 is 0.839. The integrity and source credibility positively impact EC-eWOM credibility, thus H5 and H6 are supported.We also performed regression analysis between the EC-eWOM usefulness, credibility and the adoption of EC-eWOM and SM-eWOM, as shown in Table 10.The two models are both significant with p<0.01, and F=1266.2 and 946.8. The adjusted R2 values are 0.898 and 0.868, indicating the good fit of the two models. Usefulness and credibility of EC-eWOM could be used to predict consumers’ behavior towards eWOM on both e-commerce websites and social media. According to the coefficients in Table 10, the usefulness and credibility positively impact the adoption of EC-eWOM (β=0.371, p<0.01; β=0.628, p<0.01), and negatively impact the adoption of SM-eWOM (β=−0.274, p<0.01; β=−0.700, p<0.01). When consumers’ perceived usefulness and credibility of EC-eWOM are high, they would prefer to make shopping decisions based on the comments on e-commerce websites. However, when the perceived usefulness and credibility of EC-eWOM are low, consumers would prefer to make decisions based on the comments from friends on social media. Thus, H1a, H1b, H4a and H4b are supported. In addition, despite the adoption of EC-eWOM, or SM-eWOM, the impact of credibility is stronger than that of usefulness.We discussed the moderating effects of consumer characteristics (cognition level and degree of involvement). We first analyzed the moderating effects on the influences of the antecedent factors of EC-eWOM usefulness, as shown in Tables 11–14. The variables in the analysis are centered.According to Table 11, the value of △R2 indicates that the cognitive level moderates the effects between volume, rate extremism and EC-eWOM usefulness. The moderating effects are proportional to the impacts of the two independent variables, in other words, the stronger the impact of independent variable is, the stronger the moderating effect will be. The results in Table 12 also verify the moderating effects (p<0.01), and the cognitive level negatively moderates the impacts of independent variables, with β of −0.249 and −0.137. H7a is supported. That means with the increase of the cognitive level of consumers, the impacts of volume and rate extremism of EC-eWOM will become weaker.Similarly, according to Tables 13 and 14, consumers’ involvement degree moderates the relationship between volume, rate extremism and EC-eWOM usefulness. The results in Table 14 verify the moderating effects (p<0.01), and the involvement degree negatively moderates the impacts of independent variables, with β values of −0.164 and −0.121. H7b is supported. Thus, with increase in consumer involvement, the impacts of volume and rate extremism of EC-eWOM will be weaker.Tables 15–18show the analysis results about the moderating effects on the influences of the antecedent factors of EC-eWOM credibility. The variables in the analysis are centered.As shown in Table 15, with the moderating effect, the △R2 are −0.001 and 0.002, indicating no improvement of model fit. The results in Table 16 also show that the cognitive level’s moderating effect for credibility is not significant (p=0.179 and 0.012). This means the cognitive level of consumers doesn’t moderate the impacts of the antecedent factors of EC-eWOM credibility. So H8a is not supported.R2 also changes little after including the moderating effect of involvement degree, according to the results in Table 17. The involvement degree’s moderating effect for credibility is not significant (p=0.132 and 0.126) either, as shown in Table 18. The involvement degree of consumes doesn’t moderate the impacts of the antecedent factors of EC-eWOM credibility. So H8b is not supported either.We tested the mediation effect of EC-eWOM adoption on SM-eWOM adoption based on the method proposed by Wen et al. (2005). In Fig. 2, Models 1–3 are used to verify the mediation effect on the relationship between usefulness and SM-eWOM adoption, and Models 4–6 are to verify the mediation effect on the relationship between credibility and SM-eWOM adoption. As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), to test the mediation effect of EC-eWOM adoption, we first need to test the significance of coefficient c1 in Model 1. If c1 is significant, then we need to further test the significance of coefficient a1 and b1 in Models 2 and 3. If a1 and b1 are significant, then we must verify the mediating effect according to c1′. If at least one of a1 and b1is not significant, then we must verify the mediating effect through the Sobel test. The verification of the mediation effect on the relationship between credibility and SM-eWOM adoption are illustrated in Fig. 2(b). The results are shown in Tables 19 and 20.According to Fig. 2(a) and Table 19, the coefficient a1 (0.920), b1 (−0.853) and c1 (−0.826) are all significant, but c1′ did not pass the significance test (−0.042, p=0.54>0.05). Thus, EC-eWOM adoption has a complete mediation effect on the relationship between EC-eWOM usefulness and SM-eWOM adoption. The decrease of the usefulness of EC-eWOM will weaken the adoption of EC-eWOM, which in turn will promote the adoption of SM-eWOM. The results support H9a and H9b.According to Fig. 2(b) and Table 20, the coefficient a2 (0.865), b2 (−0.390), c2 (−0.917) and c2′ (−0.579) are all significant. Thus, EC-eWOM adoption has a partial mediation effect on the relationship between EC-eWOM credibility and SM-eWOM adoption. The decrease of the credibility of EC-eWOM will weaken the adoption of EC-eWOM, while simultaneously promoting the adoption of SM-eWOM. The decrease of the intention to adopt EC-eWOM also promotes the adoption of SM-eWOM. The results support also H9a and H9c.Table 21concludes the verification results for the hypotheses in our research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
