@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of evolutionary computation for rule discovery in stock algorithmic trading: A literature review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The first systematic literature review on evolutionary rule discovery in stock algorithmic trading.A clear demonstrate of studies in this field based on a classification framework.A precise analysis of gaps and limitations in existing studies based on detail of evaluation scheme.The most important factors influencing profitability of models are presented in detail.Targeted suggestions for future improvements based on the review are proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Literature review,Evolutionary computation,Algorithmic trading,Stock trading rule,Rule discovery,Classification framework,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite the wide application of evolutionary computation (EC) techniques to rule discovery in stock algorithmic trading (AT), a comprehensive literature review on this topic is unavailable. Therefore, this paper aims to provide the first systematic literature review on the state-of-the-art application of EC techniques for rule discovery in stock AT. Out of 650 articles published before 2013 (inclusive), 51 relevant articles from 24 journals were confirmed. These papers were reviewed and grouped into three analytical method categories (fundamental analysis, technical analysis, and blending analysis) and three EC technique categories (evolutionary algorithm, swarm intelligence, and hybrid EC techniques). A significant bias toward the applications of genetic algorithm-based (GA) and genetic programming-based (GP) techniques in technical trading rule discovery is observed. Other EC techniques and fundamental analysis lack sufficient study. Furthermore, we summarize the information on the evaluation scheme of selected papers and particularly analyze the researches which compare their models with buy and hold strategy (B&H). We observe an interesting phenomenon where most of the existing techniques perform effectively in the downtrend and poorly in the uptrend, and considering the distribution of research in the classification framework, we suggest that this phenomenon can be attributed to the inclination of factor selections and problem in transaction cost selections. We also observe the significant influence of the transaction cost change on the margins of excess return. Other influenced factors are also presented in detail. The absence of ways for market trend prediction and the selection of transaction cost are two major limitations of the studies reviewed. In addition, the combination of trading rule discovery techniques and portfolio selection is a major research gap. Our review reveals the research focus and gaps in applying EC techniques for rule discovery in stock AT and suggests a roadmap for future research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Stock investment has attracted a lot of attention. In 2012, the value of share trading-electronic order book trade in the United States stock markets reached USD 23,226,924 million [1]. However, the computerization of stock trading from order book to exchange has been generating large amounts of real-time data [2,3]. At the same time, government, institutions, social media, and listed companies have been releasing an ocean of data on the operating performance of listed companies, such as news, financial statements, and macroeconomic information [2–4]. Discovering useful knowledge from these substantial high-dimensional financial data [5–12] and catching investment opportunities faster than other investors in such a noisy and dynamic market environment [2,10,11,13–15] are significant challenges faced by investors constantly.Algorithmic trading (AT), an important automatic analysis and trading decision approach for equity investment, gained prominence in the early 1990s and accounted for at least 50% of the total US equity trading volume in 2012 [16]. Generally, AT refers to the use of sophisticated computer algorithms to automatically make certain trading decisions in the trading cycle, including pretrade analysis (data analysis), trading signal generation (buying and selling recommendations), and trade execution (order management) [17–20]. One of the advantages of AT is the effectiveness and efficiency of machine learning techniques in financial big data analysis [2,21,22]. However, some AT learning models are considered as “black boxes” [23–28] because they involve difficulty in providing easy-to-understand explanations on the interactions between the model inputs and the outputs. Trading with black boxes makes investors uncomfortable and elicits mistrust in the model [2,29,150]. To address this issue, an increasing number of researchers have investigated rule discovery techniques for finding explicit trading rules that can provide explicit knowledge to guide trading.Rule discovery is an important aspect of data mining because it can generate a set of symbolic rules that describe the relationship among variables in a natural way, and rules can be better understood by the human mind than any other data mining model [30,31]. Numerous studies have demonstrated the necessity of rule discovery in AT, such as the following: (1) increasing investors’ approval of the system by improving the comprehensibility of the system decision logic. Thus, investors can justify system decisions using their domain knowledge, and potential investment risks can be reduced [32,33,151]. (2) facilitating the discovery of new knowledge and integration of new and old knowledge [33,34]. (3) reducing errors derived from noise, feature subset selection, or inaccurate parameter settings [35].Evolutionary computation (EC) has been widely employed in rule discovery. EC is generally defined as a computing tool to solve realistic problems by simulating the evolutionary mechanisms of nature [36–41]. It is mainly based on a population, uses probabilistic transition rules, and directly applies the objectives from the user as “fitness” [36,37,40–42]. Applying EC techniques for rule discovery in stock AT is becoming popular because EC is able to find a sufficiently good solution for a wide range of problems within a relatively short time [14,42]. Previous research suggested that applying EC-based models to trading rule discovery could yield promising results [32,43–45]. Moreover, EC can be employed to optimize the individual trading rule [14,26,44,46,47] and the parameters of the underlying rule discovery algorithm [44,48,49]. This study focuses on the distinctive competence of EC in rule discovery. Over the past few years, several literature reviews have been conducted on stock prediction models. Atsalakis and Valavanis [50] reviewed the application of neural and neural-fuzzy techniques in stock prediction. Guresen et al. [51] presented a comparative survey of different neural network models in NASDAQ Stock exchange index prediction. Bahrammirzaee [52] provided a comparative analysis among artificial neural networks, expert system and hybrid intelligent systems in credit evaluation, portfolio management and financial prediction and planning. However, at present, a systematic and comprehensive review of the EC techniques applied to explicit trading rule discovery remains lacking. Therefore, the objectives of this paper are as follows: (1) develop a classification framework for the application of EC techniques for rule discovery in stock AT; (2) provide a systematic and comprehensive review; and (3) determine research gaps and propose suggestions for directions of future research.The contribution of our paper is that it provides readers a clear picture of the application of EC techniques to rule discovery in stock AT by developing a classification framework for it. Furthermore, by summarizing the details of the comparative test in these studies, we have explicitly presented the most important factors, which are influencing the performance of different proposed models, precisely analyzed the major limitations in existing research, and provided a specific roadmap for future research. Thus, this paper assists readers in conducting further studies and in evaluating their models more adequately.The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows: Section 2 presents the research methodology of our paper. Section 3 introduces our proposed classification framework for the application of EC techniques for rule discovery in stock algorithmic trading. Section 4 analyzes the reviewed articles from different perspectives. Section 5 discusses the result and presents research gaps. Finally, Section 6 concludes and provides suggestions for future research.Our research can be divided into four main phases: research definition, article searching, article verification, and research analysis, as shown in Fig. 1.Step 1.1: Define the research area. The research area is the application of EC techniques for rule discovery in stock algorithmic trading, as shown in Fig. 2.Step 1.2: Define the research goal. The research goal is to provide a classification framework and a systematic and comprehensive review of EC techniques for rule discovery applied to stock algorithmic trading, as well as to determine research gaps and suggest directions for future research.Step 1.3: Define the research scope. The research scope is the articles on the application of EC techniques for rule discovery in stock algorithmic trading published in academic journals with their full text available before 2013 (inclusive).Step 2.1: Define the search terms. First, representative articles were found as references by using search terms that were strongly related to the research area (see Fig. 2). Then, the search terms were adjusted based on keywords and information found in articles and authoritative site. Finally, we determined our search terms as “evolutionary computation,” “stock,” and “trading rule”.Step 2.2: Search the articles in online databases. More than 550 articles were found in the following online journal databases:•ACMIEEE TransactionsMIT Press journalsScience DirectSpringer-Link JournalsTaylor & Francis OnlineStep 2.3: Search the articles via other ways. To collect as much related studies as possible, we utilized the reference information of the papers under our research scope (verified in Step 3). By adding the papers we collected in our previous searches, a total of 650 papers were found in Step 2.The classification of the articles found in Step 2 was carefully and repeatedly verified by the co-authors. Only articles related to stock algorithmic trading and EC techniques for rule discovery were selected. The verification process was as follows:Step 3.1: Eliminate unrelated articles. Papers that were obviously unrelated to our research area were eliminated by co-author respectively. Articles that did not refer to EC or stock investment were removed.Step 3.2: Verify the articles with defined criteria. The remaining articles were verified independently. The articles with consistent verification results were selected, and the others were discussed by the co-authors to draw a final conclusion. The criteria for selecting articles were as follow: (1) the prediction models must be able to generate trading rules; (2) the trading rule discovered must be explicit knowledge which can directly reveal the relations between the market information and the prediction results; and (3) EC techniques must be applied to optimize the trading rules.Step 3.3: Classify the articles. A co-author classified the selected articles. Then, the two other co-authors verified the results. The classifications assigned to the articles were approved by the co-authors or a discussion was held if any disagreements arose.Through Steps 3.1–3.3, 51 papers were consequently selected from the 650 papers searched in Step 2.We analyzed the selected papers from different perspectives and identified some directions for future research. The details of the analysis and conclusion are presented in Sections 4 and 5.To provide a systematic review of the available literatures on the application of EC techniques for rule discovery in stock AT, we propose a classification framework, which is shown in Fig. 3. The lists of abbreviations used in this paper are summarized in the Appendix.As Fig. 3 shows, all of the stock analysis approaches can be classified into fundamental, technical, or blending analysis. With the underlying analytical principle, completely different factors are utilized and different rules are obtained as a result. The category to which an analysis method belongs can be determined according to the input factors used in the rule discovery process. An introduction about the three aforementioned categories of analysis method is the following.Fundamental analysis. This type of analysis method is based on the assumption that the internal value of each stock is determined by its potential profitability. Thus, based on the evaluation of the fundamental value of a stock, that is analyzing the factors that reflect and influence the profitability of a company to identify whether a stock is undervalued or overvalued, fundamental analysis could generate trading rules to determine which stock to buy/sell [7,35,53–56]. In practice, a number of well-known investors have been using fundamental analysis, the most influential of which is Benjamin Graham, hailed as the father of value investing. His investment philosophy includes the concept of investment diversification and buying obviously undervalued stocks with a high safety margin [57,58]. Another example is Warren Buffett, an adherent of Graham; some of his accomplishments can be attributed to fundamental analysis. Fundamental analysis is mainly based on three essential aspects, which are described as follows [7,56,59,60]:i.Macroeconomic analysis, which analyzes the effect of the macroeconomic environment on the future profit of a company. The popular indicators include GDP, CPI, M1B, etc.Industry analysis, which estimates the value of the company based on industry status and prospect, such as by analyzing the billings (or revenues) of upper stream entities in an industryCompany analysis, which analyzes the current operation status of a company to evaluate its internal value, mostly by examining the company financial reports.Technical analysis. This analysis method considers the movement of stock price and volume as reflections of all the related information about the stock markets. In addition, previous market behavior patterns repeat in the future. Thus by analyzing the previous behavior patterns of price and volume, trading rules can be generated [35,53,54,59,61]. A common investment strategy based on technical analysis is trend following. Covel [29] described it in the following manner: “Instead of trying to predict a market direction, their strategy is to react to the market's movements whenever they occur”. Thus, trend following judges the status of the current market promptly so that investment decisions can be made [6]. Unlike fundamental analysis, technical analysis lacks a consistent taxonomy. Therefore, by referencing Bodie et al. [7], CFA Institute [59], Colby [62], Fidelity Mutual Fund [63], Goldman Sachs [64], NASDAQ [65], Pring [6], Wikipedia [66], Yahoo Finance [67], and Market Technicians Association [68], we found that domains of technical analysis can be grouped into rational classification scheme as follows:i.Sentiment, which mainly represents the behaviors of various market participants. The analysis of these indicators is grounded on hypothesis that different types of investors show different behaviors at the main market turning points. Indicators such as expert-public ratio, consulting services sentiment indicator, short interest ratio and put options to call options [6,59,62,68].Flow-of-funds, which is a type of indicator used to investigate the financial status of various investors to pre-evaluate their strength in terms of buying and selling stocks, then, corresponding strategies, such as short squeeze, can be adopted. The analyzable data for this strategy contains the capital of mutual funds or large investors, and the events like new and additional issues [6,59,68].Raw data, which include stock price series as well as price patterns such as K-line diagrams and bar charts. The former is commonly used for time series analysis or trend judgment combined with other indicators; the latter generally suggests price patterns can reflect the changes of markets sentiment which affect short movements of stocks [6,63–65,67,68].Trend, which is a type of price-based indicator for tracing the stock price trends. The corresponding strategy, called trend following strategy, proposes that economic and political events usually change market prices through changing market trends rather than by instantly returning to the most rational point. Thus, investors can gain profit by tracing the occurrent price trends. Common trend indicators include SMA and EMA [29,59,62,64,67].Momentum, which is also a kind of price-based indicator but is used to evaluate the velocity of price change and judge whether a trend reversal in stock price is about to occur. The momentum indicators are analyzed based on the hypothesis that stock prices undergo a nominal cycle, and the cycle will manifest as price rebound and callback trend. Such indicators include RSI, MACD, and ROC, etc. [6,59,62,64,67].Volume. Volume-based indicators reflect the enthusiasm for investing of both buyers and sellers, which is also a basis for predicting stock price movements. Strategy applying volume indicators is grounded on the hypothesis that price movement is determined by the enthusiasm of buyers and sellers. Transactions are commonly suggested to expand during rising tendencies and shrink during downward tendencies. Popular indicators include volume, volume ratio, and OBV [6,64,66,67].Cycle. According to cycle theories, stock prices vary periodically; a long cycle may last more than 10 years and contains various short cycles that can be as short as a few days or weeks. Strategies that use cycle indicators aim to analyze the position of the current stock price in the cycle. For example, Elliott Wave and seasonal patterns are often used to examine the cyclical variations of stock prices [6,59,68].Volatility, which is commonly used to investigate the fluctuation range of stock prices. It can be used to evaluate the risk and identify the level of the support and resistance. Stock prices are generally recognized to fluctuate between the level of support and resistance, but continue to rise (fall) once they break through the level of resistance (support). Common volatility indicators include average true range and Bollinger band, etc. [6,62,66,152].Blending analysis (fundamental and technical analysis). The analysis combining fundamental analysis and technical analysis will be regarded as the blending method.Given the large search space and nonlinear nature of stock trading rule discovery, EC has been one of the most popular techniques in financial analysis. EC is based on population, utilizes probabilistic transition rules, and directly uses objectives defined from the user as “fitness” [36,37,40–42]. EC techniques possess the following advantages: (1) compared to the classical local optimization methods such as gradient-based and hill-climbing methods which are always based on deterministic rules, the population-based and stochastic characteristics of EC can greatly expand its search space and thus reduce the probability of trapping into local optima. (2) Compare to the inefficient random search, EC is directed toward better regions of the search space because it precisely uses fitness functions rather than function derivatives, which may be unavailable in some cases. Although the stochastic characteristic of EC cannot guarantee the best results, EC techniques are effective in generating nearly optimal results within a relatively short time. These advantages make EC more effective and robust in dealing with problems of discontinuity, non-differentiability, multiple modes, and noise [39–42,69,70]. Furthermore, its convenience in addressing a wide range of problems with different search space structures because of robustness of EC and the convenience of setting encoding of representation of solutions in EC techniques, EC suitable for many analytical tasks in investment.The term “evolutionary computation” emerged in the early 1990s, which from the very beginning refers to the research areas of ES, EP and GA [37] (i.e., evolutionary algorithm, EA). Later, more algorithms such as GP and LCS have been included. Some researchers insist that EC only contains evolutionary algorithms which are based on the simulation of Darwinian evolution [39,70–75]. However, some suggest that EC should also contain swarm intelligence (SI), which is based on simulation of social behavior [36,38,41,42,76–79], because social behavior can be regarded as an evolutionary process. Thus, our review includes both EA and SI.Evolutionary algorithm (EA). EAs were proposed in the late 1950s and the early 1960s. Initially, the representative algorithms were EP, ES and GA. EA represents optimization algorithms that search the space by simulating the genetic evolutionary process of Darwin's theory including selection, mutation, recombination and reproduction. It also uses fitness functions as performance measures to drive the evolution towards better regions of the search space [39,71–75,80,81]. At present, the main sub-fields of EAs include EP, ES, GA, GP, LCS, etc.Swarm intelligence (SI). SI, first proposed by Beni and Wang [82], primitively describes a paradigm about cellular robotic systems. Afterwards, Bonabeau et al. [83] expanded this definition to “algorithms or distributed problem solving devices inspired by the collective behavior of insect colonies and other animal societies.” The latter definition is widely accepted [41,42,72,84]. At present, the main sub-fields of SI include PSO and ACO.Hybrid EC techniques (evolutionary algorithm and swarm intelligence). Algorithms that combine EA and SI will be regarded as hybrid EC techniques.Notably, some researchers also suggest that other techniques, such as simulated annealing (SA), be included into EC [36,76], however, following our investigation, this view seems to not have been widely accepted. Thus, these techniques are excluded from our review.The 51 articles are classified based on the proposed classification framework, as shown in Table 1. This section provides a summary and analysis of the selected literatures from different perspectives.The distribution of articles classified by analysis methods and EC techniques is shown in Table 2. Technical analysis dominates this field, accounting for 45 out of the 51 articles. Only two out of the 51 articles use pure fundamental analysis, and four out of the 51 papers are devoted to Blending method. As Chavarnakul et al. [56] suggested, the popularity of technical analysis maybe due to the following reasons: the gains enjoyed by technical analysis have largely led to its wide adoption among investors and financial analysts. Many Wall Street financial advisors exploit technical analysis in practice [119], and most large investments are made within this technical environment [120]. In addition, major brokerage firms that comment on individual stocks and analysts that publish newsletters mostly adopt technical analysis [121]. Surveys also indicate that many investors make investment decisions using technical analysis tools [122]. However, according to the results of the selected papers in comparison with the B&H strategy, the profitability of the models for technical trading rule discovery seems unsteady.Because of the popularity of technical analysis, popular indicators are technical indicators. According to Table 1, these technical indicators comprise MA (trend indicator, 29 out of the 51 articles), price or index (raw data, 21 out of the 51 articles), RSI (momentum indicator, 19 out of the 51 articles), stochastic (momentum indicator, 16 out of the 51 articles), MACD (momentum indicator, 16 out of the 51 articles), ROC (momentum indicator, 13 out of the 51 articles), Vol (volume indicator, 9 out of the 51 articles), WMS %R (momentum indicator, 8 out of the 51 articles), VR (volume indicator, 6 out of the 51 articles), MTM (momentum indicator, 5 out of the 51 articles), PSY (momentum indicator, 5 out of the 51 articles), and BIAS (momentum indicator, 5 out of the 51 articles). In general, the popular classifications of factors shown in Table 3are trend (35 out of the 51 papers), momentum (33 out of the 51 papers), raw data (26 out of the 51 papers) and volume (18 out of the 51 papers). Other types of factors, such as sentiment, flow-of-funds, and cycles, still lack research.For fundamental factors, 4 out of the 6 articles that analyzed individual stocks used company analysis factors mainly from financial statements, whereas the other two articles that studied the index used the macroeconomic factor of interbank rate as input.According to Table 2, currently the commonly used EC techniques in trading rule discovery are mainly GA and GP, among which GA is the most prominent accounting for 29 out of the 51 articles (one paper on fundamental trading rule discovery, 24 papers on technical trading rule discovery, and four papers on blending trading rule discovery), followed by GP with 10 out of the 51 articles (one fundamental and nine technical). Moreover, according to Table 1, 16 out of the 51 articles combined fuzzy logic techniques (such as fuzzy system and neurofuzzy system) with EC techniques, among which 12 out of the 16 articles combined it with GA. Research attaches importance to the ability of models based on fuzzy logic to generate linguistic rules. Relatively, other EC techniques, such as GNP, LCS, and PSO, have not received considerable attention because related research began in 2009.This lack of attention may be due to the following reasons. The theoretical foundation of GA was proposed in 1975 [123], GP was proposed in 1992 [124], PSO was proposed in 1995 [125], and GNP was proposed in 2000 [126]. The longer the history of an algorithm, the easier it is for researchers to comprehend and discover. A firmer ground for research is also developed. The first article in this field by Allen and Karjalainen [14], which applied GP as an extension of genetic algorithms to find rules, was published in the Journal of Financial Economics, and this article attracted the attention of researchers to GP and GA. In addition, compared with other EC techniques, such as ES, the fine combinatorial optimization capability of GA and GP allows for the easier optimization of certain rules, such as those based on Boolean functions, which have been widely used by investors who focus on technical analysis.The optimization objects of models based on different EC techniques are observably different. According to Table 1, GP and GNP are always used to reconstruct rules, i.e. they searching both the optimal structure and parameters of rules (RCons.). This fact can be attributed to the variable lengths of the strings that symbolize the decision tree representation of GP and to the graph structure representation of GNP. PSO and GA are often applied to optimize the parameters of the membership functions (MF) which the rules are based on and the parameters of rules (RPara.) or to combine rules with logical statements or the weights of the rules (RComb.). These optimization objects often combine more priori knowledge than the models based on GNP and GP. However, we cannot conclude which optimization object can gain better results based on the selected papers.Table 4summarizes the primary measures used to evaluate model performance. It shows that most researchers test their models through the simulation of trading in stock markets (32 out of the 51 papers) and present the return/profit/asset value of their models. Most of them have also considered transaction cost (23 out of the 32 papers). Thus, profitability is an important evaluation indicator in this field, which is reasonable because profit is the goal of many investors. Most studies (23 out of the 32 papers) compared their models with the B&H strategy or market index, aiming to prove whether the model can defeat the market average level (i.e., if their model is meaningful for investors). In addition, the Sharpe ratio is the most popular indicator for measuring risk-adjusted return. The most frequently used indicators that measure prediction accuracy are RMSE, MAPE, Hit rate, MAE, and accuracy.To better analyze the existing state-of-the-art research, we further summarize the detail of the research evaluation scheme. Specifically, in this part, we divide the papers into two classifications. Table 5shows that 23 studies compared their models with B&H, the most popular trading strategy used for comparisons. And the analysis of different studies based on the comparisons can help us avoid the problem that different market situation in studies will influence the profitability of models. The evaluation schemes of the remaining studies are presented in Table 6.In general, the difference between the research works in Tables 5 and 6 is in their fitness function. Most of the fitness functions in the studies presented in Table 5 are indicators of profitability, such as return, Sharp ratio, and excess return. In Table 6, they are RMSE, MSE, Hit rate, R-Square, and so on, which are used to evaluate the prediction accuracy of the models. In fact, the profitability of the model minimizing prediction error is easily influenced by the preset strategies on how to use the prediction to trade, introducing significant difficulty in evaluating their profitability.In Table 5, the evaluation scheme detail of the 23 papers compared with that of the B&H strategy is presented. Results show that outperforming the B&H strategy steadily is not easy; only 7 out of 51 papers have achieved it in their experiments. However, 4 of the 7 did not present any information on transaction cost, which indicates the costs were probably not considered in experiment (one of them are based on yearly data and transaction cost is not so important for it). One of the seven used R-Square as fitness, which means that the profitability can be easily influenced by the preset strategies. Thus, only the results of the three seem reliable.Most of the comparison results are changeable. Transaction cost and market trend are two key factors that influence the comparisons. Although researchers conduct their experiment mainly based on day trading rather than high-frequency trading, half the number of the studies which did not present any information on transaction cost steadily outperforming the B&H, and only 3 of 17 research works, which definitely considered the transaction cost, can do so. In addition, each time researchers consider different levels of transaction cost in their research, they can always be a key factor (2 out of 3) or at least an important factor (1 out of 3) for the margins of excess return.The most frequent key factor that influences the margins of excess return is market trend. In the classification of changeable results, the market trend is a key factor of the margins in 11 of 14 research works. A more interesting result is that in 11 of 11 papers, downtrend is a condition under which a model can gain excess return, and none of the papers observed the bad performance because of downtrend. Conversely, only one paper showed that its model can gain better performance in the uptrend than in other market trends, and 8 of 11 papers reported that their models underperforms B&H in the uptrend. The results suggest that existing models perform much better in the downtrend than in the uptrend. Furthermore, [97] suggests that disabling short strategies in the uptrend or disabling long strategies in the downtrend can improve the return; however, this approach cannot change the comparison result in its experiments. Actually, even compare differences of other factors among the research works, including sample, research target, optimization object, proposed model, input variables, and transaction cost, we cannot obtain any exact conclusion regarding the phenomenon based on such a small number of studies. However, by combining the information presented in Tables 1–3 and 5, we suggest that the phenomenon may be related to the input variable and the problem of liquidity in different market trends, which are discussed in Section 5.Periods for training and testing are also interesting factors that influence the return, both the long training period (about 10 years) with a short testing (1 year) period [32,101] and the short training period (180 days) with a shorter testing period (20 days) [28], are suggested by researchers. The periods in the remaining research works vary, but mainly in the middle in terms of training period (3–6 years) and with a short testing period (1 year). In addition, some researchers reported the problem of instability of results when using EC; in their experiments, the excess returns in the best run are several times that of the average level [87,97,108]. Other factors that influence the profit reported by the researchers include the research targets, algorithm parameters, input variable, fitness function, risk level, and measure.As the analysis above, many factors can influence the result; comparing the different kinds of EC techniques according to the results of the different studies is extremely difficult. Performing the comparisons in one study is more feasible. However, according to both Tables 5 and 6, studies on the comparisons among different kinds of EC techniques are lacking. Only 10 out of 51 papers implemented such comparisons, and a large number of these comparisons are among different versions of the same type of EC techniques, such as the comparisons among GNP, TA-GNP, GNP-RL, GNP-Candlestick, and GNP-SL.The surveyed stock markets (Table 7) are mainly from the US (23 out of the 51 papers) and Taiwan (11 out of the 51 papers). The remaining articles are also primarily from mature markets such as Japan, Singapore and European countries. However, given that they are hotspots of the current world economy, emerging markets such as China and India lack studies.Table 8presents the distribution of articles according to EC techniques and year of publication, while Fig. 4shows the overall research tendency. Obviously, the related studies increased significantly from 2009 to 2013. As a whole, they exhibit a rising trend.Table 9shows that the selected articles are distributed across 24 journals. Among these are, mainstream academic journals about decision support systems and expert systems, including “Decision Support Systems” (two papers), “Information Sciences” (three papers), “Expert Systems with Applications” (16 papers), and “Knowledge-Based Systems” (two papers) composing more than 45.8% (22 out of the 51) of the total articles published. Mainstream journals in operational research and soft computing (which mainly include fuzzy logic, artificial neural network, and evolution computation) follow and include “European Journal of Operational Research” (two papers), “IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation” (two papers), “Computers & Operations Research” (two papers), “Applied Soft Computing” (four papers), and “Soft Computing” (one paper) totaling 11 articles (22.9%). Mainstream academic finance journals come last and include “Journal of Financial Economics” (one paper), “Quantitative Finance” (one paper), and “Applied Financial Economics” (two papers), totaling only four papers. Overall, the two journals (“Expert Systems with Applications” and “Applied Soft Computing”) seem to appreciate articles in this field better.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
