@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance assessment of heat exchanger using intelligent decision making tools

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modeling is done to assess the performance of heat exchanger to maintain high efficiency using three intelligent tools.Performance is measured in terms of computational speed and accuracy.Results review that neural network trained with PSO outperforms other models.Improvement in performance by asset utilization, energy efficient and cost reduction in terms of production loss.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heat exchanger,Modeling,Artificial neural networks,Overall heat transfer coefficient,Fouling factor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Process and manufacturing industries today are under pressure to deliver high quality outputs at lowest cost. The need for industry is therefore to implement cost savings measures immediately, in order to remain competitive. Organizations are making strenuous efforts to conserve energy and explore alternatives. This paper explores the development of an intelligent system to identify the degradation of heat exchanger system and to improve the energy performance through online monitoring system. The various stages adopted to achieve energy performance assessment are through experimentation, design of experiments and online monitoring system. Experiments are conducted as per full factorial design of experiments and the results are used to develop artificial neural network models. The predictive models are used to predict the overall heat transfer coefficient of clean/design heat exchanger. Fouled/real system value is computed with online measured data. Overall heat transfer coefficient of clean/design system is compared with the fouled/real system and reported. It is found that neural net work model trained with particle swarm optimization technique performs better comparable to other developed neural network models. The developed model is used to assess the performance of heat exchanger with the real/fouled system. The performance degradation is expressed using fouling factor, which is derived from the overall heat transfer coefficient of design system and real system. It supports the system to improve the performance by asset utilization, energy efficient and cost reduction in terms of production loss. This proposed online energy performance system is implemented into the real system and the adoptability is validated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Heat exchangers are used to transfer the heat between two fluids across a solid surface that are at different temperatures [18]. Shell and tube heat exchangers are used in refrigeration, power generation, heating, air conditioning, manufacturing and medical applications [20,15]. These heat exchangers consist of a bundle of tubes and enclosed within a cylindrical shell. One type of fluid flows through the tube and second type of fluid flows between shell and tubes. The performance of heat exchanger deteriorates with time due to formation of fouling [5]. It is categorized into particulate, corrosion, biological, crystallization, chemical reaction and freeze. It is exclusively due to single mechanism in many situations. The methodology followed to observe performance of the heat exchangers mainly depends on the adopted practice in the plant, application, type of heat exchanger and experience of the operator. Vijaysai et al. [31] reported that the following key practices have been seen to be most prevalent and include monitoring of heat exchanger from gathering information with experts: (i) outlet temperature of the hot stream (Tho) profile, (ii) approach temperature (Tho−Tci) profile, (iii) log mean temperature difference (LMTD) with time, (iv) heat load profile, (v) time series of overall heat transfer coefficient. Although the first four methods are widely used, they are ineffective in terms of isolating the net impact of fouling from process upsets, whereas the overall heat transfer coefficient method requires detailed calculations and knowledge of the geometry of the exchangers. Any deviation from the design heat transfer coefficient will indicate the occurrence of fouling [30,14]. To overcome this, heat exchanger performance should be monitored online with intelligent tools and assess the performance periodically. It needs competent predictive model of a system to assess the heat exchanger performance. Modeling is a representation of physical or chemical process by a set of mathematical relationships that effectively explain the significant process behavior. These models are frequently used for process design; safety system analysis and process control [29]. In experimental studies and engineering applications of thermal science, researchers and engineers are expected to reduce experimental data into one or more simple and compact dimensionless heat transfer correlations [32]. The drawbacks of this method are heat transfer coefficients strongly depend on their definitions and temperature differences, and certainly need iterative method to find correlations when fluid properties are dependent on fluid temperatures [36]. The limitations of correlation methods are addressed by computational intelligent techniques, such as Artificial Neural Networks, fuzzy logic [24,23] and genetic algorithm [25,8]. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is one of the most powerful computer modeling techniques, based on statistical approach, currently being used in many fields of engineering for modeling complex relationships which are difficult to describe with physical models. It only needs input/output samples for training the network and learn complex nonlinear relationship [33].In recent years, Artificial Neural Networks have been used in thermal systems for heat transfer analysis, performance prediction and dynamic control [32]. ANN is applied in heat transfer data analysis [28,26], evaluating heat transfer coefficients from experimental data [13], identifying and controlling heat exchangers [3], simulation of heat exchanger performance using limited experimental data [6], modeling of heat exchanger dynamic characteristics [37], dynamic modeling and controlling of heat exchangers [34], dynamic prediction and neuro controller design for heat exchangers [7], neuro predictive controller design of heat exchangers [17], determining fin-and-tube heat exchangers performance with limited experimental data using soft computing and global regression [21,22], predicting heat transfer rate of a wire-on-tube heat exchanger [11], heat transfer analysis of air flowing in corrugated channels [35,12,2], control of heat exchanger in a closed flow air circuit [16] modeling the thermal performance of compact heat exchanger [27], predict the performance of laminar turbulent fluid flow in heat exchangers [9], performance assessment of heat exchanger [1] and optimization of steam cycle power plant [8]. From the above-mentioned successful applications, ANNs are well suitable for thermal analysis in engineering systems, especially in heat exchangers [10,19]. In this paper, an online monitoring system is developed for a shell and tube heat exchanger using secondary measurements namely the temperatures and flow rates of the hot and cold fluid (water). Experimental system is developed to investigate the performance of heat exchanger. Neural network trained with Back Propagation algorithm (BPNN), Genetic Algorithm (NNGA) and Particle Swarm algorithm (NNPSO) are attempted to model the heat exchanger with experimental data. The input parameters to develop a model for design/clean heat exchanger are inlet temperature and flow rate of shell and tube side fluids and output is overall heat transfer coefficient (UDesign). The overall heat transfer coefficient of real/fouled system (UReal) is calculated using online measured values such as inlet temperature, outlet temperature and flow rate of shell and tube side fluids. The heat exchanger performance is assessed by comparing the results of clean/design and fouled/real system. Any deviation from the result of design/clean system indicates that the performance is degraded due to fouling. Its degree is derived from fouling factor (FF) using UDesign and UReal.The present work is carried out at the process control lab of Instrumentation and Control Engineering department in National Institute of Technology Tiruchirappalli, India. Experiments are conducted on a 1-1 shell and tube heat exchanger. Fig. 1shows the schematic diagram of the experimental set-up developed in shell and tube heat exchanger and its photographic view is shown in Fig. 2. Specifications of the fabricated heat exchanger are given in Table 1.Cold and hot water flow into the shell and tubes respectively is changed using pneumatic control valves. The inlet and outlet temperatures of the shell and tube side fluid are measured using resistant temperature detectors. Hot water inlet temperature is maintained constant with a ±0.5°C variation using an inbuilt digital proportional–integral–derivative controller. Cold water is supplied at the room temperature (27°C). The inlet flow of the cold water is varied in the range of 0–350liter per hour (LPH) and that of hot water between 0 and 250 LPH. The flow rate of cold and hot water are measured using flow transmitter. All the sensors and actuators are interfaced with a 16bit data acquisition system (Advantech ADAM 5000 series hardware). The module consists of eight analog input and four analog output channels. A personal computer is used to log the data and run the program in MATLAB environment. RS232 cable is used for communication.In experimental design, three levels of process parameters hot water inlet temperature, cold water flow rate and hot water flow rate are selected and are tabulated in Table 2. Full factorial design of experiments is used and their experimental combinations of process parameters are presented in Table 3. The experiment is carried out in a single phase, both the fluid streams being water and are passed in a co-current fashion. In the overhead tank, water is filled and heated to a particular operating temperature. The hot water then flows from the overhead tank and passes through the tube side of the heat exchanger. Cold water flows from the reservoir tank into the shell side of the heat exchanger. The overhead tank water temperature is set initially as 40°C, cold water flow rate as 100 LPH and hot water flow rate as 65 LPH. In this set condition, the process is continued until it reaches the steady state. In steady state, the outlet temperatures of cold and hot water are observed. The flow rate of cold water is changed from 200 LPH to 300 LPH to reach steady state. Then the outlet temperatures of cold and hot water are observed. The above step is repeated by changing the hot water flow rate from 75 LPH to 85 LPH and outlet temperatures are observed. Similarly inlet temperature for the hot water is changed from 50°C to 60°C and the above procedure is repeated and the readings are noted.Based on the experimental design combination experiments are conducted for water–hot water system and their results are tabulated in Table 4. Performance of the heat exchanger is assessed by overall heat transfer coefficient (U). Overall heat transfer coefficient is calculated using log mean temperature difference (LMTD) approach because the inlet temperature, outlet temperature and flow rate of the cold and hot water are known. The overall heat transfer coefficient of shell and tube heat exchanger is calculated using Eqs. (1) and (2).(1)Qh=mhCph(Thi−Tho)inkW(2)Qc=mcCpc(Tco−Tci) in kW.Qh– heat transfer rate of hot water side.Qc– heat transfer rate of cold water side.mh– mass flow rate of hot water in kg/h.mc– mass flow rate of cold water in kg/h.Cph– specific heat capacity of hot water in kJ/kgK.Cpc– specific heat capacity of hot water in kJ/kgK.Thi– hot water inlet temperature in °C.Tho– hot water outlet temperature in °C.Tco– cold water inlet temperature in °C.Tci– cold water outlet temperature in °C.Initially the heat transfer rate (Q) of the hot or cold water is calculated using temperature and flow rates using Eq. (1) or (2). The heat transfer area of the heat exchanger is calculated based on the geometrical parameters. The capacity ratio (R) and effectiveness (S) are calculated with inlet and outlet temperatures of cold and hot water using Eqs. (3) and (4) respectively. The correction factor (F) for LMTD to account cross flow is computed using Eq. (5). LMTD for co-current flow of cold and hot water was computed with inlet and outlet temperatures of cold and hot water using Eq. (7). Based on the calculated values of Q, A, F and LMTD the overall heat transfer coefficient is calculated using Eq. (8). Overall, heat transfer coefficient of design/clean heat exchanger is computed and presented in Table 4.An online monitoring system for shell and tube heat exchanger is designed based on the current need to evaluate the performance. ANN models are developed for predicting the overall heat transfer coefficient (UDesign) of the design system using secondary measurements temperature and flow rates. Inputs of the developed network are Thi, flow rate of cold water Fciand flow rate of hot water Fhiand output is UDesign. Data acquired from the design of experiments are used for training, validation and testing the ANN models. Heat transfer coefficient of real system (UReal) is derived using secondary measurements such as Tci, Thi, Tco, Tho, Fciand Fhi.The proposed system imitates the real time system used for performance assessment (fouling) of the heat exchanger. Online measured values of Tci, Thi, Tco, Tho, Fciand Fhiare used to predict the value of UDesign and to compute the value of UReal.FF value is computed with the predicted value of UDesign and the computed value of UReal is used to identify the performance degradation or degree of fouling of the heat exchanger. If the FF value is greater than or equal to the set value (allowable) of design heat exchanger, warning message will be given for cleaning or maintenance of heat exchanger and it continues to work and monitor the system. Otherwise no warning message will be given and the heat exchanger continues to work and monitor the system. The proposed scheme and flow chart of the online performance monitoring system are shown in Figs. 3 and 4.There are different algorithms to train NN models. The most widely used method is back propagation algorithm. But is has limitations owing to the time taken to converge to a optimum solution and accuracy of result is less. This work exemplifies the use of GA and PSO technique for weight updation in neural networks. Before training the networks, the input/output datasets are normalized within the range of -1 to 1, using Matlab function [4]. The normalized value for each raw input/output dataset is calculated using Eq. (9).(9)pn=2×(p−minp)(maxp−minp)−1where, p is input/output data, pn is normalized value of p, minp is minimum value of p and maxp is maximum value of p.The topography of the BPNN model (3-8-1, i.e. three neurons the input layer corresponding to Thi, Fciand Fhi, eight neurons in hidden layer and one neuron in output layer corresponding to UDesign) as shown in Fig. 5. Linear transfer function ‘purelin’ and tan sigmoid transfer function ‘tansig’ is used in output and hidden layer respectively. Experimental data set from Table 4 are used to train the proposed UDesign network as shown in Fig. 6. The learning factors are set as goal of 10−10 and epochs of 1000. In the present work, the desired mean square error is achieved after 6 epochs. In this, twenty-one data sets are used for training and three data sets are used for validation.This section describes the development of the NNGA model to predict heat exchanger performance using overall heat transfer coefficient. In this proposed model, weights obtained from the developed back propagation neural network model are updated using GA with Thi, Fciand Fhias inputs and UDesign as output. GA is used as the training algorithm that updates the network weights in order to obtain an optimum weight set which gives minimum prediction error. By applying GA, high efficiency and performance is achieved, by proper selection of parameters like selection criteria, probability of crossover, probability of mutation, initial population. Parameters used in the development of the NNGA model are shown in Table 5. When the network reaches the stopping criteria (number of stall generations) with a best chromosome, the optimal weights are stored and used by neural network to predict heat exchanger performance using overall heat transfer coefficient. The developed NNGA model is trained and tested for different conditions. During the training phase, for each generation the mean squared error is displayed in the command window, and at last it displays the least mean squared error out of the N generations and its corresponding network weights along with the elapsed time for training the network. These network weight sets are saved and retrieved during the testing and prediction phase. Then for another network topology the same training process is carried, i.e., by varying the number of neurons in the hidden layer. Finally, the network with least mean squared error topology is selected for testing and predicting mode. The numbers of neurons in the hidden layer in NNGA model are determined according to the root mean square error of the neural network, thus avoiding the arbitrary selection of input layer parameters. Using this method, a model with 6 neurons in the hidden layer is established and forwarded for prediction of heat exchanger performance using overall heat transfer coefficient.In this proposed model, back propagation algorithm of neural network is replaced by PSO algorithm. Here the randomly generated weights are assigned in each link of neural network. In particle swarm optimization algorithm, PBest is the location of the best solution of a particle has achieved so far. GBest is the location of the best solution that any neighbor of a particle has achieved so far. Initially random numbers are generated for each particle and these random values are considered as PBest and present weights. Velocity is calculated using Eq. (10) and added with the present weight in each link of neural network. For each particle, the newly calculated weights are compared with the PBest weights and the minimum error produced weights are stored in PBest. Initial velocity V is assumed to be 1 and GBest is the weights of minimum error produced particle. New weight is calculated using Eq. (11).(10)Velocity[]=wVelocity[]+C1rand1(PBest[]−present[])+C2×rand2(GBest[]−present[])(11)Present[]=Present[]+Velocity[]where C1 and C2 are two positive constants named learning factors. rand1 and rand2 are two random functions in the range [0,1]. w is an inertia weight to control the impact of the previous history of velocities on the current velocity. The operator w plays the role of balancing the global search and the local search; and was proposed to decrease linearly with time from a value of 1.4–0.5. As such, global search starts with a large weight and then decreases with time to favor local search over global search. When the number of iterations is equal to the total number of particles, goal is compared with the error produced by the GBest weights. If the error produced by the GBest weights are less than or equal to goal, weights in the GBest are used for testing and prediction. Otherwise weights of minimum error are stored in GBest and the iterations are repeated until goal is reached.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Development of the proposed model reduces unplanned shutdowns, astronomical energy and operational costs, lower maintenance budgets and maintaining optimum operating efficiency in equipment. The maintenance cost is reduced by giving information prior to the field engineers about the performance assessment based on degradation. It helps the maintenance people to schedule the cleaning or maintenance activity well ahead. This improves the energy efficiency of the system from the sudden break down or offline of system from the process.Experiments were conducted on a 1-1 shell and tube heat exchanger with different cold water flow rates, hot water flow rate, and hot water inlet temperature to assess the performance of the system. The experimental observations are incorporated into the ANN model development. Different neural networks models are developed to predict overall heat transfer coefficient UDesign of the design heat exchanger system and the models are tested for generalization. Good agreement was identified between the predictive model results and the experimental results. It is found that the NNPSO model yield better results than other model with a minimum error of 1.33%. FF is found from the predicted UDesign and UReal value. From the estimated FF value, the performance degradation/fouling effect is within the tolerance limit (margin) or not is identified. Based on the results, degree of fouling and precaution information like warning or maintenance is given. The advantage of this system is that it could be easily implemented in the industries to get online response of fouling effect with simple and effective experimentation. This gives comprehensive information to field engineers for improving the performance of heat exchanger by asset utilization, energy efficient and cost reduction in terms of production loss and maintenance.