@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identifying patterns in channel usage across the search, purchase and post-sales stages of shopping

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Different motivations explain channel choice for search, purchase and post-sales.Channel choice is affected by the product category: search/purchase goods.Product involvement is the most relevant variable explaining multichannel behavior.Cross-channel synergies as consumers use both channels at each shopping stage.Meaningful segments based on the choice of channel are identified and characterized.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Purchase process,Channel choice,Retail,Multichannel shoppers,Segmentation,Online shopping,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Consumers today are using various channels to complete their purchase process. As shoppers pursue different goals at each stage of the process, channel choice may be explained by different drivers for search, purchase and post-sales activities. Our research framework is based on an extension of the TAM Model with the support of the Motivational Model, differentiating two types of motivations for channel usage: intrinsic and extrinsic. Moreover, we rely on transaction costs economics to explain different channel usage at each shopping stages and for different product categories. Lineal regression and cluster analysis are applied to data collected through a survey answered by 1533 multichannel retail shoppers within two product categories (apparel and consumer electronics) in two countries (UK and Spain). Our findings show that segments with different usage patterns and motivations can be identified across the shopping process and that the drivers of channel usage are different depending on the stage of the buying process and the product category considered.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the growth of online selling, multichannel distribution has become a strategic priority for firms in every sector, particularly for brick-and-mortar retailers. Nonetheless, as Badrinarayanan et al. (2012) state, research on multichannel retailing is sparse and fragmented. A retailer that starts selling over the Internet faces increased and new forms of competition; as Shankar et al. (2003) put it, “a competing offer is just a few clicks away on the Internet” (p.41). Multichannel shoppers are defined as those that combine various channels to complete the purchase process; they may navigate the same retailer’s channels or they may cross to other retailers’ channels. In this scenario where customer switching costs are minimal, the retailer that does not integrate its channels correctly risks losing customers to competitors during the purchase process (Bendoly et al., 2005).In the competitive multichannel environment retailers need to understand what drives the behaviour of multichannel shoppers, not only to keep customers but to also target the appropriate customers in channel migration campaigns. Often, retailers encourage customers to shop from different channels, as there is evidence that multichannel customers provide higher revenues (Venkatesan et al. 2007, Kushwaha and Shankar 2007, Ansari et al. 2008, Kushwaha and Shankar 2013) and are more loyal (Kumar and Venkatesan 2005, Wallace et al. 2004). However, multichannel retail shoppers are not a homogeneous group (Thomas and Sullivan 2005) and identifying segments differing in channel use is essential for retailers to implement a multichannel strategy. Rangaswamy and van Bruggen (2005) stress the need to have a clearer picture of what types of customers are shopping across channels and what drives channel preference. This research gap, related to identifying the drivers of the behaviour of channel-based segments, is also emphasized by Neslin et al. (2006), Zhang et al. (2010, and Dholakia et al. (2010).Our paper is based on the belief that in order to understand multichannel shopper behaviour, it is necessary to take into consideration the stages of the purchase process. Early contributions, such as Alba et al. (1997), and Peterson et al. (1997), highlighted the need to investigate how consumers navigate across the Internet and conventional retail channels during the search and purchase stages. We identify a research gap in analyzing whether or not the drivers of channel choice are different for each purchase stage. Most papers investigate the drivers of channel choice strictly at the purchase stage, a few papers have integrated the search and purchase stages (e.g. Konuş et al. 2008, and Verhoef et al. 2007) but to our knowledge there is no research that includes the post-sales stage. Post-sales activities include product returns, claims, and repair or maintenance services. After-sales activities play a critical role for retail companies as they are an opportunity to achieve customer satisfaction and retention (Cavalieri et al. 2007). Additionally, in online selling, offering a straightforward post-sales service is a means to reducing perceived risks and attracting online buyers (Huang et al. 2004). The need to investigate how consumers use channels for post-sales activities was strongly advised by Konuş et al. (2008).Thus, the main contribution of our paper lies in analyzing the drivers of channel choice for the three main stages of the purchasing process: search, purchase and post-sales activities and to do so, adopting a segmentation approach to account for the diversity of behavioral patterns. The choice of drivers of channel choice is based on an extension of the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) with the support of the Motivational Model. Thus, we consider channel usage is driven by two types of motivation, extrinsic (i.e. external rewards of using the Internet for shopping) and intrinsic (i.e. rewards related to the interaction with the Internet while shopping). The research design of our paper presents two additional contributions: first, we analyse and compare two different product categories: apparel as an example of experience goods, and consumer electronics as search goods, which are believed to have different shopping requirements; secondly, we collect data from two countries, i.e. Spain and Britain, which show different degrees of penetration of Internet use and analyse the differences in channel behaviour between them.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section we review the literature on the topic of multichannel consumer segmentation, present our research framework and discuss the drivers of multichannel shopping. In Section 3 we explain the methodology of the empirical study. Section 4 contains the discussion of results, and Section 5 the conclusions and implications of our research.Research on shopper typologies has a long tradition in retailing. There are a significant number of papers in this research area applied to offline retail formats (e.g. Bellenger et al. 1977, Bloch et al. 1994), which use segmentation criteria such as shopping motivations or mall/store attributes. At the beginning of the 2000s researchers became interested in segmenting online customers (e.g. Brengman et al. 2005). Most papers suggest that online shoppers have different motivations, attitudes, or loyalty patterns (e.g. Mathwick et al., 2001), but Ganesh et al. (2010) found more similarities than differences between online and offline shoppers.Nowadays, it is difficult to draw a clear line separating online and offline shoppers and thus the interest has shifted to identifying typologies of multichannel consumers. Neslin and Shankar (2009) suggest a multichannel customer management decision framework that starts with customer analysis and identification of customer segments. They argue that customers differ in channel usage and segments formed on the basis of channel usage meet the criteria of being measurable, accessible, differentially responsive, actionable and substantial. According to Neslin and Shankar (2009) customers that differ in channel usage differ in other characteristics as well, and they challenge researchers to identify the most effective segmentation variables.There are few papers that provide empirical evidence on segmentation of multichannel retail shoppers. Table 1summarises the characteristics of those studies. Most of the papers form segments on the basis of channel choice or channel choice intention, while some include multiple measures of channel usage. There is considerable variety in the variables chosen to explain the segments. Channels’ attributes, response to marketing communications, demographics and psychographics are the most frequently used variables. The variables used are of course related to the method employed: the studies based on companies’ databases employ objective measures such as the channel of purchase, marketing communications, or demographics, while the studies based on surveys employ subjective variables such as consumer attitudes or psychographics. There are corresponding findings in the reviewed papers: the importance of the multichannel segment, with the trend of consumers moving online found by Knox (2005), the existence of a hard-core offline segment, the tendency to remain in the channel with which the consumer most familiar, or the use of the online channel for search and the store channel for purchase. Most of the papers investigate multichannel behaviour solely at the purchase stage, but Verhoef et al. (2007), Konuş et al. (2008), and Schröder and Zaharia (2008) investigate the search and purchase stages of the shopping process. The findings of these papers are mixed and will be discussed in the next section.Our research design tries to explain channel usage for each stage of shopping by looking at the variables that define channel-based segments (Fig. 1). Our model is an extension of the TAM Model with the support of the Motivational Model. The use of the Internet for shopping has been often explained with the TAM Model developed by Davis (1989), which includes usefulness and ease-of-use as main determinants of the acceptance of a technology for developing a task. The parsimony and predictive power of TAM are its main strengths, but parsimony is also a limitation as there may be other variables instrumental for managers to promote the use of a technology. This limitation was acknowledged by the developers of the TAM Model, who suggested additional variables to improve the understanding of the behaviour (e.g. Venkatesh et al. 2003). The Motivational Model (Deci and Ryan 1985, Vallerand 1997) has been used by some researchers to overcome the limitations of the TAM Model to explain the acceptance of technology (Venkatesh 2000, Van der Heijden 2004), particularly the online channel (Teo et al. 1999, Shang et al. 2005). An extrinsically motivated consumer will use the online channel to achieve rewards external to the system, while an intrinsically motivated shopper will shop online driven by the benefits derived from the interaction with the Internet.The idea of different channel usage across the shopping process was in the early conceptual contributions of Peterson et al. (1997), and Alba et al. (1997), who analysed the advantages of each channel for different stages of the buying process. We rely on transaction costs economics to expect that the drivers of channel usage will act differently at each stage of shopping. There are different types of transaction costs involved across the purchase process and the online channel lowers the costs at the search stage but raises the examination, payment and post-sales costs. Balasubramanian et al. (2005) developed a model of product and process utilities that analysed channel choice considering three stages of shopping: forming a consideration set, product evaluation and purchasing. They found that for the first two stages the Internet is particularly useful as it lowers information-search costs. For purchasing, they suggested that the online channel will be chosen when consumers want to minimize transaction costs, and the offline channel when there is perceived risk and a preference for immediate consumption. Some other researchers (e.g.: Liang and Huang 1998; Teo and Yu 2005) have explicitly applied transaction costs economics to explain online purchasing.Notwithstanding the expectation that channel choice is driven by different variables at different shopping stages, we believe that the choice of channel at a stage of shopping is dependent of the choice of channel at the previous or following stages. We can identify channel lock-in when the shopper stays in a single channel during the shopping process and cross-channel synergies if the shopper changes channel to complete the process. The efficiency of the online channel for finding information before making a purchase explains why the most common multichannel pattern is to search online and purchase offline. This is the research-shopper phenomenon, defined by Verhoef et al. (2007) as the tendency of consumers to use one channel for search and another one for purchase. The findings of their study point out the lack of lock-in power of the Internet channel, as it is not able to convert searchers into buyers, therefore, showing the cross-channel synergy between using the Internet for searching and the store for purchasing. Research on multichannel segmentation has found that there is a segment of consumers that uses mostly one channel to perform all shopping activities (e.g. the store-focused segment of Konuş et al. 2008 or Thomas and Sullivan 2005 and the online segment of Schröder and Zaharia 2008), and a segment that relies on different channels at different stages of shopping process (e.g. the migration segment of Knox 2005, or the multichannel segment of Konuş et al. 2008 or Kushwaha and Shankar 2007). Moreover, channel choice for search and purchase has been shown to be driven by different variables in the studies of Verhoef et al. (2007), and Schröder and Zaharia (2008), but Konuş et al. (2008) found similar channel choice patterns for the two shopping stages. Hence, we expect to find segments of shoppers that use channels differently across the shopping process and have different motivations to do so.Our research framework suggests that channel based-segments will have different socio-demographic profiles regarding gender, age, occupation and country of residence. Herrero Crespo and Rodriguez del Bosque (2010) found that gender and education affect the importance of antecedents of channel choice for electronics, but age and occupation were not so relevant. Venkatesan et al. (2007) found that gender affects the adoption of multiple channels, with male customers being more likely to adopt a new channel. Kushwaha and Shankar (2013) found that multichannel shoppers were younger than offline customers and online-only customers were younger than multichannel shoppers. Contrary to most research evidences, Konuş et al. (2008) did not find significant differences between channel-based segment regarding demographics. Badrinarayanan et al. (2012) found that culture affects multichannel behaviour.We also argue that product category influences the use of channels for shopping. Peterson et al. (1997) stressed the need to explicitly include product characteristics when evaluating the impact of the Internet for searching and purchasing. When considering the stages of multichannel shopping, researchers have noted that the utility of one channel for a specific stage depends on the product category (Alba et al. 1997, Balasubramanian et al. 2005). Transaction costs economics again grounds our expectation that channel usage differs by product category. The study of Liang and Huang (1998) analysed, among other categories, shoes and microwave ovens, and found that the transaction costs at each stage of shopping were different by product. Teo and Yu (2005) found that the difficulty of physically assessing product quality affects online buying intentions. Products can be classified according to the extent to which consumers can research their characteristics before purchasing (Nelson 1970, Chocarro et al. 2013). Goods for which such an investigation is economically feasible are termed search goods, while experience goods are those for which this research is not economically feasible. For experience goods such as clothing, the traditional offline channel may be preferred for purchasing as the qualities of the product can be fully appreciated and risk can be reduced, whereas for search goods such as electronics, whose features can be evaluated objectively, the online channel may be more efficient to search and compare alternatives and make the purchase decision.Our framework considers two main types of motivations following the classification of extrinsic and intrinsic motivations as the drivers of channel usage across the shopping process (Vallerand 1997, Deci and Ryan 1985). Extrinsic motivations will explain that the shopper uses the online channel because he/she achieves rewards as a result of using it, i.e. the performance of the shopping task, whereas intrinsic motivations will explain the use of the online channel because the shopper achieves rewards in the process of using it, i.e. a free of effort task.TAM captures extrinsic motivation by the perceived usefulness construct, as it contributes to the instrumentality of the channel and enhances the performance of the shopping task (Davis 1989, Venkatesh 2000). We define perceived usefulness as the belief that the online channel improves the efficiency of the shopping process. Perceived usefulness has often been included in models to explain attitudes or intentions to purchase from online channels, with most of the studies showing a positive relationship. (Childers et al. 2001; Ha and Stoel 2009). During the search stage, the online channel becomes particularly useful as it allows easy comparison and evaluation of alternatives, thus lowering information search costs (Balasubramanian et al. 2005) and increasing the attractiveness of the channels (Verhoef et al. 2007). Most multichannel retailers are now allowing returns and order cancellations of online purchases at the physical stores (Chatterjee 2010). When the shopper has to return an item bought online the decision whether to do it at a store or online will be affected by the perception of the usefulness of the online medium and the transaction costs involved (Liang and Huang 1998). Post-sales activities include inquiring about the product or making a claiming about it and doing so online would require a high perception of channel usefulness as consumers may fear that their inquiries or service requests would not be handled efficiently online, thereby increasing transaction costs (Liang and Huang 1998; Teo and Yu 2005). Thus, we hypothesize:H1a: A higher level of perceived usefulness is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for search.H1b: A higher level of perceived usefulness is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for purchase.H1c: A higher level of perceived usefulness is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for post-sales.The perception of security one gets when using the channels may incline consumers to use one channel more than the other. Perceived security of the online channel refers to the belief that the Internet is a secure option for sending personal information. The total utility of a channel for shopping is affected by its perceived security (Alba et al. 1997) and this factor acts as an extrinsic motivation for the shopper who gets a security payoff when using a channel perceived as more secure. Many consumers search online but refrain from purchasing online as they are afraid of sending credit card and personal data over the Internet, thus the use of the Internet for purchasing will be higher when the perception of security rises. There is some evidence of this relationship (Salisbury et al. 2001, Cha 2011), but Montoya-Weiss et al. (2003) did not reach conclusive findings and suggested that perceived security may be relevant to the online channel depending on the context. Perceived security is expected to affect channel choice for purchase and product returns where money and personal data are involved, but as Verhoef et al. (2007) found, it is not expected to affect channel attractiveness for searching, as using the Internet for searching does not usually require disclosing personal or financial data. Hence:H2a: A higher level of perceived security is not significantly associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for search.H2b: A higher level of perceived security is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for purchase.H2c: A higher level of perceived security is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for post-sales.Time pressure, defined as the consideration by the consumer of time as a scarce and valuable resource, may have an effect on channel choice for all the phases of the shopping process. Generally, time-pressed consumers will spend less time searching and will seek convenient ways to purchase and return (if needed) the products, thus time pressure acts as an extrinsic motivation as it relates to the desire to accomplish the shopping task fast. Staying in a single channel can be a way of saving time, for that reason, Konuş et al. (2008) predicted that consumers pressed for time would be less likely to shop in multiple channels across the stages of the shopping process. However, they did not find a significant effect for this relationship. Previous research reveals that consumers, specially “hurried consumers”, perceive online shopping to be a time saving practice (Alreck and Settle 2002). In the context of multichannel retailing, Chocarro et al. (2013) conclude that consumers are more likely to select the online channel for purchasing when they are pressed for time. We believe that performing after-sales activities online is not a good option for time-pressed shoppers as it would involve a delay in the answer (product exchanged/repaired, query solved) that is avoided by going to the store where the outcome is normally immediate. Notwithstanding, according to qualitative research conducted by Alreck et al. (2009), consumers only rarely report using the Internet to save time, the majority of respondents argue that the rapid delivery options for product returns are overpriced and the regular delivery is too slow. In fact, Chatterjee (2010) found that consumers with high waiting time costs tend to complete the purchase process offline. Thus:H3a: A higher shopper time pressure is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for search.H3b: A higher shopper time pressure is negatively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for purchase.H3c: A higher shopper time pressure is negatively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for post-sales.TAM captures intrinsic motivation by the perceived ease-of-use construct (Davis 1989, Venkatesh 2000, Van der Heijden 2004). In contrast to usefulness, which relates to the outcomes of the process, perceived ease-of-use relates to the effort that needs to be put into the shopping process. Perceived ease-of-use of the online channel is defined as the degree to which the consumer believes using the Internet for shopping will require little effort. Although consumers have learned to navigate the websites of companies, Rose et al. (2012) conclude that ease-of-use of the online store continues to be an important factor in influencing consumer attitude and behaviour for purchasing online. Verhoef et al. (2007) found that attributes related to ease-of-use influence the attractiveness of the channels used for searching. Post-sales activities are quite recent in the online context and are undertaken by shoppers less frequently than searching and purchasing. Post-sales activities have traditionally involved bi-directional personal communication with staff and conducting these communications online will increase bargaining transaction costs if the perceived ease-of-use of the Internet is low (Teo and Yu 2005). Hence:H4a: A higher level of perceived ease-of-use is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for search.H4b: A higher level of perceived ease-of-use is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for purchase.H4c: A higher level of perceived ease-of-use is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for post-sales.The first papers that expanded the TAM Model to incorporate intrinsic motivations included the perceived enjoyment construct (Teo et al. 1999, Venkatesh 2000). Ignoring the hedonic aspect of using the Internet can be a major omission (Alba et al. 1997, Childers et al. 2001). Perceived enjoyment refers to the extent the consumer thinks using the online channel for shopping is fun and pleasant in itself. Previous research has observed that perceived enjoyment affects the attractiveness of the Internet for purchasing (Verhoef et al. 2007) and the attitudes towards the online channel (Childers et al. 2001, Ha and Stoel 2009). There is limited insight into how enjoyment of the Internet affects channel use for searching, but we can expect, together with Verhoef et al. (2007), that channel use for search is explained by enjoyment of the Internet shopping experience. Doing product returns means following systematic procedures that one has to learn and become used to; we expect that shoppers who enjoy the Internet for shopping would be more inclined to learn about those procedures. Thus:H5a: A higher level of perceived enjoyment is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for search.H5b: A higher level of perceived enjoyment is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for purchase.H5c: A higher level of perceived enjoyment is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for post-sales.Hedonic orientation or motivation refers to the enjoyment of shopping in itself as opposite to shopping as a task. Contrary to the perceived enjoyment variable, this is a motivation that does not refer specifically to enjoyment of the online medium, but to the pleasure encountered in the task of shopping. We believe that consumers that enjoy shopping will enjoy the shopping process over the Internet more than those with a low hedonic shopping orientation. Overby and Lee (2006) found that customers with higher hedonic motivations prefer the online retail channel for purchasing. On the contrary, To et al. (2007) concluded that a hedonic orientation would drive offline search and purchase. Konuş et al. (2008) analysed segments formed on the basis of attitudes towards channels for search and purchase and found that a hedonic orientation is related to the use of the channels, as the segment of multichannel shoppers are the ones with a higher hedonic orientation. Schröder and Zaharia (2008) found that customers who use store channels to seek information and purchase have a higher hedonic orientation than shoppers of online channels. We are inclined to believe that hedonic shoppers will prefer offline to online shops for searching and purchasing since those individuals do not value the higher convenience offered by the online channel but the increased opportunities for enjoyment offered by offline channels. Returning products at the store allows the customer to shop around for exchange alternatives and this behaviour is more likely in hedonic shoppers. Coming back to the store for exchanges provides an extra opportunity to interact with peers and staff, which are hedonic motivations (Tauber 1972).H6a: A higher shopper hedonic orientation is negatively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for search.H6b: A higher shopper hedonic orientation is negatively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for purchase.H6c: A higher shopper hedonic orientation is negatively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for post-sales.Consumer involvement with the product category is a relevant variable related to multichannel behaviour (Kumar and Venkatesan 2005). Shoppers that are more involved in the product category will get rewarded from the process of shopping in itself. Highly involved consumers search and compare more information before making a purchase (Balabanis and Reynolds 2001), so product involvement would affect the use of the channels. Peterson et al. (1997) and Balasubramanian et al. (2005) suggest that consumers with expertise in the product category are able to make decisions relying only on the factual information provided online. Wolfinbarger and Gilly (2001) explored the role of involvement with the product category as an experiential motivation to search and purchase online and found that online shoppers show higher levels of product involvement. In the apparel context, Jones and Kim (2010) obtained a strong positive association between clothing involvement and online apparel purchasing intention. Regarding after sales activities, highly involved consumers are more likely to return products as they can clearly distinguish a bad product choice (Maity and Arnold 2013), and feel less uncertainty about undertaking post-sales activities online. In fact, as highly involved shoppers have made investments in knowledge of the product category the transaction costs involved in performing shopping activities online decrease (Teo and Yu 2005), making shoppers more likely to use the online channel.H7a: A higher product involvement is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for search.H7b: A higher product involvement is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for purchase.H7c: A higher product involvement is positively associated to the use of the online channel (vs. the offline channel) for post-sales.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
