@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive molecular docking method based on information entropy genetic algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a coefficient adaptive scoring function of molecular docking.This function improves the docking accuracy greatly.Genetic algorithm with the multi-population evolution and entropy-based.It is based on force-field scoring, using empirical-based and knowledge-based scoring as other scoring factors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Molecular docking,Genetic algorithm,Information entropy,Self-adaptive,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Almost all the molecule docking models, using by widespread docking software, are approximate. Approximation will make the scoring function inaccurate under some circumstances. This study proposed a new molecule docking scoring method: based on force-field scoring function, it use information entropy genetic algorithm to solve the docking problem. Empirical-based and knowledge-based scoring function are also considered in this method. Instead of simple combination with fixed weights, coefficients of each factor are adaptive in the process of searching optimum solution. Genetic algorithm with the multi-population evolution and entropy-based searching technique with narrowing down space is used to solve the optimization model for molecular docking problem. To evaluate this method, we carried out a numerical experiment with 134 protein–ligand complexes of the publicly available GOLD test set. The results show that this study improved the docking accuracy over the individual force-field scoring greatly. Comparing with other popular docking software, it has the best average Root-Mean-Square Deviation (RMSD). The average computing time of this study is also good among them.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Molecular docking is to predict the conformation of a ligand within the active site of a receptor and search for the low-energy binding modes [1]. Molecular docking is widely used in virtual screen, and some successful cases have been reported [2]. The docking model and scoring functions have received wide concerns in recent years and a lot of scoring functions have been proposed [3]. As the core of molecular docking, scoring function can help a docking program to efficiently explore the binding space of a ligand. It is also responsible for evaluating the binding affinity once the correct binding pose is identified [4]. It is an optimization process of finding the best position of a ligand in the binding site of a receptor.A lot of comparative studies have been done to evaluate the relative performances of these widely used docking programs and scoring methods [5–18]. However, none of these scoring functions or program is generally applicable for all the situations because the interactions between ligands and receptors are complicated. In addition, it is necessary to simplify docking models to obtain acceptable computing time.Current scoring functions can be roughly classified into three types: force field-based scoring functions, empirical scoring functions and knowledge-based scoring functions. These models of widespread used docking functions are nearly approximate models. Approximation makes one scoring function inaccurate under some circumstances. Based on force-field scoring function, we also considered hydrophobic and deformation as well in our method. Instead of simple combination of them with fixed weights, coefficients are adaptive in searching procedure. In order to improve accuracy and stability, knowledge-based scoring method was used as another scoring factor with adaptive coefficient. An iteration scheme in conjunction with the multi-population evolution and entropy-based searching technique with narrowing down space was used to solve the optimization model for molecular docking. To evaluate the method, we performed the numerical experiment with 134 protein–ligand complexes from the publicly available GOLD test set (http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/). The results indicated that the scoring function for molecular docking had high accuracy.The process of finding the best pose is an optimization problem. The problem can be described as follows:(1)Min{F1(X)+F2(X)+F3(X)}s.t.gi(X)<0,i=1,2,…,nwhere X is a vector of design variables, indicating the orientation and conformation information of a ligand. Due to the computational reasons, it is always assumed that the ligand is flexible and that the receptor is rigid. So X can be defined as follows:(2)X=Tx,Ty,Tz,Rx,Ry,Rz,Tb1,Tb2,…,Tbn,C1,C2,C3Twhere Tx, Tyand Tzare the position coordinates of the ligand; Rx, Ryand Rzare the rotational angles of the ligand; Tb1, Tb2,…,Tbnare the torsion angles of the rotatable bonds of the ligand; C1, C2, C3 are coefficients of each factor. The constraints gi(X), i=1, 2,…,n are shown as follows:(3)Tx_≤Tx≤Tx¯Ty_≤Ty≤Ty¯Tz_≤Tz≤Tz¯−π≤Rx,y,z,Tb1,⋯,bn≤π0<C1,2,3<1¯In Eq. (1), F1(X) represents the part of Van der Waals; F2(X) represents empirical-based scoring and F3(X) represents knowledge-based scoring. Fi(X) is the product of Cjand force-field factor Ui(X).(4)Fi(X)=Ci*Ui(X)The force-field function part of this paper adopts the classical AMBER molecular mechanics energy functions [19,20]. The objective function is the interaction energy between the ligand and protein, consisting of the Van der Waals and Coulomb terms of force field functions:(5)f1(X)=∑i=1nlig∑j=1nrecAijrij12−Bijrij6+332.0qiqjDrijwhere each term is a double sum over the ligand atom i and the receptor atom j. nligand nrecare respectively the number of atoms in the ligand and that in the receptor; Aijand Bijare van der Waals repulsion and attraction parameters; rijis the distance between atoms i and j; qiand qjare the point charges on atoms i and j; D is dielectric function; 332.0 is a conversion factor from the electrostatic energy to kilocalories per mole. The force-field-based scoring function is widely used in popular docking programs, such as DOCK, AutoDock, GoldScore, etc. To simplify the interactions between ligand and receptor, it cannot provide very accurate results in some cases.Empirical scoring functions is assumed that the van der Waals interaction (Evdw), hydrogen-bonding energy (Ehb), hydrophobic (Ehyd) and deformation (Edef) terms are the primary parts of binding energy. Weights of the above factors are fixed and obtained by training set. X-Score [21] (a kind of empirical scoring) is considered as f2(X). The knowledge-based scoring function commonly refers to Potential of Mean Force (PMF). According to the inverse Boltzmann law, it can be directly derived from the statistical analysis of different types of atom pairs encoded in available crystal complex structures. The scoring function K-score [22] (a kind of knowledge scoring) is considered as f3(X).Ui(Xk) is the normalized objective function. In order to improve the stability, the values of the last two generations are used in Eq. (6). Then, the normalized score Ui(Xk) is represented as follows:(6)Ui(Xk)=fi(Xk)(fi(Xk−1)+fi(Xk−2))/2where k is the number of iteration in the optimizing process, and X is the optimal solution of the iteration.The objective function of Eq. (1) is a complex single-objective and multi-constraint optimization problem. Genetic algorithms provide such a capability of their successful adaptation and implementation in a series of optimal design problems. But genetic search process is a time-consuming work, so that hindered them from applied to molecular docking optimization problem, especially to massively among a virtual library of billions of small molecules for compounds that can bind to known protein binding sites. In this paper, an improved adaptive GA is adopted [23], in which an entropy-based searching technique with multi-population and the quasi-exactness penalty function is developed to ensure rapid and steady convergence.The crossover and mutation operators (pcand pm) are assigned to be the added design variables to overcome the difficulty in confirming the genetic parameters. The lower and upper limits of pcand pmcan be defined in a reasonable region (here 0.8≤pc<1.0 and 0.0≤pm≤0.3). C1, C2, C3 are also design variables of GA.Shannon's theorem [24] has wide-ranging applications in both communications and data storage applications. This theorem is of foundational importance to the modern field of information theory [25]. There are similarities between the process of optimization and communication of information theory. Information entropy or Shannon entropy H of a discrete set of probabilities p1,…,pnis defined by:(7)H=−∑pilnpis.t.∑pi=1,pi∈[0,1]Shannon entropy can be used to measure the uncertainty about the realization of a random variable. If pjis here defined as a probability that the optimal solution of the optimal problem occurs in the population j, then Shannon entropy will be decreased during optimization process of problem.The (1−pj) can be used as the coefficients of narrowing searching space in the modified genetic algorithm. When the optimal solution occurs in the lth population, then (1−pl*)=0, and its searching space is not narrowing. Using multi-population genetic strategy with narrowing down searching space, the M populations with N members are generated in the given space. Design space is defined as initial searching space D(0). M populations with N members are generated in the given space. After a new generation is independently evolved in each population, the searching space of each population is narrowed according to the following equation:(8)Dj(K)=(1−pj)Dj(K−1)dji_(K)=max{[dji*(K)−0.5(1−pj)Dj(K)],dji_(0)}dji¯(K)=max{[dji*(K)+0.5(1−pj)Dj(K)],dji¯(0)}where Dj(K) is the searching space of the population j at Kth iteration.dji_(K)anddji¯(K)are the modified lower and upper limits of ith design variable in the population j at Kth iteration, respectively. dji*(K) is the value of design variable i of the best member in the population j.Eq. (8) is employed to control the narrowing of searching space for each population. If (1−pl*)=0, the optimal solution occurs in the lth population, and its searching space is not narrowing. Then the convergence criterion of the proposed method can be defined as: when the searching space in the best population has been reduced to a very small area (a given tolerance), the global optimal solution can be obtained approximately. Using narrowed space as the convergence criterion could controls the convergence of the algorithm effectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we presented a coefficient adaptive method for multiple scoring factors to improve the accuracy of the molecular docking. Based on force-field scoring function, we also consider hydrophobic, deformation and PMF as well in the method. Instead of simple combination with fixed weight, coefficients are adaptive in searching procedure. GA with the multi-population evolution and entropy-based searching technique with narrowing down space is used to solve the optimization model for molecular docking.The results of the docking experiments on the 134 diverse complexes from the GOLD test data set have shown an obvious improvement of the docking accuracy. The average RMSD value (1.31) of this paper is the best among these docking methods. In the view of docking accuracy, our method is better than the other six docking programs.The results indicate that our method can help the force-field function to produce better docking results by introducing other related docking score factors. It is an effective method to improve the docking accuracy. Analyses of failure case indicated that the method proposed in this paper is not helpful in some cases. It is expected to make further improvement in this method in our next work.