@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
M-S-QUAL: Mobile service quality measurement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A scale designed to assess mobile service quality for virtual and physical products.A mobile service quality scale, M-S-QUAL, was constructed and tested.Five factors for virtual product shopping were concluded.Four factors for physical product shopping were concluded.M-S-QUAL demonstrated good psychometric properties.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile commerce,Mobile service,Service quality,Instrument development,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The proliferation of wireless technologies means that consumers are increasingly coming into contact with a diverse range of mobile services. Mobile service providers seeking to deliver a superior service must understand how consumers perceive these services. Although many instruments, such as SERVQUAL and E-S-QUAL, are available to measure service quality in general, to date there has been no instrument specifically designed to measure mobile service quality. Given the many types of mobile services available, our aim in this study was to ascertain the essential characteristics of such services by conceptualizing, constructing, refining, and testing a multiple-item scale, M-S-QUAL, designed to measure service quality in the mobile environment. According to Hinkin’s guidelines on scale development, the items in our scale were generated by following a deductive approach based on a theoretical foundation. There are two parts of M-S-QUAL, which assess m-commerce shopping experiences for virtual and physical products respectively. Thus, the scale developed in this study was designed to assess m-commerce shopping experiences for both virtual and physical products. We propose and empirical test a multidimensional model of M-S-QUAL using a sample of 578 Internet respondents. Through a five-step validation, the M-S-QUAL construction concluded with five factors (contact, responsiveness, fulfillment, privacy and efficiency) for the supporting services in the process of virtual product shopping and four factors (contact, responsiveness, fulfillment and efficiency) for the supporting services in the process of physical product shopping. These two aspects of M-S-QUAL demonstrate good psychometric properties, as confirmed by exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and reliability and validity tests. The findings of this study will help mobile service providers to assess the quality of their services and assist researchers in developing mobile service quality theories.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of such handheld devices as personal digital assistants (PDAs), tablets, and smart phones, wireless and mobile technologies and their associated applications have become essential for daily life. According to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), there were 7 billion mobile subscribers in 2014, a number equivalent to 95% of the world’s population (ITU 2014). The Statistics Portal (Statista) also predicted that retail m-commerce sales through smartphones in the U.S. will exceed 22 billion dollars in 2015, and in 2017 more than 90% of Internet users will access online content through their handheld devices (Statista 2014). These figures imply a very rapid evolution of Internet access and the mobile market, with ever-increasing numbers of people using handheld devices. These figures imply the very rapid evolution of Internet access and the mobile market, with ever-increasing numbers of people using handheld devices. Advanced and mature mobile communication technologies have facilitated the development of a variety of mobile commerce (m-commerce) applications, including location-based services, mobile reading services, electronic books, mobile TV, and mobile music. The m-commerce market is growing at full speed with the rapid development of m-commerce applications.Although the m-commerce market looks extremely promising, this market environment was previously unimaginable, and is even now only vaguely understood. Businesses are eager to grasp the potential opportunities in m-commerce, but do not fully understand the new paradigm involved. In any market, however, the first step in serving customers well is to offer excellent service. Service quality is crucial to a firm’s long-term success, and providing a superior service to customers is essential to gaining a competitive advantage (Caro and Garcia 2007). Mobile service providers who seek to deliver a superior service must understand how consumers perceive their mobile services, and such understanding requires a means of measuring service quality. As Peter Drucker is often quoted as saying, “You can’t manage what you can’t measure” or “If you can’t measure it, you can’t improve it.” The measurement of mobile service quality is essential to mobile service providers and to the development of m-commerce. In this paper, we focus on mobile service that supports users in making purchases anytime and anywhere on mobile platforms, rather than the telecommunication carriers’ mobile service as an infrastructure. To date, investigations into the quality of such m-commerce service have been rare. Important research questions concerning mobile service are “What factors constitute mobile service quality, and how do these factors differ from those of traditional off-line markets or web-based e-commerce?” This paper provides answers to this question by systematically constructing a mobile service quality instrument that we call the M-S-QUAL.In the context of B2B e-commerce, the primary issue is the seamless integration of operations across organizations rather than service quality. The existence of an inter-organizational B2B infrastructure mandates its use by personnel who carry out relevant tasks regardless of service quality. Thus, in this study of m-commerce service quality, a B2C environment is presumed. There are several differences between m-commerce and e-commerce. Clarke and Flaherty (2003) identified four characteristics of m-commerce: ubiquity, convenience, localization, and personalization. The characteristics that are not found in general e-commerce are ubiquity and localization. Although in the past two decades e-commerce has provided great convenience and made personalization feasible at a large scale, m-commerce has brought these two aspects to the next level. With mobile capability, the access to information is ubiquitous. Positioning technology such as the Global Positioning System (GPS) provides localization services for mobile devices (Rao and Minakakis 2003), which has facilitated the development of location-based applications that connect directly to a user’s location. Localization and ubiquity implies that there is profound opportunity for businesses to engage consumers anytime and at any place.Unlike traditional e-commerce in which physical products dominate the market, m-commerce features a proliferating range of virtual products. Physical products are tangible items that can be actually handled and can only be shipped via physical transportation, whereas virtual products are intangible products that exist in digital form and can be conveniently delivered via digital channels. However, not all intangible products are virtual products, as many intangible products cannot be delivered via digital channels and/or are not in digital form. Digital content can also become a physical product if it is recorded and sold in physical form, as in the case of DVDs. Such content is properly called a virtual product if it is organized as a digital file for transmission over digital channels such as the Internet. So far, the quality of service offered by merchants of virtual products has been little studied and is inadequately understood. Consumers may value different aspects of service when virtual products are concerned, but this too is little explored.Mobile users may have different expectations concerning service quality when they are buying physical products than when they buy virtual products. The disparate natures of virtual and physical products lead to different user perspectives and different modes of marketing. The incremental costs of producing virtual products are much lower than those of producing physical products, and the process of delivering virtual products is much less complicated. Virtual products are delivered through digital channels, which represent a convenient venue characterized by high speed, low cost, low maintenance and low rates of failure. In contrast, the delivery of physical products requires transportation systems that are typically characterized by slow speed, high cost, high maintenance and high rates of failure. In general, it is much easier to maintain quality consistency for virtual products. Therefore, in view of these less challenging processes of manufacturing and delivery, users of virtual products may be less tolerant of product or delivery failures. Currently, most of the virtual products offered through the mobile environment are easy to deliver and low in price, e.g., various apps. Therefore, users may perceive lower monetary risks in making purchases, and they may be satisfied with nominal compensations for failures by the sellers. It will be of great interest to see how the differences in service requirements for virtual and physical products play out in the m-commerce market. Thus, the M-S-QUAL constructed in this study consists of two parts that separately assess m-commerce shopping experiences for virtual and physical products.It has grown necessary to develop a service quality measure for the mobile commerce market. To date, there has been no integrated scale for assessing the quality of service to shoppers who use mobile devices in buying virtual and physical products. Therefore, there is a need to develop and validate the M-S-QUAL instrument for measuring mobile service quality as perceived by shoppers in the mobile environment. The M-S-QUAL enables mobile service providers to assess the quality of their shopping services and identify areas for improvement. In developing and evaluating this instrument, we made a distinction between the experiences of m-commerce shopping for virtual or for physical products. This distinction further ensures the M-S-QUAL instrument’s applicability to both categories of mobile service. This instrument consists of two parts, one for measuring the users’ m-commerce experience in buying physical products and the other for measuring satisfaction in buying virtual products. To the best of our knowledge, no prior research has systematically constructed a mobile service quality instrument specific to mobile commerce, or investigated the distinction between shopping for virtual and physical products. This paper, therefore, constitutes a milestone in m-commerce research.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides an introduction to m-commerce, service quality, and mobile service quality. Section 3 describes the research methods, and Section 4 presents the analytical results. Section 5 draws conclusions, discusses the study’s implications and limitations, and suggests directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
