@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting helix pair structure from fuzzy contact maps

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We incorporate fuzzy logic to create fuzzy contact maps for helix pairs.Similar distance map regions to a query are retrieved based on fuzzy contact map similarity.Retrieved distance map regions are used to predict a distance map using bound smoothing.The EMBED algorithm is used on the predicted distance map to obtain 3D structure.We obtain good structures at various levels of noise.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Helix,Protein structure,Distance constraints,Contact map,Fuzzy contact map,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One approach to protein structure prediction is to first predict from sequence, a thresholded and binary 2D representation of a protein's topology known as a contact map. The predicted contact map can be used as distance constraints to construct a 3D structure. We focus on the latter half of the process for helix pairs and present an approach that aims to obtain a set of non-binary distance constraints from contacts maps. We extend the definition of “in contact” by incorporating fuzzy logic to construct fuzzy contact maps. Then, template-based retrieval and distance geometry bound smoothing were applied to obtain distance constraints in the form of a distance map. From the distance map, we can calculate the helix pair structure. Our experimental results indicate that distance constraints close to the true distance map could be predicted at various noise levels and the resulting structure was highly correlated to the predicted distance map.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteins are a class of organic molecules that dictate all biochemical reactions in a living cell. The determination of a protein's three-dimensional structure is an important step towards the understanding of protein function. Methods currently exist for experimentally determining structure using X-ray crystallography and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy [1–4]. However, they are complex and time consuming. With the completion of the human genome and the subsequent advances in protein sequencing technology, experimental determination of protein structure cannot keep pace. Thus, there is great interest in methods for predicting protein structure from its sequence.Methods for predicting protein structure typically fall into one of three categories: homology modeling, fold-recognition, and ab initio prediction. In homology modeling, a prediction of the protein structure can be obtained if the target protein sequence has significant homology to another protein of known three-dimensional structure. This approach uses sequence similarity to the target protein to select templates from the set of known protein structures [5]. A sequence alignment between the target protein and the template protein [6,7] is then used to transfer coordinates from the templates, which acts as a foundation for predicting the rest of the protein structure. Typically, many models are generated from many templates which are then assessed using statistical, energy-based, or machine learning methods [8–10].There has been recognition of the fact that proteins often have similar folds despite no significant sequence similarity [11]. Due to a lack of sequence similarity, recognition of similar folding patterns cannot be detected until the three-dimensional structure has been determined. However, structure classification databases are growing [12,13] and can be useful for predicting proteins that lack significant homologues. Fold-recognition methods make use of structure classifications to find alignments using structure rather than sequence and is thus useful when sequence similarity to the target is low. This approach is based on the regularities of secondary structure arrangement and the topology of polypeptide chains to search for folds that are compatible with a particular sequence by determining how well a fold will fit a sequence [11]. Threading is variation of the fold recognition method [14,15]. Rather than a score based on sequence, this approach builds many rough models and evaluates which model is most likely to be correct based on structural properties [16]. Current fold recognition approaches typically use both threading and sequence alignments.Protein structure prediction by ab initio approaches require a representation of protein geometry as an atomic resolution model of a protein and its solvent environment are computationally expensive. Thus, approximations are used where only one or a few atoms represent each residue and the solvent is implicit [17]. A potential energy function and other parameters based on physical–chemical properties must then be determined [18,19]. The protein conformation space is then searched in order to generate a model, usually by searching an energy surface using stochastic methods such as simulated annealing or Monte Carlo simulation [20–22]. Advances and knowledge gained from ab initio approaches are important as they aid all other protein structure prediction approaches in terms of model assessment and optimization.In addition to the above protein structure prediction approaches, there is a growing body of research on the prediction of contact maps and the recovery of the protein structure from contact maps. There exist several methods for predicting contact maps from sequence and they have been shown to be useful in the protein structure prediction [23–25] and protein structure comparison by the Contact Map Overlap metric [26]. The viability of these approaches have been acknowledged by their inclusion in Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP), a biannual blind experiment for assessing protein structure prediction capabilities. The reconstruction of protein structure typically involves using contact maps as distance constraints for a protein's three-dimensional structure [27]. In particular, Walsh et al. [28] experimented with multi-class contact maps and observed an improvement in protein structure reconstruction. This provides motivation to examine how fuzzy contact maps may benefit protein structure prediction. Existing works on fuzzy contact maps focus on its suitability as a representation for protein structure comparison [29,30]. These works constructed fuzzy contact maps from observed distance maps and performed protein structure classification to show structure comparison was improved by the fuzzy contact map representation.In this study, we present an approach to obtain non-binary distance constraints from fuzzy contact maps to be used in calculating protein structure. Our focus is on alpha-helices, one of the regular local configurations of a protein's backbone known as protein secondary structure. Specifically, we are concerned with the structure of helix pairs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to reconstruct from fuzzy contact maps.Our approach incorporates fuzzy logic to construct fuzzy contact maps from a set of binary contact maps at various thresholds and extends the binary term “in contact” to a fuzzy membership function. This representation provides additional detail as well as robustness. The fuzzy contact map construction methodology in this study is aimed at being applicable to predicted contact maps from sequence. Furthermore, we aim to leverage the knowledge contained in fuzzy contact maps to predict the three-dimensional structure.We implement a process that retrieves similar distance map regions to a query from a database of experimentally solved structures using fuzzy contact map similarity. This retrieval process uses an exhaustive search for the best pair-wise alignment between two fuzzy contact maps and returns a set of similar fuzzy contact map regions that corresponds to distance map regions similar to a query. From the retrieved distance maps regions, we adapt a distance map using distance geometry bound smoothing [31]. The three-dimensional coordinates of the helix pair are then calculated with the EMBED algorithm [32].The organization of this article is as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the method to construct fuzzy contact maps from a set of binary contact maps at various distance thresholds. In Section 3 we make use of fuzzy contact maps and present a retrieval method to obtain a set of the distance map regions similar to a query based on fuzzy contact map similarity. Section 4 describes the adaptation of the retrieved distance maps regions into a distance map through the use of bound smoothing. We present the experimental setup and results in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 we discuss of our results.The distance map of a protein can capture to a large extent, its three-dimensional structure. A distance map, D, for a protein of n residues is a n×n symmetrical matrix where di,jrepresents the distance between residue i and residue j. The contact map is a binary version of the distance map whose values are 1 or 0 for a contact and non-contact respectively. A contact is said to exist when the distance between two residues is at or below a given distance threshold and can be defined by distances between Cαatoms, Cβatoms of amino acid residues, or atoms on the side chains.Fuzzy contact maps are an extension of standard contact maps that use a fuzzy membership function rather than a singular value to define the threshold. This results in a degree of truth for two residues being “in contact”. Typically, distance maps are converted into fuzzy contact maps by mapping the distance value to a degree of truth in the range [0, 1] via a membership function such that(1)FD=f(dij),1≤i≤n,1≤j≤m;where FDis the fuzzy contact map constructed from the distance map, f is a function describing the shape of the membership function, and dijis the distance between residues i and j.Using an image analogy (Fig. 1) where the distance map is a gray-scale image, the contact map would be a thresholded image while the fuzzy contact map would be a bounded normalized image. It seems obvious that the fuzzy contact map would contain more detail and be more representative of the distance map.Our aim is to construct fuzzy contact maps from contact maps so that it can be applicable to predicted contact maps. To that end, a set of contact maps across a range of threshold values can be considered a slice of a distance map from which a fuzzy contact map could be constructed. Since contact maps can presumably be predicted at any arbitrary threshold, this would be extensible to predicted contact maps.A set of contact maps will encompass a small range of threshold distances and they may contain errors. Thus, the fuzzy contact map conveniently provides the following:•A representation that is compact for a set of contact maps.A representation that allows for a measure of similarity to be applied between distance maps and a set of contact maps.A representation that allows for the handling of errors in the set of contact maps.The method to construct a fuzzy contact map from a set of contact maps is as follows. In the general case, the number of maps in the set of contact maps, n, is equal to the number of distance thresholds in set T such that(2)T={t1,t2,…,tn},where ti<ti+1 for 1≤i<n. The set of contact maps, C, is then(3)C={c1,c2,…,cn},where ciis a contact map with a corresponding threshold of ti. The set of distance values which represent each contact map in the set is(4)D={d1,d2,d3,…,dn},where d1=t1 and di=(ti+ti−1)/2, 1<i≤n.We then apply a membership function, similar to the way fuzzy contact maps are constructed from distance maps. But instead of finding the degree of membership for a distance map value, the degree of membership is found for each element in D. For the general case, each degree of membership in M, given D, is(5)M={f(d1),f(d2),…,f(dn)};where f is a function describing the shape of the membership function and should be identical to the membership function for constructing fuzzy contact maps from distance maps. Once M is determined, the fuzzy contact map for a protein can be constructed by applying the membership function to C and then aggregating such that(6)FC=c1f(d1)∪c2f(d2)∪…∪cnf(dn),where FCis the fuzzy contact map constructed from a set of contact maps and ∪ is a fuzzy union operator.The method for constructing a fuzzy contact map needs to account for errors. One avenue for error handling exists during aggregation.A fuzzy union operator is sufficient when no errors exist. If there exists a contact at threshold t1, then it follows that a contact will exist at tifor 1<i≤n. Thus, there is redundancy, when no errors exist, based on the ordering of threshold values. For an ordered set of contact maps without errors, (c1ij, c2ij, …, cnij) will be monotonically increasing for the (i, j)th element in a contact map such that c(n−1)ij≤cnij, ∀n>1. Otherwise, an inconsistency exists. An ordered weighted average was used to take advantage of this redundancy and to handle errors during aggregation so that(7)FC=2−1c1f(d1)+2−2c2f(d2)+…+2−(n−1)cn−1f(dn−1)+2−ncnf(dn),where FCis the fuzzy contact map constructed from the set of n contact maps, C, such that c1(f(d1)≥c2(f(d2))≥…≥cn(f(dn)), when inconsistencies were detected.The goal of the retrieval method is to obtain a set of the most similar distance map regions to a query. It can be considered a template-based search using fuzzy contact map similarity. A query is designated as a protein element whose structure is unknown but for which a set of contact maps that encompasses a range of threshold values is known. It is then searched against a database of distance maps derived from experimentally determined protein structures.The bridging representation between a query and the database is the fuzzy contact map. Fuzzy contact maps constructed from distance maps represent each element in the database. A fuzzy contact map constructed from a set of contact maps represents the query. Thus, retrieval involves computing the pair-wise similarity between fuzzy contact maps. The retrieved set can then be considered a set of the most similar distance map regions to a query based on fuzzy contact map similarity.The current focus of our methodology is on helices, that is, helix-to-helix and helix-to-self elements. In order to account for the difference in map sizes that exist among fuzzy contact maps, we designate the smaller map in a pair-wise comparison to be a sliding window that slides through every possible alignment with the larger map as shown in Fig. 2. At each sliding window interval, a Jaccard's coefficient is calculated, where the larger the Jaccard's coefficient, the better the alignment. The Jaccard's coefficient is a similarity metric that minimizes the effect of a score being dominated by similarity in background values and is defined as(8)J=|A∩B||A∪B|,where J is the Jaccard's coefficient for fuzzy contact maps A and B, which are of equal size. Thus, we exhaustively search for the best alignment based on the Jaccard's coefficient. The size of the sliding window is always the size of the smaller map in a pair-wise comparison, thus maximizing the size of the alignment.Two additional modifications were included in the retrieval methodology after considering the adaptation process. First, we trim both fuzzy contact maps being considered in a pair-wise comparison until all edges contain at least one non-zero value. This eliminates more of the background while still retaining all foreground information from the fuzzy contact maps. The second process occurs after the best alignment has been found. We modify the Jaccard's coefficient with the size of the alignment window such that:(9)S=J×W,where W is size of the alignment window in terms of the number elements it contains, J is the Jaccard's coefficient, and S is the score of the pair-wise comparison between two fuzzy contact maps. When we rank the set of retrieved elements to a query, the highest Jaccard's coefficient with the largest alignment windows will score the best. The retrieved set of similar distance regions based on fuzzy contact map similarity is then passed on to the adaptation process.The goal of adaptation is to obtain a set of distance constraints for a query. Adaptation begins by aggregating the set of retrieved distance map regions into one distance map using a weighted mean such that(10)DP=w1x1+w2x2+⋯+wnxnw1+w2+⋯+wn,wherewiis a weight representing the fuzzy contact map similarity score for each distance map region, xi, ∀i∈{1, …, n}, in the retrieved set of n maps. The result of aggregation, DP, is a distance map that is partially known, or a partial distance map. This is used as a starting point for the extrapolation of any missing values that were not obtained via the retrieval process.A bound smoothing process as described by Timothy Havel [31,32] is then applied to propagate retrieved distances in order to extrapolate missing values. Briefly, bound smoothing is a distance geometry procedure used in the experimental determination of protein structure by NMR Spectroscopy that iteratively tightens the lower and upper bound limits of residue pair distances obtained from a NMR Spectroscopy experiment. The procedure considers the triangle and tetrangle inequalities of residue triplets and quadruplets respectively in order to improve the bound limits of residue pair distances. This process can also propagate known or measured distances to extrapolate missing values by initializing the lower and upper bounds of unknown distance values to low and high values respectively and allowing the bound smoothing procedure to tighten the bound limits of unknown distance values. With regards to the adaptation methodology, the known distances are obtained by the retrieval methodology rather than from NMR Spectroscopy measurements.Before we apply the bound smoothing process, we organize the elements for a helix pair structure into a helix pair distance map. The helix-to-self partial distance maps of the two helices and the one helix-to-helix partial distance map are arranged as shown in Fig. 3.The distances in the partial distance maps are then assigned as both the lower and upper bound limits. The unknowns in the partial distance maps are assigned 0 and 100 as starting values for the lower and upper bound limits respectively. Then, triangle inequality and tetrangle bound smoothing are applied, resulting in the upper and lower bound limits of any unknowns that can be extrapolated as shown in Fig. 4.We then designate the upper bound limits as a set of exact distances on which the EMBED algorithm [32] is applied. This results in a set of three-dimensional coordinates for the helix pair as shown in Fig. 5.A set of experimentally determined protein structures consisting of 168 non-homologous alpha proteins was obtained from the Protein Data Bank [33]. Distance maps were constructed from the coordinate information of the C-α. As well, all helix-to-helix and helix-to-self regions in a distance map were noted from the secondary structure information.The membership function for constructing fuzzy contact maps from distance maps is shown in Fig. 6. This membership function was chosen empirically after testing all membership function shapes presented by Pelta et al. [29] as well as Gaussian shaped functions with various threshold ranges. Tests were performed by comparing fuzzy contact maps constructed from a set of contact maps to corresponding fuzzy contact maps constructed from distance maps across various levels of noise and calculating the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) between them. Noise refers to synthetically generated errors for each contact map in the set of contact maps by randomly flipping 1's to 0's and vice versa.The chosen membership function had the lowest average RMSE across all noise levels and resulted in 3008 helix fuzzy contact maps after removing homogeneous maps and maps that did not have at least four non-zero values along its rows and columns. 1760 were of helix-to-helix regions with the remainder being helix-to-self regions. A threshold range of 8 to 10Åwith a step size of 0.5 was chosen empirically, as described above for the fuzzy membership function, for the set of contact maps representing a query. The step-size refers to the uniform intervals within a threshold range.We evaluate the retrieval performance by using a leave-one-out strategy in which one helix region was designated as a query and the remaining regions are searched against it, until all helix regions were used as queries. If the query is a helix-to-helix region, then only the remaining helix-to-helix regions are searched against it. Similarly for helix-to-self regions.Performance was measured using the RMSE between a query's true distance map and the retrieved distance map regions. The Spearman correlation between the RMSE and Jaccard's coefficient is also calculated. A summary of the retrieval results is shown in Table 1.Each helix-to-helix query is grouped with two helix-to-self queries if they exist. The set of retrieved distance map regions for each are aggregated into partial distance maps and then organized into a helix pair distance map. The missing values are then extrapolated using triangle and tetrangle bound smoothing resulting in the lower and upper bound limits of a distance map. The performance of the adaptation process was measured using the RMSE between the true distance map and the adapted distance map's bound limits. A summary of the adaptation results for helix pairs is shown in Table 2.The upper bound limits of the adapted helix pair distance map are then used in the EMBED algorithm to calculate the three-dimensional coordinates. The performance of the coordinates in Root Mean Squared Distance (RMSD) and the Spearman correlation between the RMSE of the upper bound limits and the RMSD of the calculated coordinates are shown in Table 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
