@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparing evolutionary algorithms and particle filters for Markerless Human Motion Capture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Evolutionary algorithms and particle filters are applied to Markerless Motion Capture.Two different body models are proposed and analyzed in the dataset HumanEva-I.Two approaches are proposed for the search strategy: holistic and hierarchical.Non-parametric tests show that evolutionary algorithms outperform particle filters.Evolutionary algorithms and hierarchical strategies deal better with high dimensionality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Markerless Motion Capture,Tracking,Particle filters,Evolutionary algorithms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Markerless Human Motion Capture is the problem of determining the joints’ angles of a three-dimensional articulated body model that best matches current and past observations acquired by video cameras. The problem of Markerless Human Motion Capture is high-dimensional and requires the use of models with a considerable number of degrees of freedom to appropriately adapt to the human anatomy.Particle filters have become the most popular approach for Markerless Human Motion Capture, despite their difficulty to cope with high-dimensional problems. Although several solutions have been proposed to improve their performance, they still suffer from the curse of dimensionality. As a consequence, it is normally required to impose mobility limitations in the body models employed, or to exploit the hierarchical nature of the human skeleton by partitioning the problem into smaller ones.Evolutionary algorithms, though, are powerful methods for solving continuous optimization problems, specially the high-dimensional ones. Yet, few works have tackled Markerless Human Motion Capture using them. This paper evaluates the performance of three of the most competitive algorithms in continuous optimization – Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolutionary Strategy, Differential Evolution and Particle Swarm Optimization – with two of the most relevant particle filters proposed in the literature, namely the Annealed Particle Filter and the Partitioned Sampling Annealed Particle Filter.The algorithms have been experimentally compared in the public dataset HumanEva-I by employing two body models with different complexities. Our work also analyzes the performance of the algorithms in hierarchical and holistic approaches, i.e., with and without partitioning the search space. Non-parametric tests run on the results have shown that: (i) the evolutionary algorithms employed outperform their particle filter counterparts in all the cases tested; (ii) they can deal with high-dimensional models thus leading to better accuracy; and (iii) the hierarchical strategy surpasses the holistic one.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Markerless Motion Capture (MMOCAP) is an emerging field with potential applications in areas like the animation industry [1], medical rehabilitation [2], and video surveillance [3], among others. The goal is to automatically determine the pose of a subject from the images of a video sequence. For that purpose, a human body model is rendered on the images so as to determine the model's configuration that best matches the input images. The sequential nature of the problem allows us to use the solutions obtained in one frame as the starting point for the search in the next one. In order to cope with three-dimensional ambiguities and occlusions, the most effective setup consists of several cameras simultaneously observing the scene from different points of view. Ultimately, the problem is formulated as a continuous optimization problem that seeks the best angles for the joints of the human body model given the information available in the previous and the current images.MMOCAP is considered in the computer vision community as a difficult problem because of the many challenges that it presents. First, it is a high-dimensional problem. In order to obtain accurate results, the body model employed needs to have a suitable number of joints so as to adapt properly to all human poses. Second, the computing power is a limiting factor. The operations needed to evaluate solutions are computationally very expensive. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to obtain good solutions in as few iterations as possible. Finally, an appropriate balance is required between local and global search. While in most of the cases local search achieves good solutions, occlusion and ambiguities in the camera configuration might require the use of global optimization to discover the correct solution once the conflicting situation has finished.Most of the solutions emerging from the computer vision community are particle filtering variants [4–7], which try to cope with the high dimensionality of the model. Some solutions partition the search space taking advantage of the hierarchical nature of the problem [5,6]. Other solutions tackle the problem by dividing the search into multiple stages [4,7]. In spite of the advances achieved, most of the proposed solutions suffer from the curse of dimensionality and they need to rely on simple human models (which lead to suboptimal tracking results), or require a high number of evaluations to achieve accurate results.Over the past few years, the field of global optimization has been very active, producing different kinds of deterministic and stochastic algorithms for optimization in the continuous domain [8]. Among the stochastic approaches, evolutionary algorithms [9] offer a number of exclusive advantages that make them an attractive choice, e.g., robust and reliable performance, global and local search capability, little or no information requirement, etc. Despite of their advantages, there are few works in the literature devoted to test the performance of evolutionary algorithms on the MMOCAP problem [10–12].This work performs an experimental comparison of three relevant evolutionary algorithms namely Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolutionary Strategy (CMAES) [13], Differential Evolution (DE) [14], and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [15], with two popular variants of particle filters proposed for the MMOCAP problem namely Annealed Particle Filter (APF) [4] and Partitioned Sampling Annealed Particle Filter (PSAPF) [6]. The selection of these evolutionary algorithms is based on the results reported in the IEEE International Conferences on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) competitions on real parameter optimization [16], for which these three algorithms have continued to secure top ranking. With regards to the particle filters selected, the first one (APF) can be considered the base line algorithm taking into account the high number of cites obtained. The PSAPF has been selected for being considered the hierarchical version of the APF.This work analyzes the behavior of the evolutionary algorithms using both holistic and hierarchical strategies so as to decide which strategy is preferable. Additionally, two different articulated models have been employed. The first one, comprised of 28 degrees of freedom (DOF), is similar to those used in most of the previous approaches in the literature. The second one, comprised of 39 DOF, aims at evaluating the capability of the tested algorithms to deal with more realistic (and thus complex) body models.The experiments have been conducted on nine sequences of the HumanEva-I dataset [17], and analyzed by means of a non-parametric statistical analysis [18]. The results obtained show that: (i) the evolutionary algorithms tested provide significantly better results than particle filters; (ii) the 39-DOF body model employed in this work obtains better results than the other one; and (iii) the hierarchical strategy surpasses the holistic one in all the evolutionary algorithms applied. Additionally, our experiments determine the minimum number of evaluations required for an optimal trade-off between precision and speed for the different algorithms in the experiments.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 revises the related work. Section 3 formulates the problem of pose estimation, describes the body models, cost function and evaluation strategies. Section 4 introduces the basis of the particle filters and the evolutionary algorithms employed. Finally, Section 5 explains the experimentation carried out, while Section 6 draws some conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has compared the performance of particle filters and evolutionary algorithms for the MMOCAP problem. In particular, we have tested the APF particle filter, against the CMAES, DE and PSO evolutionary algorithms. In addition, we have evaluated both the holistic and hierarchical strategies of these algorithms with two body models of increasing complexity (28 DOF and 39 DOF).Non-parametric statistical tests have been run on the results obtaining the following conclusions. First, the evolutionary algorithms tested, dominated by the hierarchical version of CMAES, perform significantly better than the particle filters employed. Second, the evolutionary algorithms are able to manage the 39-DOF model obtaining better results than when the 28-DOF model is employed. In other words, they can employ a more realistic (and complex) model achieving better results. The same is not true for the particle filters. Finally, the hierarchical strategies rank better than the holistic strategies in all tests.