@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MRI breast cancer diagnosis hybrid approach using adaptive ant-based segmentation and multilayer perceptron neural networks classifier

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed a hybrid algorithm to classify the breast cancer images into two outcomes: Benign or Malignant.An improved version of the classical ant-based clustering algorithm to segment the region of interest of breast images.The overall accuracy offered by the employed hybrid technique confirms that the effectiveness and performance of the proposed hybrid system is high.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Segmentation,Magnetic resonance (MR) images,Ant Colony Optimization (ACO),Clustering,Swarm intelligence,Neural network classifier,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article introduces a hybrid approach that combines the advantages of fuzzy sets, ant-based clustering and multilayer perceptron neural networks (MLPNN) classifier, in conjunction with statistical-based feature extraction technique. An application of breast cancer MRI imaging has been chosen and hybridization system has been applied to see their ability and accuracy to classify the breast cancer images into two outcomes: Benign or Malignant. The introduced hybrid system starts with an algorithm based on type-II fuzzy sets to enhance the contrast of the input images. This is followed by an improved version of the classical ant-based clustering algorithm, called adaptive ant-based clustering to identify target objects through an optimization methodology that maintains the optimum result during iterations. Then, more than twenty statistical-based features are extracted and normalized. Finally, a MLPNN classifier was employed to evaluate the ability of the lesion descriptors for discrimination of different regions of interest to determine whether the cancer is Benign or Malignant. To evaluate the performance of presented approach, we present tests on different breast MRI images. The experimental results obtained, show that the adaptive ant-based segmentation is superior to the classical ant-based clustering technique and the overall accuracy offered by the employed hybrid technique confirm that the effectiveness and performance of the proposed hybrid system is high.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast MRI is an excellent problem-solving technology in detecting, diagnosing, and staging breast cancer. It has shown a high sensitivity and moderate specificity in detecting breast cancer. MRI is also excellent at imaging the augmented breast, including both the breast implant itself and the breast tissue surrounding the implant [1]. Breast MRI is also useful for staging breast cancer, determining the most appropriate treatment, and for patient follow-up after breast cancer treatment [2]. Contrast-enhanced breast MRIs acquired by contrast injection have been shown to be very sensitive in the detection of breast cancer, but are also time-consuming and cause waste of medical resources [2,1,4]. Fuzzy image processing includes the methods that understand, represent and process the images, their parts and features using fuzzy sets. Fuzzy logic systems usually employ the type-I fuzzy sets and represent uncertainty by numbers in the range (0,1) which are referred to as degrees of membership. Type-II fuzzy sets are an extension of type-I fuzzy sets with an additional dimension that represent the uncertainty about the degrees of membership. For more details refer to [3,6,26].Different methods have been developed for medical image segmentation and processing. These methods can be divided into supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised methods. Support Vector Machine (SVM), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Bayesian, and neural networks are examples of the supervised methods [7]. Clustering algorithms are examples of the unsupervised methods. The clustering algorithms are based on the whole image and consider the distance between data. Clustering algorithms can be divided into hierarchical and partitional techniques [8]. Hierarchical clustering is a sequential partitioning operation, which results in a hierarchical nested cluster structure, and partitioning clustering is an iterative partitioning operation [8]. Partitioning clustering can be divided into crisp and fuzzy methods [8,9]. K-means clustering is a well-known technique for performing difficult partitioning tasks. A fuzzy cluster analysis [10] allows memberships of data points to the clusters in [0, 1]. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) can be used for image clustering. The PSO would be organizing the image into groups in which the members are having similar intensity range and each cluster represents different intensity range [7,11,13,14]. Genetic algorithm (GA) as an optimal searching algorithm in the length of searching operation can be used for the optimal search of cluster center in medical images regarding the image size [15–17]. Using a genetic algorithm in data clustering is not a new solution. GA algorithms have been implemented for different clustering problems using various fitness functions and chromosome encoding schemes [18].Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) has been introduced as an optimization technique. Ant algorithms have been recently introduced, such as ACO inspired from the foraging behavior of ant colonies and the ant-based clustering algorithms based on the cemetery organization and brood sorting of ants [19]. ACO is a search algorithm inspired by the behavior of ants. In ACO, simple agents or artificial ants, at every generation search for good solutions. Each artificial ant establishes a solution step by step. The ants, once establish a solution, evaluating the partial solution and precipitate some amount of pheromone to sign their paths [19]. Ant-based clustering and its use for important biomedical image processing application such as biomedical image segmentation are investigated in this research. The first ACO algorithm was proposed from the early nineties and is known as Ant System [20], and many successful applications are now available. Also, theoretical results which provide guidelines to researchers are becoming available in many applications of ACO [21,20,22]. The first ACO algorithm is known as an Ant System (AS) and was proposed in the early nineties [20,21]. Many ACO algorithms have been proposed since then. The main feature of ACO is that at each iteration, the pheromone values are updated by the ants that have participated in a solution in the iteration itself [20]. Authors in [23] combined support vector machine with genetic algorithm to classify ultrasound breast tumor images. They used GA to detect significant features from auto-covariance texture features and morphologic features and determine the near-optimal parameters for the SVM to classify the tumor as benign or malignant. In the same direction of the research, authors in [24] introduced a genetic algorithm model based on artificial neural network to predict the axillary lymph node status in breast cancer. In this research GA was applied to select best features as MultiLayer Perceptron Neural Network inputs. It also optimized the weights of backpropagation algorithm in MLP. A hybrid approach for mining breast cancer pattern using discrete PSO and statistical method was introduced in [25] by studying a novel PSO that created and each particle was coded in positive numbers and has a practical system structure.In this paper we show how a combination of fuzzy sets, ant-based clustering and multilayer perceptron neural networks classifier, in conjunction with statistical-based feature extraction technique could be used to analyze MRI breast images for the purpose of diagnosing women breast cancer. An application of breast cancer MRI imaging has been chosen and hybridization system has been applied to see their ability and accuracy to classify the breast cancer images into two outcomes: benign or malignant. The proposed approach utilizes type-II fuzzy algorithm for improving the quality of MRI images. Then, we perform segmentation utilizing a new version of ant-based clustering algorithm, called adaptive ant-based clustering in order to identify target objects through an optimization methodology that maintains the optimum result during iterations. The adaptive ant-based clustering algorithm was employed to avoid the shortcomings of standard ant-based clustering algorithm when it used for image segmentation. Clustering and segmentation are performed in parallel using the concept of adaptation. Twenty Statistical features are extracted from these identified objected and finally, multilayer perceptron neural networks classifier was performed for the actual diagnosis and discrimination of different regions of interest to determine whether the cancer is benign or malignant.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the proposed MRI Breast cancer diagnosis hybrid approach in detail. Experimental results and comparative analysis are discussed in Section 3. Conclusions are discussed in Section 4.The proposed MRI breast cancer diagnosis is comprised of the following four fundamental building phases: (1) Pre-processing phase: In the first phase of the investigation, a pre-processing algorithm based on fuzzy Type-II is presented. It is adopted and used to improve the quality of the images and to make the segmentation and feature extraction phase more reliable, (2) Segmentation phase: In the second phase, a segmentation algorithm using the adaptive ant-based segmentation technique is presented to segment breast MR images. This technique is an improved ant-based clustering algorithm for segmenting breast MR images, (3) Feature extraction phase: twenty statistical-based features have been extracted, normalized and represented in a database as vector values and (4) Classification phase: The last phase is the classification and prediction of new objects, it is dependent on the multilayer perceptron neural networks classifier. These four phases are described in detail in the following section along with the steps involved and the characteristics feature for each phase and the overall architecture of the introduced approach is described in Fig. 1.To increase the efficiency of the classification and prediction process, a pre-processing stage should be considered to enhance the quality of the input breast images before feature extraction and classification process. In this paper, algorithm based on fuzzy type-II is adopted and used to enhance the contrast of the MRI breast image. Fuzzy type-II set obtained by blurring a type-I membership function. It uses interval-based sets to construct the type-II fuzzy set by defining the upper and lower membership values using the following equations:(1)μLOWER(x)=μ(x)2and(2)μUPPER(x)=μ(x)0.5where 0≤μ(x)≤1 is the membership function for x.Algorithm 1 shows the main steps of the type-II fuzzy set image enhancement.Algorithm 1Type-II fuzzy set image enhancement algorithmResult: Fuzzy type-2 enhanced imageInput: MRI breast imagesCompute the fuzzy type-I membership value by using the following equation:(3)μ(gmn)=gmn−gmingmax−gminwhere gminand gmaxare the image minimum and maximum gray level Calculate the type-I fuzzy enhanced image by computing the new gray levels of the enhanced image using the following equation:(4)g˜mn=L−1e−1−1×[e−μ(gmn)β−1]where the parameter β as a fuzzifier is set to 1.7 and the number of gray levels L is set to 256.The type-II fuzzy membership function is calculated by computing μLOWER(x) and μUPPER(x),Dividing the image into sub-images;forevery gray leveldothe type-II fuzzy membership function is computed using the following equation:(5)μTII(gmn)=(μLOWER×α)+(μUPPER×(α−1))whereα=gmeanLendFuzzy type-2 enhanced image is calculated by computing the new gray levels of the enhanced image;The adaptive ant-based segmentation technique is presented as a segmentation algorithm to segment breast MR images and generate set of objects. The following subsections describe in detail the adaptive ant-based segmentation algorithm along with the steps involved and the characteristics feature for each process.Ant-based clustering algorithms are based on the brood sorting behavior of ants. This work was initiated by Deneubourg et al. [27,28], who applied it for tasks in robotics. This work has been modified by Luer and Faita in [19]. In their algorithm, the numerical data is dispersed onto a two dimensional grid randomly [19]. Each ant moves around this grid picking and dropping the data items randomly [19]. The decision to pick up or drop an item is random but is affected by the data items in the ant's neighborhood, causes similar items to be placed together on the grid. The dropping probability of an object increases when high densities of similar objects in the neighborhood [19]. The picking probability of an object increases with low density neighborhoods and decreases with high similarity among objects in the surrounding area [19]. AntClust [19] is a distributed algorithm used to cluster pixels. It is based on the versions described in [29]. Some modifications have been introduced to improve the quality of the clustering and to speed up the process [19]. The rectangular grid was replaced with a discrete array of N cells where N is the total number of pixels to be clustered [19]. The cells of the array are linked to a nest of ants in a colony. The ants travel from one cell to another easily and are able to build or destroy existing clusters of pixels. The similarity function f(xi,cj) is defined as:(6)f(xi,cj)=1Nj∑xk∈cjα2α2+d(xi,xk)2where ant nimay pick up pixel xifrom a cell cjor drop it in cell cjaccording to the similarity function that represents the average distance between pixel xiand other pixels xkin the cell cj, and d(xi, xk) is determined by the contrast between two pixels xiand xiin terms of the gray level and is defined as follows [19]:(7)d(xi,xk)=|ngi−ngk|NG...NG is the number of the gray levels in the image, and α is the mean distance between all pixels and is defined as:(8)α=1N(N−1)∑i=1N∑k=1Nd(xi,xk)The similarity function gives the maximum response when d(xi, xk) approaches 0 [19] and the probability ppick(xi, cj) is used for pixel selection decisions.(9)ppick(xi,cj)=1if|cj|=1,qif|cj|=2,cos2Π2f(xi,cj)otherwisewhere q is a fixed parameter in the range [0,1].There are three cases for pixel consideration: (1) The considered pixel xiis alone in its cell cj, (2) two pixels in the same cell, and (3) pixels with the considered pixel xiin the cell. In the first case, the ant picks up the pixel automatically. In the second case, the cluster is invalid with only two pixels; the ant will pick up the considered pixel and destroy this cluster with a probability q. In the third case, the ant has a high probability to pick up the pixel if its similarity with all the pixels in the cluster is low (close 0)[19].The probability pdrop(xi, cj) is used for dropping pixel decisions and is defined as:(10)1−cos2Π2f(xi,cj)Once the ant picked up a pixel xi, it returns with the pixel to the nest, then looks for new cell where it will drop the pixel. The similarity function is applied to each cell and the best cell cjis the cell where the similarity function yields the higher value [19].Both the ACO and PSO algorithms are the data clustering algorithms by implementing swarm behavior. The ACO is applicable for problems in which source and destination are predefined and specific. PSO is a clustering technique in the fields of constraint handling and mutli-objective dynamic optimization. ACO can be used in the dynamic applications in which adapts to changes. The ACO and PSO can be improved and enhanced to obtain better solution. In this paper a new approach for segmentation is presented for improving the effectiveness and dynamically determining the best solution through ACO. The proposed approach improves and enhances the effectiveness and efficiency of the ant-based clustering algorithm for image clustering to provide more reliable magnetic resonance (MR) breast image segmentation based on Ant-based clustering. Compared with evolutionary computation techniques such as Genetic Algorithms (GA), the advantages of ACO are that ACO is easy to implement and there are few parameters to adjust. In the proposed method we do not need additional operations after clustering to identify the target objects (breast cancer), because breast cancer segmentation and identification is performed during image clustering process.The adaptive ant-based segmentation technique is proposed to segment breast MR images to assist in the medical diagnose. Unlike other ant-based clustering algorithms, two additional features are considered in the segmentation process: brightness and circularity. These features are included because brighter and more circular objects are commonly identified as breast cancer. The adaptive ant-based segmentation process comprises the following:1.Starting process: This process contains two procedures:•Ant-based Clustering for low number of iterattions: In this process, clustering using Ant is performed for low number from the total number of iterations (Number_low=10 in Algorithm 3). The clustering process can be summarized in the following operations:(a)Placing all image pixels in a matrixInitializing randomly the positions of ants to pick up pixelComputing functions f(xi, cj) and pdrop(xi, cj) for all ants carrying pixels to drop the carried pixel in a cell in the matrixComputing functions f(xi,cj) and ppick(xi, cj) for all ants carrying pixels to pick up the carried pixel from a cellThe steps c and d are repeated until number of iterations N=Total_max/Number_low is reachedCompute the Goodness using Eq. (12)Adaptive segmentation process: Image clustering and breast cancer segmentation processes are performed. Ant-based clustering is applied for another number of iterations starting from the last iteration in previous process. This process contains several sub-processes:(a)Goodness function calculation: In this process the goodness function is calculated using Eq (12). The goodness function is defined as the average circularity of all resulting objects multiplied by the objects areas.Goodness function evaluation: The goodness function is compared with the goodness of the previous iteration. If the result is better (minimum value of goodness is a better result), then store the better cluster center and store this clustering result. In the case that the current goodness is worse (new goodness value is greater than the previous value), the new centers generation process is applied to generate new clusters from the brightest two clusters (target objects) and store other clusters without change. These processes are repeated until the goodness result remains unchanged or the total number of algorithm iterations Total_max is reached.New center generation: Finally, the object selection process is applied to select the most circular objects (circularity ratio close to 1).Object selection process: In this process the best objects from the resulting image is selected by selecting the most circular objects.These processes are described in detail in the following section along with the steps involved and the characteristics feature for each process.1.Starting process: This process is initializes the adaptive segmentation approach by applying ant-based clustering operations for low number of iterations (in this paper we use Number_low=10). Goodness function is calculated for the first time in this iteration. The goodness function is defined as the average circularity of all resulting objects. The circularity ratio is the ratio of the area of the shape to the area of a circle with equal perimeter, which is expressed mathematically as:(11)fcirc=4*Π*AP2where P and A are the perimeter and area of the object, respectively. The fcirc is equal to one for a circle and it is less than one for any other shape. The area is obtained using the total number of pixels in each separated cluster. The goodness function is calculated using Eq. (12).(12)GOODNESS=∑i=1Mfcirci*Ai∑i=1MAiHere fcirciis the circularity ratio of ith object and Aiis the ith object area. The objects circularity ratio is multiplied by objects areas to maximize the value of big objects and minimize the value of small objects.Algorithm 2New centers generation algorithmResult: New centers generationCalculate the distance (d) between center of the first brightest cluster (x) and center of the second brightest cluster (y) as follows:(13)d=x−yCalculate center of the first new generated cluster (z) and center of the second new generated cluster (w) as follows:(14)z=x+d*R(15)w=x−d*Rwhere R is Random Value Replace the brighter of the two clusters in the best clustering result with the new generated clusters (z,wcenters).Adaptive segmentation process: The adaptive segmentation process is the core of the proposed algorithm. In this process, the Ant-based clustering operations is applied for another number of iterations starting from the last iteration of the starting process. The goodness calculation process is applied to recalculate the goodness using Eq. (12). Then, the goodness evaluation process is applied to compare the current goodness with the goodness of the last iteration. If the current goodness is better i.e., the new goodness value is less than the previous value, then the current state is stored and the old results are destroyed. In case that the current goodness is worse the new centers generation process is applied to generate new clusters from the brightest two clusters (target objects) and store other clusters without change using Algorithm 2. These processes are repeated until the goodness result remains unchanged or the total number of algorithm iterations (Total_max) is reached. The adaptive segmentation proposed algorithm is described in detail in Algorithm 3.Object selection process: Finally, the object selection process is applied to select the most circular objects (circularity ratio close to 1).Algorithm 3The adaptive ant-based segmentation algorithmResult: Regions of interest (objects) clustersInitialization:Place all image pixels in a matrix;Initialize randomly the positions of ants to pick up pixel;repeatforeach ant nidoCompute f(xi, cj) and pdrop(xi, cj) for nicarrying pixel;Drop pixel xiin a cell cj;Compute f(xi,cj) and ppick(xi, cj)for nifree;Pick up pixel xifrom a cell cj.;enduntilnumber of iterations N=Total_max/Number_low is reached; Where Total_max is the maximum number of ant iterations and Number_low is the low number of ant iterations.foreach connected object(k)doCalculate circularity ratio of object(k) using Eq. (11);endEstimate goodness using Eq. (12);repeatEstimate new goodness using Eq. (12);ifthe new goodness <= the previous goodnessthenStore the new goodnessStore the better clustering resultelseCall the new center generation Algorithm (2);forEach resulted object(k)doCalculate circularity ratio of object(k) using Eq. (11)ifCircularity ratio of object(k) is not close to 1thenRemove object(k);endStore the resultsendenduntilnumber of iterations (Total_max) is reached or goodness does not change anymoreIn this paper, we used more than twenty features including contrast, correlation, energy, homogeneity, entropy, mean, standard deviation, circularity, area, euler number, major axis length (diameter in centimeter), orientation, solidity, and to create a comprehensive feature vector for each region of interest (ROI) resulting from the adaptive segmentation process as test data and more than 25 breast cancer samples as training data. After the statistical-based features have been extracted and selected. The assessment of the classification results has been made using the multilayer perceptron neural networks classifier was applied to categorize the MRI images into two outcome: Benign or Malignant [30].The images used in our experiments were collected from MRI scans of breast patients with general intrinsic tissue variation. In the experiments 25 medical images with 135 objects were used for training and testing, 90 were used for training and 46 were used for testing. In medical research, supervised evaluation is widely used. It computes the difference between the ground truth and a segmentation result using a given evaluation metric [9]. In this paper, we used the manual segmentation to reflect the ground truth [9]. Furthermore, we evaluated segmentation algorithms by comparing the result from a segmented image against the result from a manual segmented, which is often referred to as a gold standard [9] or ground truth. The degree of similarity between the manual segmented and machine segmented images reflects the accuracy of the segmented image.The segmented results was evaluated using performance indices such as accuracy, texture-based and shape-based measures [9]. Suppose that an image contains N object types. The accuracy measure is computed using Eq. (16):(16)Accuracy=∑i=1NCSP(i)TNP(i)where CSP is the number of correctly segmented pixels in the ith object and TNP is the total number of pixels in ith object. The accuracy measure determines how different the segmented image is from a region that was manually segmented by an expert. Texture based measures that has been proven to be computationally efficient [31] such as mean (measure of brightness), entropy(measure of randomness), standard deviation (measure of contrast). Shape based measures such as orientation (measure the angle in degrees ranging from −90° to 90° between the x-axis and the major axis of the ellipse that has the same second-moments as the region), solidity (measure the proportion of the pixels in the convex hull that are also in the region). The circularity ratio is the ratio of the area of the shape to the area of a circle with equal perimeter, which is expressed mathematically in Eq. (11).Fig. 2shows obtained results of the type-II fuzzy set-based image enhancement on MRI images. The first column of each row depicts the original MRI breast image, the second column shows the result of a locally adaptive type-I fuzzy approach, while the third column gives the result of the new type-II fuzzy set approach. It shows that the results obtained by type-II fuzzy is much better than the results obtained by type-I fuzzy. Moreover, to study the accuracy of the enhancement results using type-II fuzzy compared with Type-I fuzzy, we calculate the accuracy based on the total number of pixels and the ratio of the pixels in the original and the enhanced one.This subsection illustrates segmentation results generated from different images with varying the value of k. Firstly, for breast MRI gray-scaled images, the proposed algorithm is applied. Then a comparative analysis, based on segmentation accuracy, between results obtained from the proposed adaptive algorithm and the results previously obtained from applying AntClust algorithm to the same dataset was discussed. For the assessment of the quality of the segmentation results three types of evaluation measures are used such as accuracy, texture based measures(entropy, standard deviation (STD), and mean), and shape based measures(circularity, orientation, and solidity) to determine how far the actually segmented image is from the ideal one. All results were compared using the segmentation accuracy measure to asses strength of both algorithms to segment the affected part in the investigated organ. Figs. 3–6 show experimental results that highlight segmentation accuracy for three breast MRI samples (BS1, BS2, and BS3) selected from the total examined breast MRI samples. As shown in Figs. 3–5 the results are based on the images of the segmented regions that represent the affected part of the breast using the proposed algorithm. While, Figs. 3–5 display four iterations (1, 5, 7 and 10) and selected objects that represents the final result. There were 10 iterations in total in our experiments. Fig. 3(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) shows the original breast MRI image for sample 1(BS1) using the proposed approach, results for iterations 1, 5, 7, and 10 and the final objects selected to represent the segmented results, respectively. The result presented in Fig. 3(f) outperformed AntClust result presented in Fig. 6(c) when both results were compared with the manually segmented region of interest (ROI) from the annotated sample 1(BS1) presented in Fig. 6(a).Similarly, Fig. 4(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) illustrates original and resulting breast MRI images for sample 2 (BS2). The achieved result presented in Fig. 4(f) outperformed the AntClust result presented in Fig. 6(c) when both results were compared with the annotated sample 2(BS2) (manual segmented region of interest) presented in Fig. 6(a).Fig. 5(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) illustrates original and resulting breast MRI images for sample 3(BS3). The achieved result presented in Fig. 5(f) outperformed the AntClust result presented in Fig. 6(c) when both results were compared with the annotated sample 3(BS3) (manual segmented region of interest) presented in Fig. 6(a).Fig. 6 shows comparative results that highlight the segmentation accuracy of both the proposed adaptive ant-based segmentation and Ant cluster algorithm for the examined breast MRI samples. The comparative results are for the images of the segmented region of interest, which is the affected part in the breast. Fig. 6(a) shows the desired manual segmented region for examined breast MRI samples (BS1, BS2, and BS3), and Fig. 6(b) and (c) shows the results for this region using the proposed algorithm, and the Ant clustering algorithm, respectively.For segmentation accuracy evaluation, the region of interest (ROI) is evaluated, which is the part that contains cancer. The goodness distribution at each iteration (iterations: 1–10) for sample BS1 was 5.9 at iteration 1 and 4.7 at iteration 10, for sample BS2 was 2.4 at iteration 1 and 1.5 at iteration 10, and for sample BS3 was 32.7 at iteration 1 and 15.1 at iteration 10.This subsection illustrates a comparative analysis using various evaluation measures such as accuracy, texture based measures (entropy, standard deviation(STD), and mean) and shape based measures (circularity, orientation, and solidity). Table 1 depicts a comparative analysis that highlight segmentation accuracy of both proposed adaptive ant-based segmentation and AntClust algorithm for examined breast MRI samples, respectively. The comparative analysis is for the images of the segmented region of interest, which is the affected part in the breast shown in Fig. 6. As presented in Table 1for examined breast MRI samples (BS1, BS2, and BS3), the average accuracy of the segmented ROI using the proposed approach was 95.1% (99.95% for BS1, 98.97% for BS2, and 86.38% for BS3). The average accuracy of the segmented ROI using AntClust was 90.70% (97.54% for BS1, 95.29% for BS2, and 79.29% for BS3).Tables 2–4 show a comparative analysis that highlights segmentation evaluation measures for both proposed adaptive and AntClust algorithms, and the manual segmentation results. The evaluation measures consists of two types of measures: texture based measures (entropy, standard deviation (STD), and mean) and shape based measures (circularity, orientation, and solidity). Tables 2, 3, and 4show the evaluation measures of the results obtained using manual segmentation, the proposed algorithm, and the AntClust algorithms for breast samples (BS1, BS2,and BS3, number of connected objects=2 for BS1, 1 for BS2 and BS3).The comparative analysis highlights that the proposed approach outperformed the AntClust method in various evaluation measures. For instance, the evaluations measures achieved using the proposed approach for BS3(Obj1) were Entropy=0.9636, STD=0.4874, and Mean=0.3882. The same evaluations measures were Entropy=0.9904, STD=0.4967, and Mean=0.5575 using AntClust method, and Entropy=0.9302, STD=0.4757, and Mean=0.3457 using manual segmentation.Table 5depicts samples of features (8 from total 21 features) (area, euler number (E. no.), diameter (cm)(diam.), contrast, correlation, energy, homogeneity) extracted from breast samples BS1(Obj1), BS2(Obj1), and BS3(Obj1) which is the affected part in the breast shown in Figs. 3(f), 4(f), and 5(f).Table 6shows the mean absolute error, root mean squared error, and relative absolute error of the proposed approach against several classifiers These results show that the proposed classification approach can lead to very promising results for developing an automatic computer aided diagnosis system. In addition, Fig. 7shows the accuracy of several classifies in comparison with BFtree, ADtree and Naive Bayes classifiers and the proposed approach reached 98% classification accuracy based on MLPNN.This article introduced a hybrid approach that combines the advantages of fuzzy sets, and multilayer perceptron neural networks classifier, in conjunction with statistical-based feature extraction technique. An application of breast cancer MRI imaging has been chosen and hybridization system has been applied to see their ability and accuracy to classify the breast cancer images into two outcomes: Benign or Malignant. The introduced hybrid system starts with an algorithm based on type-II fuzzy sets to enhance the contrast of the input images. The process of segmentation was implemented using the concept of adaptation in each iteration and maintaining the best results. The experimental results obtained, show that the proposed approach is superior in comparison to the existing approaches such as BFtree, ADtree and Naive Bayes classifiers and the overall accuracy offered by the employed approach confirm that the effectiveness and performance of the proposed approach. Our future work will be applying a cloud computing that can be applied in medical field to make it useful for the medical communities and may extending this idea to android based mobile devices may help patients to get their diagnostic results quickly via mobile devices [12,5].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
