@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Representation model and learning algorithm for uncertain and imprecise multivariate behaviors, based on correlated trends

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Representation model for uncertain and imprecise multivariate dataseries.Basic idea: finding repeating frequent correlated patterns among the different dimensions of the dataseries.Deal with data imperfection directly, not transforming the data and pretending it has no imperfection.Applicable to several problems that can be represented by series of observations.Provide a fix size representation, regardless of the length of the dataseries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavior modeling,Data series,Frequent Correlated Trends,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The computational representation and classification of behaviors is a task of growing interest in the field of Behavior Informatics, being series of data a common way of describing those behaviors. However, as these data are often imperfect, new representation models are required in order to effectively handle imperfection in this context. This work presents a new approach, Frequent Correlated Trends, for representing uncertain and imprecise multivariate data series. Such a model can be applied to any domain where behaviors recur in similar—but not identical—shape. In particular, we have already used them to the task of identifying the performers of violin recordings with good results. The present paper describes the abstract model representation and a general learning algorithm, and discusses several potential applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, behavioral sciences have received a lot of attention from the informatics perspective. This fact is mainly due to current demands for behavior analysis and understanding going faster than the capability of traditional methods and techniques in behavioral sciences. New computational tools for representing and working with behaviors are very welcomed and a growing field of research, namely Behavior Informatics[1], is receiving increasing recognition. A recent book [2] precisely points out this interest by gathering together a representative number of different works from several researchers in this area.Intuitively, we can define a behavior as a set of actions that are characteristic of one individual or phenomenon. These actions are ordered (or partially ordered), and therefore indexed by a variable, which is generally time. By representing behaviors, two goals are aimed: (1) identification and tagging of the behaviors and (2) forecasting future actions within them.Behaviors, as we have just defined them, can be found in many different domains. The following are some illustrative examples of such phenomena that can be represented and individually identified (some of them will be later described in more detail in Section 4.3):•The weather in a given area, represented as a series of observations at different time instants, including information such as temperature, precipitations or wind speed [3].The movements of a (injured) knee when doing some rehabilitation exercises, by monitoring the position of several reference points at different time instants [4].The way of playing an instrument. A particular performance of a piece of music can be represented as a series of notes with its respective duration and volume, among others attributes [5].User modeling for personalization of applications or prediction. This task is specially complex due to the inherent imperfect and elusive nature of human behaviors [6].The way a human being behaves within Ambient Assisted Living, with the aim of identifying strange actions and situations of potential danger [7].The personalization of mobile services. As mobile devices increase their capacity, new services and applications are developed which need modeling the user behavior and context [8].The interactions between currency exchanges. Several works have studied how some currencies behave against each other at different financial situations [9].What all these real-world phenomena have in common is that they can be naturally represented by data series. As databases from industrial and biological areas often contain timestamped or ordered records, data series are gaining weight as a suitable source of information, and working with them has become a relevant machine learning task. It is common to obtain those records in an automatic manner from different sensors.Two main goals of data series analysis are found in literature [10]: forecasting and modeling. The aim of forecasting is to accurately predict the next values of the series, whereas modeling aims to describe the whole series in a compact form. Even though they can be sometimes related, they usually differ as finding a proper model for the long-term evolution might not be the best approach to predicting the short-term evolution and vice versa.Interestingly enough, forecasting and modeling are also the main tasks concerning behaviors, as we previously said. Therefore, data series are a suitable representation for behaviors, being also the most common one. In either case, and whatever the goal of a particular data series analysis is, data representation is a crucial task anyway. It is hence required a formal representation capable of modeling the complexity of the particular data. This representation must be more reduced than representing all the observations of the phenomenon, but still describe it accurately enough.An additional problem is that real-world information is hardly certain, complete and precise; more on the contrary, it is usually incomplete, imprecise, vague, fragmentary, not fully reliable, contradictory, or imperfect in some other way. Two ways of addressing imperfection have been historically employed for representing information in a computer [11]:•The first solution consists in restricting the model to only that part of the available information of the real world that is accurate and reliable. Such a constrained approach avoids further complications of representation, but it lacks the capacity of capturing the whole rich notion of information in human cognition, being generally very limited.The second solution implies developing models capable of representing imperfect information. As this approach allows a greater number of applications, it is the one that developers usually implement in their systems. However, those models cannot successfully cope with the whole range of imperfections that generally appear in real life, and in many occasions data are simplified to a point that makes them easily treatable with traditional computational tools, but losing part of their meaning.Due to this lack of general systems capable of dealing with any kind of imperfect data, developers have been forced to handle this information in an ad hoc manner; that is, by devising specific algorithms and systems for each new application, domain and representation. Therefore, in order to model the real world as accurately as possible, several approaches for dealing with imperfect information have been introduced and studied, and there are plenty of ongoing research efforts on the matter.Although some schemes have been proposed for directly handling imperfect information coming as data series [12,13], most of the research has focused on similarity measures to deal with imperfection. Hence there is still a need for further research and new practical systems capable of accurately modeling imperfect data series, being the field of Behavior Informatics, in particular, greatly benefited by such advances.This paper addresses this necessity by proposing a novel approach for representing imperfect behaviors—concretely uncertain and imprecise—that come in the form of multivariate data series. Our work shows how we can represent underlying local trends in the data in an easy and effective way, without a complicated formalism. Some other works have identified the necessity of focusing in frequent local cues for behavior modeling [14,15]. The further aim of the work is addressing the issue of soft data series11The term soft data series is used for series whose values are not accurate or verifiable.recognition and comparison.Note here, that the main objective of our paper is representing behaviors (defined by data series) and to identify future instances of those behaviors. While certainly possible to use the model to predict future values within the series, that is not the focus of the current work.Specifically, our proposal identifies given behaviors through capturing their general footprint by means of discovering repetitive patterns in one dimension and their interdependence with patterns in other dimensions. That is, by computing the frequency distribution of the co-occurrence of patterns in different dimensions. The process can be divided in the following three stages:1.high-level abstraction of the observations within each dimension;tagging according to the patterns identified in one of the dimensions;characterization of behaviors as sets of frequency distributions.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 offers both an introduction to data series, and to imperfect data, describing the main forms of imperfection and the problems to address. In Section 3, we describe our proposed model, Frequent Correlated Trends for generically representing imperfect behaviors, and the developed system, including data gathering, representation and distance measurement. This section also introduces the formal notation and an illustrative example. Section 4 discusses the main advantages of our proposal and its computational complexity, and presents some potential domains of application, illustrating the use of the model on them. The paper concludes (Section 5) with a summary, some final considerations, and pointing out future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Many phenomena in the real world can be understood as behaviors, because they follow some rules and behave in characteristic ways. The computational representation and classification of them is a task of great interest for researchers in behavioral sciences as they are in continuous need of new tools and methods to represent, summarize and understand behaviors of growing complexity.Data series are one of the representations with increasing importance lately. They are defined as an ordered sequence of data at given intervals of an indexing variable (e.g. time). Because of that, behaviors in many domains are commonly described by imprecise and uncertain multivariate data series.Although the problem of representing imperfect data has been addressed many times in the past, the lack of a general and universal solution obligates to build ad hoc solutions for different problems. For that reason, there is still a need to find new solutions and models to represent such information.Our proposal, which assumes that some kind of commonality exists among several instances of the same behavior in a given phenomenon, represents those imperfect data series as a set of frequency distributions. To do so, it first transforms the imperfect observations into qualitative values. Then, it selects a dimension of the behavior and uses it to look for correlations with the rest of dimensions. These correlations are expressed as discrete frequency distributions of co-ocurrences of patterns.The main advantage of our method is that it employs a finite and constant representation in size for behaviors, regardless of their length. It also allows for an incremental representation of the observations until a particular moment. On the other hand, the main limitation of our model is that it is incapable of explaining the predictions it makes. Additionally, as the method is aimed for long series, its best performance is achieved when a large number of observations is available.The feasibility of the model was shown in the domain of music performances. Experiments showed that this representation allows to model and later identify violinists in a dataset of monophonic violin recordings from 23 well-known performers.The first line of further work consists of applying the Frequent Correlated Trend model to different domains to test their feasibility. Some of these domains and problems have been described here as illustrative examples, but many others might be suggested.Besides that, we plan to try other fuzzy measures apart from probability theory (specifically possibility theory). Not in vain, both probability and possibility theories are suitable for modeling uncertainty, but each one excels in different types. As our framework aims to be a general one, it should address uncertainty in all their varieties. Obviously, for each problem it has to be decided which theory is more appropriate to represent the semantics of the observations. If successful, this addition will greatly strengthen our representation model as a general framework for representing very different kinds of imperfect behaviors.A different issue would be to study the distance measure appropriate for classifying in each domain. We have defined in this paper a very simple one, but many other distance measures could be proposed to better account for the particular semantics of different applications.Leaving aside the comparison between different behaviors, we aim to employ the Frequent Correlated Trend model to predict future values in combination with a probabilistic mechanism. This issue would be of great importance specially when dealing with stream data, and if used for control tasks.Finally, we are interested in investigate how this behavior representation might be presented to users in effective ways. Our current approach lacks this feature as it is more aimed to computationally representing these behaviors rather than obtaining human-friendly interpretations.