@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SAR images analysis based on polarimetric signatures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The new method of SAR polarimetric signatures recognition is proposed.The recognizing system is based on two Kohonen networks.The scattering mechanism is recognized as well.Applications to the real data have been made.The results has been compared with the ones obtained by using entropy method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Polarimetric signature,Kohonen neural network,Pattern recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the presented paper a new method of identification of canonical coherent scatterers in the quad-polarimetric SAR data are presented. The proposed method is based on the analysis of polarimetric signatures. The observed signatures are compared with the polarimetric signatures of four canonical objects: trihedral, dihedral and helix – right and left which represent basic scattering mechanisms: single bounce, double bounce and helix scattering. The polarimetric matrices are treated as vectors in a unitary space with a scalar product that generates the norm. A recognized object is classified to one of the four coherent classes by a Kohonen network. It is not trained in an iteration process but its weights are adjusted according to the given patterns. The network classification is supported by rules. The obtained maps of pixels that represent canonical objects are compared with a map of coherent scatterers which was obtained by using the polarimetric entropy approach. The developed method of canonical coherent scatterers identification based on the polarimetric signatures analysis allows us not only to identify precisely the canonical coherent scatterers but also to determine the type of scattering mechanism characteristic for each of them. Since the proposed method works on a single-look (non-averaged) SAR data, it does not cause any spatial nor spectral decrease of amount of information because averaging is not conducted. Moreover, the proposed method will enable us the identification of a type of scattering mechanism in the canonical coherent pixels. This is an improvement in comparison to the existing methods. The obtained results should be more precise because the full polarimetric information about the scatterers is used in the identification procedure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Synthetic-aperture radar (SAR for abbreviation) is a type of a radar that applies a relative motion between an antenna and its target region to provide distinctive long-term coherent-signal variations. Over the past decade extensive research in the area of the segmentation and classification of polarimetric SAR data in the context of outdoor scene analysis have been conducted [10,23,30,32,33,40]. In general, the classification algorithms for polarimetric SAR images can be divided into three main classes [16] based on:•physical scattering mechanisms inherent in data [41],statistical characteristics of data [22,40],image processing techniques [15].The aim of the described work was to develop a new method of canonical scatterer identification in quad-polarimetric SAR data. In the presented paper, the canonical coherent scatterers are defined as the radar targets for which one dominant scattering mechanism is characteristic and the total power of the received signal is relatively high. These scatterers mainly correspond with artificial man-made targets such as buildings, power lines or bridges. The canonical coherent scatterers are a subgroup of all coherent scatterers which, in general, can be represented by a mix of different scattering mechanisms. There still does not exist any method designed directly to the identification of canonical coherent scatterers. However, a few identification algorithms of the coherent scatterers has been already proposed in the literature, which can be related to the proposed method. One of them is based on the values of signal to clutter ratio [39]. In this method the intensity of studied pixel is compared with the intensity of surrounding pixels (clutter). If the ratio is large i.e. greater than 15 dB, then the pixel is classified as coherent. The overestimation of the clutter intensity in the urban areas where coherent targets are located very close to each other is the biggest disadvantage of this method. The coherent scatterers can be also identified by using the multitemporal analysis of SAR images. In this case the value of amplitude dispersion (da) in time is determined for each pixel. If for a particular pixel the value of amplitude dispersion is small (da<0.25) then this object can be classified as a coherent one [11]. Unfortunately, for this method the relatively large number of SAR images of the same area (even more than 30) is necessary. The third widely used method of a coherent scatterers identification refers to information from quad-polarimetric SAR data and it is based on the entropy (H) analysis. In this method the entropy is calculated for each pixel of SAR image by using a small spatial window. If the value of the entropy is small (H<0.3), it can be assumed that the system is weakly depolarizing and the studied pixel corresponds to the coherent scatterer [23]. The use of a spatial averaging window, which leads to some reduction of information, is a disadvantage of this method. As it has been already mentioned, the new method of coherent scatterers identification in quad-polarimetric SAR data are proposed in the presented paper. It is based on the analysis of polarimetric signatures of pixels of SAR image. The proposed identification method allows us not only to identify precisely the canonical coherent scatterers without any spatial averaging, but also it determines their type of scattering mechanism. It is a significant progress in comparison to the existing methods.In this paper the method of SAR images identification based on Kohonen neural network is proposed. The classification algorithm is aided by rules. The proposed method works on a single-look (non-averaged) SAR data. Therefore it does not cause any spatial nor spectral decrease of amount of information because averaging is not conducted. Following this, the proposed method will enable us the identification of a type of scattering mechanism in the canonical coherent pixels.The SAR is an active coherent system which provides large-scaled two-dimensional images of the Earth surface reflectivity with high spatial and temporal resolutions. The SAR system is usually placed on satellites and aircraft boards [13]. In opposition to optical systems, not only the amplitude for each pixel of SAR image is recorded but also the phase of backscattered radar signal. In the case of the radar polarimetry imaging the information about polarization of transmitted and received signal is also included. This information, for each pixel of SAR image, is represented by scattering matrix describing the polarimetric response in four basic channels. The channels are: HH, VV, HV and VH. In the HH channel the horizontally polarized radar wave is transmitted and only the horizontal component of the backscattered wave is received. In the VV channel vertical components of the radar wave are used. In HV and VH channels one type of a wave is transmitted (horizontally or vertically polarized) and the other component is received. The polarimetric signature, that fully describes polarimetric properties of the scatterer, can be calculated on the basis of the scattering matrix. The idea of polarimetric signature was first proposed in [42].11The method based on polarimetric signatures was introduced about 25 years ago. So far it has been used only to graphic representation of polarimetric information. During the international conference PollnSAR 2013, that was organized by ESA and concerned the radar polarimetry, the necessity of study of polarimetric signature application possibilities in SAR images analysis was stressed strongly.It presents the scattering power of an object as a function of four parameters – the ellipticity and orientation angle of both incident and backscattered radar waves. The existence of these four parameters causes numerous difficulties in visualization of the set of these variables because of its size. In order to simplify the visualization of the signatures in the backscattered waves only two components of polarization are taken into consideration: the same polarization as in the incident wave and the polarization orthogonal to the incident wave. Therefore the polarimetric signatures are represented in two channels: the co- and cross-polarized. On the basis of the recorded scattering matrix the intensities of a response signal are computed for all possible polarization states, parameterized by the polarization ellipse aperture and orientation. The computed intensities are represented in two-dimensional matrices. Then these matrices can be represented as three-dimensional surfaces stretched over the full ranges of ellipticity (0–180°) and orientation angles (0–90°). In the radar polarimetry there are a few canonical objects which scatter radar waves in a characteristic ways called “scattering mechanisms”. These scattering mechanisms include: single bounce scattering (or even bounce), double bounce scattering (or odd bounce), helix scattering (right- and left-oriented helix) and volume scattering. In the case of a single bounce scattering, any radar wave bounces even times from a surface and travels back to radar. This type of scattering mechanism can be modeled by trihedral object. Double bounce scattering means that the radar wave scatters odd times and then goes back to radar. This scattering mechanism is characteristic for dihedral. Helix scattering is introduced by scattering from a complex man-made structures. It is represented by scattering from left- and right-oriented helix. The latter mechanism – a volume scattering – means that the radar wave is scattered many times from a cloud of thin oriented dipoles. This mechanism is typical for scattering from vegetation. The polarimetric signatures of these canonical objects are mathematically described in the literature [23]. Examples of polarimetric signatures of four canonical objects are presented in Fig. 1. The polarimetric signature which represents incoherent volume scattering is not discussed in this paper.The polarimetric signatures of real objects, located on the Earth surface, such as buildings, roads, viaducts, forests, fields, water, etc., differ from the canonical ones. The differences are caused by noise, by mixing different scattering types in the area which is represented in one pixel of radar image or by the inaccuracies of the radar measurement system. The pixels with one dominant scattering mechanism have a polarimetric signature most similar to the corresponding canonical object's signature. This similarity can be applied to the coherent identification process. The coherent objects are defined as weakly depolarizing scatterers for which one dominant scattering mechanism can be recovered. The coherent objects correspond mostly with man-made targets like buildings, viaducts, bridges, power poles and etc.As far, a few methods of coherent objects identification on SAR images, including artificial intelligence systems [16,24], have been developed. Each of them deals with the identification of coherent objects of a particular type or/and in particular conditions. None of the developed methods give definite results. The algorithm proposed in [32] is based on the observation that the coherent objects have a correlated spectrum in all three spatial/spectral directions, namely: ground range, height, and azimuth. Since the demand of a spectral correlation in azimuth can be too restrictive in urban areas, the Schneider's approach uses only the spectral correlation in ground range. The results of this algorithm are very promising but they depend strongly on the bandwidth of the used radar signal. In the case of narrow-band radars, only the strongest coherent objects can be detected. The Schneider's method also gives results with halved resolution, because it uses half-band images. A decrease of the resolution is an undesirable effect in most of the SAR images analysis.In the other method of coherent objects identification the entropy (H), which value is calculated from the four channels (HH, HV, VH, VV) of a polarimetric SAR image [23], is used. The entropy value is calculated for each pixel of a SAR image and it describes the degree of randomness of the scattering process. It is thought that small entropy value (e.g. H<0.3) corresponds to one scattering mechanism presented in the studied pixel [23]. In turn, an object which represents one scattering mechanism can be considered as weakly depolarizing and it corresponds to a canonical coherent scatterers. The averaging process is one of the disadvantages of this method. The averaging, performed in a spatial window, leads to decrease of the spatial resolution of the results.Another method of a coherent object identification is based on the intensities of backscattered radar waves. The intensity of a studied pixel is compared with the intensity of surrounding pixels. According to the assumptions, the coherent object should scatter the radar wave stronger than the surrounding. If the ratio of the studied pixel intensity to the surrounding intensity is large enough (higher than 15dB) the pixel can be considered as a coherent. This method, however, has a serious disadvantage. It overestimates the surrounding intensities in the urban areas in which coherent scatterers can be located close to each other.The problem of identification of coherent scatters within SAR images is a subject of many studies [14,30,32]. The coherent objects can be used for example to create spatial network of benchmark to estimate spurious phase contributions [14]. Then these contributions, such as atmospheric effects or topographic errors, can be removed and that allows us to assess long-term ground deformations with millimeter accuracy. The development of SAR imaging, manifested in better spatial and temporal resolution of radar images and inclusion of polarimetric information of radar wave, allows us to explore the backscattered stability more precisely. The authors decided to propose a new method of canonical coherent scatterers identification. The new algorithm, based on the analysis of polarimetric signatures, should preserve the maximum spatial and spectral resolution of the SAR image. The proposed method works on a single-look (non-averaged) SAR data. It does not cause any spatial or spectral decrease of amount of information because averaging is not conducted. Moreover, the proposed method will enable us the identification of a type of scattering mechanism in the canonical coherent pixels. This is an improvement in comparison to the existing methods. The obtained results should be more precise because the full polarimetric information about the scatterers is used in the identification procedure. In future this method can be developed in order to provide more possibilities of extracting polarimetric information from the data.The approach to SAR images analysis, proposed in this paper, refers to Kohonen artificial neural network [17–20,37]. The classical Kohonen network consists of some input units and one layer of neurons – Fig. 2. The network is used as a classifier – it divides the space X of the input signalsx→=[x1,…,xn]into the regions that correspond to the found clusters of the input signals [20]. Each distinguished region corresponds to the weights vector of one neuron or a few ones and it is the set of these input signals whose distance from the corresponding weight vector or a group of vectors is smaller than the distance from each other weight vector. The comparison between the input signalsx→and the weight vectorsw→(j),j is the index of a neuron, is possible because they have the same number of components i.e.x→=[x1,…,xn]and the weight vector of each neuronw→(j)=[w1(j),…,wn(j)](see Fig. 2) which means thatx→,w→(j)∈X=ℝn.The vectors of weights of neurons are set during the iterative training process. The Kohonen network is trained by using one of the competitive training rule - winner takes all (WTA) or winner takes most (WTM). If it is trained by using WTA algorithm then, as a result, each weight vector is the center of one input signals cluster. Thus, one neuron corresponds to one cluster and vice versa in the network trained by using WTA algorithm. If the WTM algorithm is used, the self organized map (SOM) is created. It should be mentioned that although SOM are better known and more widely used than WTA-trained networks, WTA-trained Kohonen networks, however, are both applied and analyzed theoretically – the papers [1] and [27] can be put as the examples. The weights modification is given by the formulaw→(j)(k+1):=w→(j)(k)+αh(i,j)(x→(k)−w→(j)(k)),where k is the number of the training process iteration, 0<α<1 is a learning constant and h is a neighbourhood function, 0≤h(i, j)≤1.The number i is the index of the winning neuron – the winner – i.e. the neuron that is most similar to the presented input vectorx→.The proximity of two vectors, let us saya→,b→∈X,can be measured as∥a→−b→∥or, in the case when the scalar product 〈·, ·〉 is determined, as〈a→,b→〉if all the compared vectors have the same values of the norm, let us say equal to r[9]. Then, because〈a→,b→〉=∥a→∥∥b→∥cos∡(a→,b→)=r2cos∡(a→,b→),the value of the scalar product determines univocally the angle between the vectors. If values of vector norms are the same, then the angle between them is the only factor that determines how different they are. If the WTA algorithm is used as the training process, then only the weight vector of the winner is modified which means that the function h has the following formh(i,j)=1forj=i,0forj≠i.In the case when WTM algorithm is used, h(i, i)=1 but h(i, j)>0 for the neurons whose weights vectors differs slightly from the weight vector of the winner. As it was aforementioned, any trained Kohonen network divides all the space X into subsets that corresponds to the established vectors of neuron weights. This division is done with accuracy to the set X0⊂X, that corresponds to borders between the created regions, which has the measure equal to zero. The signalsx→that belong to X0 cannot be classified by the Kohonen network.The analyzing system, introduced in this paper, corresponds to the Kohonen network trained by using WTA method. The system differs significantly from the classical version of the Kohonen network – see the next section – since it is used as a classifier, not as a clustering system.The polarimetric signature of a scatterer fully describes its polarimetric properties [29]. It is represented in two channels: the co-polarized and cross-polarized ones. The intensities of a response signal are computed for all possible polarization states, parameterized by the polarization ellipse aperture and orientation. The polarimetric signature has a form of a two-dimensional matrix. Its rows represent an orientation angle whereas columns represent ellipticity. Values in the matrix represent the intensity of a response signal. The values of polarimetric signature can be computed from Muller matrix M according to Eq. (1)[42] and transmitted polarization:(1)σ(χi,ψi,χj,ψj)=4πk21cos2χicos2ψicos2χisin2ψisin2χi(∑n=1N[M(n)])1cos2χjcos2ψjcos2χjsin2ψjsin2χj,where k is a wave number, ψ is a polarization ellipse orientation angle, χ is a polarization ellipse ellipticity angle and indices i and j are assigned to parameters connected respectively with received and transmitted polarization. The polarimetric signatures of canonical objects are well described in the literature [23]. They differ significantly each other in one or even in both polarimetric channels. The polarimetric signatures of canonical objects are presented in Fig. 1. In the case of real data the total observed signature very often differs from signatures of canonical objects. It is due to the fact that the observed signature, calculated for radar response signal from an area represented in one pixel, is a sum of signatures calculated for radar response signal of each object in this area. Therefore, for pixels for which one scattering mechanism is dominant, the polarimetric signatures are similar to one of the canonical pair – co- and cross-polarized. This information can be used in the canonical coherent scatterers identification process. The described method of the canonical coherent scatterers identification is based on the analysis of polarimetric signatures. The algorithm is designated for both averaged and non-averaged data. The polarimetric signatures are very sensitive to the orientation of the target towards the radar line of sight [32]. Therefore in the first step of the proposed algorithm each pixel of the SAR image is preprocessed to rotate the target orientation angle θ to zero. This angle can be computed from Eq. (2)[23]:(2)tan(−4θ)=−4Re(〈(SHH−SVV)SHV*〉)−〈|SHH−SVV|2〉+4〈|SHV|2〉.Then, the rotationS˜of the scattering matrix S can be computed using the calculated orientation angle by applying Eq. (3)(3)S˜=cosθsinθ−sinθcosθScosθ−sinθsinθcosθ.The SHH, SHVand SVVare complex numbers representing the radar response in three basic polarimetric channels – HH, HV and VV respectively, whereas “〈〉” denotes the averaging procedure in a spatial window.The compensation of the orientation angle shift allows us to obtain the results that are invariable with the target orientation angle. In the next step of the described method the polarimetric signatures are calculated for each pixel of the SAR image using Eq. (1). Then, the observed polarimetric signatures of an individual pixel – both co-polarized and cross-polarized channels – are compared with four polarimetric signatures of canonical objects representing four basic scattering mechanisms: single bounce, double bounce, helix right- and left-scattering. The preprocessed polarimetric signatures, that are matrices 180×90, are the recognized objects. They are classified to four, given a priori canonical classes: dihedral, left-helix, right-helix and trihedral. The polarimetric matrices are treated as vectors that consist of 180×90=16 200 components. In this way the polarimetric matrices become elements of a unitary spaceℝn,n=16, 200, with a scalar product “∘″ and the norm generated by it. Each of the recognized class is represented by one correct pattern, let us denote them by u1, u2, u3 and u4. The applied methodology is based on the fact that distinctive features separate the classes representatives clearly [2]. This means that there exists a sufficiently large neighborhood of each vector, corresponding to a recognized class, which does not intersect neighborhoods of the other representative vectors. It is assumed that the vector direction is one of the distinctive key parameters in the set of patterns. In order to verify this assumption, the angles between patterns, that represent each class, were calculated. The assumption was positively verified, which means that the angles between patterns are sufficiently large – Table 1.It should be stressed that, in spite of the fact that the classes u2 and u3 cannot be separated using “cross-polarization”, the “cross-polarization” is useful because it separates the class u4 from the other classes better than “co-polarization”. Therefore both polarizations should be taken into consideration in the classification algorithm. The angle between vectorsa→=[a1,…,an]andb→=[b1,…,bn]has been calculated by using a standard scalar producta→∘b→=∑i=1naibiaccording to the formula(4)cos(∡(a→,b→))=a→∘b→∥a→∥·∥b→∥,where ∥·∥ is a norm generated by the scalar product “∘″, i.e.∥x→∥=x→∘x→.The described procedure corresponds to Kohonen neural network trained by using the WTA algorithm but there are some significant differences between the classical approach, described in “Kohonen artificial neural networks” section, and the proposed approach. They can be specified as follows.1.In the proposed approach the network is not trained iteratively. The weights of all four neurons are set explicitly because ideal patterns are known. Therefore the problem is stated in a quite different way than in the case of any unsupervised competitive training task. Nevertheless, the used neural network is a Kohonen network regarding its structure.In the proposed approach the measure of the set of these vectors that cannot be classified by the network is not equal to zero because angular thresholds were used because of the fact that it is the task of the network to recognize whether the presented signal is one of the four coherent patterns. It should be stressed that the applied network does not find the coherent class which is most similar to the presented input vector, as it would be in classical Kohonen network, but it decides whether the presented vector is one of the known coherent patterns or not. Therefore, for the presented input vector the network does not find the nearest vector of weights but checks whether the presented vector belongs to one of the defined small neighbourhoods of the weight vectors.In the classical Kohonen network if the scalar product is used as the proximity measure and all the considered vectors have not the same values of their norms, then they are normalized. In SAR images the value of the norm corresponds only to the signal reflex strength and it does not supply information about type of the surface that reflexes the signal. Therefore, only the angle between the compared vectors carries crucial information and its cosine can be used as the vectors proximity measure and normalization is unnecessary.At the present stage of the recognizing system development it is not necessary to use the described Kohonen network – the formula (4) can be applied directly. Nevertheless, the system is intended to be expanded to the system that will also recognize incoherent samples. In such case neither the ideal representatives of incoherent classes are given nor the number of all the classes is known a priori. Then, Kohonen network will be the proper tool to solve such a widen task.A recognized object is represented by two vectorsx1→∈ℝnandx2→∈ℝn,corresponding to co-polarization and cross-polarization matrix respectively, that are put onto inputs of two Kohonen networks in which the weights are adjusted in such a way that they correspond to the canonical objects. The object is classified as an element of the coherent class uiif both the angles∡(x1→,vi→)and∡(x2→,wi→)are sufficiently small and both the norms∥x1→∥and∥x2→∥are sufficiently large. The output signals from two neural networks are given onto classifying module which acts according to the following classifying rules.1.If the norm of at least one vector corresponding to the recognized object is less than the assumed threshold, then the object cannot be classified. Otherwise, the vectors are put onto the inputs of two Kohonen networks which neurons are adjusted in such a way that they represent canonical scatterers.If in both Kohonen networks the winning neuron corresponds to the dihedral class, then the recognized object is classified as a dihedral one.If in both Kohonen networks the winning neuron corresponds to the trihedral class, then the recognized object is classified as a trihedral one.If in the Kohonen network corresponding to the co-polarized signature the winning neuron correspond to the left helix and in the Kohonen network corresponding to the cross-polarized signature win two neurons correspond to the left helix and right helix respectively, then the object is classified as the left helix one.If in the Kohonen network corresponding to the co-polarized signature the winning neuron correspond to the right helix and in the Kohonen network corresponding to the cross-polarized signature win two neurons correspond to the left helix and right helix respectively, then the object is classified as the right helix one.If none of the conditions specified in the points 2–5 is satisfied then the recognized object cannot be classified as a coherent one.The described method allows us to divide the set of recognized objects into two subsets. The first one consists of these elements which has been univocally classified to one of four coherent class. The second one is the set of elements which cannot be classified because the distance from at least two correct representatives is comparable.As it has been already mentioned, signatures carry information about a surface type that scattered the waves emitted by a radar. At the most general level of analysis, the scene recognition rules can be specified in the following way.1.The dihedral class, that represents double bounce mechanism, corresponds to vertical objects. The recognized object can be a wall, a high building but also a forest border.The trihedral class that represents single bounce mechanism, corresponds to the flat surfaces. The recognized object can be a flat roof, a road, a square, an apron area but also a ploughed field.Both the helix classes, that represent helix scattering, correspond to complex man-made objects. Thus, it can be expected that this class is characteristic for urban areas.No coherent class corresponds to agricultural areas and forests.The more detailed scene analysis based on polarimetric signatures will be a topic of succeeded papers. In order to create the algorithm of this analysis, structural features of the SAR images have to be taken into account [12,38]. Since there is no direct relationship between the signature type and the type of object on the analyzed scene, the structural image analysis will probably have to be enriched by probabilistic or fuzzy mechanisms [3,34–36]. It should be stressed that in this paper only canonical coherent scatterers are considered. The incoherent scatterers represent pixel-support parts-sparse pictorial structures [8] and would need more complex algorithm based, perhaps, on hierarchical classification [28,31].The scheme of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 3.The proposed method of canonical coherent scatterers identification, based on the analysis of polarimetric signatures, was tested using real data. The algorithm has been applied to TerraSAR-X image of Mahlow region. The incidence angle of around 45°, right-looking, ascending pass, and a ground range resolution of 1.7m are the measurement parameters. The Mahlow is a town located on the south of Berlin. Different types of land cover can be distinguished within the selected region. The large part of region corresponds to build-up areas but there are also some forested and agricultural fields. This causes that different scattering mechanisms can be recognized.The canonical coherent scatterers identified by the analysis of polarimetric signatures are presented in Figs. 4–7. They are displayed by using white dots. The optical images of studied region together with maps of identified canonical coherent scatterers are presented in Fig. 4. It can be seen that canonical coherent scatterers are located mostly within build-up areas. Only insignificant percent of canonical coherent scatterers were recognized within agricultural fields and forest what is a very desirable result. Moreover, the identified canonical coherent scatterers determine the location of buildings and railroad very clearly.In order to perform more detailed analysis of the obtained results, two subareas (A and B) of Mahlow region were selected – Fig. 4. The coherent objects, that were identified on the basis of the polarimetric signatures analysis, were first presented in the map (Fig. 4) and then they were divided regarding the scattering mechanism and they were presented independently in Figs. 5–7.The identified canonical coherent scatterers that represent the single bounce scattering mechanism are displayed in Fig. 5. For both analyzed regions (A and B) the canonical coherent scatterers correspond mostly to man-made structures. The canonical coherent scatterers are located along the north–south railroad in the west part of the region A and along the flat west–east car-parking roof in the north part of the studied area – Fig. 5, region A. The green areas are almost devoid of canonical coherent scatterers which is most evident in the central part of the region B – Fig. 5.The canonical coherent scatterers that represent double bounce scattering mechanism are presented in Fig. 6. The identified canonical coherent scatterers correspond accurately to double-steep building roofs. Significantly fewer canonical coherent scatterers were identified along the north–south railroad (region A) in comparison with the previous case. Only a few canonical coherent scatterers were recognized along the flat roof of the car-parking in the north part of the region A. It can be observed that the forested areas are devoid of canonical coherent scatterers – Fig. 6, region B. The canonical coherent scatterers were also well recognized along the north and south parts of a tennis court fence within the region B – Fig. 6.The canonical coherent scatterers that represent helix scattering mechanisms – both right and left-oriented – are presented in Fig. 7. It is more difficult to interpret these mechanisms than single and double bounce. It can be noticed that identified canonical coherent scatterers correspond to man-made coherent scatterers very similarly to canonical scatters with double bounce scattering mechanism. For both analyzed regions A and B the forested and agriculture areas are devoid of canonical object. The number of identified canonical coherent scatterers for which helix scattering mechanism is characteristic is significantly lower than in the case of double bounce or even single bounce mechanism.All canonical scatterers, presented by using colours for different types of the scattering mechanisms for regions A and B, are shown in Fig. 8.22It was impossible to use colours for different scattering mechanism for the whole region because of too small image resolution – see Fig. 4.In order to assess the results of the proposed method, the comparison with the entropy approach was made. In this paper the results have been compared with the entropy approach because it is the only method in which coherent objects are defined in the same way as in the our proposed method. Furthermore, in the entropy method, polarimetric information is utilized. Any other method is based on different definitions of coherent objects and investigates different features.The polarimetric entropy is a concept introduced in [7]. It determines the degree of randomness of the electromagnetic wave scattering process. The higher the entropy value is, the more random character the scattering process has. The randomness of the scattering process is determined by the amount of different scattering mechanisms. The entropy H is defined as(5)H=−∑k=1NpklogNpk,where N is the logarithm basis equal to the polarimetric dimension and the picorresponds to the pseudo-probabilities which are obtained from the eigenvalues of the coherency matrix which is a way of the scattering phenomenon describing and is computed from the scattering matrix. The piis given by(6)pi=λi∑k=13λk,where λiare the eigenvalues of the coherency matrix. The values of entropy vary between 0 and 1 and they are calculated by using a special window. The value of entropy equal to 0 is a result of an occurrence of a single scattering mechanism and the value equal to 1 is a results of an occurrence of a pure noise. In the case of low entropies (H<0.3), the system is considered as weakly depolarizing and one dominant scattering mechanism can be recovered. This dominant scattering corresponds to the equivalent point scatterer [23]. This leads to the conclusion that the pixels with low entropy values (H<0.3) can be considered as a point-like canonical coherent scatterers.The entropy method was applied to the region of Mahlow town. The entropy values were calculated in spatial window of 3×3 pixels. Only those pixels for which determined entropy values were smaller than 0.3 were considered as canonical coherent scatterers. The obtained results are presented in Fig. 9. It can be noticed that the results obtained by using entropy approach are not so clear and sharp as in the case of the polarimetric signatures-based method.For both analyzed regions it can be seen that identified canonical coherent scatters correspond mostly to roofs of buildings. Some of them are also located along the north–south railroad (region A) and the north–south road (region B). It can be observed that in the entropy approach, in comparison with the results obtained by using the analysis of polarimetric signatures, significantly more canonical coherent scatterers were identified within forested and agriculture areas. This means that the analysis of polarimetric signature is more effective than the entropy approach because vegetative areas are incoherent. Therefore the buildings, located in the build-up areas with vegetation, are not well recognized as coherent scatterers. Furthermore, the entropy-based method, incorrectly recognized canonical coherent scatters within the football pitch – region B. Such effect does not occur in the case of the algorithm proposed in this paper. Moreover, it can be also observed that the entropy-based approach reflects the location of buildings with far less accuracy than the method based on the polarimetric signature analysis. It is most evident in the case of a flat roof of a car parking in the north part of the region A. Furthermore, it is very difficult to distinguish the town boundaries by using the entropy method. For instance, the built-up areas, located in the north part of studied regions, are not visible because they are not separated clearly from forests and agriculture fields – Fig. 10. By contrast with the proposed approach, the entropy-based method does not provide information about the scattering mechanism in the recognized canonical coherent scatterers.The results summed up in Table 2show that the method based on analysis of polarimetric signatures allows us to recognize about 60% less of the coherent objects than the entropy method. It should be stressed, however, that the coherent objects, that have been identified by the method introduced in this paper, are characterized by higher intensity. Averaged values of intensity are higher even about 30–45%. Such results prove that the proposed method, based on the polarimetric structures analysis, allows us to recognize the coherent objects more precisely compare Figs. 8 and 9.It should be stressed that the result of classification cannot be determined by any quantitative measure due to pixel by pixel class labels are not available from the row data collection [15].The proposed algorithm of canonical coherent scatterers identification based on the analysis of polarimetric signatures gives some promising results. What is important, in the canonical coherent scatterers identification process, the data are not averaged. It helps us to preserve the spatial information from the image. The recognized canonical coherent scatterers correspond accurately to man-made structures which allows us to determine precisely the extent of built-up areas. By using this method the man-made coherent scatterers can be recognized, even if they are surrounded by vegetation and even if they are oriented in various directions. For the analyzed region the forested and agricultural fields are almost devoid of canonical coherent scatterers. It is a significant improvement to the entropy approach. Furthermore, the important feature of the developed algorithm allows us not only to identify the canonical coherent scatterers but also to recognize the scattering mechanism. The proposed method also gives more accurate results than the entropy approach.It should be stressed, however, that it is impossible, basing only on SAR images analysis, to give a precise interpretation of the analyzed image. Based directly on SAR we can only recognize the type of the surface that reflexes the signals. Such specification is based on the type of reflex that is encoded in the polarimetric matrices. The reflex type recognition was the aim of the paper. Thus, we can say if the surface is smooth or rough, if it is water or not, we can determine the extent of a built-up area etc. However, we cannot say if the analyzed surface is a roof, a road or, for instance, a runway. Such recognition can be done only on the basis on a context syntactic analysis of the whole image with taking into consideration also incoherent reflexes. Therefore, at the present stage, such system can be used only as supporting the analysis done by an expert. However, taking into consideration the state of the studies concerning automatic SAR images recognition, the results described in this paper seem to be significant.The relatively long time of computations, in particular if a large area of a terrain is examined, is the most important disadvantage of the proposed method. However, as computations consist in large numbers of simple operations, this problem could be solved efficiently if the possibility of application of GPU (Graphical Processing Unit), which enables us to process many tasks in parallel [26], is considered.It should also be mentioned that, potentially, SAR technique can be used in robotics as well. As it has been already mentioned, coherent scatterers mainly correspond to artificial man-made targets such as buildings, viaducts, walls, or bridges and the SAT systems are often placed on aircraft boards. Therefore SAR can be used in unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) as a part of its sensory system. The first task of the UAVs, used in civil construction industry inspection missions, is the navigation from an initial position to a final position in an unknown three-dimensional environment. Then the robot has to recognize the object, that is inspected, and it has to understand the environment and the object spatial structure in the context of the mission, particularly in the aspects of trajectory planning [4,5,25]. Therefore the technology which allows us to detect and recognize man-made targets can be an effective-acting part of the visual system of an UAV and also one of the basis of the autonomous flying agent cognitive system based on the formal models of mental processes [6,21].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
