@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wind turbine condition monitoring based on SCADA data using normal behavior models. Part 2: Application examples

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Condition monitoring system for wind turbines based on SCADA data.Normal behavior modeling of 10min average values.Fuzzy logic reasoning for anomaly and fault analysis.Industrial application to wind farm data and real measured faults.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ANFIS models,Condition monitoring,Wind turbine,SCADA data,Normal behavior models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper is part two of a two part series. The originality of part one was the proposal of a novelty approach for wind turbine supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) data mining for condition monitoring purposes. The novelty concerned the usage of adaptive neuro-fuzzy interference system (ANFIS) models in this context and the application of a proposed procedure to a wide range of different SCADA signals. The applicability of the set up ANFIS models for anomaly detection was proven by the achieved performance of the models. In combination with the fuzzy interference system (FIS) proposed the prediction errors provide information about the condition of the monitored components.Part two presents application examples illustrating the efficiency of the proposed method. The work is based on continuously measured wind turbine SCADA data from 18 modern type pitch regulated wind turbines of the 2 MW class covering a period of 35 months. Several real life faults and issues in this data are analyzed and evaluated by the condition monitoring system (CMS) and the results presented. It is shown that SCADA data contain crucial information for wind turbine operators worth extracting. Using full signal reconstruction (FSRC) adaptive neuro-fuzzy interference system (ANFIS) normal behavior models (NBM) in combination with fuzzy logic (FL) a setup is developed for data mining of this information. A high degree of automation can be achieved. It is shown that FL rules established with a fault at one turbine can be applied to diagnose similar faults at other turbines automatically via the CMS proposed. A further focus in this paper lies in the process of rule optimization and adoption, allowing the expert to implement the gained knowledge in fault analysis. The fault types diagnosed here are: (1) a hydraulic oil leakage; (2) cooling system filter obstructions; (3) converter fan malfunctions; (4) anemometer offsets and (5) turbine controller malfunctions. Moreover, the graphical user interface (GUI) developed to access, analyze and visualize the data and results is presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Condition monitoring of wind turbines is of increasing importance as the size and remote locations of wind turbines used nowadays makes the technical availability of the turbine very crucial. Especially offshore unexpected faults, especially of large components, can lead to excessive downtime due to the lack of suitable crane ships or other specialized vessels. However, also smaller issues and faults of auxiliary equipment like pumps or fans can cause expensive turbine downtime due to restricted turbine accessibility. From an operator's point of view, it is therefore worth increasing the effort to monitor the turbine condition in order to reduce unscheduled downtime and thus operational costs.Typically the available condition monitoring systems (CMSs) require high-level knowledge about the system to be monitored. However, this knowledge is difficult to access and often does not exist. Physical models of the system to monitor its condition and predict failures can thus seldomly be built with high accuracy due to its complex interaction among several dynamical subsystems [1]. Moreover, the available CMSs mainly focus on vibration analysis. Vibration analysis is by far the most prevalent method for machine condition monitoring [2]. However, vibration sensors are not installed on all turbines and components due to their high costs. This leads to a large number of wind turbines not being condition monitored at all or vibration sensors being installed at the main components only.In contrast to vibration data there is a large amount of operational (SCADA) data available, which can be used to give an indication of the turbine condition. This fact is also stressed by Yang and Jiang [3] who additionally point out that these data are the cheapest resource for developing a CMS for wind turbines.In part one of this paper series [1], a CMS is proposed utilizing adaptive neuro-fuzzy interference systems (ANFIS) to build normal behavior models (NBM) based on ordinary SCADA data. The resulting prediction error pattern of the different models is further analyzed by means of fuzzy logic (FL) rules in order to extract information about the component conditions. Part two will now entirely focus on application examples illustrating the performance of the proposed CMS. More information about the reasoning for choosing ANFIS models as well as FL can be found in part one [1].The research presented in this paper is the result of two years investigations carried out to develop a CMS that uses wind turbine SCADA data available to wind turbine operators. The data available is obtained from 18 operating onshore turbines of the 2MW class, where continuous operational data were gathered from April 2009 to March 2012.In Section 2 of this paper the graphical user interface (GUI) developed to access and visualize the large amount of data is briefly introduced. Additionally general comments about the data volume are made and the result visualization is presented. In Section 3, a flow chart illustrates the information flow and the fuzzy rule optimization process. Examples emphasizing the working principle and the effectiveness of the proposed method are given in Section 4. Results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 focuses on future aspects and conclusions are drawn in Section 7.The large amount of SCADA data available to wind turbine operators requires a systematic and standardized handling of data. For condition monitoring purposes, not all SCADA data supplied are of interest. The first difficulty therefore arises from the selection of suitable signals for processing by the proposed CMS. The number of data tags available for a 10min period can easily exceed 1000. This includes digital values, hour counters, calculated values, set point and statistical values (mean, minimum, maximum and standard deviation) for each 10min period. For the reasons given in part one [1], the focus lies on 10min average values in this research. Due to the number of data tags supplied by the turbine manufacturer, 45 models are developed for each turbine in this research covering a broad variety of signals. Thus in total 810 (45×18) models are developed, trained and their prediction error monitored. For systematic handling, a graphical user interface (GUI), Fig. 1, was developed that eases data access, visualization and analysis. The functionality of the different features in the GUI are:(A)Wind power plant selection: Allows the selection of different wind farms in the future (currently one implemented),Turbine selectionModule selection (compare part one Fig. 1):•Training module: the ANFIS models are trained, or new data processed.Anomaly detection module: Anomalies in the prediction error are detected.Fuzzy expert module: evaluates existing rules and stores the results for graphical visualization.Retrain panel: When the signal behavior changes due to service or replaced/repaired components, retraining of the models may be required, which can be controlled in this panel.Advanced settings: Training and preprocessing settings can be edited to assure proper model performance•Maximum signal lag to be removed before modelingMinimum turbine power output for analysisFiltering of transient situations, e.g. after turbine startNumber of data days and turbine operational days for the different training statesProbability value giving the alarm limitsNumber of days the anomaly detection module shall wait for a reoccurring anomaly before forgettingNumber of values to average (here 144 values equal to one day is chosen)Signal selectionNormal Behavior Model (NBM) input information: Gives information about which input signals are used to build the particular modelTraining status information: Training states (one to four) according to the steps defined in the advanced settings panelOne day average prediction error visualization: Visualization of the prediction error of the selected signalOne day average model inputs prediction error visualization: Helping the expert to find the root cause of prediction error deviation from normal (only displayed, when NBM for specific input exists)Different graphic settings used for analysis:•Anomaly error to get a quick overview about the prediction errors of the selected signals2D prediction error to visualize the prediction error magnitudeRelative error as being the prediction error divided by the actual measurement in this periodRaw dataWind turbine power curveAnomaly error inputs showing the prediction error evolution over time of the model inputs and the outputUsing the anomaly error plot function of the GUI (see area K in Fig. 1) the model error of all developed and monitored models per wind turbine can be visualized to get an overview of current model deviations. For this purpose the predictions errors are normalized by the determined anomaly limit. In Fig. 2a 2D waterfall plot of the normalized averaged percentage prediction errors over time is visualized for WTG 04 to emphasize the strength of this illustration in getting a one shot overview about present model deviations.In this plot the colors indicate the prediction error amplitude. White areas mark periods where no prediction is available, e.g. due to missing data or non-operational periods. A wind turbine schematic is visualized in Fig. 3.In order to arrive at component condition statements FL rules must be implemented by an expert who is familiar with the behavior of the turbine, typical faults and their root causes. There are two types of rules•generic rulesspecific rulesThe generic rules are used to highlight present anomalies, in case no specific rule applies. This rule type gives no information about the specific condition or potential root cause, but highlights anomalies in the data. The specific rules on the other hand provide this level of information [1]. The overall information flow and diagnosis optimization loop is emphasized in Fig. 4.The expert analysis of the root cause is aided by the prediction errors, the raw data, service protocols, on-site inspections and personal experience. Once the root cause is identified, the generic rule can be updated, or a specific rule implemented that captures the fault pattern and leads to a correct diagnosis. Moreover, the thresholds defining anomalies can be adjusted by the expert to give a better indication of the actual component condition, i.e. make the system more sensitive or less sensitive. In this fashion, the expert system will become more diverse over time concerning different diagnoses and more precise in condition classification. More information about the fuzzy expert system can be found in part one [1].Next, a number of examples will be presented which show the rule implementation process in more detail, followed by examples showing the system performance and general rule application.The examples given in this section are real measured faults analyzed by the proposed CMS. Note that during CMS development no monitoring was performed, i.e. the examples given here are based on re-analysis.In the first example, an anomaly in hydraulic oil temperature is highlighted by the CMS developed. In addition to this, it is emphasized how information about the anomaly root cause can be implemented in the CMS in order to ease the analysis of future faults. Fig. 5shows a 2D waterfall plot of the normalized averaged percentage prediction errors of the hydraulic oil temperature and the related inputs of the NBM over time. Figure was generated by selecting the period between 2009-06-15 and 2009-08-14 and the anomaly error inputs graphic setting.It is visible that beginning on 2009-07-16 an anomaly with rising amplitude occurs in the prediction error of the hydraulic oil temperature. At the same time, the related inputs behave normal, which points to a real anomaly in the hydraulic oil temperature data.Fig. 6shows the prediction error and Fig. 7the raw time series of the hydraulic oil temperature during anomaly occurrence over time to point out the amplitude height of the prediction error during fault occurrence.The trend in the prediction error is clearly visible. The highest prediction error peak is around 15°C. Although the raw time series also indicates a trend, its visibility is dependent on the operational mode of the turbine.The anomaly pattern of the normalized prediction error is analyzed by the fuzzy expert application module and a high hydraulic oil temperature is highlighted on 2009-07-16 by the CMS via the following generic rule:If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Hydraulic oil temp.==high/very high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) HV transformer ph.1 temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Top controller temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Generator current ph.1==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Nacelle temp.==ok) then (Diagnosis==Hydraulic oil temp. high) (Condition==yellow/red)(Pot. root cause==Ambiguous)These initial generic rules give no information about the potential root cause. The condition statements “yellow” and “red” are based on the general anomaly definition given in part one [1]. The fault can now be investigated and a rule established based on the diagnosed root cause. In this specific case, the root cause was a leakage in the rotary joint, causing the oil pump to run permanently and thus heating up the oil. The entries in the service report were used to set up the specific rules containing the expert knowledge as follows.If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Hydraulic oil temp.==high/very high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) HV transformer ph.1 temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Top controller temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Generator current ph.1==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Nacelle temp.==ok) then (Diagnosis==Hydraulic oil temp. high)(Condition==yellow/red)(Pot. root cause==Pump running permanently, leakage possible)The terms high “yellow” and very high “red” of the hydraulic oil temperature prediction error are defined in a master threshold table with 5°C and 14°C respectively, to reflect the gained knowledge of the component condition. Repair took place on 2009-08-06. Reanalyzing the fault gives the results presented in Table 1.The expert knowledge was successfully implemented and the CMS is now able to identify and diagnose similar issues on other turbines of the fleet. It is worth noting, that the generic rules can be set up before fault occurrence based on general engineering knowledge about the system behavior in fault situations. While each turbine is treated individually with respect to the NBMs, the implemented rules are applicable for all turbines of the same type, which is shown in the next examples.The second example shows an increase in gearbox oil temperature due to dirty filters of the cooling system. Again, a 2D waterfall plot is used to emphasize present anomaly patterns (see Fig. 8).It is visible that the gearbox oil temperature deviates from normal behavior round 2010-10-15, while all inputs are normal. At 2010-11-31 the input nacelle temperature leaves normal behavior and indicates a positive deviation, i.e. higher nacelle temperatures. This effect is a consequence resulting from the increased gearbox temperature, as the gearbox together with the generator are the main heat sources in the nacelle. Consequentially a higher gearbox temperature leads to a higher nacelle temperature. The prediction error magnitude and the anomaly limits of the gearbox oil temperature are visualized in Fig. 9and the corresponding raw time series in Fig. 10.The fluctuating pattern of the prediction error is typical for the deviation from normal behavior being depended on the turbine power output, i.e. high prediction error when high efficiency of the cooling system is required (full load) and low when the turbine power output is low. To some extent, this makes the correct classification into the category yellow and red depended on the power output. However, this can be overcome, if only the worst condition is considered until the component condition falls back to normal (green).The raw data do indicate an increase in temperature, but the level of increase appears to be constant beyond mid-August.The increase in gearbox oil temperature is highlighted by the CMS at 2010-10-15 via the generic rules:If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Gearbox oil temperature temp.==high/very high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Generator speed==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Nacelle temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Power output==ok) then (Diagnosis==Gearbox oil temp. high) (Condition==yellow/red) (Pot. root cause==Ambiguous)The categorization into the condition category “yellow” takes place based on the standard definitions of anomaly. The condition evaluation is summarized in Table 2.At 2010-12-11 the gearbox condition turned to “grey” (no diagnosis possible), as no rule in the rule base reflected the present pattern. This is because the generic rule requires the nacelle temperature to be normal. However, at 2010-12-11 the nacelle temperature model did also show a high prediction error, which prevented the generic rule from firing. This temperature increase is because of the physical link of the gearbox temperature and nacelle temperature. Note that during the increase in gearbox oil temperature no automatic diagnosis of the nacelle temperature can take place (indicated by the gray dot).The service protocol reveals that the six months service was performed on the 2011-01-12 and the maintenance manual indicates that the filter was replaced, causing the normalization of the prediction error. Knowing this, the generic rules can be changed into specific rules with regards to the potential root cause and the general rule setup.If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Gearbox oil temperature temp.==high/very high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Generator speed==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Nacelle temp.∼==low) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Power output==ok) then (Diagnosis==Gearbox oil temp. high) (Condition==yellow/red) (Pot. root cause==Cooling insufficient, filter polluted)Additionally the threshold for the condition “red” was changed to 10°C in the master threshold table, in order to make condition statements equal for all turbines and to better reflect the pollution status. Reanalyzing the prediction error evolution gives the correct results as stated in Table 3.The filter pollution is a frequent phenomenon at this type of turbine, which allows a check of rule validity for other turbines. This check is done in the next example.In this example the specific rules implemented in example 2, are applied to the same issue at other turbines. Fig. 11shows the 2D waterfall plot during filter pollution at WTG 09.The first anomaly in gear oil temperature occurs at 2010-08-20. Six days later the nacelle temperature leaves the normal operational range. Fig. 12shows the prediction error amplitudes and Fig. 13the raw time series of the gearbox oil temperature during filter pollution.Although the temperature deviation from normal behavior is up to 11°C the increase was not highlighted by the turbine controller, due to usually high thresholds set. After filter replacement the temperature fell back to the normal operational range.The trend is also visible in the raw time series, but the fluctuations due to the different operational modes make it more difficult to identify the anomaly. Note that setting simple thresholds to the raw signal would make the identification of the increase dependent on the operational mode. A partially loaded turbine would thus delay the fault discovery, which shows the effectiveness of the proposed method.The evolution of the gearbox condition during filter degradation is visualized in Table 4. The filter was replaced on 2010-10-25.The condition was correctly classified. There were six other turbines detected with the same root cause. The result of the condition evaluation is presented in Table 5and the corresponding prediction errors of the gearbox oil temperature in Fig. 14. The pattern present between the different turbines is similar. The set threshold for the condition category “red” (10°C) is acceptable as this category should be used only when action is required.It should be noted that although each turbine is treated individually with regards to the signal behavior (each turbine has its own model and model accuracy) the categorization into the condition categories is possible. Due to the different model accuracies the category “yellow” is different for each turbine, since it has not been defined in the master threshold table.Modern type wind turbines operate at variable speed. In order to be able to connect to the grid, a stable frequency is required, equal to the grid frequency.In wind turbines, this is achieved via a frequency converter (AC–DC–AC). It is thus a central component of the turbine, without which no power can be supplied. In following example, a relay failure caused the converter cabinet temperature to increase, since the fan was not working. The cabinet temperature is not available at this type of turbine, but the component temperature increase can be identified at the converter choke coil and the converter controller, mounted in the converter cabinet. Fig. 15shows the 2D waterfall plot of the converter choke coil temperature and the related inputs and Fig. 16analogously a similar plot of the converter controller temperature.Both models show a positive model deviation, while the related inputs to the models behave normal. Note that due to the different thresholds for the models the anomaly is pronounced differently, i.e. the percentage error normalized is higher for the controller temperature because the model is more accurate. Figs. 17 and 18show the prediction error evolution of the two temperatures, and Figs. 19 and 20the raw time series.In the prediction errors, the anomalies are clearly visible, while they are practically invisible in the raw time series. At 2010-05-07 the turbine had an error due to high temperature of the top controller (master controller in the nacelle from which all the turbine subsystems are controlled and monitored).The turbine restarted based on auto reset one hour later. However, due to dying wind speeds the error did not occur again until 2010-05-11 where the turbine was shut down for 6hours. One day later the error triggered the third time and a service team was sent out and identified the root cause to be a defective relay. Another seven hours of turbine downtime were generated.The two temperatures considered here by the CMS belong to the same component “Converter”.Initially there were four generic rules established to highlight anomalies in the prediction error. They were:If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Converter choke coil temp.==high/very high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Grid busbar temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Generator ph.2 temp.==ok) then (Diagnosis==Converter choke coil temp. high) (Condition==yellow/red) (Pot. root cause==Ambiguous)If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Converter controller temp.==high/very high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Nacelle temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Grid busbar temp.==ok) then (Diagnosis==Converter controller temp. high) (Condition==yellow/red) (Pot. root cause==Ambiguous)Since both temperatures behave abnormal during this fault and only one condition can be assigned to the component the rules must be weighted in order to track the right root cause. Since the converter choke coil temperature level is much higher than the temperature level of the converter controller, heat is transferred from the choke coil to the controller. Hence, in case both temperatures show an increase, it is more likely that the choke coil is the cause, as an increase in controller temperature is unlikely to be noticed in the choke coil temperature. For this reason, the weights of the rules treating the converter controller temperature were set to 0.9, whereas the weights of the rules treating the converter choke coil temperature were kept by 1. Table 6summarizes the CMS result.The condition category “red” was not triggered during fault occurrence, which is caused by the high alarm limits and the comparably inaccurate converter choke coil temperature model (the threshold for “red” lies about 30°C).The gained knowledge can be implemented in terms of specific rules: If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Converter choke coil temp.==high/very high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Grid busbar temp.==ok) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Converter controller temp.==high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Generator ph.2 temp.==ok) then (Diagnosis==Converter choke coil temp. high) (Condition==yellow/red) (Pot. root cause==Internal VCS fan not working/cooling insufficient)Based on the experienced fault pattern and the prediction error evolution, the threshold for the condition category “red” was changed to 15°C in the master threshold table. Reanalyzing the fault gives the result presented in Table 7.The period in which the category “yellow” is active is only one day. This is acceptable, since the temperature increase is sharp and a temperature increase of 15°C is considered serious and should initiate investigation.Using the same rules further converter fan malfunctions were diagnosed by the CMS at four other turbines. The condition evaluation is summarized in Table 8. Fig. 21shows the relevant prediction errors during anomaly occurrence.Even though the turbine shuts down when a high temperature is detected, the turbine restarts automatically, usually two times before the auto restart is suppressed. Latest after the third time of high temperature, a service action is required to resolve the issue. Using the proposed CMS the issue can be detected right away. The time until a service action is required and the turbine no longer auto restarting can range between one to eight months (for the examples given here).For WTG 18 the temperature level after the fan was replaced does not fall back to its normal range. This can be either due to a different setting of the thermostat, a lasting damage of the choke coil or a different fan being used. Fig. 22illustrates the raw time series of the converter choke coil temperature, indicating the maximum temperatures during fan malfunction and the temperature level after fan replacement.The maximum temperature of 150°C occurred can cause the insulation of the coil to age faster, reducing the overall component live time. In order to not trigger alarms permanently, the condition thresholds for this particular turbine can be adopted to account for the persistent offset. A different approach would be to retrain the model, or to establish an offset in the prediction error. However, the latter bears the disadvantage of tracking the established offsets. Furthermore, the prediction error appears to be normal although degradation is present. The same is true for retraining in those situations. Hence, the preferred method is the adjustment of thresholds. Note that the permanent offset in choke coil temperature can influence other models, which use this signal as input.Another interesting issue arising from Fig. 21 in combination with Table 8 is that for WTG 03 the CMS highlights the category “yellow” at 2010-05-22. However, the hard boundaries (red lines) are not violated before the step increase (2010-11-28). Here the advantage of using FL instead of crisp logic becomes visible. Due to the overlap in MFs, diagnosis is still possible, although in a crisp sense the temperature still behaves normal (within the boundaries).Fig. 23illustrates the converter choke coil MFs for the converter fuzzy interference system (FIS), including the thresholds for condition evaluation.The prediction error prior 2010-11-28 is just below 4.6°C. At this prediction error level the MF “high” already contributes some membership larger than zero to the evaluation of rules. Since at this time already the converter controller temperature is abnormal (see Fig. 24), the rule highlighting the issue fires.In this examples anemometer offsets are detected at all turbines. Anemometers are used to determine the cut-in and in some cases, also the cut-out wind speed. However, the information coming from the anemometers is useful for the overall turbine performance evaluation in terms of the wind turbine power curve, i.e. the turbine power output over the wind speed.A typical power curve of a pitch regulated wind turbine is shown in Fig. 25.As illustrated in Fig. 25, the power curve can be divided into five regions:(a)Wind speed<cut in speed–the cut in speed is the wind speed value at which the turbine starts operating; power output zero or negative; pitch angle about 90°.Wind speed>cut in speed<rated speed; Pitch angle between 0 and −5°.Wind speed around rated speed; Pitch angle between −5 and 5°.Wind speed>rated speed; Pitch angle between 5 and 25°.Wind speed>cut-out speed; power output zero or negative; pitch angle about 90°.More Information about general power curve properties can be found in Schlechtingen, Santos and Achiche [8]. If the wind speed is measured incorrect, secondary performance evaluation via the power curve is impossible or leads to wrong results. Hence, it is important to track, if the wind speeds measured fit to the measured power. Fig. 26shows the normalized prediction errors of the wind speed and the related inputs of WTG 01 exemplary and Fig. 27the wind speed prediction error during offset occurrence.The wind speed prediction error shows a negative deviation, whereas the power output shows a positive deviation at the same time. This correlation is caused by the fact that these two models use each other's signal as input, i.e. the wind speed model uses the power output and the power output the wind speed as input. This leads to the non-ideal situation, that in case of anomaly, both models will show abnormal prediction errors. However, given the set of available possible input variables, this could not be avoided.Taking into account that a positive power output prediction error means a better than normal turbine performance the root cause can be identified, as this appears less likely than a performance decrease with lower power output. On the other hand, a positive wind speed model deviation would mean a higher wind speed measurement than usual, which in terms of a classical cup anemometer appears unlikely, too. Hence the generic rules to identify the likely cause of anomaly are:If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) Wind speed==low/very low) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) power output==high) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) pitch angle==ok) then (Diagnosis==Wind speed measured too low) (Condition==yellow/red) (Pot. root cause==Ambiguous)If (Anomaly error (5 MFs) power output==low/very low) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) Wind speed∼==low) & (Anomaly error (3 MFs) pitch angle==ok) then (Diagnosis==Power output too low) (Condition==yellow/red) (Pot. root cause==Ambiguous)Applying these two rules, the CMS gives the result presented in Table 9.The cause of anomaly was an offset set initiated by a software update mid-December 2010. The offset was about −0.7m/s. The issue was also highlighted at the other turbines as summarized in Table 10.At WTG 02 and WTG 18, no diagnosis was possible, as the wind direction signal was implausible after the software update. This made power output predictions impossible. In turn, the rules involving the power output predictions could not be evaluated. In order to account for the offset, all models taking the wind speed as input as well as the wind speed model itself were retrained, since removal of the offset could not be forced.The last example shows a turbine master controller malfunction during which a dynamical set point caused the turbine power output to decrease. The dynamical set point made the turbine to reduce its power output even below rated power (region b and c in Fig. 25). As a consequence, the wind turbine power curve became broader. The reduction was non-constant, which made detection of the malfunction via visual observation of the power curve difficult. In Fig. 28three example power curves during a healthy state are depicted and in Fig. 29the power curve during controller malfunction.The malfunction happened after a controller software update at all WTGs. In the normalized prediction error (Fig. 30) as well as the prediction error (Fig. 31), the malfunction is clearly identifiable. Note that the inputs: ambient temperature and wind direction are not plotted in Fig. 30, as for this signals no NBM was developed.The turbine power output is crucial for the cost of energy. It is thus of interest to monitor the turbine power output closely. Therefore, the thresholds for the condition category “yellow” were set to ±60kW and “red” to ±120kW deviation. Based on these thresholds and the rules stated in Section 4.6, the CMS highlights the issue at the 2011-09-08. An overview about the CMS condition evaluation during the malfunction is given in Table 11.The condition evaluation at the other turbines is summarized in Table 12.Once more for WTG 02 and WTG 18 no diagnosis was possible due to implausible wind direction signals after a controller software update. Dependent on the wind resource at the particular turbine location the issue is highlighted at different dates and with different condition categories. Fig. 29 shows that the power curve deviation is particular large for wind speeds between 9 and 14m/s. At the site and time of year the turbines do not operate in this wind speed range very often, which can cause some delay in diagnosis. However, the performance of the CMS is satisfactory, since the deviation from normal behavior in other wind speed ranges was small as indicated by the fluctuating prediction error pattern. Fig. 32shows the prediction error for WTG 03, where the issue was detected comparably late. It can be seen that the prediction error violates the anomaly limit two times between 2011-09-01 and 2011-09-15 before it returns to its normal range again. However, currently the CMS is set up to highlight the anomaly only when the anomaly limit is violated minimum three times within seven days. Beginning of October the prediction error magnitude increases for a longer period and the issue is highlighted. This case points to the difficulty of the tradeoff between preventing false alarms and early anomaly detection.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, application examples of the CMS proposed in part one have been given. The examples show the crucial information contained in SCADA signals. Not only with respect to the component conditions, but also to the overall turbine performance. Using FSRC ANFIS NBM in combination with FL this information can be efficiently extracted. The CMS proposed supplies the basis for automated fault detection and diagnosis and aids experts in diagnosis of fault patterns. Taking into account a large number of different SCADA signals, the architecture gives experts a large degree of freedom with respect to knowledge implementation.Moreover, it can be concluded that rules establish with a fault experienced at one turbine can be applied to other turbines of the same type and brand to identify and diagnose similar patterns correctly. This reduces diagnosis effort required drastically and aids operators in achieving their cost reduction targets.