@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective dynamic vehicle routing problem with fuzzy time windows: Model, solution and application

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Uncertainty in customers where a set of real time requests arrives randomly over time (dynamic routing).Vehicle routing according to customer-specific time windows, which are highly relevant to the customers’ satisfaction level.Considering the fuzzy travel times and checking the maximum allowable travel time by the concept of fuzzy controls.Using a direct interpretation of the proposed model as a multi-objective problem.The computational experiments on data sets illustrate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic vehicle routing problem,Multi-objective optimization,Fuzzy time windows,Satisfaction level,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a multi-objective dynamic vehicle routing problem with fuzzy time windows (DVRPFTW) is presented. In this problem, unlike most of the work where all the data are known in advance, a set of real time requests arrives randomly over time and the dispatcher does not have any deterministic or probabilistic information on the location and size of them until they arrive. Moreover, this model involves routing vehicles according to customer-specific time windows, which are highly relevant to the customers’ satisfaction level. This preference information of customers can be represented as a convex fuzzy number with respect to the satisfaction for a service time. This paper uses a direct interpretation of the DVRPFTW as a multi-objective problem where the total required fleet size, overall total traveling distance and waiting time imposed on vehicles are minimized and the overall customers’ preferences for service is maximized. A solving strategy based on the genetic algorithm (GA) and three basic modules are proposed, in which the state of the system including information of vehicles and customers is checked in a management module each time. The strategy module tries to organize the information reported by the management module and construct an efficient structure for solving in the subsequent module. The performance of the proposed approach is evaluated in different steps on various test problems generalized from a set of static instances in the literature. In the first step, the performance of the proposed approach is checked in static conditions and then the other assumptions and developments are added gradually and changes are examined. The computational experiments on data sets illustrate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the main requirements of transportation management is to provide goods and/or service from a supply point to various geographically dispersed points with significant economic implications. One of the most important and widely studied combinatorial optimization problems, which continue to draw attention from researchers, is the vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW). This problem is an extension of the vehicle routing problem (VRP). Because of its inherent complexities and usefulness in many real-world applications, it has become a well-known combinatorial optimization problem arising in transportation logistic. The VRPTW seeks to determine the optimal number of routes and the optimal sequence of customers (from a set of geographically dispersed locations that pose a daily demand for deliveries) visited by each vehicle, taking into account constraints imposed by the vehicle capacity, service times and time windows, and defined by the earliest and latest feasible delivery time.The VRP also has several variants involving in different constraints; for instance. In this paper, the dynamic version of the VRP with hard time windows is considered. In this problem, customer orders for service are called over time in a given planning horizon. In this case, not all information related to the planning of the routes is known by the planner, in which the location, size, and time window of an order become known only after the order arrives. A sufficient number of homogeneous vehicles for serving requests are located at a single depot at the beginning of the planning horizon. Obviously, this type of problem is more challenging and sophisticated than the conventional static VRPTW. Hence, if the classes of the VRPTW and the dynamic VRPTW are denoted by P(VRPTW) and P(DVPRTW) respectively, then P(VRPTW)⊆P(DVPRTW). As a conventional static VRPTW is NP-hard [1], it is not always possible to find optimal solutions to realistic-sized problems in a reasonable amount of computational time. This implies that the DVRPTW also belongs to the class of NP-hard problems. Since a static VRPTW should be solved each time, a new immediate request is received. Then, the DVRPTW can be formulated as a sequence of static VRPTW models. This idea was also used by Kilby et al. [2]. So due to the NP-hardness of the DVRPTW and its wide applicability in real-life situations, optimization techniques (i.e., meta-heuristics) are of major importance, which are capable of producing high quality solutions within a limited amount of time.In practice, transportation often involves routing vehicles according to customer-specific time windows, which are highly relevant to the customers’ satisfaction level. In these many realistic applications, the concept of classical time windows does not model the preference of customers very well. Even though customers provide a fixed time window for service, they really hope to be served at a desired time if possible. This preference information of customers can be represented as a convex fuzzy number with respect to the satisfaction for service time. So, this paper aims to study the mentioned dynamic VRPTW with the concept of fuzzy time windows and customers’ satisfaction as a DVRPTW. Moreover, this model is interpreted as multi-objective optimization problem. Although such problems are frequently used to model real cases, they are often set up with the single objective of minimizing the cost of the solution, despite the fact that the majority of the problems encountered in industry, particularly in logistics, are multi objectives in nature. In real-life, for instance, there may be several costs associated with a single tour. However, when multiple objectives are identified, the different objectives frequently conflict. For this reason, adopting a multi-objective point of view can be advantageous and the optimization process needs to provide arrange of solutions that represent the trade-offs between the objectives, rather than a single solution. So, a direct interpretation of the DVRPFTW is used in this paper as a multi-objective problem in such a way that the total required fleet size, overall total traveling distance and waiting time imposed on vehicles are minimized and the overall customers’ preferences for service is maximized.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews literatures of the VRPTW with fuzzy and dynamic assumptions and discusses recent developments in their solution approaches. Section 3 defines the multi-objective dynamic VRPTW. The structure of the solution technique is discussed in Section 4. Section 5 describes the computational experiments carried out to investigate the performance of the proposed method. Section 6 applies the presented multi-objective model on a case study, and finally Section 7 provides the concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
