@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using binary fuzzy goal programming and linear programming to resolve airport logistics center expansion plan problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
DAHP, ZOGP and BMGP methods for airport logistic center expansion plans are proposed of both qualitative and quantitative criteria.This study considers operating costs, plan budget and contractor assignment issues in the problem.Airport ground handling services (AGHS) companies have enhanced to provide convenient services for passengers and to broaden the AGHS market.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy goal programming,Airport logistic center expansion plan,Membership function,Linear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In recent years, the number of direct flights between Taiwan and mainland China has grown rapidly, as charter flights have been turned into regular flights. This important issue has prompted airport ground handling service (AGHS) companies in Taiwan to enhance convenient services for passengers and to invest in airport logistics center expansion plans (ALCEP) to broaden the AGHS market. Due to their budgetary restrictions, AGHS companies need to outsource many of their services to contractors to implement these plans. This study proposes an ALCEP solution procedure to guide AGHS companies in adjusting their priority goals and selecting the best contractor according to their needs. This proposed procedure successfully solves the ALCEP problem and facilitates the assignment of contractors by considering both qualitative and quantitative methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently, demand for direct flights between Taiwan and mainland China has been growing rapidly and many direct charter flights have turned into regular flights. Furthermore, due to the increase in direct air links between Taiwan and the mainland China, Taiwan’s main airports are becoming global transport and logistics hubs [38]. In this context, airport ground handling service (AGHS) companies should enhance their provisions for convenient airport transportation services in order to achieve more flexible services and expand the AGHS market (e.g., ground handling liberalization) [35,36,44].Therefore, airport logistic center expansion plans (ALCEP) have become an important issue for AGHS companies in Taiwan’s airports. ALCEP investments include operating costs, budget allocations, employees hiring expenses, land costs, construction costs, leasing costs, transportation costs, fixed costs and management costs. Among these operating costs and budget allocation are the most important elements. AGHS companies must handle diverse types of ground handling work, including two major types of ground handling services: terminal and airside operations. Ramp handling is a major part of the ground handling services on the apron. This encompasses the activities of loading and unloading airplanes, as well as the transport of passengers, crew, baggage, freight and mail between airplanes and terminal buildings [45]. For example, tourists and business travelers are frequently concerned with the speed of check-in processes and the comfort of waiting areas [12,43]. However, few studies have addressed the means for selecting appropriate ALCEP to enhance these services. To resolve ALCEP problems, it is first necessary to determine operating costs and budget allocations. In addition, due to AGHS companies’ budget and resource limitations, some criteria for contractor selection should be considered in the selection of ALCEP. In practice, the ALCEP problem is a typical resource-allocation problem that has direct effects on the services and performance of individual airports. Based on the principle of acceptance of the lowest bid price, some methods have been derived for selecting contractors in order to award public plans [47].Plan selection is a vital activity commonly seen in many organizations. This is a process of selecting one or more promising plans, subject to resource limitations, while also satisfying strategic and economical objectives. Currently, plan owners, especially in the public sector, tend to outsource their plans. Thus, contractors play a major role in such selected plans, which is why contractor selection is a critical decision for plan owners. This selection process should include investigation of the contractors’ potential to deliver a service of acceptable standard, on time, and within the determined budget. Furthermore, an airport company’s limited financial budget also affects the contractor’s ability to successfully complete an airport expansion plan and contractor selection plan. This can lead to consideration of contractor outsourcing. From the outsourcing point of view, ALCEP and contractor selection plans should always be considered together.In some cases, a selection procedure called “prequalification” is used to screen out contractors with insufficient capabilities. The remaining bidders are then evaluated for further consideration. This helps to minimize the amount of abortive tendering by contractors [48]. In addition, from this standpoint, some limitations may be added into the ALCEP selection process. Thus, it is essential to provide a good ALCEP and contractor selection procedure to simultaneously resolve ALCEP problems and contractor selection. Therefore, the proposed procedure has three major phases, including contractor prequalification (using cash flow criteria to reduce performance risk), computing the success coefficient of each contractor in ALCEP, and selecting ALCEP contractors and assigning each ALCEP contractor to the most appropriate contractor for the AGHS companies to achieve their intended service levels under resource limitations.This proposed approach utilizes both qualitative and quantitative methods to select ALCEP and related contractors due to the importance of the selecting appropriate airport expansion contractor. The main contribution of this paper is to develop an ALCEP contractor selection procedure to assist AGHS companies in achieving their intended levels under actual conditions. We focus on how to use the Delphi process and the analytic hierarchy process (DAHP) method to solve the ALCEP contractor selection problem. This investigation is conducted empirically through interviews with AGHS company experts and by comparing the results of zero-one goal programming (ZOGP) [19,39] and binary fuzzy goal programming (BFGP) methods in order to draw conclusions on the practicality, acceptability, and appropriateness of the proposed methods and models for real problems [3,6].Net present value (NPV) is a common economic method for ALCEP contractor evaluation. Risk has also been taken into consideration in this paper. This method uses DAHP to calculate the success coefficient of each contractor in each ALCEP contractor selection procedure, and uses linear programming (LP) for selecting ALCEP contractors and related contractors, as well as NPV for the main selection criterion. The proposed method has been designed in a fuzzy environment to take uncertainty into consideration. Furthermore, this method uses the success coefficient as an index to reduce performance risks. Using both quantitative and qualitative methods in the ALCEP contractor evaluation process is one of the strongest aspects of the proposed approach. Finally, we use NPV and expected net present value (ENPV) in LP to select the most profitable ALCEP contractor selection plan and thereby help AGHS companies to assign the best ALCEP contractor [41,49].The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, presents a literature review. Section 3 discusses the proposed methods and models. We select the best ALCEP contractor evaluation procedure from the DAHP, ZOGP, BFGP methods and compare two LP solutions for selecting a suitable contractor. In Section 4, we provide an empirical study to solve the ALCEP problem. In Section 5, the results obtained using all of the proposed methods are discussed. Finally, discussion of application of the proposed methods for the ALCEP problem, conclusions and suggestions for future work are presented in Sections 6 and 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a method for ALCEP and contractor selections in which both qualitative and quantitative methods are considered. Our work also presents one of the best ALCEP contractors plan methods. The contributions of the proposed method are as follows: (i) the AGHS company manager can easily adjust the number of AGHS employees hired and determine the allocation of resources, (ii) the ALCEP problem can easily be solved using ZOGP and BFGP techniques in considering operating costs and budget limitations, (iii) two LP methods are used to reduce performance risks, and (iv) the quantitative and qualitative methods are used to evaluate the ALCEP contractor plan.In this ALCEP contractor plan example, we compare our LP approach with Bashiri’s LP approach for ALCEP and contractor selection. The results confirm that Bashiri’s LP approach is more appropriate for selecting the suitable ALCEP and related contractors. Future research can consider the use of other decision-making tools in this field, such as vlseKriterijumska optimizacija i kompromisno resenje (VIKOR), analytic network process (ANP) and multi-objective models. In addition, for multi-phase plans, dynamic decision making can be investigated in cases where the decision maker is allowed to decide whether to change the selected contractor or to have it follow through each phase of the airport plan. Finally, this paper provides a comparison of ALCEP solutions for AGHS company managers attempting to make suitable ALCEP decisions. In addition, future research may investigate the use of other mathematical approaches, such as combining AHP or ANP and quality function deployment (AHP-QFD or ANP-QFD) concepts and ZOGP or the multi-choice goal programming (MCGP) method to solve ALCEP problems.(1)Purpose: helps AGHS companies to select the most profitable ALCEP contractor.Domain of use: both qualitative (DAHP) and quantitative (LP) methods are used to evaluate the ALCEP contractor.Implementation: consider the NPV of plan solution cited by Mahdi and Hossein [41]. The LP program solve can be solved using the LINGO software.Quality and reliability: the results of Bashiri’s LP method show a better ENPV and objective function value (this means you can quickly recover investment and reduce risk). (The objective function value of 68.92 million is obtained in Bashiri’s LP method and ENPV value is 61.82 (R0=29.17, R1=28.49, R2=4.16, R3=11.96 and R4=2.08). The objective function value of 63.05 million is obtained in the proposed method and NPV value is 35.85 (R0=24.81, R1=0.6, R2=10.44, R3=33.95 and R4=5.22)).Input parametersRt: Net cash flow in year t, t=0, 1, 2, 3, 4Cij: DAHP criteria coefficient of airport plan i=A, B, C, D, E, F and contractor j=1, 2, 3, 4, 5(1)Purpose: helps AGHS companies to select the most profitable ALCEP contractor.Domain of use: both qualitative (DAHP) and quantitative (LP) methods are used to evaluate the ALCEP contractor.Implementation: the ENPV of plan solution cited by Bashiri et al. [49]. Bashiri’s LP approach programming solve by the LINGO software.Quality and reliability: the results of Bashiri’s LP method show a better ENPV and objective function value (this means you can quickly recover investment and reduce risk). (The objective function value of 68.92 million is obtained in Bashiri’s LP method and ENPV value is 61.82 (R0=29.17, R1=28.49, R2=4.16, R3=11.96 and R4=2.08). The objective function value of 63.05 million is obtained in the proposed method and NPV value is 35.85 (R0=24.81, R1=0.6, R2=10.44, R3=33.95 and R4=5.22)).Input parametersRt: Net cash flow in year t, t=0, 1, 2, 3, 4Cij: DAHP criteria coefficient of airport plan i=A, B, C, D, E, F and contractor j=1, 2, 3, 4, 5Eq. (3.28) denotes the objective function, that is the ENPV to be maximized and the coefficients of the objective function are the coefficient for transforming the future value to present worth (P/F, 10%, n). Constraints (3.29)–(3.33) define the net cash flow for each year. Constraints (3.34)–(3.38) ensure that net cash flow in each year is positive. Constraints (3.39)–(3.43) show that we cannot assign plans to a contractor whose cash credit is less than the total minimal expected cash credit for these plans. Constraint (3.44) ensures that each plan is not assigned to more than one contractor. Constraint (3.45) provides the decision-variable definition.