@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sugeno fuzzy PID tuning, by genetic-neutral for AVR in electrical power generation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integrated model is developed by combining genetic algorithm (GA), radial basis function neural network (RBF-NN) and Sugeno fuzzy logic approaches.Optimal PID gains obtained by the proposed RBF-NN tuning for various operating conditions are used to develop the rule base of the Sugeno fuzzy system.The RBF-NN is used to enhance the PID parameters obtained from GA.Enhanced PID parameters are used to design Sugeno fuzzy PID controller tuned by excitation parameter (Ke, τe) of the AVR system to improve the system's response.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
AVR system,Develop the rule base,Design a PID controller,GA,RBF-NN,Sugeno fuzzy logic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We report a novel design method for determining the optimal proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller parameters of an automatic voltage regulator (AVR) system, using a combined genetic algorithm (GA), radial basis function neural network (RBF-NN) and Sugeno fuzzy logic approaches. GA and a RBF-NN with a Sugeno fuzzy logic are proposed to design a PID controller for an AVR system (GNFPID). The problem for obtaining the optimal AVR and PID controller parameters is formulated as an optimization problem and RBF-NN tuned by GA is applied to solve the optimization problem. Whereas, optimal PID gains obtained by the proposed RBF tuning by genetic algorithm for various operating conditions are used to develop the rule base of the Sugeno fuzzy system and design fuzzy PID controller of the AVR system to improve the system's response (∼0.005s). The proposed approach has superior features, including easy implementation, stable convergence characteristic, good computational efficiency and this algorithm effectively searches for a high-quality solution and improve the transient response of the AVR system (7E−06). Numerical simulation results demonstrate that this is faster and has much less computational cost as compared with the real-code genetic algorithm (RGA) and Sugeno fuzzy logic. The proposed method is indeed more efficient and robust in improving the step response of an AVR system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The AVR is utilized for controlling the terminal voltage by regulating the exciter voltage of the generator, while the AVR system optimal control is performed by the PID inside the AVR.The PID is in charge of the optimal control of AVR system possessing differential, proportional and integral coefficients. The real-coded genetic algorithm (RGA) is applied to generate the optimal PID parameters for the formulation of the fuzzy rules [1]. The AVR system has differential, proportional, and integral coefficients [2]. Minglin proposed a method for designing PID-like fuzzy controller with FPGAV. The feed forward fuzzy PID controller has been used to [3] improve the performance of high pressure common rail system. The performance of current hybrid fuzzy PID controller is somewhat poor and the changes in the system parameters require a new adjustment variable of PID controller. To overcome this difficulty, Sinthipsomboon et al. [4] developed a hybrid system of fuzzy and fuzzy self-tuning PID controller. An improved fuzzy PID controller is employed [5,6] to control brushless DC motor speed. An adaptive-network-based fuzzy logic power system stabilizer (PSS) is proposed by [7,8]. In this research a novel power system stabilizer for damping both local and global modes of an interconnected system based on neuro fuzzy (hybrid) system is developed [9]. This paper is concerned with the application of an adaptive fuzzy logic controller to both single and multi-machine power system simulations. Jinwook et al. [10] proposed the design and stability analysis of Takagi–Sugeno–Kang (TSK)-type full-scale fuzzy proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller. The fluctuation in temperature is further improved by self-setting fuzzy PID control algorithm [11]. An improved fuzzy PID controller algorithm based on DSP is introduced [12]. Zhang et al. [13] designed a new algorithm of vehicle stability adaptive PID control with single neuron network. Kun et al. [14] used radical basis function (RBF) to develop an optimal PID controller called direct-drive permanent magnet linear synchronous motor (PMSM). A linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) method is implemented to improve the PID controller for a universal second-order system [15] which required a good selection of weighting functions for acceptable performance. Computational techniques such as GA and fuzzy logic are used for analytic solution [6,10–12] which resulted the control field for implementing the real time manipulation based on the neural network. Furthermore, it is established that RBF-NN has the ability to approximate any continuous function with any arbitrary accuracy [13,14].Self-tuning fuzzy PID controller means that the three parameters Kp, Kiand Kpof PID controller are tuned by using fuzzy tuner [16,17]. Computation techniques such as GA and fuzzy, are used for analytic [18,19]. Valizadeh and Gaingv [20–22] suggested a new design method for determining the PID controller parameters of the AVR system using the particle swarm optimization (PSO) method PSO is a population-based optimization technique, which is enthused by social performance patterns of organisms such as bird flocking and fish schooling. Whereas, both GA and PSO subject from computational burden and memory condition are not appropriate for on-line applications.It is a vital matter for the stable electric power service to develop the AVR of the synchronous generator with a high potency and a quick response.So the reliability of our proposed PID controller parameters and the AVR system model is validated by comparing results with other findings. The response of the system with new fuzzy PID controller design using Sugeno fuzzy logic model rule are obtained from RBF-NN tuning via genetic algorithm is highly sensitive to tiny change (∼0.005). The proposed fuzzy PID controller is found to possess minimum time of settlement, less rise time and overshoot in comparison to that obtained by using the method of LQR [15], RAG and binary-coded GA [1]. To analyze the performance of the AVR system under severe fault, 3-phase to ground fault is applied at the generator terminal and the system response is observed. The system response for above contingency with GNFPID is achieved. The ability of GNFPID in suppressing the oscillation of the terminal voltage by improving the transient response (7E−06) and good damping characteristic compression is clearly noticeable [1,23,24,25–28].Much of the existing complexities are overcome by combining combined GA, RBF-NN and Sugeno fuzzy logic approach to determine the optimal PID controller parameters in AVR system. The optimal PID gains obtained by a combined GA and RBF-NN for various operating conditions are used to develop the rule based of the Sugeno fuzzy system. This algorithm searches for a high-quality solution effectively and improves the transient response of the AVR system.The paper is organized into eight sections. Section 2 represents the concept of RBF-NN. Section 3 illustrates the proposed GA for solving the PID controller parameters optimization. The utilization of Sugeno fuzzy system concept for determining the PID controller parameters under various operating conditions is presented in Section 4. Section 5 elucidates the concept of AVR system modeling and optimization of the control parameters. Detailed simulation results are underscored in Section 6. The data analysis, validation and comparison with other findings are summarized in Section 7. The conclusion is presented in Section 8.In a synchronous generator, an AVR is used to keep the terminal voltage constant at different levels. The AVR system comprised of four main components such as amplifier, exciter, generator and sensors. The outer loop is a self-tuning PID voltage controller based on the radial basis function neural network to provide the ability to adapt for uncertain load and system conditions. Moody et al. [29] proposed a feed-forward two-layered RBF neural network with one single hidden layer to mimic the systematic arrangement of restrictive readjustment in the human mind. Whereas the RBF neural network produces the strongest response near the center of the Gaussian kernel function where each hidden node in the input data space can be regarded as a local detector [30–32] and the RBF neural network is deliberative as local estimation model for the controlled processes. Furthermore, the input samples for RBF neural network do not require a special distribution. In addition, RBF possess an on-line learning and quick converges. Consequently, the control field for implementing the real time manipulation concentrates on the neural network. The RBF is exploited to achieve the best parameters of the controller to maintain the system error zero [33]. The schematic of radial-basis function neural network is shown in Fig. 1.The updating algorithm for the adaptive PID based RBF can be formulated as,(1)Δkp=μ⋅e(k)⋅ep(k)⋅∑j=1mwjhjcj3−u(k)σj2(2)Δki=μ⋅e(k)⋅ei(k)⋅∑j=1mwjhjcj3−u(k)σj2(3)Δkd=μ⋅e(k)⋅ed(k)⋅∑j=1mwjhjcj3−u(k)σj2The PID parameters Kp, Kdand Kiare automatically readjusted by RBF on-line learning algorithm to maintain the e(k)=0 (1–3). Two commands offered by Matlab are used to design the RBF neural network viz. Newrb and newrbe. Newrb adds neurons step by step until the goal is hit with long training time with minimal error. While, newrbe designs a network very quickly with zero error [34,35]. In the training process, the achieved steps are: (i) neurons number in the hidden layer, (ii) the coordinates of the center of RBF function (iii) and the radius (spread) of each RBF functions in each dimension.GA is recognized as an effective and efficient technique to solve the optimization problems. In comparison to the optimization techniques, such as random search and simulated annealing, GA performance is superior that avoids local minima considered as a key issue in nonlinear systems [36,37].The genetic algorithms are based on the natural selection mechanism that allows survival of the fittest and generate estimated solutions by exchanging information's to attain the optimum solution. After generating the initial population, the GA discovers new individuals by producing offspring's using the reproduction, crossover and mutation operators, which replace the old generation members and form the new generation. Once several generations are produced, the algorithm finds the best chromosome that represents the optimum or near optimum solution. The major operators of GA explicitly the crossover, the reproduction and the mutation are exploited. The convergence speeds are controlled by applying various probabilities on these operators. The design of the crossover and mutation operators is carefully managed due to their immense impact on the performance of genetic algorithm [36,37]. The details of the genetic operators used in the proposed GA are illustrated in Table 1.In the process of reproduction, individuals are selected depending on their fitness function, the higher the fitness is, more chance for an individual to be selected for the next generation. Three main selection methods such as ranking method, fitness balanced selection and tournament selection are utilized [1]. In this work, we employ the tournament selection method, where ‘n’ individuals are randomly selected from the population and the best vale is chosen for additional genetic processing. This process is repeatedly performed until the mating pool is filled.The property of global search in GA is mostly determined by the crossover operator, which is the combination of two-parent chromosomes that produce a new one. The range of the selected probability is typically between 0.6 and 1.0. One of the interesting features of the crossover operators is the relation between the generated chromosome and the location of both the parents. The generated new chromosome remains close to the parents in case both the parents are close to each other. Conversely, the search is more likely to be random [1].In the mutation process a new chromosome is inserted into the population. Mutation randomly makes insignificant change in the chromosome information. In inconsistent mutation, the variable takes a consistent random number between the lower and upper limits. In this study ‘Uniform mutation’ operator is used.Recently, Devaraj et al. [1] used fuzzy set theory, in which a variable is a member of one or more sets, with a membership specified degree. They expressed the fuzzy rule as,(4)IfxisAandyisBthenz=f(x,y)where A and B are fuzzy sets in the antecedent, x and y are input variables and f (x, y) is a crisp function in the consequent. Each variable fuzzy sets is represented by suitable membership functions. The core of the fuzzy logic system is formed by a set of such rules. For an exact input signal condition, the fuzzy system defines the rules to be fired and then calculates the efficient output in two steps. Firstly, the minimum of the membership functions input (wi) is obtained for each rule, where this value is the firing value for a particular rule. Secondly, the overall output is calculated by a weighted average of individual rule outputs given by,(5)z=∑i=1Mωizi∑i=1MωiThe PID controller parameter under various operating conditions is determined by the Sugeno fuzzy system.In a synchronous generator, the terminal voltage is kept constant at different levels by using an AVR. The AVR system consists of four major components namely exciter, amplifier, generator, and sensor as shown in Fig. 2. The transfer function of the AVR components is summarized in Table 1. An increase in the generator reactive power load is accompanied by a drop in the terminal voltage. A PID controller is used to minimize the error and to achieve improved dynamic response. The PID controller consisting of proportional, integral and derivative manage devices are efficiently used together to place the manipulated variable at the set point.The transfer function of the PID controller is given by,(6)G(s)=Kp+Kis+KdsEq. (7) represents the transfer function of AVR systems with PID control. The AVR excellence affects the voltage level through steady-state process and diminishes the voltage oscillations during fleeting periods moving the overall stability of the system.(7)ΔVt(s)ΔVref(s)=(s2Kd+sKp+Ki)(KaKeKg)(1+sτs)s(1+sτa)(1+sτe)(1+sτg)(1+sτs)+(KaKeKgKs)(s2Kd+sKp+ki)The acceptable operation of the system is determined by the selection of the best PID controller parameters. Moreover, the selection problem of the PID controller parameters is considered as an optimization problem. The objective function yields,(8)MinF(Kd,Kp,Ki)=(1−e−β)(Osh+Ess)+e−β(ts−tr)The Min(Kp, Kd, Ki) uses a combination of transient response counting rise time overshoot, settling time and steady-state error. The satisfaction of the designer needs can be achieved by choosing suitable value of the weighting factor β. Therefore, the optimization problem boils down to the following constraints,(9)Kpmin≤Kp≤Kpmax,Kimin≤Ki≤Kimax,Kdmin≤Kd≤KdmaxRGA is applied to optimize the controller parameters values and the proposed GA is introduced in Section 3 above.The optimum PID controller parameters are obtained via GA tuning of PID. In this process, two major themes are used, namely the (i) variables representation and (ii) arrangement of the fitness function.The solutions of all candidates are generated in the genetic population. The solution elements of PID controller-tuning problem include the integral gain (Ki), the proportional gain (Kp) and the derivative gain (Kd). The direct representation of the solution variables reduces the computer space for storing the population. The values of the parameter (Kp, Kd, Ki) obtained from GA direct tuning into the RBF program for the optimum tuning of the PID controller parameter are substantial for the thematic factory operation of AVR system.The solution for the performance of every candidate in the population is evaluated based on its fitness which is defined as a non-negative value to be maximized. Fitness is associated in a straight line with the value of objective function. The parameter set of the individual evaluation can be determined using Eq. (8) for the performance criteria. The value of individual fitness is calculated by the outcome of the presentation criteria via mutual computation. The fitness function is the presentation of mutuality criterion F(Kp, Kd, Ki) given in Eq. (8). Thus, the minimization of performance criteria in Eq. (8) can be transformed to the maximization of the fitness function as,(10)Fitness=kF(Kd,Kp,Ki)⋅ITAEwhere k is constant, ITAE is a time integral multiplied by the absolute error value. This is used to amplify the value of 1/F, which is generally small, so that, the chromosome fitness values occur in a wider range.Next, the proposed GA was applied to optimize PID controller parameters. The software for the proposed GA was written in MATLAB and executed on a laptop Intel core(TM) 2 Duo CPU 5550@1.83GHz and 3GB. Integral gain KiProportional gain Kpand derivative gain Kdare the optimization variables. The primary population is produced randomly among the variable's lower and upper restrictions. To evaluate the fitness value of each controller parameters set the fitness function given by (10) is used to evaluate the fitness value of each set of controller parameters. Simulation was conducted with different values of β. The GA performance for various values of crossover and mutation likelihood in the ranges 0.6–1.0 and 0.001–0.1 resprctively,was evaluated. The top consequences are obtained with the following control parameters. generations’ number: 75, population size: 30, crossover probability: 0.6, mutation probability: 0.001.The GA took 33.72s to reach the optimal solution. The GA convergence characteristics are shown in Fig. 3. During this stage, the main focus of GA is to find feasible solutions of the problem. It can be noted that the value increases slowly and stabilizes near the optimum value that most individuals in the population trying to reach. The controller parameters optimal values obtained by using the proposed GA for different values of β are given in Table 2.The proposed methodology for PID controller tuning was tested on an AVR system. The AVR system consists of generator, exciter, amplifier and sensor. The parameters of AVR system are selected as following: Ka=10, Ke=Kg=Ks=1.0, τa=0.1, τe=0.4, τs=0.01 and τg=1.0 only Kgand τgare load dependent. MATLAB Simulink was used to simulate the AVR system. The MATLAB-Simulink model of AVR system with PID controller is shown in Fig. 4. The first time PID controller was tuned using GRBF-NN (RBF-NN tuning by GA), second time PID controller was tuned using (RBF-NN tuning by RAG).A step reference voltage of 0.01p.u. is applied, and the step response of change in terminal voltage of AVR system in the presence of PID controller is shown in Fig. 5. From the figure, it is observed that the AVR system response with RBF PID(RBF-NN tuning by GA or RGA) controller increases in a steady state until reaches to reference voltage of 0.01p.u with little oscillatory mode and large settling time. During this stage, the main concentrates is to find feasible solutions for the problem. Then the value increases slowly and stabilizes near the optimum value with small swing dependent on tuning data to reach that point (GA or RGA with RBF-NN). It is observed (Fig. 5) that the RBF-NN enhanced the PID parameters obtained from GA and RGA [1]. In comparing these results, it is evidenced that the proposed RBF-NN tuning by GA approach has resulted in minimum value of steady-state error (5.3275) and settling time (1.3766) in comparison to the results obtained using of RBF-NN tuning by RGA [1] method as illustrated in Table 3. In addition, the rise time (1.0024) and overshoots (0.00168) with RBF-NN tuning by GA is high compared to RBF-NN tuning via RGA [1]. It can be observed that the responses achieved using GA and RGA [1] tuning by RBF-NN reveal small difference between each other.Our simulation results are summarized in Table 3 and the terminal voltage responses are also shown in Fig. 6. We find that the proposed RBF-NN tuning by RGA approach minimizes the rise time, reduces settling time and overshoots when compared with the results obtained using methods of LQR, RAG and binary-coded GA [1]. Conversely, GRBF-NN (RBF-NN tuning by GA) results better minimum settling time, less rise time and overshoot in comparsion to that obtained using methods of LQR and binary-coded GA [1]. Furthermore, the convergence time achieved by the proposed algorithm is shorter compare to RGA. The performance of the AVR system under a three phase fault severe disturbances is further analyzed. Fig. 7shows the system response for the above emergency with GRBF-NN PID controller. The capability of GRBF-NN in restraining the oscillations in the terminal voltage by producing excellent-quality of damping characteristics is evidenced. Here, the test system includes two completely regular areas connected jointly by two 230kV lines each of 220km length. It is specially intended in to study low frequency electromechanical oscillations in big unified power systems [38,39]. In spite of its little size, it mimics very well the typical systems performance in real process. Every area is equipped with two same performance generators rated 20kV/900 MVA. The synchronous machines have identical parameters [38,39] such as H=6.5s in area 1 and H=6.175s in area 2 [40]. Thermal plants have the same speed regulators and AVR that contain GRBF-NN controller. Meanwhile, we wanted from the above results that reached why the fuzzy PID controller is designed using the optimal PID gains obtained by a combined GA and RBF-NN for various operating conditions. This is further employed to develop the rule based of the Sugeno fuzzy system. This algorithm searches for a high-quality solution effectively and improves the transient response of the AVR system as shown below.The optimum PID parameters for real-time operation are obtained by developing Sugeno fuzzy logic model, where, Keand τeare the inputs and Kp, Kdand Kiare the outputs. Eight fuzzy sets for instance ‘very low (VL)’,‘low(L)’,‘medium low (ML)’, ‘medium(M)’, ‘medium high (MH)’,‘high low (HL)’, ‘high medium (HM)’ and ‘high (H)’ are defined for the variable Ke. Likewise, the fuzzy sets defined for the variable τeare ‘very low (VL)’, ‘low (L)’, ‘medium low (ML)’, ‘medium high (MH)’, ‘high (H)’ and ‘very high (VH)’. They are linked with overlapping triangular membership functions. To formulate the table for fuzzy rule, the values of Keare varied from 2.0 to 9.0 in steps of 1.0 and τeare varied from 0.5 to 1 in steps of 0.1. For each combination of Keand τe, the proposed RBF-NN tuning via GA is applied to obtain the optimal values of Kp, Kdand Kiin each times. The table for the fuzzy rule is formulated for Kp, Kdand Kiand is summarized in Tables 4a–4c, respectively. During real-time operation, corresponding to the current operating conditions, the values of Keand τeare determined. Using these values of Keand τe, the optimal value of Kp, Kdand Kiare calculated by the fuzzy rule table and the FIS editor Sugeno inference system. Depending on the initialization (FIS editor), the inputs of the fuzzy logic controller are Ke, τeand the outputs are (Kp, Kdand Ki). The system with three fuzzy logic controllers (Kp, Kdand Ki) with rule viewer are set in which each controller has two inputs (Ke, τe) and each input has fuzzy set associated with it. The output has 144 fuzzy set rules for Kp, Kdand Ki, and 48 rules for each one parameter as depicted in Fig. 8shown rule viewer and surface viewer of novel GNFPID controller. The input range for Keis 1<Ke<10 and τeis 0.4s<τe≤1s. The output of Kp, Kdand Kidepends on the variation of Kewith respect to τethrough the output setting rule based on Tables 4a–4c).The best result are obtained with the following control parameters for GA: number of generation=50, population size=30, crossover=0.6, mutation probability=0.001 and β=1. MATLAB programming is used for the proposed RBF and GA executed on a Intel core (TM) 2 Duo CPU 5550@1.83GHz and 3GB RAM laptop. The optimal solution of GA is achieved in the duration of 23.79s. The MATLAB-Simulink model of Electrical Power Generation System along with along with Sugeno fuzzy PID controller (GNFPID) is shown in Fig. 9and the GNFPID controller used with the excitation system is shown in Fig. 10. A step reference voltage of 1.38kV is applied. The GNFPID controller has the ability to hold back the oscillations in the terminal voltage and provide high-quality damping characteristics. The test system includes a generator excitation system, as shown in Appendix, connected by 500kV lines of 650km length and a 300 MVA-500/230kV transformer feeds a 230kV–250MW load. The transmission line is split into two lines. The first line is 350km length connects between buses B1, B4, and the second one is 300km length connects between buses B4 and B5. The two circuit breakers of line 1 are CB1 and CB2 and discrete 3-Phase PLL block measures the frequency, whereas the PLL drives two measurement blocks considering the variable frequency. The first block computes the essential value of the positive-sequence load voltage while the second block computes the active load and reactive powers. The terminal voltage response of excitation system with GNFPID controller is found to be highly sensitive to a small time change (ms) as displayed in Fig. 11(a). This demonstrates the suitability of the proposed approach to obtain the optimal PID gains during system real-time operation. It is observed that the system response with new fuzzy PID controller designed by Sugeno fuzzy model rule that obtained from RBF tuning by genetic algorithm is highly sensitive to a tiny change (time response 0.05 and 2s) as shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b). Our proposed method renders better performance in the rise time, peak overshoot and the steady state error. The responses observed from the present controller have a slight overshoot, which can be improved considerably by increasing the rules number.We establish that the GNFPID controller has better performance in comparison to other controllers. The active and reactive power vatiation are shown in Fig. 12. A three-phase to ground fault on the 500kV bus is evidenced at t=1.0s. The scope block clearly reveals the tracking of the system frequency change by PLL. The frequency of the system at moment of fault steps down to 59.99997, at t=1.0s when the fault is cleared the frequency 59.9997 at t=1.1s and contnous in swing between 59.7 at time 1.2s and 60.3Hz at time 1.24s because of the electromechanical energy of interconnected system (machines). Conversely, at t=1.0s when three-phase to ground fault occurs on same bus, and the system voltage at moment of fault swing between 1.3780×104 and 1.3798×104, at t=1.1s when fault is cleared, the voltage swings between 1.3786×104 and 1.3794×104V. The voltage reached the steady state of 13,790V at t=1.2s whereas, frequncy reached 60Hz at t=1.40s as displayed in Fig. 13. Fig. 14represents the response of the terminal voltage under 3 phase ground fault with GNFPID controller.The reliability of the proposed PID controller parameters and the AVR system model is validated by comparing our results with other findings. The response of the system with new fuzzy PID controller design using Surgeon fuzzy logic model rule obtained from RBF tuning via genetic algorithm is highly sensitive to tiny change (0.005) as shown in Fig. 15. The proposed fuzzy PID controller is found to possess minimum time of settlement, less rise time and overshoot in comparison to that obtained by using the method of LQR, RAG and binary-coded GA [1] as seen from Fig. 16. To analyze the performance of the AVR system under severe fault, 3-phase to ground fault is applied at the generator termainal and response of system was observed. Fig. 17shows the system rsponse for above contingency with GNFPID. The GNFPID is able to suppress the oscillation in the terminal voltage and improve the transient response (7E−06) and good damping characristics.The reliability of the proposed GNFPID controller parameters and the AVR system is checked and compared with existing literatures as mentioned in the introduction. The response of the system with new fuzzy PID controller is highly sensitivite tor a very small change (0.005) as shown in Fig. 15. The proposed methodology gives good performance in the rise time, peak overshoot and the steady state error. The responses observed from the present controller have a slight overshoot which can be further improved by increasing the number of rules. Futhermore, our simulation shows that the GNFPID performs better than the conventional controller such as LQR, RAG and binary-coded GA [1] and keeps the system error approach to zero as shown in Fig. 16.The novel GNFPID controller improved the transient response by mimizing the swing in terminal voltage to 7E−06 between the up and down swing wave and kept the system stable (Fig. 17) as reported by Devaraj [1]. Moreover, GNFPID is able to suppress the oscillation in the terminal voltage and provide good damping characristics. This technique automatically avoids the problem of over fitting, which adversely affects many optimizations and learning algorithms. By training the combined GA, RBF-NN and Sugeno fuzzy logic with the normalized inputs, it can be seen that the result which shows training performance reached the goal perfectly. The best combination of Keand τe, is applied to obtain the values of Kp, Kdand Kithis means that the neural network had recognized the inputs with approximately 95% accuracy so that the GNFPID characteristics obtained are better than Sugeno fuzzy PID [1]. The result is reasonable, because the result of the fuzzy rule table test response acquires high sensitivity and the system error approach to zero. The system response with novel Sugeno fuzzy PID controller is found to possess minimum rise time, settling time and overshoot than other all methods. Moreover, it clearly reveals that our GNFPID controller tracks the set point with small oscillation because of the speed prime mover at start is variable and after that reached the rated speed 3000 r.p.m, so that the induced voltage at start is higher than the rated voltage according to Faraday's Law. However, in the new GNFPID, the parameters can be updated, at the same time it does not need the previous updating values. Therefore, the proposed novel Sugeno fuzzy PID can achieve numerical convergence easily.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
