@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An improved harmony search based energy-efficient routing algorithm for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new encoding of harmony memory for routing in WSNs has been proposed.A new generation method of a new harmony for routing in WSNs has been proposed.The dynamic adaptation is introduced for the parameter HMCR to improve the performance of the proposed routing algorithm.An effective local search strategy is proposed to improve the convergence speed and the accuracy of the proposed routing algorithm.An energy efficient objective function model is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks,Routing algorithms,Energy-efficient,Meta-heuristic,Harmony search algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) is one of the most important technologies in this century. As sensor nodes have limited energy resources, designing energy-efficient routing algorithms for WSNs has become the research focus. And because WSNs routing for maximizing the network lifetime is a NP-hard problem, many researchers try to optimize it with meta-heuristics. However, due to the uncertain variable number and strong constraints of WSNs routing problem, most meta-heuristics are inappropriate in designing routing algorithms for WSNs. This paper proposes an Improved Harmony Search Based Energy Efficient Routing Algorithm (IHSBEER) for WSNs, which is based on harmony search (HS) algorithm (a meta-heuristic). To address the WSNs routing problem with HS algorithm, several key improvements have been put forward: First of all, the encoding of harmony memory has been improved based on the characteristics of routing in WSNs. Secondly, the improvisation of a new harmony has also been improved. We have introduced dynamic adaptation for the parameter HMCR to avoid the prematurity in early generations and strengthen its local search ability in late generations. Meanwhile, the adjustment process of HS algorithm has been discarded to make the proposed routing algorithm containing less parameters. Thirdly, an effective local search strategy is proposed to enhance the local search ability, so as to improve the convergence speed and the accuracy of routing algorithm. In addition, an objective function model that considers both the energy consumption and the length of path is developed. The detailed descriptions and performance test results of the proposed approach are included. The experimental results clearly show the advantages of the proposed routing algorithm for WSNs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, due to the rapid progress of micro-electro-mechanical-system (MEMS) and wireless communication technology, wireless sensor networks have obtained dramatic development. As one of the most important technologies in the 21st century and the core technology of the Internet of things (IoT) [1], WSNs are profoundly changing the human life, and its application scopes become wider and wider, especially, the application of Small-scale Wireless Sensor Networks (SWSNs) which contains dozens to several hundreds of sensor nodes. Large-scale Wireless Sensor Networks can be hierarchical sensor networks comprised of some SWSNs [2,3]. The wide applications are involved with both civilian and military scenarios, including environmental monitoring, surveillance for safety and security, automated health care, intelligent building control, traffic control, object tracking, smart homes and smart grid, etc. [4–12].A WSN comprises of numerous small devices, i.e., sensor nodes, which contain sensing (measuring), computing, and communication component that ensure an administrator to observe and react to events and phenomena in a specific area called a sensor field [1]. These sensor nodes scattered in the sensor field can collect local environmental information, process them into useful data packets, and send the packets to the sink node by multi-hop. The sink node transmits the packets to administrator via internet or GPRS. Most of these sensor nodes suffer from the same constraint: limited battery life, limited transmission power, low memory and limited processing capabilities [1]. With the dramatic development of hardware technology, the CPU and flash memory are becoming smaller, more powerful and cheaper. As a result, the memory and processing capabilities of sensor nodes will not be the most important obstacle for the application of WSNs. However, the battery technology has failed to obtain a breakthrough yet. Obviously, the energy capacity of sensor nodes will be the key bottlenecks for the development of WSNs in a very long time. So the research on improving energy efficiency of WSNs, so as to prolong the network lifetime, is still the focus at present and in the future. The technical ways and methods of improving energy efficiency of WSNs mainly involve the energy efficient routing algorithms and clustering algorithms. This paper is devoting to develop an energy efficient routing algorithm for WSNs.For the wide applicability range of WSNs, WSNs routing protocols must be application-based [13], which means that designing a WSNs routing algorithm that meets the requirements of all application is impossible. Instead it is of importance that designing general routing algorithms which somehow can be applied to some application and meanwhile balance the energy consumption to increase the network lifetime as far as possible, which is an important and challenging issue, as well as the focus of developing the routing protocols for WSNs. As routing in WSNs for maximum lifetime has proven to be a NP-hard problem [14], more and more researchers try to develop heuristic and meta-heuristic based routing algorithms to address it. However, there is enormous scope for improvements in energy efficiency for some WSNs applications. And on account of the uncertain variable number and strong constraints of the routing problem in WSNs, most meta-heuristics are inappropriate to design routing algorithms for WSNs. This paper tries to develop an energy efficient routing algorithm for WSNs based on an improved Harmony Search (HS) algorithm, a meta-heuristic.The energy-saving mechanisms based on the management of the node status [15], allowing turning nodes from sleep mode to transmitting/receiving mode, has not been taken into account in this paper. Because these mechanisms are normally implemented in Physical and MAC layer.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the state-of-the-art of routing protocols for WSNs, mainly discusses the routing algorithms based on heuristic and meta-heuristic approaches. In Section 3, the IHSBEER algorithm is described in detail, in conjunction with another approach, which is the core of this paper. Section 4 presents the experimental results performed to evaluate the proposed routing algorithm. Related discussion about the proposed routing algorithm is presented in Section 5. The last section is the conclusions and topics for further work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
