@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy model combined with a support vector regression for stock trading forecasting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel approach for identify turning points of the stock trading signal is presented.SVRs classifier was applied to learn the trading signals from set of Technical indices.The TS fuzzy approach with dynamic threshold control is developed.Different stocks from the US market were selected to be compared for the model performances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Model identification,Takagi–Sugeno model,Support vector regression,Stock trading forecasting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The turning points prediction scheme for future time series analysis based on past and present information is widely employed in the field of financial applications. In this research, a novel approach to identify turning points of the trading signal using a fuzzy rule-based model is presented. The Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy rule-based model (the TS model) can accurately identify daily stock trading from sets of technical indicators according to the trading signals learned by a support vector regression (SVR) technique. In addition, when new trading points are created, the structure and parameters of the TS model are constantly inherited and updated. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed TS fuzzy rule-based modeling approach, we have acquired the stock trading data in the US stock market. The TS fuzzy approach with dynamic threshold control is compared with a conventional linear regression model and artificial neural networks. Our result indicates that the TS fuzzy model not only yields more profit than other approaches but also enables stable dynamic identification of the complexities of the stock forecasting system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The data collected from stock markets is one of the noisiest and most volatile signals. Stock markets are affected by many factors such as government policies, economic environments, interest rates, and inflation rates. In addition to the above-mentioned elements, the share prices of most listed companies also move up and down with other changing factors like market capitalization, earnings per share (EPS), price to earnings ratio, demand & supply, and market news. Despite the volatile nature of the stock markets, researchers still try to find certain correlations between these factors and stock prices.The goal of investment activities is to make high or stable profits. How to provide investors an effective approaches or rules to get good profit in their financial objectives is very important, therefore, most researchers have tried to explain the relationship between financial markets and price variations to comprehend investment opportunity [1,3]. In stock markets, analysts and portfolio managers typically would apply a technical trading rule to conduct research and make buy or sell decisions. For a successful application of a trading rule, assigning values to parameters and exploring all possible combinations have been key issues to be resolved. However, the range of parameters often varies greatly, so it is difficult for users to search for the best parameter combination within a limited time frame. During the course of time, new approaches such as fuzzy systems, neural networks, and support vector machine have evolved in the areas of soft computing or evolutionary computation. Many researchers [3,4] used these approaches to predict stock prices but not to make trading decisions. However, the buy or sell timing (i.e. decision-making in trading) is crucial in achieving returns of investment. According to the best of our knowledge, up to now, only few research projects have explored the prediction of buy or sell timing [5,6]. For investors, deciding an appropriate timing to buy and sell presents a major challenge to the academic researchers and industrial practitioners.Since the future movement of a stock price is unknown, predicting turning points is much more difficult than predicting stock price variations. Many researches in the past have focused on stock price prediction but not on trading decisions. However, to make profit in stock investment, investors need to determine the right time to trade instead of the stock price only. To resolve this problem, researchers have relied on knowledge learning and techniques from computational intelligence to reduce investment risks. A neural network methodology to provide trading signals is a core technique in their researches as background knowledge [6]. The support vector regression (SVR) is a tool on numerical prediction in support vector machine (SVM), and it is a powerful predication and learning approach [7,8]. The researchers proposed a dynamic threshold decision system combining SVR to determine the high-precision trading timing [9]. To further extend this concept, the objective of this paper is to further incorporate the Takagi–Sugeno (TS) fuzzy model [10] to identify the stock trading turning points to obtain better trade timing (trading decision). The proposed model can yield greater trading profits than a single model predication under time horizons from several days to several weeks. On the other hand, we have compared the TS fuzzy identification model with different learning algorithms to predict daily trading decisions for various stocks across different sectors in this study.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe different types of forecasting models used to make trading decisions in past researches. Then the TS fuzzy rule-based model is discussed in Section 3. Section 4 explains modeling for best historical trading using historical price and technical indicators data to make trading signals by the piecewise linear representation (PLR) method, and selecting highly correlated technical indicators by stepwise regression analysis (SRA), forecasting trading signals by SVR, and evaluating trading strategies. Section 5 explains how the TS fuzzy model identifies dynamic trading thresholds for stock trading decisions and compares the profits obtained from TS Fuzzy model with other three approaches. Finally, conclusions and directions for further research are discussed in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has presented a novel approach to identify stock trading threshold by the TS fuzzy model based on SVR's forecasting trading signals. Also, PLR approach is applied to decompose the historical stock data into different segments for providing a set of best buy-sell segments. The identification of the TS fuzzy model is implemented by combining multiple fuzzy sub-models with the SVR method in training data. The experimental results demonstrate its high efficiency to be able to conduct time series analysis in complex stock markets. The buy or sell trading decisions can provide significant trading profits for investors as shown from the experimental results. The dynamic threshold of trading point determination by TS fuzzy model is better than using fixed threshold by PLR-SVR. The fixed threshold rapid to determine trading points but it not has sensitive detection for a complex stock price fluctuation.The proposed identification model of the TS fuzzy system has the significant advantage of not requiring any human process in the decision process. Intensive experimental results using data from the U.S. stock and S&P500 index have shown that the TS fuzzy method based on trading signals provides better results than the conventional linear regression approach, artificial neural network and piecewise linear representation with support vector regression in terms of trading point predications. The future research will focus on improving the knowledge learning process in order to provide a more effective model. That will include (1) a sliding window for training our model, (2) different feature selection techniques for capturing more significant data and (3) a different knowledge learning model for improving the forecasting performance.