@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Biomimicry of parasitic behavior in a coevolutionary particle swarm optimization algorithm for global optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PSOPB is inspired by the phenomenon that parasitic behavior is beneficial to the natural ecosystem for the promotion of its biodiversity.The host-parasite interaction is mimicked from some aspects.Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of PSOPB.Search behavior analysis is performed through monitoring the variation of population diversity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coevolution,Global optimization,Parasitic behavior,Particle swarm optimization,Population diversity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The declining of population diversity is often considered as the primary reason for solutions falling into the local optima in particle swarm optimization (PSO). Inspired by the phenomenon that parasitic behavior is beneficial to the natural ecosystem for the promotion of its biodiversity, this paper presents a novel coevolutionary particle swarm optimizer with parasitic behavior (PSOPB). The population of PSOPB consists of two swarms, which are host swarm and parasite swarm. The characteristics of parasitic behavior are mimicked from three aspects: the parasites getting nourishments from the host, the host immunity, and the evolution of the parasites. With a predefined probability, which reflects the characteristic of the facultative parasitic behavior, the two swarms exchange particles according to particles’ sorted fitness values in each swarm. The host immunity is mimicked through two ways: the number of exchange particles is linearly decreased over iterations, and particles in the host swarm can learn from the global best position in the parasite swarm. Two mutation operators are utilized to simulate two aspects of the evolution of the parasites in PSOPB. In order to embody the law of “survival of the fittest” in biological evolution, the particles with poor fitness in the host swarm are removed and replaced by the same numbers of randomly initialized particles. The proposed algorithm is experimentally validated on a set of 21 benchmark functions. The experimental results show that PSOPB performs better than other eight popular PSO variants in terms of solution accuracy and convergence speed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Global optimization is to find the global optimum solution for a given optimization problem. Many real-world optimization problems could be abstracted and modeled as global optimization problems [1]. How to solve these complex problems efficiently has become a challenging research topic. In general, the classical optimization techniques have difficulties in dealing with global optimization problems because these problems usually contain multiple local optima. During the last decades there has been a growing interest in meta-heuristic techniques for solving these problems. Among existing meta-heuristic techniques, particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm, which was originally developed to solve real-world optimization problems by simulating the social behavior of social animals such as bird flocking and fish schooling, has gained a lot of attention since its inception in 1995 [2,3]. It is a stochastic and population-based iterative learning optimization algorithm that has advantages of easy implementation, fewer parameters to be adjusted and rapid convergence speed [4]. Nowadays, PSO has exhibited good performance in solving real-world problems, such as numerical optimization [5], crew scheduling [6], power system [7], and network design [8]. However, a major problem associated with the PSO is its premature convergence which results in locally optimal solutions frequently when solving complex problems [9]. Therefore, preventing from getting stuck in the local optima has become one of the most important topics in PSO research community. In the past decades, numerous PSO variants have been designed to overcome the drawback. These improved methods can be divided into the following categories: tuning the parameters [10,11], designing different population topologies [12–14], hybridizing PSO with other evolutionary optimization operators [15,16], adopting new learning strategies [17,18] and using multi-swarm techniques [19,20].The loss of population diversity in the canonical PSO is often blamed for being the main reason for sticking into local optima [21]. In the canonical PSO, each particle adapts its search patterns by learning from its own historically best position and the best position ever found by the entire swarm. This learning method enables rapid information flow among particles in the canonical PSO which results in cluster of particles[22]. The canonical PSO lacks a mechanism to maintain population diversity of the swarm. The population diversity of PSO algorithm may reduce to a tiny value, thus, the PSO algorithm is difficult to escape from the local optima and fails to explore more promising neighboring optima when solving multimodal problems. Hence, the maintenance of population diversity is essential for improving global search capabilities of the PSO.However, loss of biodiversity, which often defines the variety of all forms of life, from genes to species, through to the broad scale of ecosystems, is not observed in natural systems [23]. Based on understanding of the biological mechanism that maintains biodiversity, the approach of incorporating these biological mechanisms into PSO may be a good way to improve PSO's performance. Parasitism is the most common lifestyle on the planet. Parasite-mediating effects can shape host population dynamics and appear to be important drivers of biodiversity [24]. The growing evidence suggests that the parasites have a major impact on ecosystem health through their impact on maintaining or even boosting biodiversity [24]. Hence, an idea of incorporating the mechanism of parasitic behavior into canonical PSO is expected to ensure the population diversity and improve performance. This paper proposes a novel coevolutionary particle swarm optimizer with parasitic behavior (PSOPB), in which the population of particles consists of two swarms, that is host swarm and parasite swarm. The two swarms mimic facultative parasitic behavior of the host–parasites interactions in the natural ecosystem. The host immune response and the parasite mutation are also formulated in PSOPB. Moreover, the law of “survival of the fittest” in biological evolution is modeled. Experiments on 21 benchmark functions are conducted. The results demonstrate that PSOPB may be a good alternative to deal with global optimization problems.There are two goals in this paper. Firstly, it is to propose an effective PSO variant based on parasitic behavior. Secondly, it is to utilize the population diversity to analyze the properties of PSOPB algorithms during search. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background including canonical PSO and multi-swarm PSO. In Section 3, parasitic behavior is introduced. The framework of particle swarm optimizer with parasitic behavior is given in Section 4. We describe the experimental settings and results in Section 5. Search behavior analyses are presented in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 draws some conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has proposed a novel coevolutioanry PSO variant, called PSOPB, which mimicked parasitic behaviors in the natural ecosystem. The characteristics of parasitic behavior are mimicked from three aspects: the parasites getting the nourishments from the host, the host immunity and the evolution of the parasites. The law of “survival of the fittest” in biological evolution was also considered in the host population. Incorporating parasitic behavior into canonical PSO enhances the population diversity. Moreover, the parasitic behavior builds the bridge for information exchange between the two swarms. PSOPB combines the strength of PSO-cf solving unimodal problems effectively with advantages of parasitic behavior ensuring population diversity of the swarm.Comprehensive experiments have been conducted to compare the proposed algorithm with eight popular PSO variants on 21 benchmark functions including unimodal, multimodal, rotated and/or shifted functions. The experimental results indicated that PSOPB has better global search capability and can find quality and accurate solutions with faster convergence speed and higher reliability. It can be concluded that PSOPB is a generalized PSO variant which performs well on a diverse set of optimization problems. The further comparisons on PSOPB with the state of the art PSO variants also illustrate the effectiveness of PSOPB.For the future research, it would be interesting to test whether the parasitic behavior is helpful to other evolutionary algorithms. In addition, as several parameters are added in PSOPB, enhancing PSOPB with an adaptive parameter tuning mechanism is another interesting task.