@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supporting the development of synchronous text-based computer-mediated communication with an intelligent diagnosis tool

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This work evaluated students’ posts in computer-mediated communication.A crowd-labeling approach was applied to evaluate students’ posts.Students receive suggestions if quality of their posts is poor.The experimental results revealed the tool alleviates teaching load of teachers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cooperative/collaborative learning,Intelligent tutoring systems,Support Vector Machines,Computer-mediated communication,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To date, a look at the scientific literature on the construction and use of synchronous computer-mediated communication (CMC) support environments reveals that most researchers have focused either on exchanging information or on constructing and presenting posts. In this work, an intelligent collaborative synchronous CMC platform that detects whether the learners address the expected discussion issues is proposed. The concept maps related to the learning topics are first outlined by the instructor. After each learner issues a post on the synchronous CMC platform, a feature selection approach is adopted to derive the input parameters of a one-class Support Vector Machines (SVMs) classifier. The classifier then determines if the learners’ posts are related to the concept maps previously outlined by the instructor. Meanwhile, learner peers from the same group are asked to provide comments on the synchronous CMCs, and a group grading module is established in this work to evaluate the quality of the synchronous CMCs. If the evaluation results from the classifier and the group grading module are inconsistent, the instructor or the teaching assistant is consulted to verify the evaluation results. Notably, a feedback rule construction mechanism is used to issue feedback messages to learners in cases where the synchronous CMC support system detects that the learners have strayed astray from the expected learning topics in their posts. The classification rates for the one-class SVM classifier can reach up to 97.06%, and the average pre-test and post-test grades were 51.94 and 66.77, respectively, which revealed that the junior high school students participating in synchronous CMC activities related to natural science were benefited by the proposed intelligent synchronous CMC platform.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The distinguishing factor in the development of a computer-mediated communication (CMC) system is its use of the Internet as the transmission media. It is believed that using CMC system and the Internet offers advantages; for example, students with lower learning achievement and more passive learning styles can overcome their fears by participating and discussing in the course of learning activities using the synchronous CMC system. The instructor first assigns online discussion topics, and then learners issue their posts via the CMC platform. To build up students’ knowledge via the CMC, teachers examine the content of the learners’ posts to determine the degree to which is related to the learning topics. Clearly, this type of online learning platform cannot evaluate the CMC automatically, and the teaching load of the teachers is therefore not alleviated. Moreover, the feedback for students’ posts cannot be given in a timely manner, and must wait until the experts have completed their deliberations.Synchronous CMC is similar to a telephone conversation except that much of the communication mode in the former is text-based while in the latter it is voice-based [1]. Synchronous CMC has a great potential to increase individual participation and group collaboration. The results of the study in [2] showed that the students were satisfied with their experiences in synchronous critique discussion. The students indicated that synchronous CMC was beneficial for them to exchange prompt feedback and suggestions without delay. The students also indicated that regular meaningful interactions scheduled across the semester enhanced social presence and a sense of connectivity among the participants which played an important role in their willingness and satisfaction. Findings in [3] suggest that improving student satisfaction with synchronous interactions will effectively raise their overall satisfaction with online courses. The study in [4] reported that that various features, such as text chat and the webcam, facilitated interaction among the students and with the instructor in the virtual classroom. An evaluative case study of a university course that made extensive use of teacher and student synchronous chat was presented in [5]. It was claimed that the online instructor successfully presented new concepts for discussion, fostered interaction and explanations, and received confirmation of understanding through the chat tool. Meanwhile, student chat sessions reflected more substantive messages, which are directly related to the prescribed topic, than did the asynchronous discussions.It was observed that synchronous CMC has the advantages of providing a greater sense of presence and generating spontaneity than asynchronous CMC [6]. Analysis of transcribed messages supports the contention that students develop skills via synchronous CMC and that tutor online behavior affects the quality of synchronous interaction [7]. It was reported that feedback was most effective when it was understood by the student, tailored to the mistakes that they had made and when it prompted students rather than giving the answer [8]. The importance of students’ ability to receive immediate feedback and their experience as presenters was highlighted across the various kinds of interaction [4]. Thus, an effective online assessment tool for synchronous CMC can foster a learner and assessment centered focus through formative feedback and enhanced learner engagement with valuable learning experiences [9]. Accordingly, the development of an automatic assessment tool for synchronous CMC is required although it is more difficult to implement than asynchronous CMC, and strategies for the analysis of synchronous CMC will have to be carefully selected or developed in alignment with the purposes that the conversation is designed to engender [10].In the recent literature, most of the short free-text assessment tools that can be used to detect if a student's post in CMC is related to the prescribed topic only handle English-written text and require large volumes of text for learning [11]. The study in [32] proposed a method for short text assessment from scientific documents based on titles, and three types of universal datasets, DBLP, LNCS and Wikipedia were applied to enhance the features of short text documents with topic models. Yang et al. [33] used Wikipedia as background knowledge, combined lexical and semantic features by mapping words to topics with different weights, and employed a Support Vector Machine (SVM) as a classifier for assessing short texts. Besides, WordNet database have been extensively employed to alleviate the need for a large corpus in order to fairly assess short textual synchronous CMC. Meanwhile, word co-occurrence may be rare or even null in short free-text synchronous CMC, and yet have similar meanings. However, the use of a large corpus is impractical because of the unrestricted possible different free-text synchronous CMC's to a prescribed topic in online discussion [12]. An automatic assessment in recent study [11] was performed to both types of exams, training and evaluation for short free-text synchronous CMC. However, the evaluation exams were checked by teachers, because the purpose of their assessment system was not substituting the teacher, but to support him the best way in the laborious task during the assessment. Most important of all, the above-mentioned works [11,12,32,33] cannot solve the problem that arises when the extracted keywords are not stored in the sample database; therefore, as a result, the posts could be adjudged as unrelated concepts by the system.In recent years, the concept of learning from crowds [13] has attracted increasing research attention, and crowd-labeling emerged in response to the need to label large-scale and complex data. Since it is often a tedious, expensive and time-consuming task, cheap-and-fast labeling is becoming widely used by researchers and practitioners. The quality and integration of different labels remains an ongoing problem, however, because the labelers taking part in the task are unfamiliar with it or are unreliable in terms of a lack of expertise. A common approach called simple majority voting (SMV) [14] has been proposed to estimate consensus labels from individual worker labels. A limitation of SMV, however, is that the consensus label for any given example considered only the labels assigned to that example, without regard to the accuracy of the workers involved in other examples. An alternative is to take the full set of global labels into consideration to estimate worker accuracies. A variety of work has investigated means for assessing the quality of worker judgments and difficulty of annotation tasks [15]. Experts first annotated the true labels for some examples. Other workers re-annotated these same examples and useful information can be obtained by comparing their labels with those of the experts. However, with the method in [15] it was necessary to increase the number of parameters to be learned to improve the reliability of the system.Recently, social network sites have become popular, with one of them, Facebook, founded by Mark Zuckerberg with his college roommates in 2004 [15], becoming the world's largest social networking site and boasting a rapidly increasing number of registered users. It has been observed that almost every fourth user of the Internet also uses Facebook [17], and Facebook has attracted significant research attention because of its booming popularity. For example, Fovet [18] designed an online platform that examined the impacts of Facebook on students’ peer relations and their adaptation to school. The experimental results pointed out Facebook gives a great support for students with social, emotional and behavioral difficulties (SEBD) in terms of their adaptation to school and management of peer relations. Nemec et al. [19] found that a combination of Facebook and applications whose features are like Facebook Groups or Chat could serve as an effective supplemental tool in academic courses. In addition, Manca et al. [20] analyzed how Facebook works in promoting the establishment of new friendships.The motivation of this work is that we found the contents in an online discussion board were too disordered and in a mess. If teachers want to check the content of these posts one after another, the loads of teaching may be increased. Therefore, we applied the advantages of synchronous CMC for providing a greater sense of presence and generating spontaneity. However, there are some problems to be solved while synchronous CMC system is applied in actual teaching activities. For example, recent literature pointed out that the CMC system can only handle English-written text, not for Chinese-written text. Moreover, the feedback for students’ post cannot be given immediately. Besides, if the extracted keywords are not stored in the sample database, some posts will be adjudged as unrelated concepts by the system, and this problem still cannot be solved in other related works.To tackle the above-mentioned challenges, we proposed a tool which can effectively assist teachers by automatically examining students’ posts in synchronous CMC to determine the degree to which these posts address the various learning topics. The students could receive some suggestions in the form of feedback messages if the evaluation of the learners’ posts indicated they were irrelevant to the expected learning topics. As for the problem arising when keywords are not stored in the sample database, a so-called group grading module was proposed in this work to overcome this shortcoming of other algorithms in the literature. As mentioned in the work of Jang et al. [34], soft computing can incorporate human knowledge effectively, deal with imprecision and uncertainty, and learn to adapt to unknown or changing environments for better performance, and the proposed group grading module demonstrates the application of a soft computing algorithm to simulate the human mind.An experiment has been conducted in a junior high school natural science course to investigate the following research questions:(1)Does the proposed platform help increase students’ learning performance with the assistance of the feedback module?Can students evaluate peers’ posts in synchronous CMC with the design of the proposed group grading module, based on the assumption that students can make correct assessments for peers?Were students satisfied with the usage of the intelligence-based synchronous CMC learning assistance platform?The experimental results illustrated the effectiveness of the application of the proposed algorithms to the implementation of a synchronous CMC-based diagnostic tool for a collaborative learning platform. In addition, the feedback form from the instructor revealed that the proposed tool can also alleviate the teaching load of teachers, thereby allowing them to put more time and effort into designing effective teaching strategies.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The details of the proposed synchronous CMC-based learning assistance platform are presented in Section 2. Section 3 addresses and discusses the experimental results. Conclusions and future work are set out in Section 4.Based on the system architecture shown in Fig. 1, the proposed e-learning platform consists of four major components, including the curriculum support module, the text classifier, the group grading module, and the feedback module. The system operation is as follows:Step 1. In the curriculum support module, a platform is provided to assist teachers in establishing the discussion topics on the discussion board. Besides, students’ peers can click on the check boxes if the peers agree that the posts are related to the given subtopics designated by the teacher.Step 2. Students submit their posts in the synchronous CMC platform, and the sentences will be sent into the classifier.Step 3. Next, the feature extraction module extracts the keywords from the students’ posts and the one-class SVMs classifier will check if a student's post is related to the discussion topics given by the teacher.Step 4. A group grading approach is adopted to double-check the evaluation of the posts to prevent the classifier from misjudging a good post as a bad one. The instructor or the teaching assistant will be requested to act as the arbiter if the evaluation via peers’ grading differs from that of the text classifier. Notably, the classifier will be retrained if the arbiter determines the classification result of the text classifier is incorrect. On the other hand, the instructor can also adopt appropriate remedial teaching if most of the students in the same group made posts adjudged to be wrong.Step 5. Finally, the feedback module will then determine if it is necessary to send a feedback message to the student, according to the classification results.The user script in the curriculum support module is shown in Fig. 2where the description of each area has been addressed clearly. It not only supports teachers and students as they collect the supplementary learning materials, but also allows teachers to establish the discussion topics on the discussion board. In this work, the students were expected to focus on the discussion of three main learning topics, including how to fly far away, how to fly straight, and how to fly stably. Under the three subtopics, the related concepts included the airfoil size, the center of gravity, the throwing angle, the throwing strength, and the shape of the airplane's nose. As shown in Fig. 3, concept maps that address the above-mentioned design issues were established beforehand by the teacher and were stored in the database.Area 1. Here, students can input their arguments to all members participating in this synchronous CMC-based learning assistance platform.Area 2. This is the discussion area where all arguments are shown. After students issue their posts, the posts are listed here. Students’ peers can then click on the check boxes for three subtopics, the definitions of which been addressed in Area 3, if the peers agree that the posts are related to one or more of the subtopics designated by the teacher.Area 3. The descriptions of the three subtopics, including how to fly far, how to fly straight, and how to fly stably, have been addressed in this area. Each student can evaluate other peers’ arguments according to the definitions.Area 4. In this area, all online members will be listed.Text classification is the task of automatically classifying documents into categories from a predefined set. The content of a document is usually illustrated as a vector in the term space, where terms consist of words, phrases, or any other indexing units used to define the contents of a text. A term weighting method represents how much the term contributes to the semantics of a document, and is designed to improve the effectiveness of text classification. A new simple supervised term weighting method that favors high-frequency terms in the positive category was proposed in [21] to improve the terms’ discriminating power for text categorization tasks. The experimental results showed that the new term weighting method has consistently better performance than traditional comparable methods. Although term weighting methods help in making possible more efficient and accurate classification, the collected terms are often biased and limited to the training set. This means when the training set and test set are not from the same source, the performance of the classification is significantly degraded. Mohaqeqi et al. [22] thus applied a concept graph in their work to improve the classification of documents from unknown sources. The relationship between language concepts is sketched in a concept map structure, in which each node represents a term and each edge shows a relationship between two terms.As shown in Fig. 4, the feature extraction module first extracts the keywords from the students’ posts before computing the term weighting. Next, the system needs to carry out the preprocess steps in advance, including the Chinese synonym replacement, word segmentation, and stop word deletion in the synchronous CMC system database. After the completion of the preprocess steps, we will compute each processed sentence's term weighting. The weights of the keywords were then calculated as the input vectors of a one-class Support Vector Machines (SVMs) classifier [23] at the next stage. The one-class SVMs classifier will check if a student's post is related to the discussion topics given by the teacher.It is necessary to build a synonym database, since people may use different words to represent the same meaning. All synonyms are replaced by the unitary word to ease the computation complexity of the following analysis before processing word segmentation.Here, we adopted the Chinese Knowledge and Information Processing (CKIP) system developed by Academia Sinica in Taiwan to perform the segmentation of Chinese words for further operations. Then keywords were extracted by eliminating stop words like ‘a’ and ‘the’ in English, because these stop words that are not directly related to the discussion topics frequently appear in the sentences. Next, the weights of the keywords were determined via the term weighting computation approach described in the next sub-section.For text categorization (TC), a term weighting method that prefers high-frequency terms in the positive category has been widely studied as a way to represent the importance of a term contributing to the semantics of a document. For example, a term weight (TW) computation method was proposed in [21] to improve the terms’ discriminating power of TC. The experimental results indicated that the new term weighting method outperforms traditional methods. The weight of a specific term is determined by multiplying relevance frequency of a specific term with the number of occurrences of the term in the documents, and the relevance frequency (RF) of a term is defined as,(1)RF=log22+pMax(1,n),where p denotes the number of documents in the positive category that contain a specific term, and n represents the number of documents in the negative category that contain this term. Notably, a minimal denominator is used to avoid the occurrence of a zero divisor. Besides, two is placed as the first term on the right-hand side of the equation if there is no document in the positive category that contains this specific term.In this work, each student's post was graded by the teacher during the training process. The grading showed the degree of relevance between the post and the expected discussion topics. To meet our requirement, we revised the method presented in [21] with four weighting levels transformed from the grades given by the teacher. The final weight of a specific term is then derived by,(2)TW=∑i=1p+nWLi⋅TFi⋅RF,where p denotes the number of documents in the positive category that contain a specific term, and n represents the number of documents in the negative category that contain this term. WListands for weighting level of the ith post graded by the teacher, and TFidenotes the term occurrences of the ith post.One-class SVM classifier is employed in this work because the well-known SVMs have developed rapidly due to their numerous desirable characteristics and outstanding empirical performance [24] and Schölkopf et al. presented a method adapted from the SVM methodology that is very appropriate to tackle a one class classification issue. Meanwhile there is no way for us to collect enough negative samples, which are irrelevant to the expected learning topics, to be used for training of a traditional two-class classifier, such as SVMs.Similar to the approach taken in [21], the weights of the terms obtained from the term weighting computation method are fed into a one-class SVMs classifier during the training stage. The extracted features from training sample posts as given in Eq. (2) were used in turn to train the one-class SVMs classifier.As observed from looking at the sample posts, students’ posts might include keywords that were not recorded in the sample database. The odds of this situation occurring were very likely, since the number of samples was limited. Besides, during the process of the experiments, we found that some posts were correct but these reports were adjudged as unrelated concepts by the classifier. This is because the extracted keywords were not stored in the sample database; therefore, the posts could be adjudged as unrelated concepts. Accordingly, the weights obtained by using the term weighting computation method caused the misclassification of some results of the classifier as described in the preceding subsection. Inspired by Facebook, we designed a group grading approach, the application of soft computing technique, to adopt students’ viewpoints into the decision making of the classification module.Take a student's post as an example: “Both sides are the same.”In this student's sentence, not any one keyword can be detected in the concept map. However, “both sides” means both sides of the airfoil, and “the same” means “symmetric”. If we only adjudge the student's sentence via the classifier, this student's post will be adjudged as an “unrelated concept”.In this work, the students in a class were first assigned into heterogeneous groups. After a student issued a post on the discussion board, the peers in the same group were asked to click on the checkboxes associated with the post, to evaluate if the post was related to the learning topics designated by the teacher. Next, the peers’ comments were collected by the group grading module, and the group grading module re-evaluated the post. If the evaluations from the classifier and the group grading module were not identical, the instructor or the teaching assistant then acted as the arbiter to make the final decision. It should be noted that the one-class SVMs classifier was retrained if the arbiter determined that the classification result of the one-class SVMs classifier was incorrect. The reason why we retrain the system is because that some keywords are not stored in the sample database, and this proposed group grading module overcomes the drawbacks of the classifier. The group grading module is operated as follows.In this work, we assign greater weight to the peer who is more accurate. Therefore, we first determine the reliability of the ith student that comments on the post. Basically, we want to design a function that can ensure the reliability of each student's comment falling between a positive and a negative constant value, such that the curve of the function can exhibit smoothness and asymptotic properties. Accordingly, the reliability of the ith student that comments on the jth post, i, j, is expressed by:(3)ℜi,j=Γ⋅ri,jΘmax2+ri,j2,(4)ri,j=ri,j−1+∑k=1Kδi,j−1,k,δi,j−1,k=w⋅Θmaxifci,j−1,k=Cj−1,k−w⋅Θmaxifci,j−1,k≠Cj−1,k,(5)ri,0=Θi,(6)δi,0,k=0,where the constant Γ on the right-hand side of Eq. (3) is used to reflect the influence based on the reliability of each student's comment on the final consensus of each discussion group. In this way, the reliability of the ith student falls within the range of −Γ and Γ. ri,jrepresents the updated weight of the ith student after the student has commented on the jth post. Before students use the platform, the teacher needs to assign an initial weight, Θi, for the ith student based on the student's past performance. The range of the initial weight thus falls between 0 and Θmax, and Θmax is a predetermined constant which is set to 100 in this work.K in Eq. (4) stands for the number of subtopics and k denotes the index for the subtopic, respectively. δi,j−1,kin Eq. (4) stands for the adjustment of the ith student's weight after the student has commented on whether the (j−1)th post is related to the kth subtopic. Notably, a predetermined small constant w is used in (4) to ensure δi,j−1,kis set to a small positive constantw⋅Θmaxif the student's comment, ci,j−1,k, is consistent with the correct comment Cj−1,k, and−w⋅Θmaxin the case where the converse is true. Here Cj−1,k=1 if it is a positive comment, and equal to −1 in the case where the converse is true.Because the correct comment on the jth post is not available yet, we first estimate the comment on whether the jth post is related to the kth subtopic by,(7)ζj,k=1if∑i(ℜi,j⋅ci,j,k)>0−1if∑i(ℜi,j⋅ci,j,k)<0,where ci,j,kdenotes the ith student's comment on whether the jth post is related to the kth subtopic. Notably, the arbiter, who is a teaching assistant or the teacher, will be requested to provide the correct comment if the term ∑i(ℜi,j·ci,j,k) in Eq. (7) is equal to zero.Next we derive the difficulty level of the comment based on whether the jth post is related to the kth subtopic, as follows,(8)ℒj,k=∑iℓi,j,k,ℓi,j,k=1ifci,j,k=ζj,k0ifci,j,k≠ζj,k.As seen from Eq. (8), the value of ℒj,kis larger if the comment is determined to be less difficult because more instances of consensuses are reached from the peers.The approximation of the correct comment based on whether the jth post is related to the kth subtopic can then be inferred by,(9)Cj,k=1if∑iΓ1+e−ri,j⋅ℒj,k⋅ci,j,k>ρ−1if∑iΓ1+e−ri,j⋅ℒj,k⋅ci,j,k<−ρ,where a logistic function, Γ/(1+e−ri,j·ℒj,k), is adopted to reflect the reliability of the ith student's comment on whether the jth post is related to the kth subtopic. Accordingly, the term ∑i((Γ/1+e−ri,j·ℒj,k)·ci,j,k) in Eq. (9) evaluates the quality of the jth post based on each student's weighted reliability. Notably, the logistic function is adopted here because the inputs to the logistic function are squashed into small range of positive values, and the S-shaped curve of the logistic function exhibits smoothness and asymptotic properties. In addition, if the absolute value of the term ∑i((Γ/1+e−ri,j·ℒj,k)·ci,j,k) is less than a predefined small positive constant ρ, it implies that the quality of the jth post is incapable of generating consensus among the peers. We thus request the arbiter to provide the correct comment in this case.We compare the classification result of the one-class SVMs classifier, as discussed in the preceding subsection, with the output derived from Eq. (9). If the outputs from both algorithms are inconsistent, the arbiter is requested to provide the correct output. If the output from the one-class SVMs classifier is incorrect, the weight vector of the jth post is formed using Eq. (2), and then the one-class SVMs classifier is retrained. Notably, it might happen that the arbiter has already given the correct output, as illustrated at the end of Steps 2 and 4. In this case, the classification result of the one-class SVMs classifier is compared with that of the arbiter, instead of the result derived from Eq. (9). In addition, the teacher will be informed of the existence of misconceptions on the part of the students if the output derived from Eq. (9) is inconsistent with that provided by the arbiter.After students had issued their posts in synchronous CMC, the feedback module analyzed the students’ posts. The feedback messages obtained from the corresponding entries in the database were shown to the student immediately in the case that feedback was determined to be necessary. There are three kinds of feedback messages provided in this module. First, if the system detects that a student's status is idle a message will be provided to remind the student to actively engage in the discussion. Second, if a student's posts are detected to have deviated from the given topic many times, a message will be provided to warn the student. Finally, as shown in Fig. 5, if a student always focuses on the same subtopic, a message will be provided to prompt the student to try considering other subtopics. If the feedback module found that the messages displayed on the screen still could not prompt the students to effectively input appropriate sentences related to the given issues, the system would inform the teacher that it had provided another alternative feedback message.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
