@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch using a new self-adaptive particle swarm optimization technique

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nonconvex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) is a complex optimization problem.Many optimization techniques and algorithm have been applied to solve it.A new improved particle swarm optimization technique is proposed for the same.The effectiveness of the proposed method is tested on two practical systems.The results are compared with classical as well as other heuristic technique.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Self-organizing hierarchical particle swarm optimization with time-varying acceleration coefficients (SOHPSO_TVAC),Prohibited operating zones (POZ),Price penalty factor,Non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel parameter automation strategy for particle swarm optimization algorithm for solving non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) problems. Many evolutionary techniques such as particle swarm optimization, differential evolution have been applied to solve these problems and found to perform in a better way in comparison with conventional optimization methods. But often these methods converge to a sub-optimal solution prematurely. This paper presents a new improved particle swarm optimization technique called self-organizing hierarchical particle swarm optimization technique with time-varying acceleration coefficients (SOHPSO_TVAC) for non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) problems to avoid premature convergence. Generator ramp rate limits and prohibited operating zones are taken into account in problem formulation. Non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) problem is obtained by considering both the economy and emission objectives. The performance of the proposed method is demonstrated on two sample test systems. The results of the proposed method are compared with other methods. It is found that the results obtained by the proposed method are superior in terms of fuel cost, emission output and losses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Economic load dispatch (ELD) is one of the important tasks in power system operation. The main objective of economic load dispatch (ELD) of electric power generation is to schedule the committed generating units so as to meet the load demand at minimum operating cost while satisfying all unit and system equality and inequality constraints. Generally, electric power plants are operated on the basis of least fuel cost strategies without considering the pollutants produced. There is a growing need from the society for adequate and secure supply of electricity not only at the cheapest rate, but also at minimum level of emission. Since the passage of Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA) and Kyoto Protocol 2005, environmental management tasks have topped the list of utility management concern [1]. It has become almost compulsory for electric utilities to reduce the pollution level below certain limit. Power plants using fossil fuels produce particulate matters such as ash and gaseous pollutants like oxides of carbon (CO and CO2), sulphur oxides (SOx) and oxides of nitrogen (NOx). The contributions of the electric energy industry to environmental pollution are of great concern which demand serious action toward reducing pollution. Several methods to reduce the atmospheric emissions have been proposed and discussed by many researchers. They include switching to fuels with low emission potential, installing post-combustion cleaning system e.g. electrostatic precipitators, replacement of the aged fuel-burners with cleaner ones, and reallocation of loads to generators with low emission coefficients. The first two methods involve considerable amount of capital investment and hence, can be considered as long term options. The third method is an attractive short-term alternative and requires only minor modification of dispatching programs to include emissions. By proper load allocation among the various generating units of the plants, the harmful effects of the emission of particulate and gaseous pollutants thermal power stations can be reduced. A revised power dispatch program is required in such cases that will consider both the generation cost and emission cost as the objective functions. One of the major complications in the above considerations is that the cost and emission functions are conflicting to each other. In other words, minimizing pollution increases cost and vice versa.Several methods to reduce the atmospheric emissions have been proposed and discussed [2–4] by many research groups. Emissions in power dispatch problems have been included either in objective function or treated as additional constraints by several researchers. Non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) is a highly complex nonlinear constrained optimization problem. An earlier attempt on solving minimum emission dispatch problem was taken up by Gent et al. [5]. Nanda et al. discussed the feasibility of developing a classical technique based on coordination equations to solve economic emission load dispatch problem [6]. In recent times economic and emission dispatch problems stressing on the methods of minimizing cost subject to emission constraints are also solved by different heuristic techniques. A genetic algorithm with arithmetic crossover for environmentally constrained economic dispatch was proposed by Yalcinoz et al. [7]. Deb et al. proposed a fast elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm for multi-objective optimization [8]. Agrawal et al. presented a multi-objective particle swarm algorithm with fuzzy clustering for electrical power dispatch [9]. Kulkarni et al. proposed a method for solving the economic emission load dispatch problem using weighting factors and improved back-propagation neural network [10]. An evolutionary algorithm based multi-objective technique was presented by Abido [11]. A bi-objective power dispatch solution using fuzzy satisfaction maximizing decision approach was reported by Huang et al. [12]. Muralidharan el al. presented a new recursive technique for solving emission constrained economic dispatch problem [13]. A multi-objective fuzzy dominance based bacterial foraging algorithm to solve economic emission dispatch problem was presented by Panigrahi et al. [14]. A multi-objective particle swarm optimization for environmental economic dispatch problem was presented by Abido [15]. Recently, Roy et al. presented an algorithm using bio-geography based optimization technique to solve emission constrained economic dispatch problem with promising results [16].A novel parameter automation strategy called self-organizing hierarchical particle swarm optimization technique with time-varying acceleration coefficients (SOHPSO_TVAC) is applied in this paper to address the problem of premature convergence. In this case, the particle velocities are reinitialized whenever the population stagnates at local optima during the search. A relatively high value of the cognitive component results in excessive wandering of particles while a higher value of the social component causes premature convergence of particles. Hence, time-varying acceleration coefficients (TVAC) [17] are employed to strike a proper balance between the cognitive and social component during the search. The proposed approach was first tested on a simple test system comprising of six units and then the effectiveness of the SOHPSO_TVAC was demonstrated on a more practical system comprising of fourteen thermal units with valve point loading, prohibited operating zones and ramp rate limits. The results have been compared with other evolutionary methods and found to be superior.In this section, we describe the problem formulation for non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) as follows.The primary objective of ELD problem is to minimize the total fuel cost of the generating units and to meet the system demand under several operating constraints. The fuel cost curve for any unit is assumed to be approximated by segments of quadratic functions of the active power output of the generator. Thus, the problem may be described as the minimization of the total fuel cost as defined by (1)(1)FC(Pg)=∑i=1n(aiPgi2+biPgi+ci)where FC(Pg) is total fuel cost of generation in the system ($/h), ai, bi, ciare the fuel cost coefficients of the ith generating unit, Pgiis the power generated by the ith unit and n is the number of thermal units.However, for more practical and accurate model of fuel cost function, the above expression needs to be modified suitably. Modern thermal power plants consist of generating units having multi-valve steam turbines in order to incorporate flexible operational facilities. The generating units with multi-valve turbines have very different cost curve compared with that defined by (1). When steam admission valve in thermal units are first opened, a sudden increase in loss is registered. Typically, a ripple results in as each valve starts to open. Thus, the effect of valve-point loading may be considered by adding a sinusoidal function to the quadratic cost function described above. Hence, the function described by (1) is revised as follows;(2)FCv(Pg)=∑i=1n((aiPgi2+biPgi+ci)+|ei×sin(fi×(Pgimin−Pgi))|)FCv(Pg) is the total fuel cost of generation in monetary unit/h including valve point loading, ei, fiare the fuel cost coefficients of the ith generating unit reflecting the valve-point effect, Pgiis the power generation by ith unit. The cost is minimized with the following constraints:(i) Generator upper and lower limitThe power output of each generating unit must be greater than or equal to the minimum power permitted and also be less than or equal to maximum power permitted on that specified unit. This can be defined as follows.(3)Pgimin≤Pgi≤PgimaxwherePgiminis the minimum power generation by ith unit,Pgimaxis the maximum power generation by the ith unit.(ii) Power balanceTotal power generated by all the units must be equal to power demand plus losses and the same can be expressed as(4)∑i=1nPgi=PD+PLwhere PDis the total power demand and PLis the total transmission loss. The transmission loss PLcan be calculated by using B matrix and is defined by (5)(5)PL=∑i=1n∑j=1nPiBijPjwhere Bijs are the elements of loss coefficient matrix.(iii) Generator ramp rate limitIn actual operating condition, the power output by generating unit cannot change instantaneously. Practically the operating range of the generating units is limited by their ramp rate limits. The active power output of each generating unit is limited by ramp up/down rate as follows.(6)Max(Pgimin,Pgi0−DRi)≤Pgi≤Min(Pgimax+URi)wherePgi0is the previous operating active power output of the ith generating unit in MW; DRiand URiare the down and up ramp rate limits respectively in MW/h.(iv) Prohibited operating zones (POZ)Generating units may have certain regions where operation is either not desired or impossible due to physical limitations of the machine components or issues regarding instability. These regions produce discontinuities in the cost curve since the unit must operate under or over certain specified limits. The operating zone of ith unit may be described as follows:(7)Pgimin≤Pgi≤Pgi,1lPgi,j−1u≤Pgi≤Pgi,jlj=2,3,…,niPgi,niu≤Pgi≤Pgimaxwhere niis the number of prohibited zones of the ith unit;Pgi,jlis the lower active power limit of prohibited zone j of the ith unit in MW andPgi,j−1uis the upper active power limit of the prohibited zone j−1 of the ith unit in MW.The solution of ELD problem will give the amount of active power to be generated by different units at a minimum fuel cost for a particular demand. But the amount of emission or emission cost is not considered in pure ELD problem. The amount of emission from a fossil-based thermal generator unit depends on the amount of power generated by the unit. The expression for emission also can be approximated as a quadratic function of the active power output of the generator. The emission dispatch problem can be described as the optimization (minimization) of total amount of emission release defined by (8).(8)EC(Pg)=∑i=1n(αiPi2+βiPi+γi)where EC(Pg) is the total amount of emission (lb/h or kg/h) and αi, βi, γiare the emission coefficients of the ith unit.The economic dispatch and emission dispatch are two different problems. Emission dispatch can be included in conventional economic load dispatch problems by the addition of emission cost to the normal dispatch. In this method different types of emissions are modeled as a cost and added to the fuel cost. The bi-objective problem of non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) can be converted into single objective optimization problem by introducing a price penalty factor h[10] as follows:(9)TC=FCv(Pg)+h×EC(Pg)where TC is the total operational cost of the system subject to the constraints defined by (3)–(7).Now, for a trade off between fuel cost and emission cost (9) can be revised as (10)Minimize(10)TC=w1×FCv(Pg)+w2×h×EC(Pg)where w1 and w2 are weight factors and(i)w1=1 and w2=0 for pure economic dispatchw1=0 and w2=1 for pure emission dispatchw1=w2=1 for non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch.The price penalty factor h can be found out by a practical method as discussed by Kulkarni et al. [10]. The following steps can be used to find out price penalty factor for a particular load.(i)Find out the average cost of each generator at maximum power output.Find out the average emission of each generator at its maximum outputDivide the average cost of each generator by its average emission and thus hiis given as(11)FCv(Pgimax)/(Pgimax)EC(Pgimax)/(Pgimax)=hi,i=1,…,n$/kgArrange the values of price penalty factor in ascending order.Add the maximum capacity of each unit (Pgimax) one at a time starting from the smallest hiunit until∑Pgimax≥PD.At this stage, hiassociated with last unit in the process is the price penalty factor h for the given load.In this section, we briefly describe some PSO techniques that are commonly employed to solve optimization problems.The Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is one of the recent developments in the category of heuristic optimization technique. Kennedy and Eberhart [18] originally developed the PSO concept based on the behavior of individuals (i.e. particles or agents) of a swarm or group. PSO, as an optimization tool, provides a population-based search procedure in which individuals called agents or particles change their position with time [19]. In a PSO algorithm, the particles fly around the multidimensional search space in order to find the optimum solution. Each particle adjusts its position according to its own experience and the experience of neighboring particle.Let in a physical d-dimensional search space, the position and velocity of the ith particle (i.e. ith individual in the population of particles) be represented as the vectors Xi=(xi1, xi2, …, xid) andVi=(vi1,vi2,…,vid)respectively. The previous best position of the ith particle is recorded and represented as pbesti=(pbesti1, pbesti2, …, pbestid). The index of the best particle among all the particles in the group is represented by the gbestd. The modified velocity and position of each particle can be calculated using the current velocity and the distance from pbestidto gbestdas shown below:(12)Vidk+1=w×Vidk+C1×rand()×(pbestid−Xidk)+C×2rand()×(gbestd−Xidk)i=1,2,…,Np,d=1,2,…,Ngwhere Npis the number of particles in a swarm or group, Ngis number of members or elements in a particle,Vidkis the velocity of individual i at iteration k, w is the weight parameter or swarm inertia, C1 and C2 are the acceleration constant and rand() is uniform random number in the range [0 1].The updated velocity can be used to change the position of each particle in the swarm as depicted in (13) as:(13)Xidk+1=Xidk+Vidk+1Suitable selection of inertia weight w provides a balance between global and local explorations, thus requiring less iteration on average to find a sufficiently optimal solution. In general, the inertia weight w is set according to the following equation:(14)w=wmax−wmax−wminitermax×iterwhere itermax is the maximum number of iterations and iter is the current number of iterations.The constants C1 and C2 represent the weighting of the stochastic acceleration terms that pull each particle toward the pbest and gbest positions.It is observed from (12) that the search toward the optimum solution is heavily dependent on the two stochastic acceleration components (i.e. the cognitive component and the social component). Thus, it is very important to control these two components properly in order to get optimum solution efficiently and accurately. It has been reported [20] that in PSO, problem-based tuning of parameters is a key factor to find the optimum solution accurately and efficiently. Kennedy and Eberhart [18] reported that a relatively higher value of the cognitive component, compared with the social component, results in excessive roaming of individuals through a larger search space. On the other hand, a relatively high value of the social component may lead particles to rush toward a local optimum prematurely.In general, for any population-based optimization method like PSO, it is always desired to encourage the individuals to wander through the entire search space, during the initial part of the search, without clustering around local optima. In contrast, during the latter stages, it is desirable to enhance convergence toward the global optima so that optimum solution can be achieved efficiently. For this, the concept of parameter automation strategy called Time Varying acceleration Coefficients (TVAC) had been introduced [17]. The main purpose of this concept is to enhance the global search capability during the early part of the optimization process and to promote the particles to converge toward the global optimum at the end of the search. For this, the cognitive component should be reduced while the social component should be increased during search procedure. In TVAC, this can be achieved by changing the acceleration coefficients with time. With a large cognitive component and small social component at the beginning, the particles are encouraged to move around the search space, instead of moving toward the population best prematurely. On the other hand, during the latter stage of optimization, a small cognitive component and a large social component encourage the particles to converge toward the global optimum. The concept of time varying acceleration coefficients (TVAC) can be introduced mathematically as follows [17].(15)C1=(C1f−C1i)iteritermax+C1i(16)C2=(C2f−C2i)iteritermax+C2iwhere C1i, C1f, C2i, C2fare constants representing initial and final values of cognitive and social acceleration factors respectively.It is seen that the classical PSO is either based on a constant inertia weight factor or a linearly varying inertia weight factor. It is reported that the particles in classical PSO may converge to a local minimum prematurely due to lack of diversity in the population, particularly for complex problems [17]. In SOHPSO_TVAC, the previous velocity term in (12) is kept at zero. It is observed that in the absence of previous velocity term the particles rapidly rush toward a local optimum solution and then stagnate due to the lack of momentum. In fact in the absence of velocity term, the optimum solution depends highly on the initial population. To overcome this difficulty, the modulus of velocity vector of a particle is reinitialized with a random velocity (called reinitialization velocity) whenever it stagnates in the search space. Stagnation of particles highly influences the performance of PSO in searching global optimum. When a particle is stagnated, its pbest remains unchanged over a large number of iterations. When more particles are stagnated, the gbest also remains unchanged and the PSO algorithm converges to a local minimum prematurely. The necessary momentum is imparted to the particles by reinitialization of velocity vector with a random velocity. The above method can be implemented as follows [17]:(17)Vidk+1=(C1f−C1i)iteritermax+C1i×rand1×pbestid−Xidk+(C2f−C2i)iteritermax+C2i×rand2×(gbestd−Xidk)If Vid=0 and rand3<0.5 then(18)Vid=rand4×VdmaxelseVid=−rand5×VdmaxThus a series of particle swarm optimizers are generated automatically inside the main PSO according to the behavior of the particles in the search space until the convergence criteria is satisfied. The variables rand3, rand4 and rand5 are numbers generated randomly between 0 and 1. A time varying reinitialization strategy is used to overcome the difficulties of selecting appropriate reinitialization velocities.In this section, an algorithm based on PSO is described to obtain quality solutions for NECED problems of the practical power systems with valve point loading, generator constraints, prohibited operating zones, ramp rate limits and transmission loss. For any population based evolutionary algorithm like PSO, the representation of individuals and their elements is very important. For the present problem, the position of each particle (i.e. each individual in the population of particles) is composed of a set of elements and each element is represented by the power output of each generating units. Each individual within the population represents a candidate solution for the NECED problem. The algorithm starts with the initialization process. For a system with Ngnumber of generating units, position of individual i is initialized randomly satisfying the constraints and can be represented by(19)Xi0=(Pi10,Pi20,…,PiNg0)i=1,2,…,NPwhere Npis the population size (i.e. number of particles), Ngis the number of generating units that are operated to satisfy the total load demand. Thus, the dimension of the population is Np×Ng. Now, velocity of each individual is also initialized randomly and is represented as(20)Vi0=(vi10,vi20,…,viNg0)i=1,2,…,NPThe following strategy may be used to generate initial velocity of each individual satisfying the constraints.(21)(Pjmin−μ)−Pij0≤vij0≤(Pjmax+μ)−Pij0where μ is a small positive real number. It is important to note that both position and velocity elements have the same dimension, i.e. MW in the present case. The velocity element j of individual i is randomly generated within the limit. The above scheme always generates individuals satisfying the constraints.Now, the algorithm can be described as follows:Step 1. Initialize randomly each particle according to the limit of each unit including individual dimensions, searching points and velocities according to (19)–(21). These initial particles must be feasible candidate for solutions that satisfy the practical operating constraints.Step 2. For each particle, calculate fitness value according to (10).Step 3. If the fitness value is better than the best fitness value in history, then set current value as the pbest.Step 4. Modify the member velocity of each particle according to (17) reinitialize it according to (18).Step 5. Modify the member position of each particle according to (13) satisfying the constraints.Step 6. Choose the particle with the best fitness value of all the particles as the gbest.Step 7. If the number of iterations reaches the maximum, then go to Step 8 else go to Step 4.Step 8. The individual that generates the latest gbest is the solution of the problem.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Environmental concern is one of the important issues in the operation of present day power systems. The basic objective of non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch problems is to reduce fuel cost as well as emission. The optimal non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch is a complex optimization problem. This becomes more complex when one consider more practical cases with effect of valve point loading, prohibited operating zones, ramp rate limits etc. Many optimization techniques and algorithm have been applied to solve this non-linear non-convex optimization problem. In this paper, an algorithm based on a new improved particle swarm optimization technique with time-varying acceleration coefficients have been successfully applied to solve non-convex emission constrained economic dispatch (NECED) problems with equality as well as non-equality constraints to avoid premature convergence. The effectiveness of the proposed method is tested on two practical systems with valve point effect, prohibited zones ramp rate limits etc. The results of the proposed method are compared with fuzzy controlled genetic algorithm, Newton–Raphson method and bio-geography based optimization techniques. It has been seen that proposed method provides superior results in terms of fuel cost, emission output and losses.