@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
How does customer self-construal moderate CRM value creation chain?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Constructing the chain from customer value to organization value at individual customer level.Investigating the moderating effect of self-construal in such a chain.Collecting data points from China in the context of mobile data services.The positive relationship between customer loyalty and duration is moderated by customer’s interdependent self-construal.The positive relationship between customer satisfaction and customer loyalty is moderated by independent self-construal.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CRM value creation chain,Customer value,Organization value,Self-construal,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most of the existing literature on CRM value chain creation has focused on the effect of customer satisfaction and customer loyalty on customer profitability. In contrast, little has been studied about the CRM value creation chain at individual customer level and the role of self-construal (i.e., independent self-construal and interdependent self-construal) in such a chain. This research aims to construct the chain from customer value to organization value (i.e., customer satisfaction→customer loyalty→patronage behavior) and investigate the moderating effect of self-construal. To test the hypotheses suggested by our conceptual framework, we collected 846 data points from China in the context of mobile data services. The results show that customer’s self-construal can moderate the relationship chain from customer satisfaction to customer loyalty to relationship maintenance and development. This implies firms should tailor their customer strategies based on different self-construal features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past decades, many firms have implemented customer relationship management (CRM) to facilitate the development of firm-customer relationships (Rogers 2005). According to a 2013 Gartner report, the worldwide CRM market experienced 12% growth in 2012, three times the average of all enterprise software categories1http://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2013/04/26/2013-crm-market-share-update-40-of-crm-systems-sold-are-saas-based/1. However, according to the same survey, 70% of CRM projects resulted in either loss or no bottom line improvement. Many executives reported that their CRM initiatives not only failed to deliver profitable growth, but also had damaged long-standing customer relationships (Richards and Jones 2008). Thus, it is essential to critically examine whether and how CRM creates value and provide guidance for practitioners to improve the CRM value creation chain.According to Payne and Frow (2005), CRM creates two kinds of value: value that customer receives from the organization and value that the organization receives from its customers. The former is called customer value and is the base of CRM value creation; the latter is called organization value and becomes the outcome of providing and delivering superior product/service. Thus, the CRM value creation chain spans from customer value to organization value. A firm’s CRM implementation will achieve better performance if it can effectively manage its CRM value creation chain.The research area most related to the CRM value creation chain is one that explores the relationship between CRM dimensions (value drivers) and CRM outcomes. Yim et al. (2004) identified four dimensions of CRM implementations and investigated their effect on customer satisfaction, customer retention, and sales growth. Richards and Jones (2008) outlined ten propositions to describe the relationship among seven CRM drivers and three kinds of customer equity. Krasnikov et al. (2009) examined the positive impact of CRM implementation on firm’s operational cost efficiency and firm’s profit efficiency. Liu et al. (2012) linked CRM applications to shareholder value, and showed that competition features can moderate the CRM value. Shang and Lu (2012) examined four CRM dimensions’ impacts on firm performance in the context of freight forwarder services. Hakkak et al. (2012) studied the role of CRM in improving organizational effectiveness. It is evident that much of the CRM research reviewed above has focused on organization value; empirical exploration of the link between customer value and organization value is still in its infancy (Graf and Maas 2008). Moreover, almost all the research is at the aggregate level; very little has been done at the individual customer level.Another related active research area is service profit chain (SPC). The SPC model, introduced by Schlesinger and Heskett (1991) and later expanded by Heskett et al. (1997), illustrates the relationship between employee satisfaction, customer satisfaction, customer loyalty, and firm’s financial performance. SPC integrates operation management (OM) and human resources management (HRM) for organizational improvement in the context of a service organization (Yee et al. 2009). The SPC proposition has inspired much investigation into the relationship between customer satisfaction, loyalty, and firm performance (Gelade and Young 2005, Maritz and Nieman’ 2008, Chi and Gursoy 2009, Kim et al. 2014), which is very similar to our CRM value creation chain. Nevertheless, work in SPC is still done at the aggregate level. Our work explores the mechanism between customer value and organization value at the individual customer level.In this paper we aim to investigate the following research questions (RQ):RQ1. Is there a general CRM value creation chain model at the individual customer level which to provide the link from customer value to organization value? Which factors are involved in the CRM value creation chain, what are the relationships between these factors, and which is the most crucial factor?To our knowledge, our paper is the first to construct an entire CRM value creation chain at the individual customer level from customer value to organization value.RQ2. Does customer self-construal moderate CRM value creation chain? At the national level, cultural factors have attracted some research attention. Huber et al. (2007), and Cunningham et al. (2006) introduced cross-culture into customer value analysis, and found that customers in different countries have different value drivers of customer value. Graf and Maas (2008) suggested that future customer value research pay more attention to the characteristics of cultural differences. Qi et al. (2012) investigated the impact of cross-cultural factors on customer lifetime value, but they did not consider the difference between customers from the same cultural background. Markus and Kitayama (1991) argued that although independent and interdependent self-construal are predominant in individualistic and collectivistic cultures respectively, individuals within a given society can be less or more independent or interdependent. Moreover, Hackman et al. (1999) demonstrated that independent and interdependent self-construal orientations are two separate constructs and suggested that the predictive capacities of these two variables are investigated separately. In this research, we investigate the roles of independent and interdependent self-construal in the CRM value creation chain.By answering RQ1 and RQ2, we make two major contributions. First, our CRM value creation chain from customer value to organization value at the individual customer level provides new insights for both theoretical CRM development and practical CRM implementation. For theoretical CRM development, this value chain model suggests the mediation effect of customer loyalty on the relationship between customer satisfaction and customer patronage behavior. For CRM practice, this value chain model suggests managers pay more attention to the entire value chain, rather than just the beginning of the chain (i.e., customer satisfaction).Second, we are the first to investigate the moderating effect of customer’s self-construal on CRM value creation chain. We hope to stimulate more research on CRM value creation process. We also believe that our findings can help executives to formulate better customer strategies to make their CRM value creation chain effective.The data for our analysis were collected from mobile data service in the telecommunication industry of China, for three major reasons. First, China is the world’s largest mobile telecom market, with the number of subscribers increasing rapidly from 145 million in 2001 to 986 million in 2011. Second, based on China Mobile’s annual reports, in the past five years, the proportion of voice services in the total revenue decreased 4.8%, 9.9% and 16.7% for China Mobile, China Telecom, and China Unicom, the three main telecommunication service providers in China. In its place, various value-added mobile data services – including short message service (SMS), games, electronic transaction, and web browsing – are becoming greater revenue sources for telecommunication service providers. Third, while it is clear that the adoption and consumption of mobile data services differ by customers based on their characteristics (Kim et al. 2004, Choi et al. 2005, Qi et al. 2009, Kakousis et al. 2010), very little is known about whether and how self-construal could impact on this difference.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We begin with the theoretical background and hypotheses development. We then present our research methodology and the results. Next, we offer possible explanations of the results, the theoretical and managerial implications of the findings. Finally, we present limitation and future research direction.There are various ways to define, understand and apply customer value (Parasuraman et al. 1985, Eggert and Ulaga 2002, Walker et al. 2006, Flint et al. 2002, Rosendahl 2009). In this paper, our definition of customer value follows “customer value from a customer’s perspective” in Graf and Maas (2008), which is the value generated by a firm’s product or service as perceived by the customer, or the fulfilment of customer goals and desires.Graf and Maas (2008) also reviewed the relationships between the customer value construct and other central marketing constructs. Among these relationships, they generalized the relationship between customer value and customer satisfaction, and concluded that customer satisfaction is a post-consumption assessment by customer about the purchased product or service. Customer value is the antecedent of customer satisfaction, and customer satisfaction is the consequent of customer value (Fishbein and Ajzen 1975, Lin and Wang 2006, Turel and Serenko 2006, Kuo et al. 2009). Thus, customer satisfaction can be regarded as an indicator of customer value.There are also several close concepts related to organization value (Richards and jones 2008, Songailiene et al. 2011, Srivastava et al. 1998, Rust et al. 2004, Blattberg and Deighton 1996). In this paper, organization value means the economics of customer acquisition and customer retention for cross-selling, up-selling and getting customer loyalty. This is similar to customer value from a company perspective in Srivastava et al. (1998), in which the ultimate goal of organization value is to maximize a firm’s profitability from customer.There are two kinds of indicators for organization value: customer loyalty and customer patronage behavior. Customer loyalty can be seen as the emotional organization value, and customer patronage behavior is the behavioral organization value.The most direct way to monitor the change of organization value is to observe the change of customer patronage behavior. Aurier and N’Goala (2010) classified customer patronage behavior into relationship maintenance and relationship development, both of which contribute to long-term profitability. Relationship maintenance describes how long a firm can keep relationship with a customer, and relationship development reflects how much a firm can get profitability from a customer.Customer retention is a central concern for CRM (Reinartz and Kumar 2000, Gustafsson et al. 2005). Based on earlier research, we use customer relationship duration (“duration” for brevity) to represent relationship maintenance. Duration refers to the length of a customer’s business relationship with a specific firm.Retaining customers alone is not enough to develop revenues, margins and profits (Reinartz and Kumar 2000). Firms’ profitability also depends on their ability to get current customers to use their services/products more intensively (usage of service) and buy additional services/products (cross-buying). In line with Bolton et al. (2004), and Aurier and N’Goala (2010), we take service usage and cross-buying as fundamental elements of customer development. Service usage reflects the level of usage of the consumed services, and represents the customer transaction intensity and value which reveal regularities in the purchase behavior of customer. Cross-buying refers to the number of associated or closely related products/services that a customer uses within a firm over time (Aurier and N’Goala 2010). Therefore, in addition to duration (length of relationship), usage of service (depth of relationship) and cross-buying (breath of relationship) are the other two value resource for multiservice providers (see Verhoefa et al. 2001).The CRM value creation chain refers to the relationship chain from customer value to organization value. As discussed before, customer satisfaction is an indicator of customer value; and customer loyalty and customer patronage behavior are two indicators of organization value. Therefore, the CRM value creation chain at the individual customer level is the chain between customer satisfaction, customer loyalty and customer patronage behavior. Fig. 1shows the conceptual model of the CRM value creation chain.Although there is an extensive literature on the positive relationship between customer satisfaction and customer loyalty (Lages et al. 2005, Romano and Fjermestad 2003, and the references therein) and the positive relationship between customer loyalty and customer patronage behavior (Siddiqi 2011), the existence of the CRM value creation chain cannot be taken for granted. It is necessary to test the mediating effect of customer loyalty on the link from customer satisfaction to customer patronage behavior.Customer value is the core issue of marketing research. Thus, customer satisfaction becomes the most common construct. At the aggregate level, customer satisfaction is commonly considered a very important factor for predicting a firm’s financial performance by many executives (Nysveen et al. 2005, Lages et al. 2005, Romano and Fjermestad 2003). Moreover, customer satisfaction is one of the most frequently used marketing metrics and is often part of a Balanced Scorecard in practice (Nysveen et al. 2005). At the individual customer level, however, questions have been raised on the assumption that satisfied customers are more profitable (Jones and Sasser 1995, Seiders et al. 2005). In fact, satisfied customers can also change into churned customers, and satisfied customers are not always profitable customers. Many organizations have fallen into a satisfaction trap, with management focusing on satisfaction scores at the expense of enhancing customer retention and lifetime purchases. In light of this, some researchers attribute customer patronage behavior more to customer loyalty than to customer satisfaction (Oliver 1997).Recent research findings demonstrate that the link between customer satisfaction and the various outcomes are not as simple and direct as they appear. Mediating mechanisms between customer satisfaction and firm’s performance (at the aggregate level), between customer satisfaction and customer patronage behavior (at the individual level) are discovered. For example, Homburg et al. (2005) revealed that willingness to pay is one mediator variable for the link between customer satisfaction and firm performance. Aurier and N’Goala (2010) showed that trust and commitment mediate the impact of customer satisfaction, which appears a necessary but not sufficient condition for relationship maintenance and development. Reichheld (2003), Pritchard et al. (1992), and Liddy (2000) see willingness to pay as one aspect of customer loyalty, and customer trust and customer commitment are empirically tested extensively as the antecedents of customer loyalty (Keiningham et al. 2007). As an important factor of customer relationship quality, customer loyalty is regarded as the highest level of customer relationship bonding (Kim et al. 2006). Although there may be such factors that mediate the relationship between customer satisfaction and the various outcomes, the existing models have mostly focused on those factors which are related to customer loyalty.Based on these findings we hypothesize that customer loyalty is the mediator between customer satisfaction and customer patronage behavior.H1aThe impact of customer satisfaction on relationship maintenance is indirect, positive, and mediated through customer loyalty.The impact of customer satisfaction on relationship development is indirect, positive and mediated through customer loyalty.The conceptual model on the mediating role of customer loyalty is shown in Fig. 2.Self-construal is concerned with how individuals perceive themselves in a relationship with others and how individuals form a set of thoughts, feelings, and actions with a concern for their connection to or separation from others (Markus and Kitayama 1991, Singelis 1994). There are two types of self-construal: independent and interdependent. Singelis (1994) defined independent self-construal as a “bounded, unitary, stable” self that is separate from social context. It emphasizes (a) internal abilities, thoughts, and feelings, (b) being unique and expressing the self, (c) realizing internal attributes and promoting one’s own goals, and (d) being direct in communication. An interdependent self-construal is a “flexible, variable” self that emphasizes (a) external, public features such as status, roles, and relationships, (b) belonging and fitting in, (c) occupying one’s proper place and engaging in appropriate action, and (d) being indirect in communication and “reading others’ minds.” Zhang and Shrum (2009) found that while an individual show either an independent or interdependent self-construal, both types of self-construal can resonate with an individual simultaneously. We study both types of self-construal in this paper.The existing research in self-construal alluded to the potential influence of self-construal on customer behavior (Fan 2002, Dong 2010, Wei et al. 2012). To explore the effect of self-construal on CRM value creation chain, the objective of our present study is to examine the effect of self-construal (independent vs. interdependent) on the relationships (1) from customer satisfaction to customer loyalty and (2) from customer loyalty to customer patronage behavior.People with interdependent self-construal prefer a tightly-knit social framework in which individuals can expect their relatives, clan, or others in the group to look after them in exchange for loyalty. Wheeler et al. (1989) showed that people with interdependent self-construal tend to engage in long-term in-group relationships and have more intimate relationships among in-group members. In other words, interdependent self-construal is likely to reject out-group members (Turner et al. 1987). To have loyal interdependent self-construal customers requires more effort from a firm, because the firm must first make itself considered as in-group member by the interdependent self-construal customers. In general, the threshold for changing from an out-group member to an in-group member of an interdependent self-construal customer is relatively high. Therefore, it is more difficult for customers with interdependent self-construal to have feelings of interdependence with the firm even if the firm provides good customer care.In contrast, people with independent self-construal prefer a loosely-knit social framework in society wherein individuals are supposed to take care of themselves (Triandis 1989). People with high independent self-construct places particular importance on independence and the expression of one’s own attributes. They do not classify members into in-group and out-group. Hence, the psychological threshold for independent self-construal customers to be loyal to a firm is comparatively low. If the firm can provide unexpected excellent consumption experiences, it will have high probability to win the heart of independent self-construal customers.In the research on corporate social responsibility (CSR), Dong (2010) found that, compared with interdependent self-construal individuals, independent self-construal individuals seem more sensitive to CSR information. Specifically, when the CSR information is positive, the independent self-construal individuals show higher level of brand loyalty than interdependent individuals. In contrast, when the CSR information is negative, all customers show the same low level of loyalty. Although Dong’s research is about the moderating effect of self-construal on the relationship between CSR and customer loyalty, it provides indirect support for our hypothesis below:H2Independent self-construal will positively moderate the positive relationship between customer satisfaction and customer loyalty, such that higher customer satisfaction will bring even higher customer loyalty when independent self-construal is stronger.For customers with interdependent self-construal, they are likely to value connectedness and group harmony. When they develop loyalty with the firm, they have already considered the firm as an in-group member, and are more likely to show stronger loyalty to the firm, especially brand loyalty (Fan 2002). Thus they are more likely to adopt other products from the same firm and to increase volume and frequency with the firm (Sharma et al. 1999).Customers with independent self-construal view themselves as independent individual entities, distinct from the group. Consequently, those with independent self-construal are likely to pursue their own goals of expressing individuality regardless of the social context (Trafimow et al. 1991, Ybarra and Trafimow 1998). They can easily be tempted by competitive products from other firms, and may not patronize the original products/services provider anymore, even if they are satisfied. Therefore, while it may be relatively easy for a firm to get the loyalty from independent customers, if the firm wants to keep them longer, it has to do more. Thus, we hypothesize that:H3aInterdependent self-construal will moderate the positive relationship between the customer loyalty and duration, such that customers with higher levels of loyalty will stay even longer when interdependent self-construal is stronger.Interdependent self-construal will moderate the positive relationship between customer loyalty and usage of service, such that customers with higher levels of loyalty will bring more revenue when interdependent self-construal is stronger.Interdependent self-construal will moderate the positive relationship between customer loyalty and cross-buying, such that customers with higher levels of loyalty will purchase more other products/services when interdependent self-construal is stronger.The conceptual model is summarized in Fig. 3.The data for this study were collected through survey questionnaire. The 328 potential student respondents were surveyed by e-mail, while the other respondents were surveyed through field survey. In order to match quota criteria, the field survey was carried out in business districts, restaurants, office buildings, and residential communities in Beijing. The field survey was conducted both during the work week and on the weekend to get more qualified samples. Ten college students were trained as questionnaire investigators and organized into five pairs. They were dispatched to different locations to conduct the survey. During the field survey in each place, the pair of investigators explained to each participant the nature of the study and that their participation was completely voluntary and non-related to the services of the providers where they were contacted. The questionnaire survey took place from November 1, 2009 to December 10, 2009. Discarding incomplete and obviously untruthful responses, the surveys yielded a final sample size of 846 respondents, for a response rate of 97.2 percent. Table 1shows the detailed characteristics of the sample.Relationship maintenance captures telecommunication provider’s ability to keep or retain current customers. We define relationship duration to be the existing length of the relationship from the time of registration to the survey date, and measure it by asking each customer “how long you had been with the current telecom provider”. This approach is in line with that of Seo et al. (2008) in the US mobile telecommunications service market, in which they calculated the length of stay to be the number of months since the beginning of service.Relationship development is measured by two indicators: usage of services and cross-buying. Usage of services refers to the level of the services usage (Aurier and N’Goala 2010). By following Ahn et al. (2006), who measured the level of service usage by the monthly charge, we asked the respondents to provide their average monthly spending on mobile data services during the last year. Cross-buying refers to the variety or the number of different services acquired by a customer from the telecom provider. To measure that, we asked customers in the survey to self-report the number of mobile data services – among Short Message Service (SMS), Instant Message (IM), mobile e-mail, and location-based services – that they currently use. Customers provided binary answers to these options (1 if used, 0 otherwise). The sum of these four indicators was used as a global indicator to represent the level of cross-buying.Our measurement of customer satisfaction is based on Lin and Wang (2006) for M-commerce and we modified their work to fit the mobile data services for four-item measure in this paper (for details see Table 2).Based on Xue and Liang (2005), and Lin and Wang (2006), we measured customer loyalty using four factors: repeated purchase, positive attitude, expected purchase, and recommendation. We further tailored these four measurements to better fit mobile data services (for details see Table 2).The measures for self-construal are based on the work of Singelis (1994). We conducted a separate survey of 200 people to test Singelis’s measurement in China. According to reliability and validity, we then selected four items from Singelis (1994) to measure interdependent self-construal and three items for measuring independent self-construal (for details see Table 2).In order to ensure the clarity of the questionnaire, we first conducted in-depth interviews with 15 customers similar to those in our sample pool. The respondents showed no difficulty in understanding and answering the questions. We then slightly revised the questionnaire based on feedback from the interviewees. All questions employed a seven-point Likert scale. We carefully followed the standard procedure to make sure the measures are good (Patton 1980). Table 2 contains a complete list of all items used.To test the reliability of these variables, we used confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to assess the scale properties of the measurement model. CFA results indicated that the four measures about customer satisfaction can be merged into a single one, with the Cronbach’s Alphas coefficient (0.78, see Table 3) being sufficiently high to allow further analysis. Similarly, the measures of customer loyalty, interdependent self-construal, and independent self-construal converge can all be merged into a single factor with Cronbach’s Alpha values of 0.7, 0.92, and 0.84, respectively (see Table 3). The variance inflation factors (VIF) values in Table 3 are also below the recommended threshold of 10 (Segars 1997). In addition, average variance extracted (AVE) values for the constructs also exceed the cut-off point of 0.5 (Fornell and Larcker 1981), indicating that the constructs have captured a sufficiently high level of variance.We assess convergent validity by examining the factor loadings through the exploratory factor analysis. The criteria for an acceptable level of convergent validity are: (1) individual item loadings greater than 0.5, and (2) cumulative variance contribution greater than 40%. The results of all item loadings are reported in Table 4, and they support the dimensionality of the constructs.One additional guideline for discriminant validity is that the square root of AVE for each construct should be greater than the correlation values of the construct with other constructs (Fornell and Larcker 1981). As reported in Table 5, all constructs across the samples met the guideline. Therefore, the discriminant validity criterion is also met.In summary, the measures of the proposed constructs achieve high reliability as well as convergent and discriminant validity.Self-reported data collection and logical constructs of items lead naturally to variance in the measurement method (Podsakoff et al. 2003). Whereas this variance is commonly acknowledged, very few papers actually address it, despite the popularity of self-report survey method (Woszczynski and Whitman 2004).Given that we measure customer satisfaction, customer loyalty, and self-construal with information gathered from the same respondents, we must address the common method variance issue. We conducted a Harmon single-factor test (Lindell and Whitney 2001), and it showed common method variance unlikely to be a concern. Table 5 shows the results of the adjustments, with zero-order correlations below the diagonal and adjusted correlations above it. This test indicates that our results do not show a substantial bias due to common method variance. All relevant correlations remain significant after the correction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
