@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of stable cutting depths in turning operation using soft computing methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Different soft computing methods were used to predict stable cutting depths.Different experiments were used in the models to predict stable cutting depth.ANN model produced successful results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chatter vibration,ANN,Heuristic optimization,Regression models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article suggests soft computing methods to predict stable cutting depths in turning operations without chatter vibrations. Chatter vibrations cause poor surface finish. Therefore, preventing these vibrations is an important area of research. Predicting stable cutting depths is vital to determine the stable cutting region. In this study, a set of cutting experiments has been used and the stable cutting depths are predicted as a function of cutting, modal and tool-working material parameters. Regression analyses, artificial neural networks (ANN) decision trees and heuristic optimization models are used to develop the generalization models. The purpose of the models is to estimate stable cutting depths with minimum error. ANN produces better results compared to the other models. This study helps operators and engineers to perform turning operations in an appropriate cutting region without chatter vibrations. It also helps to take precautions against chatter.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During machining high-precision mechanical parts, the static and dynamic behaviour of the machining system is a critical factor that significantly influences the surface quality. Generally, vibrations in the machining systems can be divided into the sum of the free, forced and self-excited vibrations. Free and forced vibrations can be easily detected and suppressed and their effect is low. In contrast, chatter vibrations negatively affect surface quality of the parts. Additionally, they can lead to abnormal tool wear and tool breakage. Therefore, preventing chatter vibrations is essential. The main reason for chatter in turning is the regenerative effect, which is a sum of the instantaneous tool-workpiece relative vibration [1]. Regenerative chatter is effective at medium-high cutting speeds. In contrast, at low cutting speeds, the rubbing of the tool major flank against the machined surface, known as process damping, is likely to reduce chatter vibrations [2].Metal machining is often accompanied by severe relative motion between the tool and the workpiece, which is referred to as chatter vibration. Turning operations are currently restricted by complicated chatter problems. These chatter problems lead to a severe deterioration of the machined surface, increase the rate of tool wear and decrease the spindle life. The problems are challenging because the vibrations cause a reduction in the productivity rate. Chatter vibration produces insufficient surface quality, low accuracy, excessive noise, increased tool wear, increased tool damage and high costs [3].Chatter vibration in machining is prevented by selecting stable cutting parameters. To display the combinations of the width of cut and cutting speed, stability maps can be developed to determine the stable cutting parameters. As a result, determining stable cutting depths is crucial in machining operations without chatter problem [4,5].Research into chatter vibrations during turning process has a long history. Different analytical models were developed to predict chatter stability. Studies in the literature are classified according to the number of degrees of freedom (DOF), tool-workpiece flexibilities [6–9], tool wear and process damping [10,11]. A number of researchers used Nyquist plots and finite element analyses and carried out experiments measuring force and vibration in an attempt to estimate chatter stability [12–14]. In recent literature, Urbicain et al.’s [15] study focuses on the problem of identifying stability charts when cutting Inconel 718. The method finds the free-chatter regions in longitudinal chatter when the tool vibrates in the tangential direction. The study proposes one and two degree of freedom (DOF) dynamic model to carry out the effect of the tangential mode on chip regeneration in the regenerative plane. Tyler and Schmits [16] find an analytical solution for turning and milling stability that involves process damping effects. Comparisons between the new analytical solution, time-domain simulation, and experiments are presented. The velocity-dependent process damping model applied in the analysis depends on a single coefficient. The process damping coefficient is determined experimentally via a flexure-based machining setup for a chosen tool-workpiece pair. The effects of tool wear and the cutting edge relief angle are also analyzed. Otto et al. [17] study chatter vibrations in cutting processes, and a unified method for the computation of the stability lobes for the turning, boring, drilling and milling processes in the frequency domain is provided. The method can be used for fast and reliable detection of the stability lobes. The presented analysis is appropriate for getting a deep understanding of the chatter stability, which is dependent on the parameters of the cutting process and the structure. Chen et al. [18] proposed a new dynamic cutting force model with nominal chip thickness to estimate the stability of interrupted turning, in which the dynamical cutting force is described by a function of the nominal chip thickness and the dynamical chip thickness. The stability lobes of interrupted turning are acquired via the full-discretization method and Floquet theory.In the literature, some parameters (geometrical, material, etc.) were kept constant, and orthogonal cutting conditions were assumed. Therefore, analytical models were developed based on these assumptions. In some circumstances, oblique cutting conditions should be taken into account. Moreover, all cutting, geometrical and modal parameters have not been observed at the same time before. Furthermore, soft computing methods weren't used before to predict chatter vibrations. This study investigates all the effective cutting parameters and combines orthogonal and oblique cutting conditions at the same time. The proposed models help operators and engineers to select appropriate parameters without chatter. This study will lead to predict stable cutting depths and stability maps with different cutting parameters.This research attempts to determine the stable cutting depths without chatter. The paper has five parts. First, it reviews the extant literature relevant to chatter stability prediction. Then, soft computing methods used in the study are explained briefly. Subsequently, experimental and computational studies are presented respectively. Next, the findings are discussed and summarized. The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoretical and practical applications and directions for further research.The methods used in the study are explained briefly below.Multiple linear regression models predict the best-fitting linear equation for the output values according to the input values. The multiple linear regression equation shows a straight line, which minimizes the squared differences between the estimated and real output values. This is a popular statistical technique that is used in estimations [19].Multiple regression models are simple and provide an easily interpreted mathematical equation for predictions. This type of modelling is a long-established statistical procedure; therefore, the properties of these models should be well known. The models are also easily trained. The multiple linear equations are provided in Eq. (1). The error term is shown in Eq. (2).(1)yi=B0+∑i=1nBiXi+ei(2)ei=Yiactual−YipredictedB0, Bi: constant terms; yi: the dependent variable; Xi: independent variables; ei: error term.The determination coefficient is calculated as follows (Eq. (3)):(3)R2=1−SSerrorSStotalSSerror, sum of squares for errors; SStotal, sum of squares for total.ANN models are basic models of the operation of the nervous system. The standard units of neural networks are neurons. A neural network is a basic model that shows how the human brain processes information. This network simulates interconnected processing units. The processing units are organized in layers. A neural network is usually composed of three parts: an input layer, an output layer and hidden layers. The units are linked to different weights [19].The network learns by examining specific records. The network generates an estimate for each record and changes the weights when an incorrect prediction occurs. This procedure is replicated, and the network improves the estimates until the stopping criteria are achieved. At first, all weights are arbitrary, and the answers are nonsensical. The network learns via training, and the responses are compared with the known results during the procedure. Information from this comparison is passed back through the network, and the network slowly alters the weights. After the training, the network can be used in future scenarios [19].Sum function is given as follows (Eq. (4)):(4)u=∑i=1nwixi+bxi, input nodes; wi, weights; b, bias.Different activation functions are used in ANN. An activation function of sigmoid is shown as an example (Eq. (5)):(5)y=11+e−uDecision tree models can be represented as a collection of if-then rule sets that show the information in an understandable way. The decision-tree display is helpful to understand how attributes in the data can be divided, or partitioned, into subsets relevant to the problem. The rule set display is beneficial to see how particular groups of items relate to a specific conclusion [19].CART node is a tree-based classification and prediction technique. The technique uses recursive partitioning. The purpose is to divide the training data into subgroups with similar output data. CART begins by analyzing the input data to find the best split, measured by the decrease in an impurity index that is caused by the split. The split defines two subgroups. These subgroups consequently split into two more subgroups, till one of the stopping criteria is triggered. All splits are binary [19].CART permits the tree to grow to a large size before pruning based on more complicated criteria. This may cause smaller trees which have better cross-validation properties. An increase in the number of terminal nodes usually decreases the risks in the training data [19].The Gini impurity, information gain, and variance reduction are the metrics used in the model. The metrics are calculated as follows (Eq. (7) and (8)):(7)IG(f)=∑i=1mfi(1−fi)(8)IE(f)=−∑i=1mfi⋅log2fifi, the fraction of items labelled with value i in the set.The variance reduction of node N is defined as the total reduction of the variance of the target variable x resulting from the split at this node (Eq. (9)):(9)Iv(N)=1|S|∑i∈S∑J∈S12(xi−xj)2−1|st|∑i∈S∑J∈S12(xi−xj)2+1|Sf|∑i∈S∑J∈S12(xi−xj)2S, St, Sf: the set of presplit sample indices.Genetic, cuckoo search and particle swarm algorithms are explained below.A genetic algorithm (GA) is a heuristic algorithm using natural selection and the population genetics mechanism [20,21]. The fundamental idea of a GA is about the biological process of survival and adaptation. In the genetic algorithm method, different decision variables are shown using string of finite length code [22,23]. The steps of the algorithm are given below.1.Identify the preliminary population.Identify the fitness of the population.Reproduce the population.Identify the crossover point.Identify if mutation happens.Step 2 is repeated with the new population until the condition is achieved.Mechanisms used in the genetic algorithm are given below.1.Encoding: The decision variables of a problem are encoded into a finite length string.Selection: Selection mechanism is used to increase the chances of the survival of the fittest individuals. There are many conventional and user specified selection systems particular to the problem configuration [24].Crossover: The crossover operator plays a crucial role in generating a new generation. The crossover operator brings together two chromosomes to generate a new chromosome.Mutation: Mutation consists of the modification of the value of each ‘gene’ of a solution. Mutation operation restores lost or unexplored genetic material into the population [25].Cuckoo search (CS) is a heuristic optimization algorithm that is developed by Yang and Deb [26]. The theory of this algorithm is about cuckoo birds. Three rules are used in this algorithm.1.Each cuckoo lays one egg and puts its egg in an arbitrarily selected nest.The best nest with high-quality eggs will continue for the future generation.The number of available hosts’ nests is fixed, and the egg is laid by a cuckoo by the host bird with a probability pa ϵ [0,1].Particle swarm optimization (PSO) was developed by J. Kennedy and R.C. Eberhart in 1995. This method is used where the gradient is too hard or impossible to derive. It includes many desirable properties like low computation and easy to use. In particle swarm optimization, particles set their movements in a search plane using their flying experience and their neighbours. Each particle has its own pieces of information. These are position (xi), velocity (vi) and its best position (pbesti). At first, particles are randomly distributed throughout the solution space. Each particle has its random velocities which are assigned initially [27]. Following rules are valid for each particle (Eq. (10) and (11)).(10)Vidk+1=wVidk+q1r1(pbestidk−Xidk)+q2r2(nbestidk−Xidk)(11)Xidk+1=Xidk+Vidk+1vid≤vmax: should be provided to avoid particle to get out of feasible solution space; q1, q2: acceleration coefficients; nbestid: best location of particle's neighbour; r1, r2: two random numbers that show stochastic behaviour of the algorithm; d: dimension of solution space; k: the number of iterationAfter PSO terminated, it calculates the minimum value of the objective function with given constraints and bounds below (Eqs. (12)–(16)).Objective function: minf(x)Constraints:(12)c(x)≤0(13)ceq(x)=0(14)A⋅x≤b(15)Aeq⋅x=beqBounds:(16)lowerbound≤x≤upperboundb, beq: vectors; A, Aeq: matrices; c(x), ceq(x): functions that return vectors, might be nonlinear; f(x): function that returns a scalar, might be nonlinear; x, lb, ub: vectors or matrices that show boundary limits.The method uses interior-point, trust reflective, sequential quadratic programming and active set algorithms [28].After PSO terminated, Pattern search searches a local minimum of a function with starting point X0 and using the constraints which are given below (Eq. (17) and (18)) [28]. Pattern search is used for non-continuous or non-differentiable functions.(17)A⋅x≤b(18)Aeq⋅x=beqHammer and cutting tests were carried out during experiments to obtain vibration characteristics. Details are given below.An accelerometer was connected in the feeding direction, and the hammer hit in the X direction. After the hammer test, all data were processed using the Cut-Pro 8.0 software, and the structural coefficients were calculated. The mass (m), stiffness coefficient (k), damping ratio (ζ), and natural frequency (wn) of the tool were evaluated during the hammer test. The tests were performed using a hammer by connecting different overhang length of tools. The hammer test was performed separately for each overhang length of tools because the rigidity of the system changes for every setup. The hammer test was performed after the tool was set. Hammer test is shown in Fig. 1.AISI 4140, AISI 1040, Al-2024, Al-7075, and Inconel 718 materials were used in the experiments. The number of revolutions were 355, 500, and 710rpm. The chatter sound was recorded using a microphone and processed using a programme in the LabView 7.1 software package. The LabView 7.1 software was used during the cutting tests to investigate the stable cutting depths without chatter. The stable cutting depths were obtained by trying different cutting depths at different cutting speeds. Cutting test is shown in Fig. 2.Detailed explanation about experiments is given in Turkes's [29] and Sofuoglu's [30,31] studies. The results of the experiments are given in Appendix.In the computational study, experimental results are taken from Turkes [29], Sofuoglu [30,31] and Gok [32] and they are given in Appendix (Table A1). The stable cutting depth is a dependent variable, whereas the different workpieces and insert materials, geometries, cutting and modal parameters are independent variables. The data (192 points) were taken into consideration and randomly divided into 122 training experiments (Table A2) and 70 test experiments.Multiple regression models were developed to predict the stable cutting depths. The enter method was used in the models. The independent variables are given in Table 1. The dependent variable is the stable cutting depth. Three different models were developed, and the determination coefficients were calculated.The determination coefficients of the regression models are shown in Table 2. Taking into account determination coefficients in training and testing stage, the first model produces better results compared to the other models. The performance of the three models is nearly identical. Although the third model includes fewer independent variables, the training and testing performance of this model is close to the other developed models.ANN models were developed to predict stable cutting depths. The input layer nodes are given in Table 3. The output node is the stable cutting depth. The parameters of the models are given in Table 4.In Table 5, the results of five different training methods are shown. One hidden layer was used in the Quick, Prune and Multiple models, whereas two hidden layers were used in the other models. Three, four, and nine neurons have been used in the hidden layer of the Quick, Multiple, and Prune models, respectively. In total, 230 and 11 neurons have been used in the Dynamic model; and 30 and 20 neurons have been used in the Exhaustive Prune model. The Dynamic and Exhaustive Prune models contain more hidden layers and the number of neurons.The models that best fit the data are the Dynamic and Multiple models in the training stage. The results of the Quick, Prune and Exhaustive Prune models are similar. To examine the results of the model, the models were further tested. The determination coefficients of the training and testing stages are shown in Table 6. The models that have fit the data most are Dynamic, Multiple and Prune in the testing stage. The predicted values according to different models are given in Appendix (Table A3). Stability diagrams with real and predicted values are given for Al-2024 and AISI-1040 in Figs. 3 and 4. Predicted results are very close to the experimental data.Taking into account determination coefficients in training and testing stage, Multiple model produces better results compared to the other models.In this stage, five different models were developed. The first model has two tree depths, whereas the fifth model has six tree depths. The inputs of the models are given in Table 7. The output is the stable cutting depth. The determination coefficients of the five models are given in Table 8for both the training and testing stage. Increasing the tree depth enhances the performance of the models. Although undesired results for the first and second models in the training stage were noted, the testing results agree with the experimental data.Taking into account determination coefficients in training and testing stage, the third model produces better results compared to the other models.Heuristic linear models were developed in the training process, and the testing procedure was applied for validation. The objective function of the linear model is defined in Eqs. (19) and (20).Objective function:(19)ei=yreal−ypredicted(20)Minimize∑i=1nei2yreal: experimental stable cutting depths (mm); ypredicted: predicted stable cutting depths (mm); ei: error between experimental and predicted values.The bounds of the linear model are given in Table 9. The magnitudes and signs of the bounds are determined based on a previous study [31]. Simulations were run on a Pentium PC with 2.13GHz Intel Processor and 2 GB of RAM.According to Table 9 (bounds) and Eqs. (19) and (20) (objective function), genetic algorithm was used to predict stable cutting depths. Different population sizes (50, 100, 200, 300), reproduction crossover fractions (0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1) and crossover functions (scatter, single point, two point, intermediate, heuristic) were tried to tune parameters accurately. The parameters and results of the model are given in Table 10.Convergence behaviour of the algorithm is given in Fig. 5. Fig. 5 reveals that there has been sharp drop in 100 iterations. After 100 iterations, it decreases slowly.According to Table 9 (bounds) and Eqs. (19) and (20) (objective function), cuckoo search algorithm was used to predict stable cutting depths. Different discovery rates (between 0 and 1) and levy exponents (between 1 and 5) were tried to tune parameters accurately. The parameters and results of the model are shown in Table 11.According to Table 9 (bounds) and Eqs. (19) and (20) (objective function), particle swarm algorithm was used to predict stable cutting depths. Different self adjustment coefficients (0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5), social adjustment coefficients (0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5), swarm size (25, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 160) and inertia rates (between 0 and 1) were tried to tune parameters accurately. The parameters and results of the model are presented in Table 12.Convergence behaviour of the algorithm is shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6 shows that there has been steep decline in 400 iterations. After 400 iterations, it decreases slowly.Particle swarm algorithm has also hybrid function options. Using same parameter values in Table 12, pattern search and fmincon options were selected. These hybrid function options were used after the particle swarm algorithm terminated. The results of hybrid function options are given in Table 13. The results are improved slightly compared to the non-hybrid particle swarm algorithm. The coefficients of the particle swarm algorithm-fmincon are presented in Table 14.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, different soft computing models were developed to predict the stable cutting depths. The factors that affect the stable cutting depth were observed with an experimental study [29–32]. Data were combined from these studies for computational study. Taking into account all the models, ANN produced successful results compared with the other models. Moreover, except genetic algorithm, there are slight differences between heuristic, regression and decision tree models according to the determination coefficient performance values. It was observed that workpiece hardness and the number of revolutions are effective criteria to avoid chatter problem.In the next studies, different prediction methods (support vector machine etc.) might be developed with addition of different experiments. Also, further research might explore the prediction of stable cutting depths for different process (milling, drilling, etc.) without chatter. Additionally, different optimization models (artificial bee colony algorithms etc.) might be developed.