@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Competition, cooperation, and regulation: Understanding the evolution of the mobile payments technology ecosystem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Considers competition and regulation in technology ecosystem paths of influence model.Analyzes mobile payments technology evolution to empirically test this approach.Contributes a new analysis approach useful for many other settings of financial services.Analyzes the paths of influence that led to different patterns of m-payments evolution.Identifies key accelerators and decelerators that affect technological changes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Competition,Cooperation,e-Commerce,Financial services,Mobile payments,Paths of influence,Regulation,Technology evolution,Technology ecosystems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The past twenty years have been a time of many new technological developments, changing business practices, and interesting innovations in the financial information system (IS) and technology landscape. They have led to the increasing use of prior innovations that have supported e-commerce, and that are now being brought into financial services to support different kinds of improvements to core business processes. This research examines recent changes in the payment sector in financial services, specifically related to mobile payments (m-payments) that enable new channels for consumer payments for goods and services purchases, and other forms of economic exchange. We extend recent research on technology ecosystems and paths of influence analysis for how industry-centered technology innovations arise and evolve. We explore the extent to which they can be understood through the lens of several simple building blocks, including technology components, technology-based services, and the technology-supported infrastructures that provide foundations for the related digital businesses. Our extension of the prior research focuses on two key elements: (1) modeling the impacts of competition and cooperation on different forms of innovations in the aforementioned building blocks; and (2) representing the role that regulatory forces play in driving or delaying innovation in the larger scope of our modeling approach. To assess the efficacy of our approach, we use it to retrospectively analyze the past two decades of innovations in the m-payments space. Our results identify the industry-specific patterns of innovation that have occurred, suggest how they have been affected by competition, cooperation and regulation, and point out some more universal patterns of technology innovations that offer insights into the development of e-commerce.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The history of the financial services industry has witnessed several waves of innovations for services delivery that have changed the ways that customers and banks interact. Advances in information communication and technology (ICT) have played an important role in initiating, driving and shaping these innovations (Hatzakis et al. 2010).In some niche markets, the impacts of technology-based business innovation have been transformational and far-reaching (Callado-Munoz et al. 2012; Steiner and Teixeira 1989; Wriston 1988, 2007). Some of them include the emergence of computer-assisted program trading in the 1980s, the e-brokerage boom in the 1990s, and the elimination of floor trading at the exchanges (Gastineau 1991). Some others are: the introduction of value-at-risk (VAR) and risk-adjusted return on capital (RAROC), which were incorporated in financial risk management systems after the stock market crash of 1987 (Fama 1998, Saita 2007); and the widespread adoption of Internet banking in the 2000s. More recently, mobile payments (m-payments), high-frequency trading (HFT), Bitcoin, and crowdfunding have been shaping the new high-tech landscape of financial services in the late 2000s up to the present (Aldridge 2013).Various kinds of mechanisms for consumers to make payments have had elements of mobility for many years. For example, in 1946, the National Bank of Brooklyn, New York, issued a “Charge-It” card program that allowed customers to access bank credit at local stores (Bellis 2015). Then in 1950, Frank McNamara, Ralph Schneider and Matty Simmons created a credit card company, the Diners Club, as a means of allowing a customer to pay for lunch or dinner at a participating restaurant without having cash (Diners Club International 2015). The card required payment in full, month by month, for its use, and this “mobile credit” service grew rapidly through the mid-1960s in the restaurant, travel, hospitality and entertainment sectors (Ma 2014). In 1958, the Bank of America introduced the BankAmericard, which became the first all-purpose and general-use credit card in payments history (Simon 2007). In the early 1970s, the Bank of America relinquished control of BankAmericard issuance to other organizations in the U.S., which created National BankAmericard Inc. (NBI), and its licensing activities expanded to other countries (Stearns 2007). Then in 1975, NBI and some of its affiliates created an independent organization called VISA, which we know today as one of the leading credit card associations and transaction processors, and a provider of branded credit, debit and prepaid card products to financial institutions.The past twenty years from 1994 to 2014 have been a period of high innovation in the development of payments technologies and solutions. The first big wave of innovations emerged when Microsoft attempted to acquire Intuit to enter the Internet banking sector in 1994 (Fisher 1994). There was an intense period of experimentation that occurred in parallel with Microsoft’s and other firms’ investigation of electronic bill payment and presentment, and these things supported the growth of industry-wide interest in online payments. The subsequent rise of the online payment services provider, PayPal, and the emergence of online brokers further stimulated the growth of non-cash payments. The growth of money market funds and other investment vehicles in the shadow banking system – non-bank financial intermediaries that do not operate subject to the regulations of depository institutions – along with other problems with asset-backed securities, derivatives and ineffective accounting practices contributed to the financial crash in 2008 and the subsequent global financial crisis. After the market downturn years of 2008–2011, companies such as Square, Softcard, Google, PayPal, and Apple Pay expanded their efforts to create and bring m-payments technology and service innovations to the marketplace.A more formal definition of an m-payment is any payment in which some kind of a mobile device is used to initiate, authorize and confirm an exchange of financial value in return for goods and services (Karnouskos 2004). Conceptually, an m-payment is a new form of value transfer, similar to other payment instruments that consumers can use, but that relies more on the advanced features of mobile phones and the tokenization of a consumer’s financial credentials (Pandy and Crowe 2014). According to a recent Mobile Payments Industry Workgroup (MPIW) discussion document made available through the Federal Reserve Bank in the U.S. (Pandy and Crowe 2014, pp. 2–3):A token is a randomly generated substitute value used to replace sensitive information through a process called tokenization. When used for financial transactions, tokens replace payment credentials, such as bank account and credit/debit card numbers. The ability to remove actual payment credentials from the transaction flow can improve the security of the payment and is a key benefit of tokenization. … The key goal of tokenization is to protect the Primary Account Number, or PAN. A PAN is a 13 to 19-digit number embossed on a plastic bank or credit card and encoded on the card’s magnetic strip. The PAN identifies the card issuer in the first six digits, known as the Bank Identification Number (BIN), as well as the individual cardholder account (generally the final four digits), and includes a check digit for authentication. Tokenization eliminates the need for merchants to store the full PAN on their network systems for exception processing or to resolve disputes. Replacing PANs with tokens can reduce the financial impact resulting from data compromise, theft, or unintended disclosure during disposal. While data breach prevention is the key to reducing the risk of compromise, tokenization has the benefit of making the compromised data less valuable.In this research, we retrospectively analyze the evolution of mobile payments technology innovations in the past two decades with respect to technological changes relative to market competition and cooperation, and government regulation. Financial services professionals and analysts have a difficult time to predict the arrival of new technological developments, estimate the extent of their impacts, and forecast their future status. Hence, there is a strong need to understand how highly impactful technology-based financial innovations were initiated and developed, and then evolved over time.We address two fundamental research questions. What are the major forces that drive the evolution of technology-based innovations, such as mobile payments, in financial services? What are the roles played by market competition, cooperation, and regulation in shaping the observed paths of evolution and the changing pace of technological transitions?To answer these questions, we propose a financial information system (IS) and technology ecosystem approach that extends Adomavicius et al.’s (2008a)technology ecosystem paths of influence model.1We presented these ideas in multiple conferences in the past, where we obtained useful comments as the basis for earlier and much less complete versions of the current work. They include an article that explored decision-making under certainty for mobile payments (Kauffman et al. 2012, 2013a), followed by a more recent journal article that proposes a new approach for continuous-time stochastic valuation modeling for IT investment under uncertainty that incorporates a mean reversion process to capture cost and benefit flow variations over time (Kauffman et al. 2015b). In addition, we have given presentations about the technology ecosystem view in articles on high-frequency trading (Kauffman et al. 2015a) and mobile payments (Kauffman et al. 2013b, Liu et al. 2014) that are a basis for the present research article. The present article is a unique piece of research, with new ideas on competition, cooperation, and regulation contextual analysis that go beyond our prior work.1We consider the issues that financial services decision-makers and analysts face, as they think through what will drive the major changes in the technology ecosystem in the financial IS and technology landscape. We categorize innovations in three levels: the technology component level, the technology-based service level, and the technology-supported business infrastructure level.2Adomavicius et al. (2007, 2008a, 2008b) constructed three key building blocks, including components, products and applications, and infrastructures, and focused on the general IT landscape rather than the financial services sector, as we do here. We adapt their approach to emphasize the services innovation perspective instead of the product innovation perspective.2The technology ecosystem perspective only considers technology supply-side forces for innovations though. In this research, we offer an extended view that incorporates market-side competition, cooperation and regulation among a range of stakeholders in financial services as important forces that jointly shape the evolution of technology-based financial innovations.Historical events and trends inspired some of our thinking in this research, as did some of the well-known conjectures about how technology performance improves and the alternative interpretations of how changes arise in technology evolution. On the technology side, Moore’s Law suggests that technologies double in performance every eighteen months, a 60% improvement per annum (Moore 1965), but its prediction has been debated due to subsequent empirical assessments (e.g., Tuomi 2002). In addition, Nielsen’s Law states that the telecom bandwidth available to users increases by 50% annually (Nielsen 1998). These laws are vague in their specifications, with many versions that observers believe contradict one another (Sood et al. 2012).There are also social perspectives that offer useful theoretical explanations. A specific technology innovation will only be able to be developed and implemented when there are consumers who express demand for it. So the market must have a sufficient level of capability and maturity, and entrepreneurs must make the requisite effort and investment to push it forward to connect with consumers.In addition, one can think of an analogy between technology evolution and biological evolution in the manner that the different perspectives of two well-known nineteenth century naturalists were put forward. Lamarck (1815-1822) postulated that biological organisms extended their capabilities within their ecosystems through generational adaptations to the environment. He believed that they possessed the capacity to pass on specific characteristics that were acquired and worked well during their lifetimes, leading to the equilibrium of diversity that is observed in the natural world (Stafleau 1971). A counter-interpretation is Darwin’s (1859) evolution via survival of the fittest, which posits that diversity is the result of unexpected jumps and mutations that make individuals who fit better in their ecosystems survive over a longer period of time. A comprehensive technology ecosystem analysis approach ought to consider both views – the Lamarckian inheritance and environmental selection view, together with the Darwinian idea of specific ecological niches and the mutation for fitness view – for analyzing technology innovation developments.Technological progress has been suggested as a primary factor that drives societal evolution (Morgan 1877, White 1949), and not just the evolution of narrower technology ecosystems. Another view of technology evolution can be built on the extent of information and knowledge that a society is able to process (Lenski 1966), and how advances in communications can be leveraged for its dissemination. Still another view of technology evolution involves whether technological progress results in economic changes that achieve an equilibrium outcome, or the outcome is path-dependent, and instead reaches one of several absorbing states that are similar to unique Darwinian ecological niches. This view is associated with evolutionary economics (Nelson and Winter 2009).These different perspectives motivated us to extend Adomavicius et al.’s (2008a)paths of influence model by incorporating the effects of competition, cooperation, and regulation as a means to explore technology evolution in the payments sector. This sector has a highly regulated yet competitive marketplace with extensive interactions among the innovators, adopters, and regulators. To understand the recent developments in services, the influence of related technology innovations, and the resulting structural changes in the payments industry, it is important that we analyze the historical changes in the payments technology ecosystem.We will argue that market competition, cooperation, and regulation act as key accelerators or decelerators of industry changes, while new m-payments innovation has the potential to transform it. Some accelerators include the adoption of co-opetition strategy by key stakeholders for business infrastructure innovation, new capabilities that arise from innovations in technology components, the outcome of differentiation strategies for new technology services innovations, and the emergence of new strategic thinking from high-tech firms that become financial institutions themselves. On the other hand, the decelerators arise from the defensive behavior of existing firms in the market, the increased complexity and uncertainty when multiple firms offer different technology solutions in the absence of regulatory guidance and technology standards, and a lack of understanding by investors who fund new and potentially high-risk ventures as to how technologies will evolve. These are likely to lead to market entry deterrence to prevent innovators from participating, and damage due to fierce competition that can impair the health of the payments sector in the financial services industry.Our ecosystem view recognizes multiple factors affecting the evolution of mobile payments technology innovations, and identifies several patterns behind the process by which one core technology for payment services seems to replace another over time. We connect technology evolution thinking to financial innovations, and propose a new perspective to master the complex relationship between them in the evolutionary process of technology-based financial innovation. The application of our extended analysis approach to m-payments technology evolution contributes to research in the domain of electronic and mobile payments. Unlike prior research, we focus on payments innovations from an evolutionary perspective, rather than a technical or a managerial perspective (Karnouskos et al. 2008).3Some past works on mobile payments include Au and Kauffman (2008), who looked at the emerging technology of mobile payments via the prism of economic theory. Another is Dahlberg et al. (2008), who provided a review of prior literature based on behavioral, organizational, technological, processual and strategic perspectives, and suggested directions for future research. Kousaridas et al. (2008) developed, explored and analyzed a proposed architecture that supports mobile payments and mobile banking. In addition, Schierz et al. (2010) empirically evaluated consumer acceptance of mobile payments services. Finally, de Reuver et al. (2015) conducted case study research on an m-payments platform involving the issue of collaboration between banks and telecom operators.3We collected data on key events that have occurred during the past two decades in the payments industry. We coded them, analyzed the underlying forces that drove their occurrence, and identified their evolutionary patterns. Our results validate the need to consider market forces, in addition to technology forces (Zmud 1984).This article is organized in the following way. Section 2 reviews theoretical perspectives related to technology evolution-based thinking and analysis, and financial services innovations. Section 3 presents the general modeling approach, connects it to the financial services industry, and defines the key constructs. Section 4 discusses technology innovations in the mobile payments sector, and presents an application of the extended paths-of-influence model that integrates a competitive and regulatory analysis in the m-payments context. Section 5 discusses how the different accelerators and decelerators affect the pace of technology innovation and evolution in the m-payments area. It also offers some implications that are relevant for other financial IS and technologies. Section 6 concludes with a statement of the main findings and limitations, and provides some thoughts about the general applicability of the perspective that we have developed to innovations in e-commerce.In 2008, in a special issue of Electronic Commerce Research and Applications that was intended to encourage new research on m-payments, the Guest Editors, Stamatis Karnouskos, Robert J. Kauffman, Elaine Lawrence and Key Pousttchi (Karnouskos et al. 2008, p. 137), wrote:“Traditional payment systems dominate the domain of electronic commerce today. However, most of them are coupled with too much overhead for the customer and lack of security for Internet transactions. Mobile payments, on the other hand, have been surrounded by a lot of hype since the dotcom era of the 1990s, and although they were welcomed by some of the early adopters, not all of the key technical components were in place to yield broad-based success in the marketplace. Now, almost a decade out from the first approaches, the domain of m-payments is advancing steadily and maturing, shedding the hype and the inappropriate and wild visions of applicability, toward a real and practical alternative for future payment infrastructures for the wireless world of e-commerce”.The earlier special issue sought to encourage authors to develop new theoretical background related to financial technology innovation like m-payments for e-commerce. Our work continues in this vein, and draws upon several streams of research on technology innovation and financial services, technology ecosystems and paths of influence, and market competition, cooperation, and regulation.There is a rich literature on technology innovation, including Kondratiev’s (1925) innovation waves, Schumpeter’s (1939) S-curve innovation cycles, Drucker’s (2007) seven sources of innovation, and Rogers’ (2010) diffusion of innovation. However, relatively little work has focused on categorizing different innovations and studying their interactions. Zmud (1982) first characterized the differences between new product and service innovations and process innovations. Robey (1986) then differentiated among three types of organizational innovations: new product or service innovations, administrative innovations, and technical innovations. Swanson (1994) proposed a tri-core model for IS innovations: innovations confined to the IS task; innovations supporting administration of the business; and innovations embedded in the core technology of the business. Lyytinen and Rose (2003) further considered base IT innovations, service innovations and system development innovations. Though these studies primarily offer an organizational instead of evolutionary view of innovations, they can be used as a basis for us to classify technology innovations at different levels.Innovations in financial services have been recognized as an engine of economic growth, generating market gains for the innovators and adopters (Tufano 1989), improving welfare for society (Frame and White 2004), and leading to revolutionary changes in the structure of the financial market and institutions (Merton 1995). On the other hand, financial services innovations can be a double-edged sword – they have a veiled relationship with catastrophic events and financial crisis (Diaz-Rainey and Ibikunle 2012, Thakor 2012).Most studies on technology-based financial innovations have focused on their diffusion paths, the characteristics of adopters, and the consequences of innovations for firm profitability, social welfare and economic performance (Kavesh et al. 1978, Merton 1992, Miller 1986). The literature rarely has concentrated on understanding the origins of innovations and how they evolve though (Lerner and Tufano 2011). Our work attempts to fill this research gap by retrospectively analyzing past innovations and prospectively assessing future innovations, where there are opportunities for firms to take advantage of investment and market opportunities.How technologies evolve is an important research topic. Prior work suggests that technology evolution is a process of continual improvement in the performance of a technology through novel recombination and synthesis of existing technologies (Henderson and Clark 1990, Foster 1986). Sood et al. (2012) showed that technologies evolve along step functions with multiple crosses as the capabilities emerge, and there are huge spikes in performance after periods of long dormancy (Tellis 2008). We adopt path dependence (David 2007, Arthur 1994) and new growth (Romer 1994) thinking to understand the dynamic process of financial IS and technology evolution. The evolution of technology-based innovations can take various paths within a technology ecosystem, so understanding technological changes requires an integrated view of the continuous path that the change process traces over time (Boland et al. 2003).Motivated by the lack of depth of insight available from Gartner’s “hype cycle” perspective (Fenn et al. 2000), Adomavicius et al. (2007) first proposed a technology ecosystem view to represent temporal development of innovations associated with different clusters of technologies. They defined an IT ecosystem as a subset of ITs in the technology landscape that are interrelated to one another in a specific context of use (Adomavicius et al. 2008b). An ecosystem represents three distinct groups of technologies with specific technology roles: components, products and applications, and infrastructures. Driven by technological changes, innovations happen in different technology roles, resulting in cross-level effects – paths of influence (Adomavicius et al. 2008a). Adomavicius et al. (2012) empirically validated the existence of such cross-level effects and identified several patterns of technology relationships in the context of wireless networking, using econometric forecasts of the technology changes.The impact of market competition on technology innovation remains controversial among researchers (Sood et al. 2012). Does competition spur and speed up innovation, or does it block and slow down its evolution? Some positive effects have been identified in the literature. Given that technological innovations are critical for the survival and success of firms (Anderson et al. 2006, Banker et al. 1993), and that a firm’s returns from innovation at the margin are significantly larger in an oligopolistic than a monopolistic market (Fellner 1961, Scherer 1967), large firms tend to devote a massive amount of time, equipment, money and personnel to technology innovation. Competitive pressure encourages new innovations and improvements in products and services. In addition, competitive necessity (Goh and Kauffman 2013) and compulsive sequences involving known and observed patterns of problem-solving that lead, step-by-step, to innovations (Rosenberg 1969) encourage firms to fully realize the benefits from innovations and trigger further breakthroughs that enhance their value. Furthermore, the strategic entry of firms that aim to preempt the market and the co-opetition strategy emphasizing cooperative alliances among rival firms will also spur the discovery of new opportunities and capabilities, as well as promote faster progress with technological change and service improvement (Brandenberger and Nalebuff 1996, Teece 1992).Negative effects of competition have been documented too. Several competitive strategies will likely result in the deceleration of the development of technology innovations, and increase uncertainty related to technology investments (Dixit and Pindyck 1994, Mason and Weeds 2010). Examples include: an incumbent’s defensive strategy in response to the innovations brought by new market entrants (Katz and Shapiro 1987); the emergence of multiple technology solutions and standards that increase the market uncertainty (Kauffman and Li 2005); and cooperative defense and resistance when innovations generate new technical problems causing potential risks or change the market’s competitive status quo (Ferrier et al. 1999). In addition, the leading firms in the industry often possess a large amount of resources, which put them at an advantage for being successful with innovations. This often allows them to continue to grow and dominate the next generation of technology platforms, and has resulted in monopolistic market power that tends to deflect and de-power the efforts and incentives of other innovators (Arrow 1962). However, a lot of real-world examples demonstrate that wealthy firms are not always able to maintain leadership, and sometimes they are even unable to survive the next generation of innovation (Tellis 2008). For example, leadership in the mobile phone market moved from Motorola, Blackberry and Nokia to Google, Apple and Samsung.Regulation regarding competition policy, pricing, market entry, natural monopoly and public utilities also plays an important role in shaping technology and innovation evolution (Blind 2012, Stewart 2010). The impact of regulation on innovation and competitiveness in the market has attracted considerable research interest. Swann (2005) investigated a number of British companies and showed that regulation can either nourish or obstruct innovation activities. Prior studies also found a negative correlation between the intensity of product market regulations and the intensity of R&D expenditures in some countries (Bassanini and Ernst 2002). Stricter regulations seem to have had a negative influence on services innovation in certain industry (Prieger 2002). In the financial services sector, financial institutions are closely connected to consumer welfare, so regulators are extremely cautious about how disruptive technological innovations may change the market (Dewatripont and Tirole 1994). Silber (1983) analyzed financial innovations and showed that about 30% were induced by regulation. Today though, regulators may find it more and more difficult to keep up with the pace of technological innovation and market changes. When they do get a handle on it, it is likely that they will have lagged effects to slow down the pace of technology evolution and innovation (Stigler 1971). In some key sectors, regulators often caution market participants that technology innovations might create hidden dangers, or send misleading signals about the health of the market. Warren (2008) indicated that the inflexibility of financial regulations could hinder truly beneficial innovations. On the other hand, when regulation offers support for a technology standard in some way, or provides a roadmap for a specific technology innovation, market uncertainty will be diminished and its development will be accelerated.We next introduce our technology ecosystem approach for analyzing the paths of influence for mobile payments technology evolution, and integrate it with the extended competition and regulatory analysis.The technology ecosystem model proposed by Adomavicius et al. (2008a) emphasizes the organic nature of technology change and evolution in the underlying technologies themselves, a supple-side perspective. An ecosystem consists of a population of interrelated technologies with specific roles and overlapping hierarchies. These things represent a complex system of determinants for the evolutionary outcomes that are commonly observed in technology product and service settings. Rapid technology innovation and the uncertain outcomes associated with technology competition contribute to the difficulty of predicting future technology evolution.Following the concept of a technology ecosystem and considering unique features of financial services, we introduce the idea of a financial IS and technology ecosystem. It includes a set of interdependent financial IS and technologies that work together in the operation and production of a specific financial service. To define such a financial IS and technology ecosystem requires the identification of a relevant set of technologies within a specific context of use. For example, if we are interested in analyzing electronic payments solutions to deliver electronic funds transfer (EFT) services to customers, the related EFT technology ecosystem will then include technologies such as telecommunications, cyber security, credit cards, electronic banking kiosks, and so on.We define three different levels at which technology innovations will happen within a financial IS and technology ecosystem: the component level, the service level, and the business infrastructure level. Table 1summarizes the definitions, descriptions and examples for technology innovations at each level.The difference between component and service innovations is that the former acts as a sub-unit or sub-system of the latter. Innovators recombine or integrate existing component innovations, or modules involving multiple components, into service innovations to address customers’ needs. For example, credit cards originally were an innovation at the service level for many EFT services vendors. Credit cards also consist of a set of component innovations though, including: the magnetic stripe; Europay, MasterCard and VISA (EMV) chips; and connectivity with an automated clearing house (ACH) for transactions. As such, identifying the context of use and defining the scope of the financial IS and technology ecosystem should be an important first step.The distinction between business infrastructure innovation and component innovation is that business infrastructure innovation creates the basis but is not necessary for the provision of services to customers. For example, market-wide VAR-based risk management tracking systems, which enable firms and regulators to oversee trading activity risks effectively, are must-have infrastructure capabilities, and we can hardly imagine any firm in the market operating without them today. Other examples of technology-supported business infrastructures in the EFT ecosystem include short message services (SMS) and email capabilities. They are not operationally necessary for electronic bill payments (EBP) and cardholder-initiated transactions, though they may be helpful for communication between customers and financial services providers for mutual informedness and account security.Paths of influence are used to represent the impact of technology-based financial innovations across different levels in a financial IS and technology ecosystem. Technology innovation that happens at any level can affect the subsequent innovations across the other levels. For example, the success of the global adoption of smartphones and mobile apps has helped to drive the development of mobile financial services innovations, such as mobile banking, mobile payments, and peer-to-peer money transfers. This illustrates how a technology innovation at the component level – from feature phones to smartphones – can influence the development of new services technology innovations at other levels.We use C, S, and I to represent the present state of technology innovation at the component level, service level, and business infrastructure level. An asterisk (∗) represents the future state of a technology innovation. In this way, we can analyze interdependencies among technology innovations over time, address the complexity of their relationships, and identify trends with how technology innovations evolve.A financial services ecosystem is affected by multiple factors related to technology, market, society, and institutions (Hekkert et al. 2007, Markard and Truffer 2008). As a result, modeling technology-driven paths of influence alone is insufficient to tell the full story. Including the impact of firm strategy and market regulation on technology innovation, we define a set of new artifacts that affect the technological changes: competitive forces that are spurring or stalling innovations, and regulatory forces that are driving or delaying innovations. These forces often result in changes in both observable and unobservable facets of value from innovations, including profit, social welfare, expenses, beneficial network effects, and goodwill (Au and Kauffman 2008).Innovation-spurring competition influences the evolution of innovations in multiple ways. In an oligopolistic market, a number of competing firms invest in R&D, resulting in faster technology innovations and service performance improvement. A leading firm’s efforts with innovation may create a basis for further breakthroughs in the related areas or facilitate faster and wider adoption of the innovation. Competition will encourage firms to pursue preemption and co-opetition strategies, creating new opportunities and capabilities in some important aspects of financial services.We observed the innovation-spurring effects of competition in the early years of automated teller machine (ATM) innovation development, for example. During the mid-1970s, Philadelphia National Bank (PNB) launched one of the U.S.’s first and largest regional networks of ATMs: the Money Access Center (MAC) network (Clemons 1990). PNB was instrumental in pushing the adoption of ATM technology innovations forward in multiple ways, including bank-to-bank ATM services sharing for customers, kiosk-based “icon services” that permitted different banks to offer their own branded on-ATM services, and other services. Another example of co-opetition is the partnership between the now-worldwide Cirrus and Plus interbank electronic banking and credit card networks. Together, they expanded the beneficial effects of ATMs and credit card networks to many banks and their customers. They also moved the related technologies from a more limited U.S. national service role to a global business infrastructure role in support of financial IS and technology ecosystems.Innovation-stalling competition demonstrates the negative side of competition. To maintain market power and leadership, an established incumbent firm may employ a defensive strategy to prevent others from adopting, accessing or making use of a specific technological innovation, slowing down or even blocking the evolution of the innovation. With a differentiation strategy, competing firms tend to invest in different technology solutions, resulting in the appearance of multiple similar innovations in the market at almost the same time. Though differentiation increases new product and service variety, the lack of a recognized standard creates uncertainty and limits mass adoption of a specific innovation. In addition, high competitive pressures sometimes give firms an incentive to push immature technologies into the market, increasing the possibility of innovation failure and market risks. These all will negatively affect the adoption and diffusion of a truly valuable innovation.There sometimes is also an impetus for a firm or a group of firms to hold back technological change and innovation so the competitive status quo is not dramatically undermined. When they consider the potential technological risk and uncertain market changes that may accompany technology innovations, these strategies may serve the purpose of blocking innovations. One example is Citibank, which for some years declined to join the Cirrus national network of shared ATMs in the United States. Citibank deployed its own high-end ATMs at locations in the New York area (Quint 1991), and had the highest-quality operational performance and most attractive ATM-based services, but did not permit the customers of other banks to use them. This slowed down the development of the paths of influence for ATM technology-based service innovations, which cascaded to the business infrastructure level in the electronic banking ecosystem.Another example is J.P. Morgan Bank’s early 1990s effort with CapitaLink Securities Corporation. It attempted to build a subsidiary called CapitaLink Bond Auction Systems to support commercial bank sell-side bond issuance (Quint 1989, 1990). The effort challenged the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) Shelf Registration Rule 415, which did not permit commercial banks at the time to take on the debt issuance functions of investment banks (Kauffman and Wang 2007). When CapitaLink attempted to bring a three-year US$100 million note to the market in 1991, it was blocked by Merrill Lynch & Co., which sought to hold Morgan back from participating in the corporate debt underwriting market. This was intended to permit Merrill to preserve its own valuable market franchise.Regulation-driven innovation occurs when regulators set rules to ensure that firms achieve minimum revenues, and reduce their risks and compliance costs. They may try to motivate firms to enhance their productivity, avoid imitation and achieve innovation. Regulators may also wish to liberalize and privatize markets that have been dominated by public organizations. Hence, they may make decisions that unintentionally support the adoption of a specific kind of technology innovation, which potentially will result in the emergence of a future technology standard and lead to technology evolution (Blind 2012). These are likely to be by-products of working with industry leaders, so new services in an area of technology innovation become more valuable. Regulators are unlikely to consciously favor one technology over another, though it may be the case that they block some technology innovations from diffusing because they are viewed as being potentially damaging, or actually have damaged competitiveness, or amplified the risk associated with operating in a specific area of the market.The example of CapitaLink is also relevant here. Shortly after the SEC permitted Morgan to grow its debt and equity issuance businesses via its subsidiary, Morgan pulled the plug on CapitaLink (Sell-Side Technology 1991). Later, the long-standing restrictions of the U.S. Banking Act of 1933 (the Glass-Steagall Act) were repealed when the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 was adopted (Labaton 1999). This legislation brought together the interests of commercial banking, investment banking and insurance services stakeholders, and smoothed the way for a unified industry-wide approach to technological innovation in financial services for capital creation through debt and equity issuance, while creating new wealth and new risks in the U.S. banking industry (Mamun et al. 2005). Another example is the European payments-integration initiative, Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The SEPA regulation by the European Commission made all electronic payments across the Euro area, including by credit card, debit card, bank transfer or direct debit, as efficient as domestic payments within one country, and created a single payment market in Europe (European Commission 2012).Regulation-delayed innovation occurs when the actions of regulators restrict cooperation between companies for R&D, and thus discourage innovation activities. Market entry regulations also put up barriers for innovators to enter a specific market. In addition, regulators’ actions may change the conditions in the marketplace, on purpose or unintentionally, so it becomes unattractive for firms to adopt or use specific technological innovations (Aghion et al. 2005, Blind 2012). These post hoc regulatory restrictions lower the impetus for technological progress (Averch and Johnson 1962), limit innovation in financial services, and slow their implementation.Typically, the purpose of regulation is not to directly interfere with innovations and delay their development. Instead, it is to mitigate potential negative effects associated with disruptive technology innovation, and to ensure security, stability, efficiency, and fairness in the related marketplace. One example is what is happening in emerging on-demand and peer-to-peer markets, and the collaborative sharing economy, which has stimulated new consumption, improved productivity, and encouraged individual innovation and entrepreneurship. Various aspects of the practices that characterize the sharing economy have increased regulators’ concerns in several areas, including short-term accommodations, point-to-point urban transportation, and car rentals. For example, New York City cracked down on Airbnb lodging that violated zoning and other laws, and the Philadelphia Parking Authority conducted sting operations for UberX cars in the city that disrupt the traditional taxi industry (Sundararajan 2014).Another example of regulation-delayed innovation was the 2009 U.S. Senate hearing on dark pools, flash orders, HFT and other financial market structure issues. The capability to trade at a high speed with low-latency direct market access has been built to create out-of-software hardware acceleration. This is based on field-programmable gate-array chips, and high-speed telecommunication protocols, such as InfiniBand and 10/40gigabit Ethernet (10billion bits per second), which now permit order data transfers and confirmations within 10milliseconds (Mellanox Technologies 2013). Along with these and other technological innovations that have supported HFT, there came opportunities for some firms to see changing prices and trading opportunities just milliseconds sooner than other stakeholders, which supported flash trading and front-running (Durden 2009). In addition, risk controls were widely viewed as being less stringent for HFT due to the competitive pressures for trade execution in such a short time (Chakraborty 2012). The U.S. Senate (2009) hearing in 2009 assessed the performance of computerized trading venues, as well as the road ahead for algorithmic trading. As a result, market practices for HFT changed, which caused the market share of HFT in the U.S. to fall from 61% of the total in mid-2009 to 51% by late-2009 (Popper 2012).M-payments are widely viewed as the next revolution in payments to support store-based bricks-and-mortar selling. Huge potential benefits are associated with successful adoption for firms that are able to get the technology innovation right (Etherington 2013). The investment and adoption decision-making for m-payments technologies involves significant uncertainties though. These consist of technological risks, changing consumer demand and expectations, competition in the marketplace, and ill-defined technology standards (Kauffman et al. 2013a). Various technology solutions will emerge when industrial standards are not provided, generating uncertainty for potential adopters. In addition, the m-payments technology ecosystem demonstrates complexity in its structure, spanning multiple sectors, including banking, payments, telecoms and retailing. Its success thus also depends on the efficacy of collaboration among stakeholders in multiple related industries across the underlying innovation network. Such collaboration is typically very hard. All these contribute to the difficulty of m-payments investment and adoption decision-making. As a result, it is critically important for senior managers to understand the patterns of technological changes and the paths of innovation development. It will help them estimate the sustainability of certain innovations, and what is likely to be the future state of the m-payments market, and eventually to make the right investment decisions. We will next analyze the paths of influence for the m-payments technology ecosystem.We first offer an overview of current mobile payments services and define the m-payments technology ecosystem. Fig. 1shows the generalized near field communication (NFC)-enabled m-payments technology platform that represents the most recent business model innovations, such as Softcard, Google Wallet, and Apple Pay (Contini et al. 2011). (See Fig. 1.)The m-payments platform providers participate and cooperate in a cross-industry alliance, such as the Smart Card Alliance (www.smartcardalliance.org), to establish a set of common operational, process and technology standards, enabling related technology innovations to populate the m-payments technology ecosystem (Smart Card Alliance 2007).In this business model, each sector takes on different responsibilities. Mobile network operators (MNOs) and mobile device manufacturers equip the smartphones with a Secure Element (SE) and an NFC chip for safe memory and execution operations. Banks control the payment terminals and issue specialized credit, debit or prepaid cards. Merchants install new NFC-enabled point-of-sale (POS) terminals. And trusted service managers (TSMs) and gateway services providers transmit, process, and secure the transactions and provide additional services to merchants and consumers (de Reuver et al. 2015).M-payments satisfy customers’ cashless payment service demand, relying on the prevalence of mobile phones and the tokenization scheme that we discussed earlier. The tokenization of customers’ payments credentials significantly reduces the risk of and impact from data breaches, so customers are better protected from fraud and other kinds of disruptions. As a result, there is a new regime for risk management that is possible with mobile payments, and an extension to the instantaneous credit provision capabilities of the standard credit card for merchants and customers through new devices. The digitalization of m-payments process, reduced financial risks and lower transaction costs will also support peer-to-peer payments among individuals, as the sharing economy expands.Understanding the scope of the participants and the business process will help us to know what technology innovations are likely to influence the development of m-payment services, and how they will fit into our extended paths of influence model. Some of the related innovations are summarized in Table 2.Following the four steps offered by Adomavicius et al. (2007), we identify the related technology innovations occurring at three levels in the m-payments technology ecosystem. Step 1 involves the identification of the focal innovation and context of use. Step 2 covers the identification of competing service innovations. Step 3 is for the identification of technology innovations at the component level. And finally Step 4 is for the identification of technology innovations at the business infrastructure level.Fig. 2illustrates the interrelationships among technology innovations at three levels – component, service, and business infrastructure – for m-payments. (See Fig. 2.) It serves as a basis for interpreting how the market has developed and how it will further evolve.We next offer a first step toward an explanation of the technology evolution process in the m-payments ecosystem, by discussing our methods in greater detail. We collected information on when m-payments-related technology innovations occurred. Our second step was to understand how competition and regulation add to our understanding of the evolutionary patterns in 4.3.Since the first m-payment service emerged in the late 1990s, a number of significant technological changes have occurred in the m-payments technology ecosystem. The development process has involved many different related technology innovations that occurred at the component, service, and business infrastructure levels. Hence, the ecosystem is an ideal setting for us to illustrate the nature of the changes that have occurred in the related financial IS and technologies. In addition, the payments marketplace with intensive competition, cooperation, and regulation among multiple stakeholders enables us to map the analysis to our new constructs.Given the complex structure of the m-payments ecosystem and limited sources of quantitative data, we decided to adopt a qualitative analysis approach (Miles and Huberman 1994, Sarker et al. 2013, Strauss and Corbin 1998), following guidelines described by Hevner et al. (2004). We collected data involving m-payments technology-related events over eighteen years between 1997 and 2014. We used news and industry announcements, government reports and surveys, publicly-available historical documents, Internet search tools, and also interviews with industry practitioners. In total, we tracked innovations on approximately twenty related technologies in the m-payments technology ecosystem. The changes in m-payment technology and the associated events are reported in Appendix 1, which are organized in chronological sequence. We applied the procedure for identifying an ecosystem, as described earlier, for different points in the timeline that our data cover. The coding and analysis procedure is similar to what is described in Kauffman et al. (2015b).We coded the events occurring in the evolution of m-payments technology at the component, service, and business infrastructure levels, and identified different patterns of technological change based on the paths of influence across different levels. We adopted a state transition diagram to visualize the paths of influence over time and to depict patterns in the ecosystem’s development trajectory. (See Fig. 3.) Technology evolution involves entrepreneurs and organizations that contribute to the path-dependent nature of the process, which makes it seem random.The arrows in Fig. 3 represent the paths of influence that reflect changes in the three kinds of innovations across fourteen time periods. The collection of arrows in each period represents the various evolutionary patterns of m-payments technology. M-payments technology evolution started with the introduction of SMS-enabled m-payments in 1997; and it exhibits five different patterns that are summarized in Table 3. Note the similarities to the patterns presented by Adomavicius et al. (2008a).Most of the recent innovations in the m-payments ecosystem have started with new components and services that allowed for more advanced performance and new functionality. For example, the vendors of various mobile wallets (Google Wallet, Apple Pay, and Softcard) now offer services that permit swiping a mobile phone to make a payment. They are also providing the ability to collect detailed data about where consumers are transacting and what they are buying – as well as more information about where they are, and how they are moving. This information can be analyzed to understand and predict consumers’ purchase behavior. It also allows merchants to send real-time targeted advertisements and perform location-based services (LBS), by taking advantage of existing components (the global positioning and accelerometer components of smartphones, cloud servers and storage, and high-speed mobile networks) and business infrastructures (mobile banking, location-based systems) (Groenfeldt 2014; Liu et al. 2013).Some of the patterns that we have observed are a by-product of competition and cooperation that have occurred among the different stakeholders in the m-payments ecosystem. We previously noted that, among the drivers of changes in the financial IS and technology ecosystem, innovation-spurring and innovation-stalling competitive forces played an important role in the observed developments.When the first two SMS payments-enabled Coca Cola vending machines were installed in Finland in 1997 (Montgomery 2012), few people were truly aware of the capabilities of mobile devices to initiate, authorize and confirm the exchange of financial value in return for goods and services supplied. By 2001 though, the introduction of 3G mobile networks enhanced their connectivity and capability for data transmission among mobile phones, and the competition for the central roles in the mobile marketplace had begun. The component-based innovations of the early 2000s were stimulated by competition among mobile market participants, and created a strong push-forward force for m-payments-related technology innovations. Since that time, the collaboration and cooperation strategies have come to characterize much of the additional development of the market, especially when firms such as Google, MasterCard, Citibank, First Data Corporation and Sprint from different industry sectors worked together to create Google Wallet. Their cooperation accelerated the development of NFC-enabled m-payments technology solutions, resulting in a service and infrastructure alignment pattern that we have observed in our sketch of m-payments technology evolution in its ecosystem (Aspan and Saba 2011).We now shift gears to do a richer assessment of how some of the other events that are present in the timeline of the evolution of m-payments technologies played out, when there is evidence of the concomitant effects of regulation. Sometimes financial IS and technology providers benefit when they are able to anticipate regulatory actions to minimize the risks, so it is possible for them to harmonize their actions to push forward the adoption and diffusion of an innovation. Otherwise, they may encounter countervailing forces from the market or the regulators. This represents a setting in which competition spurs innovation while regulation drives or delays it – in other words, in settings where there are complementary or countervailing forces at work to some degree.4Various kinds of countervailing forces and their effects can be observed in the evolution of industrial organization in different sectors, with respect to firm-level strategies and decision-making (Freeman and Soete 1997). This is especially true in settings involving different kinds of IT. At the industry level, Kauffman and Tsai (2010) evaluated the evolution of business process and technology standards, and how they developed out of the changing interests of different stakeholders – technology producers and users, business intermediaries and standard-setting organizations, regulators and market analysts – in different industry settings. At the firm level, Kauffman and Kumar (2008) evaluated countervailing positive and negative network effects, as well as complementary network effects arising from the mutually value-enhancing components of a network. The authors argued that technology adoption and the forces that support technological innovation can be studied over time by firms, enabling them to take value-maximizing managerial actions for the deployment of services based on new IT innovations, as the market situation changes.4We recognize that it may be difficult to identify the exact extent to which each force is at work, but it nevertheless is possible to identify the outcomes associated with their co-occurrence.When there are active vendors whose interests align with the regulators’ interest on new technology-based services, this will increase the likelihood of the success of technology innovation and help to push its evolution forward faster. Elements of this kind of behavior on the part of market participants can be observed with the success of M-Pesa in Kenya and other countries in East Africa, and the transformation of the consumer payments process there (Graebner 2014). A large segment of the population in these countries has long been unbanked, and generally under-served by financial services organizations, which have struggled to achieve profitability in markets with low-income consumers (Deloitte 2012). The success of M-Pesa since 2007 is due to its close collaboration with the Central Bank of Kenya, which provided its expertise to help M-Pesa’s management to mitigate key systemic risks and offered it room to innovate rather freely (Bishko and Chan 2013). Collaboration between the national central banks and mobile financial services entrepreneurs in that region also facilitated a valuable and direct dialogue (Nyaga 2014).More recently, the dialogue has emphasized the negative impacts of M-Pesa’s near-monopoly power though, such that the regulators are now interested in shaking up the financial network infrastructure of the economy, by permitting the entry of new mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs), such as Finserve Africa, Mobile Pay, and Zioncell Kenya (Heinrich 2014). This process aids in identifying the inappropriate aspects of the highly-concentrated network operational and financial risks related to financial technology innovations for payments (The Economist 2013).When large and powerful Internet firms have turned their attention to the payments marketplace – the traditional territory of large financial institutions, the competition, risk, and market uncertainties have all been affected. Changes in competition driven by digital convergence (Yoffie 1997) involve a somewhat different impetus for innovation. Instead of having existing market participants to develop new innovations, other players – start-ups, technology firms, telecoms and Internet giants – have entered the m-payments marketplace because the expected returns for successful firms there are so high (Ernst and Young 2014).Examples of digital convergence are occurring all around us. Accenture (2012) has pointed to instances of digital convergence, such as Square (www.squareup.com) and iZettle (www.izettle.com), which have been expanding the capability of mobile phones as point-of-sale checkout devices to support consumer purchases. Despite the new technologies, the payments scheme is still similar in its underlying operations, since banks dominate the payment authorization, clearing and settlement processes. However, there is now greater transparency in the payments process, new segments of payments services for under-banked and unbanked customers are being served, and new ways to accomplish risk management now become possible. The digital convergence process exhibits the Lamarckian style of evolution that we discussed earlier, in which next generation technologies seem to be inheriting somewhat amplified characteristics that were acquired during the prior generation. A recent report by Accenture (2012, p. 8) commented further:“These characteristics make the new online payment providers especially dangerous competitors, as they have the capacity to target growth aggressively, secure in the knowledge that they can switch to focusing on profits once they achieve a critical mass of users and transactions. This means they can effectively buy market share by ‘giving away’ the services that banks currently regard as revenue generators. … Against this background, assuming concerns over security can be overcome, if banks or card issuers try to charge fees for new service that technology players might offer for free, then users will inevitably migrate towards free alternatives … However, the ability of banks and card issuers to compete effectively against new entrants is currently undermined by a lack of visibility over how the relative costs in their different payments silos stack up and compare. This makes it difficult for them to make pricing and investment judgments around payments offerings – boosting the risk that they could get these decisions wrong and face being disintermediated.”In other settings where there is a more fragmented market, for example, characterized by the lack of an accepted technology standard, or conflicting strategic objectives across different business networks, there may be innovation-stalling competition, as well as regulation-driven effects. Regulations, in some cases, pave the way for the market to understand how the emergence of innovations may proceed.The history of m-payments, based on our empirical observations, suggests that almost all of the initiatives in the 2000s failed. After 2011, the m-payments standard competition between online independent payment service providers, such as PayPal and Alipay, and the new technology platforms, such as Google Wallet and Softcard (Arthur 2014), as well as more recent developments around Apple Pay (CardNotPresent.com 2014), created uncertainties for stakeholders’ adoption decisions and network formation (Zalubowski 2014). This has slowed down the pace of m-payments services innovations, as market leadership is still a major issue that needs to be sorted out. In 2012, a U.S. Senate (2012) hearing was convened to assess the development of a framework for mobile payments and identify the major roadblocks for m-payments infrastructure and services development.Government agencies that deal with the market for financial services also have considered the stability and risks of current banking and payment systems in light of competition around technological innovations (World Bank 2012). Some have noted that m-payments innovations may be detrimental to the operation of well-functioning financial services in an economy (Khiaonarong 2014), and that they also may cause severe security issues (Dobos 2013; ISACA 2011). For the most part though, the purpose of regulation is not to interfere with innovation-spurring competition in the m-payments arena, but instead to facilitate a more successful payments regime, maintain financial stability, monitor the risks, and build an efficient payment process.In January 2010, the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Boston convened a set of key players in the U.S. mobile payments ecosystem to create the MPIW, which we mentioned earlier. The purpose was to identify the barriers, potential risks and opportunities for the development of a robust mobile payments environment. In addition to suggesting the fundamental elements for success, the MPIW has been trying to understand the appropriate regulatory oversight model that will enhance safety and integrity in payments systems. New regulations regarding the risk management and instantaneous credit capabilities of m-payments have begun to address consumer protection issues also, such as identity management, consumer privacy, cyber security and how prepaid mobile phone accounts are handled (Contini et al. 2011).A notable example of regulation-delayed effects related to m-payments technology innovation occurred in China in March 2014. The People’s Bank of China (PBC), China’s central bank, promulgated innovation-stalling regulations that slowed down the initiatives of Tencent and Alibaba to roll out virtual credit cards (Zhao and Xie 2014). The central bank was especially concerned about these companies’ use of quick-scan QR codes that support m-payments innovations. The problem was a perceived lack of security with respect to the transaction verification process that uses QR code-based technology. It expressed concerns about the potential risks that new payment mechanisms may create, especially for the stability of the banking and credit card industries, although others have alleged that the pull-back on third-party m-payments could be based on the concern that there would be lost revenues and fees for banks, and conflicts with NFC-based initiatives that UnionPay promoted (Hernandez 2014).During the past five to ten years, large firms in financial services have competed intensely to produce innovations that will transform the traditional processes related to payments services. Severe competition may decelerate the development of new services since the related investments may involve greater uncertainty. This will affect the patterns of technology evolution, possibly causing a shift in the observed patterns going forward. In contrast, some firms have been able to push a technological innovation forward by obtaining strong support, and by partnering and making alliances with other firms to gain advantage and accelerate the development of new services (Dai and Kauffman 2004).We observed this in our timeline of m-payments ecosystem events most recently, when Apple announced its cooperation with VISA, MasterCard and American Express at the business infrastructure level, in the rollout of Apple Pay mobile payments via smartphones used at contactless point-of-sale (POS) outlets (Townsend 2014). Most merchants and banks supported Apply Pay shortly after its initial launch, which brought a new set of capabilities and installed base of consumers to the m-payments market. According to recent estimates, about 800 million people have access to iTunes (Arora 2014), although many fewer have an iPhone 6 or similar mobile handset. This nevertheless was an astonishing development in terms of the potential network effects that Apply Pay may eventually be able to project in the m-payments ecosystem. Some large U.S. retailers, however, including Wal-Mart, CVS, and Rite Aid, have refused to commit to Apple, since they have contracts with rival payments systems that will punish the stores for adopting Apple Pay (Wells 2014). Karen Webster (2014), CEO of Pymnts.com and m-payments market analyst, has reminded us:… it’s more or less game over for everyone but Apple in the iOS ecosystem. Pundits cite the fact that Apple has embraced the payments status quo by getting issuers on board (so much so that they’re paying to be part of the Apple Pay wallet), getting 3 of the 4 networks to play ball their way, legitimizing NFC as an enabling payments technology and commercializing a tokenization scheme tied to the Apple Secure Element that pretty much sets the standard for cardholder security. … The payoff for Apple, of course, is that, beyond its initial launch, the most powerful technology company in the world, with the biggest cash horde, has been able to make the profit-challenged banks, awash in legal fees, pay for massive amounts of marketing.Apple’s extraordinary success as a newly-entering m-payments services vendor, according to Webster (2014), is that “Apple Pay was the kick in the pants that everyone in the ecosystem needed to get the mobile payments flywheel focused and moving in high gear.” The untested aspect of the Apple Pay launch is whether Apple will be able to build strong network effects with merchants, who will recognize that adopting Apple Pay is an essential part of doing business – again, a hook-up-lose-out value proposition, based on the long-standing argument of Clemons and McFarlan (1986). Adoption may ensue on multiple sides of the m-payments platform around Apple’s solution – current iPhone 6 and next-generation users, banks, as well as merchants and stores – because the functionality and convenience are high-value solutions. Antitrust issues in the market may arise around such a powerful technology services vendor, just as Microsoft, when it seemed like the dominant and unchallenged force in the Internet browser and office software suite market niches, was alleged to have inappropriately tied the distribution of Microsoft Windows to Internet Explorer and the Microsoft Office software suite (Liebowitz and Margolis 2001). Apple’s market capitalization of US$724 billion as of mid-March 2015 is now about 114% greater than Microsoft’s at US$338 billion, so there may be future issues with regulation that Apple will face (Watts 2014). (See Table 4for a summary.)Organization-level internal factors such as firm heterogeneity and competitive strategy, and industry-level external factors including government regulation and technology standards, jointly contribute to shaping the evolution of m-payments innovation. They have encouraged and supported, or stalled and delayed the adoption and diffusion of specific m-payment-related technologies. We next discuss m-payments technology evolution at the organization level, and provide some recommendations to firms about how to increase their firm-level returns on investment (ROI) after committing to m-payments.First, we claim that first-mover advantage and network effects are positively associated with the success of a firm’s investments in technology innovations. Gaining the first-mover position and obtaining network effects will help to accelerate the pace of evolution of a technology, especially when the investment decision can be made flexibly or delayed to manage its risks.The development of the m-payments market supports this statement. The m-payments services market has been highly fragmented since it emerged. Many competing technology solutions have coexisted in the market; different stakeholders have invested in and shepherded their development. There have been no widely-accepted technology standards so far though. This has made firm-level m-payments adoption decisions difficult for many market participants. On the other hand, in spite of the market uncertainties that are present, there still are advantages and benefits associated with the early adoption of a truly valuable technology innovation that will become a standard later on (much like EMV chips in credit cards). David (1985) noted that first-to-market technology innovations can become entrenched, such as QWERTY keyboards or Microsoft Windows, and sometimes inferior standards can persist because of the installed base they have built up. This will give firms an incentive to preempt the rest of the market with their early adoption and full commitment (Dai and Kauffman 2006). When the uncertainties associated with technology innovations are substantial and the investment is at least partially irreversible, firms will value flexibility. They can benefit, for example, through having the flexibility to defer adoption (Dixit and Pindyck 1994). This may affect the opportunities that firms have to leverage first-mover advantage though: deferring for too long a time may eliminate the flexibility for a firm to benefit from timing adoption to achieve high ROI (Mason and Weeds 2010).Another issue is network effects in financial services, which affect decision-makers’ choices in two ways. First, strong network effects will induce them to make investment decisions at a little earlier rather than a later time (Kauffman et al. 2013a, 2015b). Second, they will tend to make similar rather than different investment decisions. An analogy is that stores have an incentive to geospatially cluster (Krugman 1991). When there are enough stores to form a business hub, competitors located elsewhere will be at a disadvantage. As a result, they may eventually move to the hub, further increasing its relative attractiveness. This is precisely the story that we see playing out now with Apple Pay and the banks. Richard Branson, the founder and chairman of the 400 companies that comprise the Virgin Group, has commented (Green 2014): “Apple Pay is a step towards mobile payments becoming even more mainstream and it’s the right step because its how I think we’ll be making payments in the future.” Clearly, if Branson’s views are on target, then the strong network effects associated with Apple Pay will hasten the decisions of banks to adopt and speed up innovation, while consecrating the value of the first-movers’ choice to become involved.Firm differences are also important when we consider these issues. In practice, a firm’s willingness and ability to commit and participate in cross-industry collaborations for payment-related technology innovation will vary. Some have the spare resources; others do not. The lack of uniform willingness to commit may also be due to the individual views that firms have of the risks of future technological changes, market uncertainties associated with consumer and merchant responses to new technologies, as well as other firm-specific factors, such as different market shares, nuanced and contrasting technology capabilities, and competing strategic objectives.It is unlikely that all firms will make unanimous adoption decisions and take actions all at once in most technology adoption settings, because senior managers must make the “right” decisions in the absence of perfect information or a full and sophisticated decision-making capability (Au and Kauffman 2003). The firms are also different in terms of their ability to acquire and process information from the market, and even when they are able to acquire similar information, they still may process it differently. In previous research in different domains, Au and Kauffman (2005, electronic bill presentment adoption), Li and Kauffman (2012, public transit systems pricing mechanism adoption), Li et al. (2014, inefficient herd behavior in a world of rational decision-makers) and (Ma and Kauffman (2014, software-as-a-service adoption) noted that firms go through a process of adaptive learning. They may eventually align their rational expectations about the business value of a technology they are evaluating, and whether and when to adopt – or they may not. The latter scenario was for electronic bill payment and presentment in the U.S., as Au (2004) showed in his doctoral dissertation.The lack of harmonized firm actions in the market typically will result in an observable time-wise distribution of their adoption decisions, as opposed to clustered adoption that occurs more or less all at once (Au and Kauffman 2001; Au et al. 2009). We conclude, therefore, that one firm’s decision, including which m-payments technology innovation to invest in, when to adopt, and how heavy the investment should be, will impose externalities on other firms. More specifically, we believe that firms which are early adopters of a specific technology innovation may impose competitive externalities on other non-adopters. High competitive externalities can potentially delay adoption and slow down the pace of a specific technology innovation, because other rival firms may commit to competing technology innovations. These things will make it harder for firms to align their collective interests, in order to make mutually-beneficial adoption decisions based on their rational expectations of what is likely to come out in the market.Competitive externalities are external penalties that affect other competitors if one firm’s adoption of a specific technology innovation has the potential to affect and change market-wide profitability (Seidmann and Wang 1995). An early adopter typically can obtain higher profits from the new services and increased transactions that become available with the new technology. Since one firm’s profitability from adopting a technology innovation critically depends on its transactions volume, relative market share, and the number of other competing adopters, the firm’s incentive for adoption will decrease as more and more rival firms adopt. When adoption becomes less and less attractive due to too many adopters, as Bakos and Brynjolfsson (1993) and Dai and Kauffman (2006) have shown for electronic procurement market participation, it eventually will drive latecomers to reconsider their strategies. If this occurs with respect to technology innovation, firms are more likely to turn to competitive differentiation strategies, since this will mitigate head-to-head market competition among them. An example in the m-payments domain is PayPal, which left NFC capabilities in its m-payments solution to achieve differentiation in comparison to Google Wallet and Softcard in 2011 (Pymnts.com, 2012). Such strategic interactions among firms, thus, are likely to delay the diffusion of a specific type of innovation and decelerate its evolutionary pace. This is also true for their competitive interactions when they are mostly influenced by the uncertainties in the market of a given technology solution or standard. We view this as another kind of competitive externality: an indecision externality. This term makes sense to us, because it is clear in such cases that the entire market bears the social costs of stalled adoption. Indeed, any movement in the market to the “next” equilibrium involving new technology will be beneficial, especially in terms of the value for firms to learn what is necessary to succeed for a given m-payments technology innovation.Competition itself in the financial services industry and the payment services segment also demonstrates unique features. Decades ago, banks and other financial institutions bore the heavy financial weight of initial fixed costs in building the foundations for today’s payments system. As a reward, they gained dominant positions in the industry and have enjoyed oligopolistic market power for years.5A parallel argument can be made about the global distribution systems (GDSs) in the air travel and hospitality industries. They included such firms as Amadeus, Galileo/Travelport, Sabre and Worldspan that bore the heavy investment load with their airline firm partners in the development of the airline flight schedule, pricing and booking systems (Granados et al. 2008). It was the case that the U.S. government airline industry regulators prohibited the practice of display biasing, which caused certain GDSs and computerized reservation systems (CSRs) to favor some airlines over others by positioning their schedules and fares on easier-to-reach pages in the green-screen GDS airline ticket book systems used by travel agents. The industry regulators also sought to make it illegal for the GDSs and CRSs to block competing airlines from cross-listing their fares. Clemons (2010) has referred to these information-based competition issues as the strategic geometry of industry distribution, which also has implications for electronic banking, and shared ATM networks at the regional and national levels.5With the high entry barriers in the financial services market, it has been difficult for new entrants to enter and succeed, unless some portion of the market becomes newly vulnerable: easy to enter, attractive to attack, and difficult to defend (Clemons 1997; Granados et al. 2008). An example is the trading segment of the financial markets, which has experienced great technological innovation (McGowan 2010, Menkveld 2013), as well as the emergence of issues that made new oversight and regulation a reality (Gould 2011).Things have changed with m-payments though, especially in terms of what Weber (1995) has called digital bypass. Many current financial services, inclusive of m-payments, heavily rely on the success of underlying technology innovations, rather than any firm’s historical position in the marketplace. For example, some m-payments solutions are able to digitally bypass the offline payments networks in banking with direct access to the ACHs and the card networks. This disintermediation capability created a technology-based vulnerability. It also provided opportunities for new entrants to be involved and compete with existing market players. Due to competitive pressures, the latter have had to adjust their strategies. For example, they now are forced to invest to reduce customers’ transaction costs and improve service quality, with little hope for additional profitability. The investments they make will be more a matter of strategic necessity than strategic advantage (Goh and Kauffman 2013). These, in turn, will result in a new wave of competition for payments services, eventually leading to gains in consumer welfare and economic efficiency (Laffont and Tirole 1990, 2001), such as we have seen in the past with ATMs (Bernhardt and Massoud 2002, McAndrews 1998, Wright 2004).These analyses allow us to conclude that the payments sector is a newly vulnerable market, in large part due to the rise of m-payments. So we expect that competition in this market will be much more intense than in other traditional markets – at least for a while. Since competition may impose two opposite effects on technology innovation – an innovation-spurring or innovation-stalling effect, there are two questions that need to be asked. (1) Which effect will dominate and drive the outcome? (2) And what can be done so the more positive innovation-spurring effects will be fully expressed, while the more negative innovation-stalling effects are minimized?Our answer is this: the level of uncertainty that exists in the market will play a key role in this process. Both technological and business-related uncertainties in the m-payments market will impact the effects of competition. If such uncertainties can be mitigated, there is a higher likelihood that incentive-compatibility and value co-creation among different stakeholders can be achieved without destabilizing the existing market structure. As a result, competition is more likely to accelerate technological advances, spur the creation of valuable innovations, and benefit the m-payments ecosystem.Newly-vulnerable markets, such as has been occurring in the payments sector, tend to have relatively unstable institutional structures. Many new firms are likely to be entering and pursuing digital convergence strategies or alliance strategies, with some of them – including existing market participants – failing and exiting the market. This creates high business-related uncertainties for participants, so that decision-making related to m-payments adoption, in particular, is likely to be difficult. The decision process is made even harder in light of the high switching costs and technology lock-in power that are present in a technology-intensive industry (Farrell and Shapiro 1989), like the financial IS and technology ecosystem. In addition, the m-payment market is fragmented in terms of its underlying infrastructure technologies, and thus is viewed as having high technological uncertainty as well (AFP 2014, Kim 2012). No industry observers, consultants or university researchers have expressed an ability to foresee what is likely to happen in the future, though many have offered insightful predictions. Instead, firms mostly are experiencing a “learning-by-doing” process. The existence of various incompatible technology solutions indicates their lack of agreement with respect to expectations on what the relevant technology standard will be and which business models are likely to be suitable for m-payments (Hayashi and Bradford 2014).In the presence of significant uncertainties, it is likely that competition will harm the health of the m-payments market. Competition brings along a lot of new things, attracting new firms, producing new products, enabling new strategies, and introducing new technologies. The fact is that not all of them are able to offer true value though. Some new market entrants will be operating inefficiently and will not create real business value. Some technology innovation-based strategies will be myopic in maximizing short-term profitability, and will fail to achieve sustainable returns in the long-term. And some innovations are not mature enough to be implemented and create much value. These are like noise in the market that will delay the adoption and evolution of more valuable innovations. They also represent a loss in social welfare due to the inappropriate investments of some participating stakeholders. Market uncertainties can be mitigated through standardization in the underlying payments technologies, in order to have competition result in the beneficial innovation-spurring effect though.Finally, it is important to note that m-payments technology solutions require a high level of consumer data-sharing. Thus, financial services firms are often reluctant to make commitments that may compromise their separate commitment to customer data privacy. We expect that, over time as the market gradually reaches a consensus on appropriate technology solutions and business infrastructures that are likely to become the actual standards, firms will see that some m-payments technologies achieve critical mass across a large installed base of users. Once this happens, concerns in the marketplace will be diminished among consumers, banks, and the regulators about the technology adoption aspect, though they will continue to express concerns about data privacy, and identify theft and payment fraud.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
