@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discovering Chinese sentence patterns for feature-based opinion summarization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study ascertains part-of-speech patterns in Chinese opinion sentences from customer reviews.A feature-based summarization algorithm is proposed to calculate feature scores based on sentence patterns in reviews.The extraction of feature words and opinion/feeling words can be performed in the same phase to improve efficiency.The patterns can be used in different domains.The proposed algorithm works well with Chinese reviews and outperforms the baseline.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Feature-based opinion summary,Opinion mining,Sentiment analysis,Sentence pattern,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study discovers part-of-speech (POS) patterns of sentences that express opinions in Chinese product reviews. The use of these patterns makes it possible to identify opinion sentences, feature words, and opinion/feeling words. Degree words and negation words are used in determining the orientation of opinions as well as the degree of their intensity. In order to identify the subject of opinions, the associations between opinion/feeling words, feature words, and corresponding features were ascertained. An algorithm for feature-based opinion summarization is then proposed based on these patterns and association rules. Both car and movie reviews were collected for discovering patterns and testing of the patterns and algorithm. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm and approaches perform well on Chinese product reviews.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid growth of the Internet has made it possible for people to easily share their feelings and opinions on the Web. Online customer reviews have thus become a source of information that is very useful to both potential customers and sellers of products. Thus, how to automatically summarize opinions from online reviews is an important issue. Feature- or aspect-based opinion summarization is useful to understand both positive and negative aspects of a product. Such summarization generally involve three tasks (Hu and Liu 2004, Liu 2011): (1) extracting product features from reviews; (2) identifying opinion sentences and determining whether their semantic orientations are positive or negative, as well as the degree to which these opinions are felt; and (3) summarizing customers’ comments and calculating the opinion score for each feature. The automatic generation of feature-based summaries reduces the amount of human effort that is required to read and organize the results of thousands of reviews, and it enables Internet users to quickly understand the advantages and disadvantages of products.Prior studies on feature-based opinion summarization did not pay attention to the patterns of opinion sentences (Eirinaki et al. 2012, Hu and Liu 2004, Ku and Chen 2007, Liu et al. 2012, Thet et al. 2010, Zhuang et al. 2006). Typically, the nouns and noun phrases that frequently appear in reviews are identified as candidate product features. Adjectives near feature words are extracted as opinion words. The shortcomings are that two separate phases are needed to identify feature words and opinion words, and an opinion sentence may not contain a noun and an adjective. These shortcomings can be eliminated if we know the patterns of opinion sentences. For instance, if we found that a sentence containing a noun followed by a verb and an adverb is an opinion sentence, in which the noun is a feature word and the adverb is an opinion word. Based on this pattern, a feature-based summarization system can identify the sentences “the actors played well” and “the story flowed perfectly” as opinion sentences in a movie review and recognize the feature words “actors” and “story” as well as the opinion words “well” and “perfectly” in only one phase (one scan of review).Some opinion sentences do not explicitly express features. Limited research has been done to address the problem of implicit features (Liu et al. 2005, Su et al. 2008, Yu et al. 2011). In addition, people commonly use different words or phrases to describe the same feature. How to group feature words indicating the same features is an important issue (Guo et al. 2009, Liu et al. 2005, Liu et al. 2008a, Yu et al. 2011, Zhai et al. 2011). Moreover, little research has been done to consider the effects of degree words on sentiment tendency (Gui and Yang 2013, Yang et al. 2010). Degree words can modify opinion intensity and even change orientations. The present study proposes a feature-based summarization approach that identifies opinion sentences, feature words, opinion/feeling words according to the patterns of opinion sentences. These patterns are sequences of parts of speech (POS) with the positions of feature, opinion/feeling, negation, and degree words. The proposed algorithm infers features from feature words or opinion words by applying association rules. Thus, the problems of synonym and implicit features can be solved. This study considers the effects of degree words in calculating opinion scores that denote opinion orientations and intensity. Moreover, we differentiate between opinion words and feeling words to understand how people use feeling words to express their opinions. Both utilitarian and hedonic products are considered in this study to ensure that the proposed approach and discovered patterns can be used in different domains.In contrast with prior studies that mainly focused on English reviews, this study deals with Chinese reviews. According to Internet World Stats, Chinese is the second most used languages on the Internet. TechInAsia referred to the statistics offered by Smartling and predicted that Chinese is going to overtake English as the web’s number one language very soon. Since Chinese and English have different syntax and grammar the prior approaches cannot be applied directly to Chinese reviews (Peng and Shih 2010, Ye et al. 2006). This study provides a good solution to automatically summarize opinions from Chinese reviews.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
