@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Innovations in the payment card market: The case of Poland

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identifies the directions for the development of payment cards market in Poland.Makes short-term forecasts of the development of this market.Focuses on the intensity measures of payment card use and the use of payment card devices.Describes what can be expected from observing the current Polish electronic payments market.Applies an econometric modelling approach that can be used to study electronic payments markets elsewhere in the world.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Card services,Decision-making,E-commerce,Econometrics,Empirical research,Forecasting,Payment cards,Poland,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Polish payment card market is important given the current position of Poland as the largest Central European country. The purpose of this research is to determine directions for the development of the payment cards market in Poland. An econometric model describing some important aspects of this market is presented. Short-term forecasts of this market’s development will be estimated using a set of constructed empirical econometric models, with particular attention paid to the intensity measures of payment card use, as well as to the use of payment card devices. The findings from these models are meant to provide answers to the question of what can be expected from observing the current Polish market for electronic payments. At the same time, the methodology that is applied is universal and can be used to study the directions of development for electronic payments market elsewhere in the world. It should also be emphasized that selection of an appropriate method requires the testing and matching of such models, which will describe market development most effectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The development of the market for financial services is connected with the development of the sector that produces financial innovations. The term innovation is derived from Latin word innovare, which means “to create something new.” Innovation also can be understood as the application of new knowledge in a production process (Begg et al. 1997). Various entities operating in such a market often attempt to diversify their products and services in a manner that corresponds with sudden and gradual changes in the economy (Tufano 2003).Financial innovations entail new financial instruments, new kinds of financial institutions and financial services, and new niche markets, as well as innovations associated with how financial services are delivered (Sokołowska 2010, 2014a) – including the move to the cashless society (Bank of Netherlands 2006). This definition is broad and has been evolving over time, and includes innovative products and processes. The products include derivatives (Sokołowska 2009, Wiśniewska 2003, 2007), for example, and the processes include novel ways of distributing the products, innovative ways of financial transaction settlement, and new payment techniques.Financial innovation also is a functional approach. New products and services allow financial services market participants to reduce their costs and risks. Such innovations also can better satisfy the expectations of participants compared to traditional products and services. Improvements that are introduced thus should target the need to meet the higher expectations in the marketplace (Frame and White 2014).Some of the factors that have been driving financial innovations include: progressive globalization processes; the deregulation of financial markets; increased competition; and technological progress. New technologies seem to have increased scale economies in the production of financial services, creating opportunities to improve efficiency and increase value through consolidation (Berger et al. 1999, Berger and DeYoung 2006, Hancock et al. 1999, Hauswald and Marquez 2003, Li et al. 2006).One of the most visible trends in financial innovation is the development of the payment card market. The need for online payments was first addressed by using payment methods from the offline world for online payments (Vincent et al. 2010). In recent years, a shift away from traditional forms of payments, such as cash and checks, toward more innovative and electronic means of payment has been occurring. Past research by Bolt et al. (2008) indicates that the number of payments using payment cards increased by 140% in 11 European Union countries in the years from 1987 to 2004.The first plastic credit card appeared in 1958 in the United States, and banks quickly recognized the advantages of this modern means of payment. Magnetic stripe cards in Poland were introduced in the 1980s. The first payment cards in Poland appeared in the late 1960s. For many years payment cards in Poland were unobtainable though, mainly due to the economic and political system that blocked modern and innovative solutions. Foreign banks were the ones to have issued these cards, but their usage was very limited. The economic changes that took place in Poland after 1989, and the entry of Poland into the European Union gave the country more opportunities for developing the payment card market.Serious development of the payment card market only began to take place in Poland in the 1990s though. This was possible mainly because of the reforms carried out after 1989. These changes shaped the national banking sector of the time, and initiated the transformation of retail banking. At the same time, banks began to offer their customers new products and services, including payment cards. Thus, despite the fact that such payment instruments in Poland were a kind of untested financial innovation, the card market grew very fast. Data from the (Polish National Bank 2014) indicate that, in the 3rd quarter of 2013, there were more than 863,000 cash withdrawals at the bank’s counters, for a total of 99 million PLN.Recent changes encourage the assessment of the payment card market in the near future, and the Polish case is an interesting subject for research. On the one hand, the average number of payment cards in Poland per user is lower compared to the average of the European Union countries. On the other hand, the Polish market for electronic payments is one of the most advanced and innovative markets in Europe, and it offers its participants a wide spectrum of payment tools, as well as access to the newest technologies in electronic payments. What is more, after the transformation of the system in Poland, very rapid development of the financial market was observed. The relatively rapid enrichment of the society, which has had significant impacts on the development of the market of financial instruments and services, also has taken place. The growth of gross domestic product (GDP), the enrichment of selected social groups, and the prospects of growing prosperity in the middle Eastern European countries have caused them to become a very attractive market segment for this type of services. For example, in 2013, the value of household savings in Poland exceeded 1 billion PLN (with 1PLN=0.33USD). This growth indicates, that in the years 2001–2011, the savings of the Poles were increasing on average by 11.4% annually (Sokołowska 2014b).Currently, the payment card market in Poland operates within the national payments structure as part of the retail payment system. Cards play an important role by being an integral part of the payments capabilities in Poland, and the number of payment card subscribers has been increasing with each year. This is determined by universal access, and because payment cards are an excellent alternative to traditional cash. Modern computer and telecommunication technologies have fostered further development of the payment card market due to the innovative solutions that have emerged. The two largest payment organizations, MasterCard and VISA, have proved to be the most popular channels for the distribution of their services. Moreover, Poland was one of the first countries in Europe after Great Britain and France to introduce near field communication (NFC)-based card payments.The high level of the fees that banks charged for payment card services involving interchange payments hindered market development. The fees amounted to around 1.50% of the transaction value for credit card payments, and around 1.60% of the transaction value for debit card payments. The average in the European Union countries amounted to 0.84% and 0.70% for credit cards and debit cards, while in many others countries these services were available free of charge. An amendment of the Payment Services Act of August 30, 2013 reduced interchange fees to a maximum of 0.5% of the value of domestic transactions using a payment card (Sejm of Poland 2013). The new fee structure went into force starting on January 1, 2014. These changes were meant to increase the availability of non-cash payment mechanisms for all interested consumers. In addition, the improvement of safety and the facilitation of lost payment card claims were other stimulators for market development. The Polish Banks Association launched a new system card cancellation system for this, for example.Analysis of the payment card market is particularly important given the current position of Poland, since it is the largest country in Central Europe. So studying the direction of development for payment cards in Poland is valuable and interesting – something that this research can achieve.To this end, an empirical model describing some important aspects of this market will be presented. Short-term forecasts of this market’s development, estimated using econometric analysis, also will be reported. Particular attention will be paid to intensity measures for payment card use, as well as the use of payment card devices. These models are meant to provide an answer to the question of what can be expected from observing the current Polish market for electronic payments. At the same time, the methodology is universal. It can be used to study development in electronic payments markets elsewhere in the world. It should also be emphasized that selection of an appropriate method requires the testing and matching of such models, which will describe market development well. We will use quantitative data related to the intensity of payment card usage and electronic payments infrastructure, compared with quantitative variables that describe the characteristics of the market. These include cards, payment-related devices, ATMs, and card-accepting merchants.Research on the subject of electronic banking appeared in the literature as early as the 1990s. Printing, distribution, and cash controls were estimated to cost a developed economy about 0.75% of annual gross domestic product (GDP), and an emerging economy 1–2% (Cobb 2003). As of mid-2015, the number of studies on the subject of electronic payments has grown much larges. The study performed by Asokan et al. (1997) analyzed electronic payment systems and focused on the issues related to security. Clemons et al. (1996), Kreltszheim (1999), Panurach (1996), Shon and Swatman (1998), and Westland et al. (1998) also conducted electronic payments-related research in the 1990s. Some other empirical studies include work by Borzekowski et al. (2006), Borzekowski et al. (2008), Hyytinen and Takalo (2004), Stavins (2002), van Hove et al. (2005), Zinman (2005a,b), and Jonker (2007). Most studies on the adoption and usage of a new electronic payment technology have been based on the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis 1989) and innovation diffusion theory (IDT) (Rogers 1995), without any explicit consideration of the two-sided market structure of the payments market. See-To et al. (2007) developed a model of a two-sided market, and found that a survival mass of merchants and consumers is required for a payment system to be sustainable, and a critical mass for the acceptance level to take off and remain stable.With regard to the directions for changes in the market for electronic payment forms, it is worth noting the study by Humphrey et al. (1996). They attempted to estimate how consumer payments break down between different payment mechanisms in various countries. They aimed to explain the determinants of these choices. The results of their study confirmed that dynamic growth of electronic payment forms is associated with a lower cost of their use compared to other payment forms. The authors also tried to explain why payment systems differ across various countries. Major factors influencing those differences reflect the variety of the options available to consumers, as well as the institutional and cultural differences among the countries. Their differences can be explained based on cultural and institutional factors. For instance, the usage of non-cash payment systems depends on per capita income, the availability of new payment systems, as well as the prevalence of volatility.Research analyses of the increase in transactions using debit and credit cards has assessed the influence of demographic factors on the development of electronic payment transaction-making in the market. Some interesting studies on customer behavior in the payment card market were conducted in the U.S., for example. Using the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), Kennickell and Kwast (1997) (SCF 1995), Stavins (2002) (SCF 1998) and Zinman (2005a,b) (SCF 2001) have shown that using new technologies and electronic payments is typical for young and well-educated customers. These studies have found that there is no linear relationship between the number of payment card transactions and the level of income though. Additionally, no significant increase in payment transactions has been observed for the wealthiest households. Klee (2006), Carow and Staten (1999), and Rysman (2004), who studied debit card use and diffusion, extended these research findings. Rysman (2004) focused on the role of demographic factors that influence credit card brands. Borzekowski et al. (2008) considered the rapid increase in the number of debit card transactions, which exceeded the number of credit card transactions, and investigated the patterns, preferences and price responses of debit card consumers using a nationally representative consumer survey.Amromin and Chakravorti (2009) demonstrated that greater use of debit cards caused a decline in demand for small-denomination bank notes and coins used to give change. Payment cards offer benefits to consumers and merchants in terms of safety and income insurance. Besides that, payment cards played an important role in the overall success of the Single European Payment Area (SEPA). Moreover, Hussain et al. (2007) noted that the trends in the electronic payments markets of the developed countries constitute a sort of a behavior pattern for the developing countries also. They investigated the factors affecting emergence and development of e-business in China, India and Pakistan, using a logit model for payment method preferences.The first study of European payment systems scale economies study was carried out by Khiaonarong (2003). Beijnen and Bolt (2009) investigated economies of scale for the European payments processing industry also. They suggested that the creation of SEPA will stimulate consolidation and mergers among these organizations, similar to what has been observed elsewhere in the world.Some details and empirical regularities will give the reader with additional understanding of European payments. Fig. 1presents data on card payment penetration across Europe.Notice in particular that a large group of people in Poland remained outside the market for non-cash payments as recently as 2012. That year, the indicator for the number of payment cards per capita in Poland was 0.86. In the European Union, in contrast, only Romania had a lower rate of 0.64, while the average number of cards that people held in other European Union countries was 1.46. Despite rapid growth of non-cash transactions using cards, and in spite of the increase of devices supporting payment cards per million inhabitants, Poland still was significantly lower compared to the more developed European Union countries. This implies that the market will grow at a rapid pace.The present research views Poland as a developing market, but we apply knowledge on card payments based on trends in other developed countries. Our purpose is to develop new knowledge that goes beyond existing studies of these issues, such as Hussain et al. (2007). We also will attempt to verify the hypothesis that Poland, as a developing market, will follow the path of developed markets in the growth of its card market. The quantitative and qualitative methods that we use will require multiple tests in order to select the models that most effectively describe the mechanisms that underlie the Polish market.Currently there are several kinds of payment cards in Poland. The following cards can be distinguished: credit cards, debit cards and charge cards. The differences depend on how they accomplish funds settlement. It is also possible to classifying the cards according to their data storage technologies, including: magnetic stripe cards; magnetic stripe and microprocessor cards; and virtual cards. Virtual cards are intended for Internet payments only, or for other payments not requiring the physical presentation of the card, such as through the use of a mobile phone. This classification is important based on how payment card data acquisition works.Our analysis uses statistical data regularly provided by the Payment Systems Department of the Polish National Bank. The data refer to Polish payment cards, and are from banks and non-bank entities. The Electronic Payment Instruments Act of September 12, 2002 is the legal basis for obligatory reporting, and this enabled us to acquire the data for this study. The Act came into force after October 12, 2003, and the following organizations were required to report to the Polish National Bank:•Payment card issuers – including banks and non-bank entities – must report on: the type and the number of payment cards issues; the operations that use those cards; the monetary value of payments that are run through the cards; the number of ATM machines in the market; and the number and the monetary value of ATM transactions.Settlement agents also must report information regarding the card-accepting network, in terms of: the number of accepting merchants and organizations; the number of retail locations and service points; the number of devices that support electronic payment transactions; and the transactions executed in this network.The bank acquires up-to-date information from the banking sector, non-bank entities and settlement agents. For the purpose of capturing the most important variables to characterize Poland’s payment card market, we selected the period from the 4th quarter of 2004 till the 4th quarter of 1013 as the period for analysis with data from the Polish National Bank (2015). This enabled us to acquire data on a quarterly basis. Settlement agents, who fall under the 2003 Act, also provided relevant data.Secondary data used in the study are analyzed though the use of the methodology of statistics and econometrics for the description and analysis of changes in the payment card market (Wiśniewski 2009, 2013). In order to show the dynamics of the changes in the payment card market, we will present some of the data to enable the reader to become familiar with the payment card market during the study period. In addition to graphical methods that allow visual assessment of the changes that have been taking place, we also apply a number of econometric models with different functional forms. The basic model used is linear, as follows:(1)yt=α0+α1xt1+…+αjxtj+…+αkxtk+ηtwhere: ytis the model’s dependent variable; xt1, …, xtj, … xtkrepresent the model’s explanatory variables; α0,α1, …, αj, …, αkare the model’s structural parameters; ηtis a random component; t (t=1, …, n) representing the n periods of time t for the observations; and j (j=0, 1, …, k) represents the number j of explanatory variables, with 0 as the intercept term.In addition, seasonal dummy variables, a time variable, and autoregressive variables with lags of 1, 2, 3 and 4 quarters are included among the variables. Time-series data are used to represent the quarters of a year. We also will estimate a non-linear trend model in the following hyperbolic form:(2)yt=α0[(t-α2)/(t+α1)]+ηtThe signs of Eq. (2) are the same as in Eq. (1), while the variable t in Eq. (2) represents the time period and also acts as the subscript t on the other variables.The methodology allows the estimation of the dependent variable in each empirical model, which underpins decision-making in the business entities concerned – mainly banks. It also supports forecasting future values of the variables that are considered, which makes it a useful tool in decision-making. Short-term forecasts of the characteristics of the payment card market in Poland, up until the end of 2015, will be presented. Tables 1–3summarize the data on the payment card market (see Table 4).The results of this study confirm that the decade between 2004 and 2013 was a period of dynamic development in the Polish payment card market. In the 4th quarter of 2013, the value of transactions using payment cards reached 113.6 billion PLN and was higher by approximately 163.3% compared to the value of such transactions in the 4th quarter of 2004. We will present information on the intensity processes of payment card transactions in the period from the 4th quarter of 2004 till the 4th quarter of 2013. The transactions using debit cards were dominant, exceeding 90% of overall payment card transactions. We also will analyze the share of credit card transactions, which accounted for just a small percentage in each of the periods that were analyzed.The quarterly time-series of the monetary value of credit card transactions per credit card supports very specific assessments. Up until 2009, there was a downward trend of this variable. However, after 2009, a trend of dynamic growth in the monetary value of transactions per credit card appeared, reaching nearly 1500PLN quarterly. We will study this based on an empirical estimation model.The variables in our estimation model include: #Merchants is the number of merchants that accepted payment cards in a period; CreditCardTransValuet−1 is the mean of the monetary value of credit card transactions delayed by 1 quarter; and Q2 and Q3 are dummy variables equal to 1 during the 2nd and 3rd quarters, and 0 during the 1st and 4th quarters. In addition: R2 represents the typical explanatory capability of the model with respect to the dependent variable; volatility, Vol, is a random coefficient in percentage terms for the regression standard error, StdErr, relative to the mean of the variable CreditCardTransValuet; and ε represents the 0 mean regression residuals.The estimated empirical model describing the quarterly volatility of the monetary value of credit card transactions has the following form:(3)CreditCardTransValuet=-0.147(3.119)+0.004(5.786)#Merchantst+0.693(9.725)CreditCardTransValuet-1+0.094Q2(3.710)+0.080Q3(3.264)+∊tR2=94.6%,StdErr=0.060,Vol=6.63%Eq. (3) indicates that an increase in the number of merchants who accepted credit cards during the periods that were considered resulted in an increase of the average monetary value of transactions for credit cards by 4PLN. There was a strong inertial effect in transaction value though. This indicates that, along with an increase in the mean transaction value for credit cards by 1PLN in a previous quarter, there also was an increase in transaction value in the current quarter by almost 0.7PLN. What is more, there were seasonal fluctuations indicating that the value of credit card transactions in the 2nd quarter of each year increased on average by over 0.09PLN for cards during the 2nd quarter, and on average by 0.08PLN during the 3rd quarter. Eq. (3) explains the variation in the variable CreditCardTransValuetwith high accuracy, since almost 95% of the variation is described by the explanatory variables in this equation.Eq. (3) also can be used to estimate the future CreditCardTransValue, however, it is necessary to obtain information for the estimation of the number of card-accepting merchants, #Merchants. With this in mind, we constructed an autoregressive model with seasonal fluctuations to describe this volatility from period to period of the variable #Merchants, as follows:(4)#Merchantst=5.655(1.140)+0.566(4.182)#Merchantst-1+0.320(2.412)#Merchantst-3+0.410(2.129)t+∊tR2=97.8%,StdErr=3.587,Vol=3.71%Seasonal fluctuations were eliminated in Eq. (4), while a positive linear trend and autoregressive terms with one and three period lags remain. There is high descriptive accuracy of the variable #Merchantst, as confirmed by the value of R2=97.8%. The information presented in Table 2 allows the variable CreditCardTransValue to be estimated. Forecasts of the quarterly average monetary value of credit card transactions are presented in Table 5. The information in Table 5 allows inferences to be made: for example, a slight increase in the value of transactions per credit card, up to around 1691PLN in the second quarter of 2015, can be expected in the future. The related forecast is shown in Fig. 2, which depicts the estimated number of merchants accepting cards in 2014 and 2015 (see Fig. 3).Also, forecast estimations of the variable CreditCardTransValue indicate a decrease in the value of the average monetary value of credit card transactions, as a result of seasonal fluctuations during the related trimesters (4th quarter 2014 and 1st quarter 2015). Thus, a systematic increase in the value of the forecasted variable cannot be expected. These forecasts are acceptable since the average prediction errors are small.The characteristic of intensity of transactions using major debit cards is different. An upward trend in the values transactions for debit cards is observed, and the increments diminish. This signifies that the process is approaching the saturation level. The following empirical model of a hyperbolic trend illustrates this process:(5)CreditCardTransValuet=3633.6[(t+1.0297)/(t+1.974)]+εtIn Eq. (5), as before, CreditCardTransValuetrepresents the monetary value of quarterly transactions per debit card, and εtrepresents the regression residuals. The coefficient α0=3,633.6PLN, which is the saturation level. It follows that the average monetary value of quarterly transactions per debit card is about 3633PLN. Thus, we can expect this variable to become stable when the saturation level is reached.The estimated empirical model describing the volatility of the quarterly average monetary value of transactions for debit cards is as follows:(6)DebitCardTransValuet=3.244(9.696)+0.242(3.081)DebitCardTransValuet-1-0.0097(6.669)#Facilitiest(7.408)+0.056t(11.94)-0.324Q1+∊tR2=96.6%,StdErr=0.064,Vol=1.91%The variable DebitCardTransValue is characterized by a first-order autoregressive lag and by seasonal fluctuations during the first year. Along with an increase in the average monetary value of transactions for debit cards by 1PLN in the previous quarter, there was an increase on average of that value in the current quarter by 0.242PLN. During the first quarter of the year, there is a decrease in the value of the variable DebitCardTransValuetby around 0.324PLN relative to the systemic component. A positive trend seems to be occurring, which signifies an average quarterly increase in the monetary value of transactions for debit cards of about 0.056PLN. In addition, the coefficient of random volatility, Vol, as a percentage of the standard error of the arithmetic average of the dependent variable is 0.064; and the fit of the model is very good, as signified by R2=96.6%.The number of the facilities, #Facilities, where payment card payments can be used is a significant factor that influences DebitCardTransValue. As a result, with an increase in the number of such facilities by 1000, there is an associated decrease in the average monetary value of debit card transactions by around 9.7PLN. This may signify an increase in the frequency of payments using payment cards instead of cash payments.The high accuracy of the model for the dependent variable makes it appropriate for forecasting and estimation, but we also need to forecast the value of #Facilitiest. To do this, we constructed an autoregressive trend model with seasonal fluctuations that describes #Facilitiest:(7)#Facilitiest=8.790(1.319)+0.917(13.45)#Facilitiest-1+0.480t(1.747)+∊tR2=99.1%,StdErr=4.364,Vol=2.49%The volatility of the #Facilities variable is described by one-lag autoregression and a linear trend. The model fits the data well, based on R2=99.1%, which allows Eq. (7) to be used to estimate the future value of this variable. The forecast results are presented in Table 7.Forecasts for Poland suggest a further increase in the number of #Facilitiest. Payment cards are being used more commonly now, as more new offerings become available on the market, which must adapt to the needs of customers who would like to pay using a payment card. As a result, it also is likely that changes in DebitCardTransValuetwill occur during subsequent periods. Our forecasts of this variable are presented in Table 6and Fig. 4.The estimates indicate that the quarterly forecast of the average monetary value of transactions for debit cards during the quarters of 2014 and 2015 will oscillate around the saturation level established by Eq. (5). The forecasts are 3363.38PLN in the first quarter of 2014 up to the highest value of 3704.40PLN during the fourth quarter of 2014.The next characteristic of development intensity in the payment card market is the quarterly average monetary value of ATM withdrawals for payment card (ATMTransValuet). Eq. (8) describes this process:(8)ATMTransValuet=-0.376(0.550)+0.620(3.668)ATMTransValuet-1+0.350(1.929)ATMTransValuet-2-0.017(2.706)t+0.0078(2.386)#Merchantst-0.323(5.138)Q1+0.384(4.020)Q2+0.292(3.021)Q3+∊tR2=0.935,StdErr=0.119,Vol=2.82%Eq. (8) contains a traditional autoregression, a trend, seasonal fluctuations, and variables characterizing the development of non-cash card payments. We evaluated a regression that included the number of accepting merchants, the number of devices executing payment card transactions, and the number of facilities handling payment card payments. Only the #Merchants turned out to be statistically significant though. Table 8and Fig. 5present forecasts of the average quarterly monetary value of ATM withdrawals during 2014 and 2015. A systematic increase in the value of the variable ATMTransValuetcan be expected. This likely results from the increasing wealth of payment cardholders, and from their increasing habituation to substituting payments with payment cards for cash transactions (see Fig. 6).Finally, the intensity mechanism of using payment card transaction devices, especially the average monetary value of quarterly non-cash transactions on card-related devices, NonCashTransValue in thousands of PLN is described by Eq. (9). The related model includes autoregressions up to and including the fourth order, a trend, and seasonal fluctuations, as well as explanatory variables characterizing the development of non-cash payment card use. These include: the number of the accepting merchants; the number of the devices executing payment card payments; and the number of the facilities handling payments using payment cards. The following equation describes this process:(9)NonCashTransValt=544.48(11.958)-2.118(17.83)#Facilitiest+9.687(19.68)t-27.443(9.089)Q1+uVncutR2=0.935,StdErr=0.119,Vol=2.82%The autoregressive processes turned out to be statistically insignificant. In Eq. (9), only the number of the facilities, a linear trend, and seasonal fluctuations in the first quarter were statistically significant. The equation describes the volatility mechanism of the variable NonCashTransValt, which allows the forecast estimation of that variable (see Table 9).The forecasts indicate that during 2014 and 2015 seasonal fluctuations of non-cash transactions should were still to be expected. The variation of this variable was predicted to range between a little over 313,000PLN during the first quarter of 2015 up to 346,000PLN during the second quarter of 2014.The Polish payment card market is likely to be similar to those of other large European Union countries. The changes occurring in this market, however, require systematical observations and research, since new non-cash payment technologies are emerging, which can displace current technologies.The relatively short period of payment card usage, especially in new European Union countries, is a significant limitation for carrying out studies on payment cards. Thus, statistical inference must be viewed with increased caution. As such, it seems necessary to study the relationship between cash payments and card payments in the retail consumer market, since it will affect decisions regarding cash issuance.The most important challenges in the Polish payment market include: interpretation and national implementation of the Payment Services Directive; increases in banking penetration into Polish society; and the introduction of innovations associated with payment instruments. Further increases in transactions in the electronic payment market require increased banking competition, more participation in the market by non-banking competitors, as well as an increase in efficiency through operational and cost optimization, and especially the optimization of customer migration to new SEPA instruments. The current state of the market suggests that Polish consumers are willing to use innovative solutions. As such, it is necessary to conduct marketing activities to popularize additional services, by which consumers will be informed about new opportunities due to their possession of payment cards. Information on card safety and usage is also important. Increasingly widespread usage of the mobile Internet, GSM network standards such as USSD and SMS, and contactless transactions, including contactless cards and NFC mobile payments, are of particular importance among innovations in payment services. Further research ought to address the impact of demographic factors on the development of the electronic payment market, but this requires collection and access to much more detailed data.The future of payment cards undoubtedly entails additional services that will go beyond payments. The possibility of connecting a payment card with another identity document or a public transportation card is also noteworthy. Modern solutions also appear in increasingly effective card security measures, such as the rapidly-changing CVV/CVC codes. Lack of permanent access to the card and the possibility of reading the current codes that block payment authorization may result in a significant reduction of cyberspace crime. Contactless payment cards, which verify the identity of the user through an embedded fingerprint, also has proven to be a valuable innovative. Innovations arising in the payment card market are challenging and undoubtedly will help to movitate new lines of research.Additionally, in recent years, at least three parallel mobile payment systems have appeared in the Polish market, however, the direction of their development has not been sufficiently specified. The first commercial offers of NFC payments in Poland appeared at the end of October 2012, as a result of cooperation among T-Mobile, mBank and PolBank, as well as between Orange and mBank. But the lack of deeper involvement and engagement on the part of these entities, which are required for success in operation, has constituted a barrier. The bank, the telecom operator, the organization of payments, and the clients all must be in synch with one another in order to work out effective measures. Meanwhile, consumers face the special task of having to navigate a complex process, while there must be a capable bank and telecom operator to work through. Also, it is necessary for consumers to have mobile phones that are network-compliant, a SIM card, and so on. These things do not make for easy and convenient solutions for consumers. There also has been a noticeable reluctance on the part of consumers to adopt new ways to make payments, so payment cards continue to be a dominant and attractive way to make payments. At the same time, there is the hope that growing competition and increasingly sophisticated customer demand will result in continuous and new developments in the marketplace.Given all of the existing opportunities, the most important potential benefits from the banks’ participation in the Single Euro Payments Area are simplifying payment procedures, and the increasingly popular electronic payment instruments among customers. Improving the safety and security for a variety of payment instruments will lead to an increase of non-cash transactions, as well as ability to have them interoperate throughout the European Union territory.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
