@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient detection of faulty nodes with cuckoo search in t-diagnosable systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We adapted two versions of the recently proposed Cuckoo Search metaheuristic for use in the combinatorial optimization realm.We have applied the two adapted Cuckoo Search implementations to system-level fault diagnosis.We have experimentally validated the optimization capabilities of these schemes and compared them to particle swarm optimization, dynamic mesh optimization, and firefly algorithm.Tests were performed across three different distributed diagnosis models under systems of small, medium, and large sizes.After a rigorous statistical analysis, we conclude that cuckoo search algorithms offer superior performance, especially YD-CS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fault diagnosis,Cuckoo search,PMC model,Comparisonmodel,t-Diagnosable systems,Combinatorial optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
System-level fault diagnosis (SLFD) deals with the detection of all faulty nodes in a set of networked units in a parallel or distributed system. By allowing nodes to test each other under well-defined conditions and carefully inspecting the collection of test outcomes, the true set of damaged nodes can be located. In this paper, we tackle the SLFD problem by using a recently proposed bio-inspired optimization method: the Cuckoo Search. Two formalizations of this scheme were independently put forth by Yang and Deb [16] and Rajabioun [17] for numerical optimization. In this work, we have adapted both methods to work in the combinatorial search space induced by SLFD and we have tested them against other nature-inspired metaheuristics in presence of a class of distributed systems called t-diagnosable systems, since they are easy to generate and eliminate ambiguity in the optimization-driven fault diagnosis. Three well-known test models (i.e. PMC, symmetric and asymmetric comparison) that define how the system units test one another were employed in the simulations. The empirical results reveal that the two cuckoo-based approaches outperformed their competitors in terms of solution quality and spatio-temporal requirements, with Yang and Deb's version achieving notable improvements over Rajabioun’.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Parallel and distributed systems are becoming quite ubiquitous in today's society. With the recent advances in robot-assisted sensor networks [1], cloud-based infrastructures [2], vehicular systems [3], mobile social media [4] and the Internet of Things [5], we are rapidly moving towards degrees of interconnectedness never envisioned before. This places a paramount importance on the efficient identification of hardware and software faults that will most likely arise during the operational lifetime of these platforms. Though notable research progress has been made in the fault identification realm, many serious challenges that demand reliable and efficient responses can still be witnessed.Since undetected faults lead to system errors with unpredictable outcomes, the early identification of each system node's status (i.e., either faulty or fault-free) is the driving force behind system-level fault diagnosis (SLFD) [6]. This problem has drawn a great deal of attention over the past three decades and has been approached from many angles. As stated in [6], this self-diagnosis distributed framework allows an individual unit in a system to test another unit and report the result in the form of “pass/fault-free” or “fail/faulty”. The status of every unit is then decided on the basis of the set of collected test outcomes (a.k.a. the input syndrome), bearing in mind that tests conducted by fault-free units are reliable and those performed by faulty units are unreliable. Different test models [7–9] have been proposed in the literature so as to determine how and by whom will the tests be carried out.The examination of the input syndrome under a certain test model bears non-polynomial complexity if the system topology does not exhibit any particular property that could be exploited to speed up this process. Given the nominal nature of the node assignment process (i.e. labeling each node as either faulty or fault-free), SLFD can be posed as a combinatorial optimization problem. The optimal solution, hence, is the system labeling (set of node assignments) whose induced test outcomes perfectly matches the observed input syndrome.Exact algorithms like branch-and-bound [10,11] have been applied to this problem, mainly for small systems. More recently, population-based meta-heuristic optimization techniques [12] have demonstrated great potential in tackling SLFD due to their ability of concurrently exploring multiple solutions. Particle swarms [13], artificial fireflies [14] and dynamic meshes [15] have all succeeded in reliably spotting the actual ensemble of damaged nodes.Recently, the parasitic breeding behavior of cuckoo birds gave rise to a new metaheuristic algorithm, the Cuckoo Search. Two formalizations of this scheme were independently put forth by Yang [16] and Rajabioun [17] for numerical optimization. In this paper, we tackle SLFD through Cuckoo Search. Our work makes the following contributions: (1) we adapt Yang's and Rajabioun's cuckoo versions to work in the combinatorial search space induced by SLFD; (2) we test both discrete cuckoo versions against other population-based metaheuristics in presence of a class of distributed systems called t-diagnosable systems of varying sizes and under three well-known test models (i.e. PMC, symmetric and asymmetric comparison); (3) we provide an insightful discussion of the empirical results together with their statistical validation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that both existing cuckoo search methodologies have been compared in a practical application domain. The obtained results reveal that the two cuckoo-based approaches outperformed their competitors in terms of convergence speed and memory requirements, with Yang's version achieving notable improvements over Rajabioun's.The remainder of this article has been structured as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews relevant works and Section 3 elaborates on the three test models under consideration. The two original cuckoo search algorithms are briefly described in Section 4 and then adapted to the SLFD arena in Section 5. Simulation results and the ensuing discussion can be found in Section 6 whereas some final remarks are provided in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we have formulated two discrete versions of cuckoo search to tackle SLFD. The first version is based on the original algorithm proposed by Yang and Deb in 2009 [16] while the other is based on a scheme put forth by Rajabioun in 2011 [17]. Both of these versions were originally conceived for numerical optimization and we adapted them to the combinatorial realm.The performance of the two cuckoo search schemes was tested and compared to peer metaheuristic techniques like PSO, FA and DMO across different test models and system sizes. The results of our empirical evaluation framework indicate that cuckoo search offers competitive performance. In particular, YD-CS outperforms each other algorithm in nearly every test. Furthermore, the two cuckoo variants are the only methods capable of consistently identifying the true fault set for large systems of up to 1000 units.As future work, we plan to incorporate other fault diagnosis models and performance metrics into the experimental validation and procure further enhancements through the hybridization with other metaheuristics or the application of local search mechanisms that intensify the exploitation of the candidate fault sets discovered by the algorithm.