@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive hierarchical artificial immune system and its application in RFID reader collision avoidance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An adaptive hierarchical artificial immune system (AHAIS) is proposed.A top-bottom leveled structure of the antibody population is constructed.Antibodies from different levels employ different mutation operators.The proposed AHAIS is applied to RFID reader collision avoidance problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artificial immune system,Elitist-learning,Optimization,RFID reader collision avoidance,Self-learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an efficient adaptive hierarchical artificial immune system (AHAIS) for complex global optimization problems. In the proposed AHAIS optimization, a hierarchy with top-bottom levels is used to construct the antibody population, where some antibodies with higher affinity become the top-level elitist antibodies and the other antibodies with lower affinity become the bottom-level common antibodies. The elitist antibodies experience different evolutionary operators from those common antibodies, and a well-designed dynamic updating strategy is used to guide the evolution and retrogradation of antibodies between two levels. In detail, the elitist antibodies focus on self-learning and local searching while the common antibodies emphasize elitist-learning and global searching. In addition, an adaptive searching step length adjustment mechanism is proposed to capture more accurate solutions. The suppression operator introduces an upper limit of the similarity-based threshold by considering the concentration of the candidate antibodies. To evaluate the effectiveness and the efficiency of algorithms, a series of comparative numerical simulations are arranged among the proposed AHAIS, DE, PSO, opt-aiNet and IA-AIS, where eight benchmark functions are selected as testbeds. The simulation results prove that the proposed AHAIS is an efficient method and outperforms DE, PSO, opt-aiNet and IA-AIS in convergence speed and solution accuracy. Moreover, an industrial application in RFID reader collision avoidance also demonstrates the searching capability and practical value of the proposed AHAIS optimization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Biological immune system is a complex and powerful defense system which can keep the bodies of animals from the invasion of external pathogens. Inspired by the biological immune system, in the last two decades, the developed artificial immune systems (AIS) have attracted considerable attention as a promising intelligent approach to tackle with theoretical researches and engineering applications [1], such as numerical optimization [2,3], data mining [4,5], pattern recognition [6,7] and anomaly diagnosis [8,9]. Recently, many variations of AIS have been proposed, most of which are derived from four branches of theories related with AIS: clone selection theory [10], negative selection [11], danger theory [12] and artificial immune network [13]. In artificial immune networks, an immune cell can recognize not only the specific antigens but also the other immune cells, which leads to a negative response of suppressing the recognized immune cells [14]. As an important branch of artificial immune systems, artificial immune networks are increasingly employed to solve some practical problems in many industrial applications.An earlier version of artificial immune networks has been proposed and named as aiNet by de Castro [13], which is aiming at clustering and filtering the redundant and rough data from real problems, and thus becomes popular for global optimization in filtering, control systems, pattern classification, disease prediction and many other applications [15]. Subsequently, aiNet has been improved much in various ways. For example, the aiNet applied to multimodal function optimization (i.e., opt-aiNet) [16] has a well-designed convergence criterion and is capable of determining the population size automatically, combining exploitation with exploration of the affinity landscape, and stably locating local optimal solutions. Later, an improved algorithm named omni-aiNet [17] has been proposed to solve single and multiple objective problems with a single or multiple global optimal values, because it is able to adjust the population size dynamically and to avoid high levels of redundancy within the population. As well, cob-aiNet [18] employs the concept of concentration to guide the evolution of antibodies. On the other hand, an efficient artificial immune network with the elitist learning mechanism [19] and its improved algorithm [20] have been proposed by borrowing the elite strategy from PSO. These algorithms discriminate the elitist antibodies and the non-elitist antibodies during the mutation operation. To increase the adaptability, an improved adaptive artificial immune system (IA-AIS) [21] including the affinity-based cloning, the affinity-based mutation and the concentration-based suppressor, has been designed by taking advantage of the affinity data between an antibody and an antigen to guide the evolution of antibodies. Likewise, with the induction of elitist antibodies with higher affinity, an artificial immune network with social learning (aiNet-SL) [22] has been proposed and applied to optimize the coefficients of a finite impulse filter. All these achievements suggest that artificial immune systems, especially artificial immune networks, have been studied deeply and have a broad application foreground in the future.However, the existing artificial immune systems are faced with such disadvantages as too many parameters which are lack of adaptability, the simple structure which is apt to result into slow convergence velocity and the fixed searching step length which is easy to cause poor convergence accuracy. Taking into account these issues mentioned above, this paper attempts to propose an efficient adaptive hierarchical artificial immune system (AHAIS) for complex global optimization. In the AHAIS optimization, a two-leveled structure will be designed, and the mutation operator will be redesigned. As well, a dynamic level updating strategy and an adaptive searching step length adjustment mechanism will be introduced. This proposed AHAIS optimization is expected to quickly capture the optimal solutions of complex optimization problems. Some comparative numerical experiments on benchmark functions are arranged among different evolutionary algorithms such as the proposed AHAIS optimization, differential evolution (SaDE/rand/1/bin) [23], particle swarm optimization [24], opt-aiNet and IA-AIS. Furthermore, an industrial application related with RFID reader collision avoidance is simulated. The experimental results will prove the high-performance and effectiveness of the proposed AHAIS optimization.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the artificial immune systems, i.e., opt-aiNet and IA-AIS. Subsequently, Section 3 gives the technical details of the proposed AHAIS optimization, including division of antibody population during initialization, differentiated mutation operators for two-leveled antibodies and dynamical updating mechanism of antibodies. Section 4 compares the performance between the proposed AHAIS optimization and the other existing evolutionary algorithms by a series of numerical simulations and a practical application. Finally, Section 5 draws some conclusions.By resorting to the biological functionalities of recognition, learning and memorization, the biological immune system is capable of killing the invasive pathogens timely. In detail, once invading the organism, the pathogen becomes the antigen and causes the immune response of biological immune system. When the antigen is detected by the immune cells for the first time, the immune cells will be activated and then propagate a number of cloned antibodies to destroy this antigen. During the propagation, the immune cells undergo the affinity-based somatic hypermutation, where the affinity is measured by the combination degree between an antibody and an antigen. As this biochemical reaction continues, the immune cells become mature and further differentiate as memory cells. When the same or similar antigen appears again, the memory cells will quickly identify and destroy the antigen. By imitating these principles of the biological immune system, artificial immune systems are developed to solve real-world problems. Corresponding to the biological immune system, for the sake of clear definition, several terms often used in artificial immune systems are required to be qualitatively described. The antigen refers to the objective problem to be solved which includes linear and non-linear constraints, the antibody refers to the feasible candidate solution of the objective problem and the affinity refers to the fitness value of the objective problem (antigen) related with the feasible candidate solution (antibody) [1,10,13].As an extended algorithm of aiNet, the opt-aiNet optimization [14] has been developed to solve multimodal function optimization problems. In the cloning operator, the opt-aiNet optimization employs the uniform cloning strategy, where a fixed number of children antibodies are reproduced from a parent antibody. Then, all the cloned children antibodies but the parent one goes through an affinity-based Gaussian mutation (AGM) operator. But only one child antibody with the highest affinity among the cloned children antibodies is selected to enter the next generation. Once there is a very slight difference in the average affinity between two neighboring generations, a similarity-based suppressor will be activated. For any two antibodies whose Euclidean distance is less than a predefined suppression threshold, the antibody with lower affinity will be suppressed. To keep the diversity of population, some randomly generated antibodies are recruited. Repeat this iterative process until the termination condition is satisfied.It is worth pointing out that the opt-aiNet optimization is capable of combining the exploitation with the exploration of the population, and at the same time shows the good stabilization of the population. Moreover, the dynamic searching mechanism for the optimal population size based on a certain suppression threshold is helpful to probe the local optima of objective problems. However, the opt-aiNet optimization is costly in computational time and not satisfactory in quality of solutions. Therefore, it can be concluded that a broad research space exists in improving the computational efficiency of the opt-aiNet optimization. Please see [14] for more details.In order to improve the adaptability of parameters in opt-aiNet, an improved adaptive artificial immune system (IA-AIS) [19] has been designed to deal with complex optimization problems. In IA-AIS, an affinity-based cloning operator is employed, where the antibodies with higher affinity are reproductive. On the other hand, a controlled affinity-based Gaussian mutation (CAGM) operator is used to make the antibodies with lower affinity mutate much more than those with greater affinity. In addition, the threshold can be adjusted dynamically and is proportional to the similarity between antibodies.By utilizing the affinity data between an antibody and an antigen, the IA-AIS optimization performs well while not only mining the local information but also probing the potential information of the objective problem. Three redesigned operators (i.e., the affinity-based cloning operator, the controlled affinity-based Gaussian mutation operator and the concentration-based suppressor) contribute to improve the performance of IA-AIS, which is profitable to probe the global optima quickly and accurately.Note that both opt-aiNet and IA-AIS have a single level of candidate antibodies, so the good information from those better antibodies is neglected. In these two algorithms, each antibody is evolved only by learning from itself but any other better antibodies, which decreases the convergence speed to some degree. Moreover, both of these two algorithms use fixed mutation step length. When any antibody appears near the global optimum, if the step length is too large, it is hard for this antibody to reach the global optimum. As a result, the convergence accuracy is impaired. On the contrary, if the step length is too small, the convergence speed will be depressed. Please see [19] for more details.To overcome the shortcomings of artificial immune systems mentioned in Section 2, this paper proposes an efficient adaptive hierarchical artificial immune system (AHAIS). In the AHAIS optimization, all the candidate antibodies are separated into the top-level elitist antibodies (TLEA) and the bottom-level common antibodies (BLCA). Those antibodies with higher affinity step into TLEA while the remainder antibodies belong to BLCA. These two levels of antibodies experience different mutation operators, where TLEA uses the self-learning strategy while BLCA uses the elitist-learning strategy. In fact, TLEA guides the evolution of BLCA while BLCA outputs excellent antibodies to TLEA. The overall operating process and some technical details are presented as follows.In the initialization phase, as shown in Fig. 1, we firstly create an initialized population Ab(t) with N randomly produced antibodies, i.e., Ab(t)={Ab1(t), …, Abi(t), …, AbN(t)}, where Abi(t) is the ith candidate antibody in the tth generation. Then, we evaluate the affinity of all the candidate antibodies and sort them by their affinity in a descending order, i.e.,Aff(Abk1(t))≥Aff(Abk2(t))≥⋯≥Aff(AbkN(t)), where Aff() is the affinity function, kj∈[1, N]. Here, if j1≠j2, thenkj1≠kj2. Finally, the first Ne(Ne=round(N×pElitist), pElitist∈(0, 1)) antibodies with higher affinity step into TLEA, which are grouped as AbElitist(t), and the other Nu(Nu=N−Ne) antibodies step into BLCA, which are described as AbCommon(t). Consequently,AbElitist(t)={Abk1(t),Abk2(t),…,AbkNe(t)}andAbCommon(t)={AbkNe+1(t),AbkNe+2(t),…,AbkN(t)}are obtained. Note that, in Fig. 1, the operator “≥” means that the affinity of the former antibody is greater than or equal to that of the latter one.In the cloning phase, an affinity-based cloning operator is executed as(1)Nci(t)=(Ncmax−Ncmin)×Aff*(Abi(t))+Ncmin,where Ncmax and Ncmin are the maximum and minimum number of cloned children antibodies, respectively, and Aff*() is the normalized value of affinity function. It is clear that the cloned multiplier number is linearly proportional to the normalized affinity value.Because TLEA has higher affinity and plays an important role in local search, those antibodies in TLEA experience a mutation operator with the affinity-based self-learning strategy(2)ΔAbi(t)=G1×λ(t),Abi(t+1)=Abi(t)+ΔAbi(t).Where ΔAbi(t) is the variant value of the ith candidate antibody, Abi(t+1) is the child antibody of Abi(t), G1 is a Gaussian random variable with zero mean and standard deviation of 1. In addition, λ(t) is the searching step length in the tth generation. The canonical mechanism with the fixed mutation step length impairs the convergence speed and the solution accuracy. This is because, if any elitist antibody appears close to the optimum and the step length is too long, it is easy for such an antibody to step away from the optimum. On the other hand, if the step length is too short, the convergence speed will slow down. Therefore, we design a dynamic adaptive searching step length adjustment mechanism for TLEA, and λ(t) follows(3)λ(t)=min{Dij|i≠j,Abi(t),Abj(t)∈AbElitist(t)},where Dijis the Euclidean distance between the ith antibody and the jth antibody. The searching step length is equal to the minimum distance between antibodies in TLEA.Because BLCA plays a role of global search under the guidance of TLEA, all the candidate antibodies in BLCA experience the elitist-learning strategy from the best antibody in TLEA, which is formulated as(4)Abi(t+1)=Abi(t)+r×(Abe(t)−Abi(t)).Where r is a uniform random variable, Abe(t) is the best antibody in TLEA, which follows(5)Abe(t)=argmaxAbi(t)∈AbElitist(t)Aff(Abi(t)).In the proposed AHAIS optimization, a concentration-based suppressor is employed, where the threshold Thscan be determined by(6)Ths=ξ×(max{Dij|i≠j}−min{Dij|i≠j}),where the controlling coefficient ξ∈(0, 1). This is aimed at suppressing those similar candidate antibodies.After learning from TLEA, some candidate antibodies in BLCA will probably become better in affinity than those in TLEA. Thus, it is necessary to dynamically update the elements of candidate antibodies in both BLCA and TLEA. We design a dynamic level updating strategy which allows those candidate antibodies with higher affinity in BLCA to transfer into TLEA and allows those with lower affinity in TLEA to return to BLCA. As shown in Fig. 2, the detailed procedures are explained as follows.Step 1. Sort the candidate antibodies in BLCA by their affinity in a descending order.Step 2. Make the first p (p=Nu×b, b∈(0, 1)) candidate antibodies in BLCA transfer into TLEA.Step 3. Sort the candidate antibodies in TLEA by their affinity in a descending order.Step 4. Make the last p candidate antibodies in TLEA retrograde into BLCA.The flowchart of the proposed AHAIS optimization is shown in Fig. 3. The revised or redesigned operators are placed in the red dashed-line boxes, respectively. In the initialization, the randomly produced candidate antibodies are separated into TLEA and BLCA based on their affinity. For TLEA, the candidate antibodies experience the affinity-based cloning and the affinity-based self-learning mutation where the searching step length is adjusted adaptively by a well-designed mechanism. On the other hand, for BLCA, the candidate antibodies undergo the elitist-learning mutation from the best candidate antibody in TLEA after the common clone process. After the evolutionary process, if the level updating condition is met, the level updating strategy is triggered. Next, if the suppression condition is met, the concentration-based suppression operator is excited for the candidate antibodies in BLCA. Repeat this process until it is terminated.For the sake of clear explanation, the pseudocode of the proposed AHAIS optimization is shown in Fig. 4.In this section, a series of numerical simulations are arranged to analyze the sensitivity of the key parameters and to examine the solution quality and the convergence velocity of the proposed AHAIS optimization by comparisons with DE, PSO, opt-aiNet and IA-AIS. Furthermore, the proposed AHAIS optimization is also applied to schedule the communication resource of an RFID reader collision avoidance problem.Eight classical benchmark functions are chosen from [25] to examine the proposed AHAIS optimization, which are listed in Table 1. The Sphere function, the weighted Sphere function and the Schwefel's Problem 1.2 are simple unimodal functions and easy to solve. The Griewank function, the Rastrigin function and the generalized Schwefel's Problem 2.26 are multimodal functions, and they are difficult to reach the global optimum. The Rosenbrock function, with a narrow valley from the perceived local optima to the global optimum, can be treated as a multimodal function. The Ackley function, whose global optimum is on the bound, can be also regarded as a multimodal function.In the proposed AHAIS optimization, three parameters, i.e., the antibody population scale of TLEA (pElitist), the controlling coefficient for suppression (ξ) and the percentage of updating antibodies (b), need to be tuned. In this subsection, eight benchmark functions in 10D are used to discuss the impact of these three parameters. All the numerical simulations are run for 25 replications. The antibody population size is set to be 100, the maximum number of function evaluations (Max_FES) is set to be 100,000, the termination error value (Ter_Err) is set to be 10−8, and the maximum and minimum cloned multiplier numbers are set to be 20 and 4, respectively. The test results are shown in Figs. 5–7, respectively. For the sake of clear display in figures, the corresponding results are expressed in lg (i.e., log10) scale.Fig. 5 represents the impact of antibody population scale pElitistof TLEA. In this simulation, ξ=10% and b=50% are given in advance. As shown in Fig. 5, for Sphere function (f1), Rastrigin function (f3), Weighted Sphere function (f5) and Ackley function (f8), the proposed AHAIS optimization is able to obtain smaller results than Ter_Err in each of 25 trials, whatever the value of pElitistis. And for Griewank function (f2), pElitisthas no significant effect on error of global optima. However, for Rosenbrock function (f4), the mean error grows up as pElitistincreases, especially when pElitist>20%. On the contrary, for generalized Schwefel's Problem 2.26 (f7), the mean error decreases as pElitistincreases, and there is a sharp decrease for pElitist>70%. It is noticeable that for Schwefel's Problem 1.2 (f6), there is a large bounce in the mean error for 30%≤pElitist<70%. Above all, pElitisthas no remarkable effect on the mean error of all the benchmark functions except for f6. Therefore, the suggested range of pElitistis considered as [0.1, 0.3].Fig. 6 represents the impact of controlling coefficient for suppression ξ. In this simulation, pElitist=20% and b=50% are given. Seen from Fig. 6, ξ has no obvious effect on the final reached solutions of f1, f3, f5, f6 and f8. For f4, when ξ is 10%, the mean error (lg) is −0.11, and is smaller than the mean error (about 0) in other conditions. And for f2, when ξ is not more than 20%, the mean error (lg) is about −1.46, and is superior to the mean error (lg) (about −1.33) when ξ is greater than 20%. For f7, the mean error (lg) always looks equal to 2.52 whatever the value of ξ is. For the sake of the trade-off among different benchmark functions, ξ is recommended to be set no greater value than 10%.Fig. 7 represents the impact of the percentage (b) of updating antibodies. In this simulation, pElitist=20% and ξ=10% are given. According to Fig. 7, b has little effect on the final solutions of f1, f3, f5 and f8. For f4, when b is 10% or within 30–50%, the mean error (lg) is about 0, and is smaller than the mean error (about 0.10) in other conditions. For f2, when b is within 40–70%, the mean error (lg) is less than −1.47; otherwise, it is greater than −1.44. Likewise, for f7, the mean error looks slightly waving around a horizon line as b increases. For f6, the obtained mean error is approximate to Ter_Err in each of 25 trials when b∈[0.3, 0.9]. According to these analyses, it is recommended that b should be properly set to be 40–50%.To summarize the simulation results of the parameter sensitivity analyses, when the parameters of pElitist, ξ and b are set in such intervals of [10%, 30%], (0, 10%] and [40%, 50%], respectively, the proposed AHAIS optimization can harvest more stable performance.For the sake of fairness, the initialized population size of these eight algorithms is set to be 100, Max_FES is set to be 10,000×D, and all the simulations are repeated for 25 trials. Known from the results of parameter sensitivity analysis, we select pElitist=20%, ξ=10% and b=50% for AHAIS. The maximum and minimum cloned multiplier numbers for AHAIS and IA-AIS are set to be 20 and 4, respectively. The cloned multiplier number used in opt-aiNet is fixed as 10. Please see [16,21,23,24] for the rest parameter settings of the other algorithms.To evaluate the convergence accuracy of these algorithms, Tables 2–4present the numerical simulation results for eight selected benchmark functions. The resulting indices include the best, worst, mean and standard deviation (Std) of error in 10D, 20D and 30D, respectively, and the best results are typed in bold. Note that, T means that the corresponding algorithm reaches Ter_Err before it comes to the predefined Max_FES. Known from these results, especially in the simulations for Sphere function, Rastrigin function, weighted Sphere function, Schwefel's Problem 1.2 and Ackley function, the proposed AHAIS optimization can capture the global optimum in each of 25 trials. In other simulations, although the proposed AHAIS optimization fails to reach the global optimum in every trial, it is able to search better solutions than the other algorithms. In summary, it is clear that the proposed AHAIS optimization has better convergence accuracy than DE, PSO, opt-aiNet and IA-AIS.To evaluate the convergence speed of these algorithms, Figs. A.1–A.8 in Appendix A show the average convergence processes for eight benchmark functions, respectively. For the sake of clear observation, the results are expressed in lg (i.e., log10) scale. In the sub-figures of Figs. A.1–A.8, the convergence curves are drawn in different colors and marked by integers which stand for different algorithms, respectively. It is obvious that the proposed AHAIS optimization has faster convergence speed than DE, PSO, opt-aiNet and IA-AIS. For example, the proposed AHAIS optimization can easily capture the optima of f3 in 10D within 105 function evaluations and even within 1500 function evaluations. For f8 in 30D as shown in Fig. A.8(C), the mean error obtained by the proposed AHAIS optimization is smaller than Ter_Err within 105 function evaluations while those captured by other algorithms is larger than 0. However, for f2 in 20D and 30D as shown in Fig. A.2, though the mean error obtained by AHAIS is smaller than those obtained by other algorithms, it cannot continue to decrease after a certain number of function evaluations. In summary, the proposed AHAIS optimization performs better than the other four algorithms in convergence speed.As a nonparametric statistical method, Wilcoxon rank sum test [26] is used to judge if there is a significant difference between two groups of independent optimal solutions (samples) obtained by AHAIS and any other algorithms (i.e., DE, PSO, opt-aiNet or IA-AIS), respectively. In these cases, each group of samples consists of 25 solutions obtained from 25 independent trials. Assume p is the probability of observing the given solutions by chance if there is a significant difference between two groups of solution samples, and h is a two-value variable which means “rejection” or “acceptance”. In details, h=1 indicates that there is a significant difference between two independent samples at the 5% significance level and h=0 indicates that there is no significant difference. Tables 5–7show the results of the Wilcoxon rank sum test between AHAIS and the other four algorithms at the 5% significance level in 10D, 20D and 30D, respectively. Seen from Tables 5–7, for all eight benchmark functions, we can always get h=1 whichever of opt-aiNet and IA-AIS the proposed AHAIS optimization is compared with. This indicates that the results of optimal solutions obtained by the proposed AHAIS optimization are significantly different from those by both opt-aiNet and IA-AIS for all eight benchmark functions in 10D, 20D and 30D, respectively. Again, by recalling the results of Tables 2–4, it is further verified that the proposed AHAIS optimization performs better than opt-aiNet and IA-AIS.On the other hand, observed from Tables 5–7, we can partially get h=1 when the proposed AHAIS optimization is compared with DE or PSO. In this case, it is indicated that the proposed AHAIS optimization reaches significantly different optimal solutions from those optimized by DE or PSO, and thus outperforms DE and PSO, which is viewed from Tables 2–4. For instance, we can get h=1 in testing the results of AHAIS and PSO for f3 in Table 6. Correspondingly, AHAIS has a very small mean error (less than 10−8) in 20D marked with “T” and PSO has a mean error of 3.607825e+001, as shown in Table 3. Therefore, it can be concluded that AHAIS should outperform PSO. Meanwhile, we can also get h=0 in testing some benchmark functions (e.g., f7 in 30D, f8 in 10D) when DE or PSO are compared with AHAIS. According to Wilcoxon test, h=0 means no significant difference between two groups of solutions optimized by AHAIS and DE or PSO. For the example of f7 in 30D as shown in Table 4, DE obtains the smallest “best” error value of 3.818270×10−4, but AHAIS obtains the smallest “mean” error value of 1.917918×10−3 among 25 trials. From the viewpoint of solution population, the proposed AHAIS optimization still performs better than DE.Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a class of non-contacted automatic identification technique, and can be used to identify the targets automatically by radio frequency signals. RFID has lots of advantages, such as strong penetrability, fast data reading rate, good safety performance, long service life, large memory. Therefore, RFID has been found in public management, manufacturing industry, commodity circulation and many other fields [27].The transmitting power of a reader is often much stronger than that of a tag. Therefore, when a reader attempts to receive the signal of tags, the signal will be masked by the other one or more neighboring readers which are transmitting at the same time. This will cause reader-to-reader collision problem (R2RCP) and decrease the interrogation radius of the desired reader [28–31]. Fig. 8shows a simple R2RCP with only two readers, i.e., a desired reader Riand an interfering reader Rjat the distance of di,jfrom Ri. If Rjdoes not operate when Riis detecting the target tag, i.e., there is no interference at Ri, the maximum interrogation radius of Rican reach a maximum value rmax. However, if Riand Rjare operating at the same time, the interrogation radius of Riwill decrease to r. If the interference from Rjis strong enough, and as a result, the interrogation radius r is smaller than the distance x between Riand the target tag, Ricannot identify the tag successfully.Suppose that there are NReaderreaders randomly placed in a square region and NFavailable frequency channels can be allocated to these readers. Considering the interference from other readers, the effective interrogation radius riof reader Rifollows(7)ri′=αbωEtagPiGTGRPL2SINRminhGTGR∑j=1,j≠iNReaderPjSmask(|CHi−CHj|)PLdj,i−γ+Ni1/2γri=min(r′i,ri,max),where SINRmin is the minimum signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) required by a reader to identify a tag, αbωis the normalized spectrum power, Etagis the effective power reflection coefficient, Pirepresents the transmitting signal power of Ri, GTand GRrepresent the transmitting antenna gain and the receiving antenna gain, respectively. h is the fading coefficient which is not considered, because the distance between readers is on the line of sight. Smaskis the spectrum mask level. CHiand CHjdenotes the channel numbers selected by Riand Rj, respectively. P0 denotes the reference path loss at the distance of 1m from a desired reader, dj,idenotes the distance between the readers Riand Rj, Nirepresents the noise power at Ri, and γ is the path-loss exponent which is greater than or equal to two. In addition, ri,max is the maximum interrogation radius of the reader Rifollowing(8)ri,max=λi4πPiGTGRPmin×1−Md4(1+Md)2,where λidenotes the wavelength of the reader Ri, Pmin is the desired minimum power for tag operation, and Mdmeans the modulation depth. The technical details of the derivation process of Eq. (8) are shown in [28].Actually, the total effective interrogation area of readers determines the tag identification capability of an RFID system. This is because tags have greater opportunities to be identified with greater total effective interrogation area. So we can obtain the optimal power and frequency allocation by maximizing the total effective interrogation area S as(9)maximizeS=∑i=1Nπri2s.t.CHi∈[1,NF],∀i∈[1,N].Suppose that all readers are placed in a square working area of 100m×100m, and all the parameter settings in R2RCP are listed in Table 8.Fig. 9shows the encoding format for an antibody individual. In Fig. 9, each antibody individual includes two segments of the channel and the power, where Chi,j∈[1, NF+1) denotes the channel after a round down operator, and Pi,j∈(0, Pmax] denotes the power. Note that, Chi,j=0 means that Rjdoes not operate.To investigate the performance of five algorithms applied to RFID reader collision avoidance problem, three cases with 10 readers, 15 readers and 20 readers are considered, respectively. Table 9shows the comparative results of the effective interrogation area among all algorithms. Observed from the results, the proposed AHAIS optimization always obtains the largest total effective interrogation area than the other four algorithms in three cases. In details, in the case with 10 readers, the effective interrogation area obtained by AHAIS is 628.8079m2, which harvests improvements of 125.13%, 40.59%, 12.06% and 9.80% by comparison with those obtained by opt-aiNet, IA-AIS, DE and PSO, respectively. In the case with 15 readers, the effective interrogation area by AHAIS is 643.2970m2, which achieves increases of 216.35%, 148.39%, 8.77% and 8.61% by comparison with those by opt-aiNet, IA-AIS, DE and PSO, respectively. In the case with 20 readers, the effective interrogation area by AHAIS is 641.1060m2, which obtains improvements of 301.27%, 242.32%, 10.90% and 5.93% by comparison with those by opt-aiNet, IA-AIS, DE and PSO, respectively. It is obvious that the proposed AHAIS optimization has efficient computational performance in such an application of RFID reader collision avoidance problem.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an adaptive hierarchical artificial immune system (AHAIS) is proposed for complex global optimization problems. The proposed AHAIS optimization absorbs the spirit of elitist learning to quicken the convergence speed. In AHAIS, a top-bottom leveled antibody population is constructed, where elitist antibodies with higher affinity step into the top-level subpopulation and the common antibodies with lower affinity enter the bottom-level subpopulation. In the cloning operator, the affinity-based clone multiplier is employed to judge the reproductive capacity of antibodies. In the mutation operator, the elitist antibodies experience the elitist-learning, while the common antibodies experience the self-learning. In addition, a dynamic adaptive step length adjustment method is designed to improve the convergence accuracy. Firstly, in the numerical experiments, the effects of several parameters on the optimization performance of AHAIS are investigated and the resulting best value ranges of parameters are determined. Further, the numerical simulation results from eight classical benchmark functions are analyzed by using statistical methods including Wilcoxon test to evaluate the efficiency of AHAIS. Finally, an optimal scheduling based application model for RFID reader-to-reader collision avoidance problem is used to validate the effectiveness of AHAIS. The experimental results indicate that the proposed AHAIS optimization can obtain the global optimum more quickly and more accurately than DE, PSO, opt-aiNet and IA-AIS.