@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel model for credit card fraud detection using Artificial Immune Systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We added Negative Selection, update and dataset analysis to base AIRS algorithm.Antigen affinity is calculated using a novel method.The model uses a cloud computing solution in order to perform the training phase parallel.We used scoring for flagged records which shows how risky a fraud-flagged record might be.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Credit card fraud detection,Artificial Immune Systems,Artificial Immune Recognition System,Memory cell,Cloud computing,MapReduce,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The amount of online transactions is growing these days to a large number. A big portion of these transactions contains credit card transactions. The growth of online fraud, on the other hand, is notable, which is generally a result of ease of access to edge technology for everyone. There has been research done on many models and methods for credit card fraud prevention and detection. Artificial Immune Systems is one of them. However, organizations need accuracy along with speed in the fraud detection systems, which is not completely gained yet. In this paper we address credit card fraud detection using Artificial Immune Systems (AIS), and introduce a new model called AIS-based Fraud Detection Model (AFDM). We will use an immune system inspired algorithm (AIRS) and improve it for fraud detection. We increase the accuracy up to 25%, reduce the cost up to 85%, and decrease system response time up to 40% compared to the base algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Credit card fraud is an important issue and has considerable cost for banks and card issuer companies. Financial organizations try to prevent account misuse using different security solutions. The more complex the security solutions are, the more sophisticated fraudsters get i.e. fraudsters change their methods over time. Therefore it is crucial to improve fraud detection methods along with security modules which try to prevent fraud. Fraud detection has become a crucial activity in order to decrease the impact of fraudulent transactions on service delivery, costs, and reputation of the company. There are plenty of methods used for fraud detection each of which tries to retain maximum quality of service while keeping false alarm rate at minimum. Fraud is cost and detecting it before the transaction is registered will reduce this cost significantly, which needs a very accurate system with quite few false alarms. Edge and Falcone Sampaio [1] state that while implementation of proactive methods increases the potential for early fraud alerting, real-time processing significantly reduces the available time window within which computational analysis should be performed and an accurate decision should be made in response to newly arriving transactions. The quicker a fraud detection system responds, the better. Fraud detection systems are trained using older transactions in order to decide about new ones. This training phase is time-consuming which can be parallelized in most cases. In order to reduce computation time one can reduce the number of previous transactions processed by minimizing the time window, use less complicated methods, and etc. each of which might result in reduction in accuracy, which means more missed fraud cases and more false alarms. Accordingly, a powerful tool is needed on which the fraud detection system could run and process transactions in minimum time This paper suggests using cloud computing i.e. implementing fraud detection system on a cloud-base file system, namely Hadoop, which makes data parallelization possible in large datasets.Different methods have been used for fraud detection including Bayesian algorithm [2], Neural network [3], Markov model [4], account signature [1], Artificial Immune Systems [5–8]. AIS is based on human immune system and is similar to fraud detection system in many aspects: 1 – Both of them pursue the same goal of separating normal records from unauthorized ones. 2 – In both cases the number of normal records is much more than unauthorized ones. 3 – In both cases unauthorized records are similar to those of normal. In human body viruses and non-self cells carry protein and masquerade self cells. Fraudsters also try to have similar behavior to card owner's behavior. 4 – Both systems have to detect and learn new methods of misuse. Human body could face new types of non-self cells any time and it has to not only detect the new types, but also remember them so that they can be detected later. Similarly, a typical fraud detection system should be able to detect any type of fraud even if it had not happened before. Also the system should learn it for future cases.AIS addresses detecting non-self cells, imitating the functions of human body which occurs during generating detector cells, detecting non-self cells, and cleaning the body from non-self while learning its pattern. Detector cells, namely lymphocytes, are self-tolerant which means they are not stimulated by self cells but by non-self cells. Immune system can learn new patterns of non-self cells that it has not come across before. Once a detector is stimulated by a non-self, the system keeps the detector as a memory cell. Therefore, if that particular non-self cell enters body later, it can be detected again. This makes AIS adaptable to its environment. Immune system starts training with no information about non-self cells. This means it is trained using only self cells.In this paper we will use an AIS-based method for credit card fraud detection and introduce AFDM. We will improve a previously introduced algorithm [9] in various aspects to get higher precision. We will also propose a new implementation model for the method in order to reduce training time. The results are compared to a similar work [6] which has improved AIS system parameters. We use the same parameters as well as the dataset used in [6]. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the background information. First AIS is described followed by Artificial Immune Recognition System – the algorithm which is used in this paper. Then, after a brief introduction about Cloud Computing, Hadoop file system and MapReduce API are described. Section 3 is about related work in credit card fraud detection field focusing on using AIS for fraud detection. Section 4 describes AFDM, the methodology, the improvements on AIRS, and the implementation model. Section 5 includes the results of the tests. Finally, Section 6 discusses future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
