@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust heuristic algorithms for exploiting the common tasks of relational cloud database queries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MQO is adapted for relational Cloud DB with a cost model including network expenses.Alternative query plans are intelligently developed and experimentally evaluated.B&B, Genetic, Hill Climbing and Genetic-Hill Climbing algorithms are developed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Relational cloud database,Multiple-query optimization,Evolutionary computing,Branch-and-Bound,Hill Climbing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cloud computing enables a conventional relational database system's hardware to be adjusted dynamically according to query workload, performance and deadline constraints. One can rent a large amount of resources for a short duration in order to run complex queries efficiently on large-scale data with virtual machine clusters. Complex queries usually contain common subexpressions, either in a single query or among multiple queries that are submitted as a batch. The common subexpressions scan the same relations, compute the same tasks (join, sort, etc.), and/or ship the same data among virtual computers. The total time spent for the queries can be reduced by executing these common tasks only once. In this study, we build and use efficient sets of query execution plans to reduce the total execution time. This is an NP-Hard problem therefore, a set of robust heuristic algorithms, Branch-and-Bound, Genetic, Hill Climbing, and Hybrid Genetic-Hill Climbing, are proposed to find (near-) optimal query execution plans and maximize the benefits. The optimization time of each algorithm for identifying the query execution plans and the quality of these plans are analyzed by extensive experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud computing is creating a new market, DataBase as a Service (DBaaS), that has a great potential to attract users ranging from small businesses to very large enterprises seeking high performance solutions. In addition to its high performance, lower cost of ownership, quality of service guarantees, data privacy, scalability, and elasticity are the other opportunities offered by this emerging paradigm.One of the biggest challenges that DBaaS providers have to cope with is the request of users for continuously meeting the service level agreements. Providing an illusion of infinite resources with increasing database workloads is an NP-Hard optimization problem where the tasks need to be scheduled optimally in order to answer the required services [1,2]. Cloud database query engines can take advantage of common tasks and efficiently manage the resources by using a well-known database optimization technique, Multiple Query Optimization (MQO) [3–8]. Although MQO requires significant search for the identification of common tasks among queries, it has been successfully applied to complex Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) queries that involve big data processing and common tasks [9,10].MQO has been studied on centralized databases for more than 30 years; however, solving the same problem for relational Cloud databases has not been studied from the perspective of alternative query plans (QP) [8,12,13]. Conventional query engines find the fastest execution plans for single queries and try to execute them as fast as possible on the other hand MQO can execute sets of queries together in shorter times by using their alternative QPs.In this study, we introduce four robust heuristic algorithms (Branch-and-Bound, Genetic, Hill Climbing, and Hybrid Genetic-Hill Climbing) that improve the total execution time of a set of queries in a relational Cloud database by using alternative QPs that have more sharable tasks. Locality of previously computed tasks and concurrently executing sub-queries are optimized with the proposed robust heuristic algorithms and used for the solution of this problem.Our contributions in this study can be listed as:(1)MQO problem is formally adapted for relational Cloud databases including an improved cost model with network communication costs.Alternative QP generation methods for relational Cloud databases, where the site locations of join tasks can be decided intelligently to reduce communication costs, are developed and experimentally evaluated.Heuristic Branch-and-Bound, Genetic, Hill Climbing, and Hybrid Genetic-Hill Climbing algorithms are developed and experimentally evaluated for solving the Cloud MQO problem.In Section 2, information about the related work on Grid/Cloud MQO techniques is given. Section 3 gives the formal definition of the problem. Section 4 explains the distributed query engine. Section 5 presents our proposed algorithms that work with alternative QPs. Section 6 discusses the experiments conducted for evaluating the proposed algorithms. Finally our concluding remarks are given in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
