@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhancing scalability and accuracy of recommendation systems using unsupervised learning and particle swarm optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
With a goal to enhance the scalability and accuracy of recommendation systems (RSs), we have introduced a new model which is a combination of both unsupervised learning and supervised learning.Through unsupervised learning we are selecting a matched partition for training set (mostly a small subset) for addressing the issues of scalability problem in RS.Additionally, we have introduced a more general framework of PSO optimized α-system which can solve the problem of sparsity and hence helps to increase the accuracy of the overall system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Recommendation system,Collaborative filtering,Sparsity measures,Particle swarm optimization,Unified measures of sparsity,Alpha estimates,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recommendation system has been a rhetoric area and a topic of rigorous research owing to its application in various domains, from academics to industries through e-commerce. Recommendation system is useful in reducing information overload and improving decision making for customers in any arena. Recommending products to attract customers and meet their needs have become an important aspect in this competitive environment. Although there are many approaches to recommend items, collaborative filtering has emerged as an efficient mechanism to perform the same. Added to it there are many evolutionary methods that could be incorporated to achieve better results in terms of accuracy of prediction, handling sparsity as well as cold start problems. In this paper, we have used unsupervised learning to address the problem of scalability. The recommendation engine reduces calculation time by matching the interest profile of the user to its partitioned and even smaller training samples. Additionally, we have explored the aspect of finding global neighbours through transitive similarities and incorporating particle swarm optimization (PSO) to assign weights to various alpha estimates (including the proposed α7) that alleviate sparsity problem. Our experimental study reveals that the particle swarm optimized alpha estimate has significantly increased the accuracy of prediction over the traditional methods of collaborative filtering and fixed alpha scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recommendation system (RS) is a type of information filtering system that gives advice on products’ information, or services that a user may be interested in. They assist users with the decision making process when choosing items with multiple alternatives [23,30]. RS is based on human social behaviour where opinions and tastes of known acquaintances are taken into consideration while making decisions. RS generates personalized recommendations that incorporate various mathematical, probabilistic [32], soft computing, and swarm based computing techniques [14]. For conducting research on recommendation system generally the researchers adopt to movie recommendation sites [38,7,33]. Recommendation systems have a wide range of applications in e-commerce [29,24], e-learning [43,10] and digital libraries [39,40]. Because of the information overload and its vigorous dissemination, it is a challenge for the researchers to design a RS that can take into account many demographic, contextual, and preference factors and predict useful items more efficiently. The crux of RS is a filtering algorithm involving knowledge, demographic, content, utility, collaborations or their combination, and when applied collectively are called hybrid RS. Among all the existing types of recommendation systems, those that employ collaborative filtering (CF) methods are widely used and are known to be effective methods of recommendation technique.Generally, the quality of CF recommendation systems can be enhanced by improving the similarity measures and neighbourhood set which is the most critical component of the CF mechanism. Due to some CF limitations such as sparsity, scalability, and cold-start problems the recommendations’ accuracy is extremely affected [21,15]. Although many researchers tried to address these issues, the CF systems are still in need of more improvements in overall recommendations accuracy and performance. Since CF is based on the ratings of the neighbours who have similar preferences, it is very important to select the neighbours properly. The more the similarity measure is improved, the more valuable neighbours and accurate recommendations are obtained.Sparsity of ratings data is one of the basic challenges of CF systems. CF may not produce the desired result in the presence of sparse data where many users do not share common items. Therefore users must rate a sufficient number of items to get a reasonable profile overlap so that the system is able to establish its neighbours [21]. High sparsity data levels result in poor recommendation quality, hence they need to be taken care of. This issue is addressed in our approach by establishing transitive relationships between different neighbours.Alongside, the crucial part of CF algorithms consists of the group of metrics used to determine the similarity between each pair of users [2,9], among which the Pearson correlation metric stands out as a reference for many models. Local similarity measures such as the Pearson similarity measure and cosine similarity measure [11], base the similarity computation step between two users, on the set of common items rated by both users.The most important ingredient of accuracy of any filtering technique is the way it learns user models [5]. Effective prediction of ratings from a small number of examples is also important [2]. This can mitigate the problem of scalability to some extent. Hence to enhance the scalability of the recommendation systems, we have used k-means algorithm [27,34] for determining a small size of training set.In this work, we propose a new α estimation scheme based on the overall sparsity in the ratings data as well as sparsity based on the active users and the items whose ratings need to be predicted. The dependency of α value on the user and item ensures that the local and global neighbours are weighed differently using PSO [31] for every user and for every prediction. The experimental results support our ideas and demonstrate that the proposed methods are superior to the fixed α scheme [36]. Our experimental results show that the prediction quality has increased significantly and even users with limited ratings are provided with a considerate number of recommendations. Further, the PSO based α estimates are comparatively better to genetic algorithm based α estimates in terms of running time and accuracy [6]. This argument is proved by experimental results and theoretically as well, because unlike genetic framework, PSO uses less number of parameters and operators.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present the background of this work like traditional collaborative filtering approach for recommendation system and PSO. Section 3 presents our proposed system framework. Section 4 concerns with experimental study and results. Finally, Section 5 concludes this paper with future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
