@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Calibration based on entropy minimization for a class of asset pricing models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have considered the problem of pricing goods in sequential auctions.Price intervals are formed by an ask–bid pair by the seller and buyer.A binomial tree model is developed to price the items on sale.The minimum entropy principle is used to calibrate the predicted prices.Numerical results have shown a calibration within an error of O(10−4).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sequential auctions,Binomial tree,Pricing algorithms,Entropy minimization,Model calibration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider the problem of calibrating pricing models based on the binomial tree method to market data in a network of auctions where agents are supposed to maximize a given utility function. The calibration is carried out using the minimum entropy principle to find a probability distribution that minimizes a weighted misfit between predicted and observed data. Numerical results from calibrating the mid prices from the bid–ask pairs of the buyer and seller to Taobao data demonstrated the feasibility of this approach in the case of pricing goods in a sequential auction. Further numerical test cases have been presented and have shown promising results. This work can equip those engaged in electronic trading with computational tools to improve their decision-making process in an uncertain environment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Auctions have long been used in various economics settings for trading or resources allocation, see for example [1]. A large number of products are sold online, sometimes via auctions, allowing sellers to use a range of pricing strategies in an attempt to maximize their revenues. As online auctions are gaining in popularity, consumers have a real chance to maximize their purchasing power. For a given asset, consumers can keep track of price movement over time and compare its prices from different auction houses. This can enable them to buy items at the lowest price possible. Such tasks can be well performed by software agents roaming between auction houses on the World Wide Web. This kind of trading paradigm mediated by online software agents has the potential to save time and money for human consumers.In this work, we consider sequential auctions wherein single item auctions with limited runtimes are repeated over time in a way in which selfish but rational agents can observe the history of winning bids thus far. Seller and buyer agents will need to price or value goods in the auction as reflected by the market so as to make informed decisions on the bidding process. Goods are assumed to have a reserve price (under which the item cannot be sold) unknown to the bidders; the seller is not aware of the bidders’ valuations of the item. Finding the ‘right’ price for a good on sale in such an uncertain environment is challenging but can be carried out using a model dependent on certain parameters. Such a computational model can be used, for example, by bidders to make important bidding decisions. Ideally, we would like the value predicted by the model to be as close as possible to the winning bid value. Since the future is uncertain, we would like the model to be at least consistent with historical market data. This is the aim of model calibration. In finance for example, engineers have to recalibrate model parameters to intraday market prices almost in real time.In [2], stochastic pricing models using binomial tree for seller and buyer agents were presented. They assumed a selfish but rational agent maximizing an utility function in an uncertain market model. In this paper, we rely on the pricing models of [2] to build up a pricing model wherein a price of an item on sale is not a real number but an interval formed by an ask (by the seller) and bid (by the bidder) prices. In particular we have used the hypothesis that ask prices are always greater or equal to bid prices. Under this model, the market is incomplete since we cannot determine an unique value for an item on sale. The bid–ask spread is interpreted as being caused by variations on the volatility of the pricing models. The main objective of this paper is to address the following key questions:1How can we calibrate single item auction pricing models in which item prices are represented by intervals in lieu of single values due to uncertainties?How precise future prices of goods sold by online auctions can be predicted; in particular when prices are pairs of ask and bid values?Calibrating a pricing model from the market prices is a challenging problem even when prices are predicted as single values due to incomplete information. Prices are available up to a limited period and at a set of times with possibly different time steps. In this case, it is important to find a volatility model that is consistent with observed prices with a minimum bias with respect to missing values [3].Our approach to the calibration process relies on the concept of entropy used in information theory as a measure of data compression or uncertainty [4]. The relative entropy also known as the Kullback–Leibler distance is a measure of similarity between two probability distributions. Given a prior probability distribution, the minimum entropy principle suggests that the distribution that minimizes the Kullback–Leibler distance is the least biased to the unknowns. Consequently, we have applied the minimum entropy principle to estimate a distribution that is unbiased to missing information and consistent with observed prices. Following [5], given a prior uniform distribution over the observed prices, we determine a posterior distribution over the mid-prices resulting from the bid–ask pairs by solving a constrained optimization problem. The resulting optimization problem can be solved using the Langrangian multiplier method if the bid–ask spreads are small enough. In our model, the bid–ask spread can be large. To avoid numerical infeasibility, we have used the penalty function method consisting in optimizing a weighted sum of residuals to find an acceptable approximate solution. This calibration algorithm has been implemented from within Matlab.•We have considered binomial tree models in order to price an asset in a sequence of auctions as an interval formed by an ask–bid pair by a seller and buyer agents in lieu of using machine learning techniques as investigated in for example [6–10] or time series in [11].We have then proposed a calibration scheme based on determining the probability distribution of future prices in lieu of finding parameters of the underlying pricing model by the least-square residuals method as in [2,12]. The probability distribution is calculated by minimizing the relative entropy viewed as a measure of similarity between the prior distribution formed by the mid-values of the ask–bid pairs and the observed distribution of the asset prices over time.We have applied this algorithm to calibrate our binomial pricing model by a buyer and seller to Taobao prices for mobile phones. Numerical results showed a calibration within an error of O(10−4). To further test this calibration scheme, we have used it to calibrate stock prices of the China Petroleum & Chemical company in the Shanghai Stock Exchange and numerical results have shown a better prediction compared to a simple fit based on moving averages [13, Ch. 11].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
