@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Human action recognition in H.264/AVC compressed domain using meta-cognitive radial basis function network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed a fast human action recognition system in H.264 compressed domain.Readily available quantization parameters and motion vectors are used for feature extraction.The functional relationship between the features and action labels are classified using PBL-McRBFN which has a cognitive and meta-cognitive component.Results are analyzed for various GOP parameters.Achieved more than 90% accuracy using PBL-McRBFN on two benchmark datasets KTH and Weizmann.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human action recognition,Compressed domain,Motion vectors,Quantization parameters,PBL-McRBFN,Meta-cognitive learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose a H.264/AVC compressed domain human action recognition system with projection based metacognitive learning classifier (PBL-McRBFN). The features are extracted from the quantization parameters and the motion vectors of the compressed video stream for a time window and used as input to the classifier. Since compressed domain analysis is done with noisy, sparse compression parameters, it is a huge challenge to achieve performance comparable to pixel domain analysis. On the positive side, compressed domain allows rapid analysis of videos compared to pixel level analysis. The classification results are analyzed for different values of Group of Pictures (GOP) parameter, time window including full videos. The functional relationship between the features and action labels are established using PBL-McRBFN with a cognitive and meta-cognitive component. The cognitive component is a radial basis function, while the meta-cognitive component employs self-regulation to achieve better performance in subject independent action recognition task. The proposed approach is faster and shows comparable performance with respect to the state-of-the-art pixel domain counterparts. It employs partial decoding, which rules out the complexity of full decoding, and minimizes computational load and memory usage. This results in reduced hardware utilization and increased speed of classification. The results are compared with two benchmark datasets and show more than 90% accuracy using the PBL-McRBFN. The performance for various GOP parameters and group of frames are obtained with twenty random trials and compared with other well-known classifiers in machine learning literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human action recognition has been an area of keen interest to computer vision researchers for the past few decades. Day by day, length and breadth of the problem statement are expanding and researchers have come up with solutions to tackle scale, appearance, illumination, orientation variations, and occlusions. Speed of recognition has not been given ample thrust in the evaluations. The aim of this research is to highlight the speed of recognition as an important parameter in the analysis of action recognition algorithms.Conventionally the problem of action recognition is tackled in pixel domain. This involves two major steps: decompressing the video and extracting low level features like optical flow. Further, decompression increases the data by 50–100 times, leading to a proportional increase in computational overhead. Whereas, compressed domain analysis utilizes the various compression parameters that are extracted by partial decoding for processing. These compression parameters such as motion vectors, quantization parameters etc. are low bit-rate data and require a fraction of computations/memory compared to the fully decoded pixel domain processing. On the other hand, since the compression parameters convey the approximate noisy information of the underlying pixel process, it is a huge challenge to achieve the performance comparable to pixel domain analysis. A substantial amount of research is being done in compressed domain owing to its high processing speed. A survey of proposed approaches for various applications in compressed domain is presented in [1].Monitoring at high resolution, low bandwidth usage, reduced storage requirements, faster frame rates, and better video quality makes H.264/AVC [2,49] the ideal video standard for real-time applications. In a typical video transmission system, raw video input from the camera is compressed and streamed across a network targeting a decoder to reconstruct the source video. Bandwidth is the limiting factor over which bit-rate adjustment has an upper hand. Motion Vectors (MV) are the indication of how motion was compensated while exploiting the temporal frame redundancy during encoding. Quantization Parameter (QP) has a major role in regulating the bit rate during the encoding process. QP values can be adjusted to maintain a constant bit rate within the allowed channel bandwidth. Hence, real-time encoders heavily depend on varying the QP values to control the trade-off between video quality and compression. A combination of these features can be used for various applications of video analysis. For example, Biswas et al. [3] have proposed a crowd flow segmentation technique for H.264 compressed domain videos using motion vectors.In the proposed approach, three types of features are extracted from the readily available quantization parameters and motion vectors of compressed H.264 bitstream. The first two features, Quantization-Parameter Gradient Image (QGI) spread and QGI projection profile, are obtained from the QGI at macro-block resolution (16×16). This QGI provides a compact representation of the action indicating the location and spatial-spread of the motion. The third feature, histogram of magnitude-weighted orientation of MVs, obtained at sub-macro-block resolution (4×4) provides important cues regarding the dynamics of the action. The main objective is to find the functional relationship between the features and action labels. One can employ machine learning approaches to estimate the decision boundaries.Metacognitive Radial Basis Function Network (McRBFN) emulates the Nelson and Narens model of human meta-cognition [4], and has 2 components, namely, a cognitive component and a meta-cognitive component. Projection Based Learning algorithm of the Metacognitive Radial Basis Function Network (PBL-McRBFN) has a radial basis function network with Gaussian activation function at the hidden layer which is the cognitive component of McRBFN and a self-regulatory learning mechanism which is its meta-cognitive component. McRBFN begins with zero hidden neurons, adds and prunes neurons until an optimum network structure are obtained. The self-regulatory learning mechanism of McRBFN uses the best human learning strategy, namely, self-regulated learning to decide what-to-learn, when-to-learn and how-to-learn in a meta-cognitive framework. The meta-cognitive learning algorithm has been implemented in neuro-fuzzy [5–7], complex-valued [8,9] and neural networks [10]. Among these implementations, PBL-McRBFN [11,12] is computationally efficient and provides better generalization performance. Hence, PBL-McRBFN is used to approximate the functional relationship between the proposed features and action labels. The results show a superior performance of PBL-McRBFN in recognizing human actions. Recently it has been shown in neural network literature that learning algorithms employing meta-cognition (what-to-learn, when-to-learn and how-to-learn) provides better generalization performance [6,13–15].The paper is structured in the following way. Related works on activity recognition in pixel and compressed domains are presented in Section 2. The proposed approach is discussed in detail in Section 3. Section 4 briefly explains the PBL-McRBFN classifier. Section 5 presents the experimental results and discussions. Concluding remarks and future works are stated in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
