@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Characteristics and stock prices of firms flamed on the Internet: The evidence from Japan

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study investigates Internet flaming using Japanese data on flamed firms.We find that large firms with negative net income are more likely to be flamed.Flaming alone may be too weak to impact the stock prices in the short-run.Flaming can lower the stock prices at a later period, or with newspapers reports.Negative market reactions are intensified with the serious flaming contents.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Event study,Flaming,Internet,Japan,Stock prices,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we investigate the economic impact of flaming on the Internet using Japanese data. In examining the data on firms that experienced flaming between 2006 and September 2013, we establish the following three main findings. First, large firms and ones with negative net income are more likely to be flamed on the Internet. Second, flaming alone may be too weak to impact the stock prices of target firms in the short-term, although it can lower the stock price of target firms at a later period, or when newspapers report the same event. Third, the negative market reaction grows when the flaming content is serious.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this study, we examine the economic impact of flaming on the Internet using Japanese data. The phenomenon of flaming has received a lot of attention from both practitioners and academic researchers over the past 20years. Many studies associate flaming with computer-mediated communication (O’Sullivan and Flanagin, 2003; Siegel et al., 1986). A typical definition of flaming is “the expression of strong and inflammatory opinions to others electronically” (O’Sullivan and Flanagin, 2003, p. 161). However, other researchers argue that defining flaming in the context of online behavior assumes technological determinism and confuses the behavior with its causes (Thompsen and Foulger, 1996). Here, we basically follow the definition of Moor et al. (2010, p. 1537), that flaming involves “displaying hostility by insulting, swearing or using otherwise offensive language” towards a person or entity.Although flaming has been around for decades, its incidence has increased dramatically since 2011, when social network services (SNS), such as Twitter, Facebook, LINE, etc., became more common due to the use of smartphones and tablet computers.Despite its convenience and usefulness for communication and the instant sharing of information with a large number of people, SNS tends to intensify negative online behaviors such as flaming. The result can be serious risk to flamed firms and people. For instance, when an employee at a fast food chain posted a photo of himself in the refrigerator of his workplace on Twitter,1This event happened at Hotto Motto in August 2013.1it led to a half-day suspension of business while foodstuffs were discarded and the store disinfected. Another tweet with a photo of naked men in a famous restaurant chain resulted in closure of the restaurant and damage to the company’s reputation.2This event happened at Ohsho Food Services, Co. in September 2013.2To reduce the risk of being flamed, a number of large Japanese companies set SNS guidelines for their employees that prohibit employees from posting confidential company information, as well as inconsiderate or negative comments about products, services, clients, supervisors, or competitors, etc. Other companies have developed businesses that manage the online reputation of client firms. Industries and states have exerted considerable effort to reduce the risk of flaming and construct better Internet governance. However, legal rules may exercise undesirable external power over participants and providers of virtual communities, and outcomes are often unsatisfactory because of international borders with different laws and legislative processes that are slower than technological changes. Acknowledging these difficulties, researchers stress the importance of industry self-regulation, including guidelines on Internet sites (Wall and Williams, 2007; Suzor, 2010).Although there have been many social-psychological studies on flaming, to the best of our knowledge, no research has examined whether and how flaming affects a firm’s value measured by stock price responses. Stock prices are often used to measure a firm’s value, because they theoretically reflect the present value of the firm’s future cash flow or profits. Flaming can damage such values because the display of hostility against a firm may damage its reputation and brand, resulting in decreased sales and market share, and increased costs of capital and crisis management.3Such links between flaming and negative impact on business are discussed later in the context of the development of our hypotheses.3These negative impacts have been intensified by the diffusion of SNS, which can widely and immediately spread negative news regarding target firms.4Siegel et al. (1986) show that anonymous and simultaneous communication increases the frequency of uninhibited behavior, which is observed more commonly in computer-mediated than in face-to-face communications.4To address this gap, we examine the economic impact of flaming. Specifically, we examine data on flamed firms listed on the first and second sections of the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) between 2006 and September 2013. We find that large firms with negative net income are more likely to be flamed on the Internet. Other findings include: (1) flaming alone may be too weak to impact the stock prices of target firms in the short-term, although it can lower the stock price of target firms at a later period, or when newspapers report the same event; and (2) negative market reactions are intensified with the seriousness of the flaming contents.The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information, a literature review, and our working hypotheses. Section 3 describes the methodology and data. Sections 4 and 5 explain and discuss the empirical results, respectively. Concluding remarks are provided in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
