@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of tire force characteristics using a Hybrid method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Hybrid method for identifying tire parameters in Magic Formula has been applied.Firstly, the Hybrid method uses Genetic Algorithm (GA) with a high exploration power.Then, the best result of GA is used as starting values (SVs) for Levenberg–Marquardt.The method shows high convergence speed and accuracy, and null-sensitivity to SVs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tire,Magic Formula parameters,Hybrid method,Genetic Algorithm,Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present study applies a Hybrid method for identification of unknown parameters in a semi-empirical tire model, the so-called Magic Formula. Firstly, the Hybrid method used a Genetic Algorithm (GA) as a global search methodology with high exploration power. Secondly, the results of the Genetic Algorithm were used as starting values for the Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) algorithm as a gradient-based method with high exploitation power. In this way the beneficial aspects of both methods are simultaneously exploited and their shortcomings are avoided. In order to establish the effectiveness of the proposed method, performance of the Hybrid method has been compared with other methods available in the literature. In addition, the use of GA as a Heuristic method for tire parameters identification has been discussed. Moreover, the extrapolation power of Magic Formula identified with Hybrid method has been properly investigated. Finally, the performance of the Hybrid method has been examined through tire parameter identification with priori known model. The results indicated that the Hybrid method has outstanding benefits such as high convergence speed, high accuracy, and null-sensitivity to the starting values of unknown parameters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Performance factors such as ride, handling and fuel efficiency are of significant importance for a vehicle; hence, they need to be considered by vehicle designers. Vehicle handling plays a vital role in vehicle designing, because passenger safety during driving maneuvers is to a large extent dependent on this factor [1]. In fact, the interactions of vehicle and road are through tires; therefore, tire forces and torques determine the vehicle handling behaviors. Nowadays, by using computers, designers have the ability to predict vehicle performance before making a prototype. Such predictions leads to more efficiency in the design activity and lower costs for experimental plans. However, there is a need to develop precise modeling of tire behavior to achieve a good agreement between simulation and experiment.In this regard, remarkable efforts have been made with both analytical [2,3] and empirical approaches [4–6]. Due to the complexity of the underlying physical phenomenon, an analytical model of a tire based on the physics of the tire construction does not have enough accuracy. Compared to analytical models, empirical models have higher abilities to identify tire behaviors accurately. Empirical models of tire forces are described by a family of curves whose parameters are identified by experimental data [5–7].A widely used empirical tire model is the so-called Magic Formula (MF) [4]. There have been different versions of this model developed. One of these models known as Delft-tire 96 [5] is commonly used to describe the steady-state tire force and moment characteristics in pure and combined slip conditions; in this present study, it has been used to establish the objective functions. The MF tire model requires a set of parameters to describe the tire dynamic properties. These parameters should be tuned based on the measured data. Several research studies have been conducted in this research line.Overall, there are two different approaches for parameter identification. The first is off-line parameter identification in which the parameters are determined in experimental laboratory conditions according to certain tire characteristics such as size, constitutive material, inflation pressure, etc. During the car life, however, the operating condition may change because of tire aging (deterioration), inflation pressure, temperature conditions and its side effects on tire behavior. To ensure the accuracy of the model parameters, the corresponding values should be modified and re-estimated with a set of new data. This procedure can be conducted, only by using the tests performed under real conditions on the road. In the second approach called on-line tire identification, off-line parameters value are used (as rough estimations) and then the tire parameters based on the new operating condition will be tuned again. The methodologies of parameter identifications for these two approaches are absolutely different due to different requirements for solving the associated problems. Accuracy, null-sensitivity to starting values, generalized estimation (non over-fitted values) and in the lower priority, estimation speed, are the requirements for off-line identification of tire parameters. Furthermore, robustness, accuracy and speed of estimation are important requirements for on-line determination of parameters. In this present study, the focus is on off-line identification of MF parameters.So far, various methods have been presented for the on-line identification. Kiencke and Daiß [8] and Stéphant et al. [9] introduced linear and non-linear observation methods using a bicycle model. Methods on the basis of both time-domain and frequency-domain methodology have been suggested by Sierra et al. [10]. Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) was suggested by Mancosu et al. [11] and Bolzern et al. [12] to determine the tire lateral force on the basis of pre-established results of the theoretical model as well as those obtained from experimental tests on the corresponding real model. In 2009, Kim [1] found that in many other EKF studies conducted to estimate lateral tire forces, tire models with many parameters are included in the vehicle model estimation which can make EKF design more complicated. Furthermore, due to no attention to tire dynamic effects, the models did not provide reasonable results during rapid transient maneuvers. Accordingly, in order to simplify the EKF design, the model was firstly modified into a vehicle with four degrees of freedom. Then, by considering the suspension–tire relaxation length in the model, the transient dynamic behavior was properly estimated.There are some research studies for off-line identification of tire parameters. Van Oosten and Bakker [13] used a method based on the starting values optimization technique (SVO) to solve the tire identification problem. Since tire identification is highly dimensional and multimodal, a good starting value for the optimization process is an essential constraint. Palkovics and El-Gindy [14] applied the so-called Neuro-Tyre model using an artificial neural network to model tire characteristics. Moreover, Cabrera et al. [15] presented a method called IOA(IMMa11Área Ingeniería Mecánica Málaga (IMMa) – University of Malaga.Optimization Algorithm) based on a Genetic Algorithm. They claimed that the method outperforms the work done in [13,14] as well as the optimization process done by Nelder and Mead [16]. Oritz et al. [17] presented a summary of the results using the IOA to identify pure and combined tire forces. Later in 2009, they used the IOA presented in [15] with a self-adapting technique (IOAsat). They improved the accuracy of the work while no input variables needed to be chosen by the user [18]. Using only the Genetic Algorithm to reach global minima with good accuracy and speed is not practically possible; therefore, the use of alternative methods is unavoidable. In 2010, Huang Chan and Chen Long used a Genetic Algorithm in order to tune both Pacejka's coefficients of the Magic Formula as well as Neural Network weights. They indicated that Neural Networks can outperform Pacejka tire modeling [19]. Extrapolation capability and time requirements for the optimization process are important factors which should be considered in tire identification methods. However, neither of them were discussed in the comparative study conducted in the available literature presented above.The present study addresses a Hybrid method to achieve fast and reliable identification of tire model parameters. The proposed method, faced with the optimization problem in parameter identification, indicated a good exploration due to the Genetic Algorithm (GA) as the first step and also showed enough power of exploitation as a result of using the Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) algorithm [20,21] as its second procedural step. In addition, as the Exploration capability of the method is high; it is not essential to be aware of non-convexity of the searching space or finding good starting values for unknown parameters in the optimization process. In other word, the uniform random numbers in the interval [0, 1] are used as starting values for unknown parameters. Finally, comparing the performance of the present Hybrid method in terms of accuracy and convergence speed with that of other researchers showed the superiority of the proposed Hybrid method.In order to facilitate the precise description of tire forces and moments the SAE22Society of Automotive Engineers.[22] has defined the axis system shown in Fig. 1. The X-axis is along the intersection of tire plane and ground with the positive direction forward. The Z-axis is perpendicular to the ground with a positive direction downward. The Y-axis is in the ground plane, makes the axis system orthogonal and right-hand. Tire orientation can be characterized by camber angle γ and side slip angle α. The camber angle is the angle between the wheel plane and the vertical. Side slip angle is the angle between the direction of wheel heading and travel direction. Longitudinal Slip (κ) (sometimes called the slip ratio) may be tentatively defined as the ratio of longitudinal slip velocity and the forward speed of the wheel center [23].As previously noted, identification of tire forces and moments has been an important issue for designers. Among different approaches, using experimental data to identify a mathematical formula (e.g. Magic Formula [24]) with unknown parameters has attained the most attention. However, estimation of these unknown coefficients from experimental data with good accuracy in a reasonable time has been a challenge. Mathematically the problem can be stated as follows:(1)minXS=∑i[fMagic Formula(X,Ci)−fMeasured(Ci)]2which f represent tire force or moment, Ciis tire operating conditions including vertical force, camber angle, side angle, etc. And X denotes the so-called Magic Formula parameters [24]. In the present work, to tackle this problem, a Hybrid method has been presented.Generally, an algorithm for solving optimization problems is a sequence of computational steps which asymptotically converge to sub-optimal solutions. Numerical optimization algorithms can be classified in two main groups: Deterministic Algorithms and Probability-based (Stochastic) Algorithms. A deterministic algorithm will always yield the same output, each time it is given a particular input. However, in a probability-based algorithm randomness is introduced into the search process which might enable the method to escape a local optimum and finally to approach a global optimum. Deterministic algorithms themselves can be roughly categorized into direct search methods and gradient-based methods. Direct search methods (e.g. Nelder and Mead [16] for linear programming) are also known as derivative-free, or black-box methods. However, Gradient-based methods use first derivatives (gradients) or second derivatives (Hessians) to search landscape. Clearly, proper exploitation of gradient information can significantly enhance the speed of convergence in comparison with a method that does not compute gradients. However, potential weaknesses of gradient-based methods are relative inability to tolerate difficulties such as noisy objective function spaces, inaccurate gradients, categorical variables, and topology optimization. In addition, incapability of finding global optimum, and easily getting stuck in local optimum are two other important disadvantages of these methods [25]. On the other hand, null-sensitivity to starting values is one of the important benefits for probability-based methods such as Genetic Algorithm. Besides, although the tendency to converge to global minimum in these kinds of methods is very promising, convergence speed to find the exact optimal point is often low.In the present context, to describe and evaluate an algorithm performance the terms Exploration and Exploitation have been utilized. The comprehensive concepts associated with the words “Exploration” and “Exploitation” return to their usage in organizational learning[26]. But in literature related to searching and evolutionary optimization algorithm, the terms “Exploration” and “Exploitation” have been popular and play a significant role in describing the working of an algorithm [27–30]. In the present work, these terms have been used with the following concepts:-Exploration: exploring the search space in order to discover new information about the landscape in hopes of finding better solutions.Exploitation: searching a limited (but promising) region of the landscape with the hope of refining existing promising solutions.Thus, algorithms shall use the right trade-off between exploitation of the positive properties of the existing set of solutions and exploration of other areas of the search space to find an optimum.The Genetic Algorithm is the method inspired by Darwin's theory of survival of the fittest. Original reference to this algorithm is found in the work of Holland in 1973 [31]. Modifications were done by Goldberg [32]. In fact, the Genetic Algorithm belongs to a larger class of evolutionary algorithms, which generate solutions to optimize problems using techniques inspired by natural evolution, such as selection, crossover and mutation (genetic operators). In the Genetic Algorithm method, the population is a set of possible solutions and population's individuals (genes) are characterized by array structures named chromosomes. The survival possibilities for each individual are determined by its degrees of fitness which is the evaluation of its objective function. Normally, the initial population is generated through random numbers and the next generations are sets of solutions made via genetic operators. Genetic operators ensure the existence of sufficient pressure to obtain even better solutions from the existed good ones (exploitation). Furthermore, such operators sufficiently force the algorithm to cover the solution space to maximize the probability of discovering the global optimum (exploration). Production of new generations is iterated until the convergence criteria are satisfied. These convergence criteria could be dependent on many parameters such as the number of generation or the degree of convergence.Selection: A set of individuals from the previous population must be selected to form a mating reproduction pool. There exist different types of selection operators. The roulette wheel selection is known to be the most popular one. It uses a probability distribution for selection in which the selection probability of a given chromosome is proportional to its fitness. However, when the differences among the fitness function values of the individuals are very large, the roulette wheel selection tends to select only the best individual; therefore, the local minima near the starting points are searched. In order to avoid a premature convergence of the population, ranking procedure is employed. This procedure selects the parents according to the ranks of the function values rather than the magnitudes.Crossover: crossover aims to create new strings (i.e. design vectors) by exchanging information among strings of the mating pool. Many crossover operators have been used in literature related to GAs. In most crossover operators, two individual strings are selected randomly from the mating pool generated by the selection operator. Then, some portions of the selected strings are exchanged. In the current research, the so-called scattered method is applied for crossover operator. In this method two strings (parents) are randomly picked from the mating pool; then, a random binary vector of the same size of each string in the mating pool is generated. Following this procedure, if the vector element is 1, genes are selected from the first parent. However, when the vector element is 0, genes are selected from the second parent. Finally, the parent genes are combined to form the child. The effect of crossover may be useful or detrimental. Thus, in practice, a crossover probability -pc- is used to select the parents for the crossover.Mutation: The algorithm creates mutation children by randomly changing the genes of individual parents with a specific small mutation probability, pm. The purpose of mutation is to maintain diversity in the population. Therefore, it will enhance the chance for generating individuals with higher fitness values. In the present study, a decreased-based Gaussian mutation has been utilized [33]. The following relations describe the mutation operator mathematically:(2)Mutation term=σiN(0,1);(3)σi=γσ0;γ=1−α0inwhereN0,1means unit normal distribution. σ0, i and n denotes standard deviation, current generation number and generation number, respectively. The positive parametersα0∈0,1can be used to control the decreasing rate.Elitism: In comparatively recent successful variants of GA, some of the better strings from the current generation are allowed to carry over to the next, unchanged. This strategy is known as elitist selection. In the current implementation, the best individual in each generation will be allowed to directly enter the next generation.The Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm is a standard technique used to provide a numerical solution to the problem of nonlinear function minimization. Both least square curve fitting and nonlinear programming are originated from these minimization problems. Least square problems arise when fitting a function to measurement sets of data obtained by minimizing the sum of the squares of the errors between the data points and the function values. In fact, the LM algorithm blends the Steepest Descent Method (SDM) [34] and the Gauss–Newton Algorithm (GNA). The steepest descent uses the first-order derivative of the objective function (i.e. the steepest descent search direction) to find the minima in the search space. On the one hand this approach is very slow because its rate of convergence is linear, but on the other hand, it shows good robustness to find the minima. However, in the Gauss-Newton method, the objective function is approximated by a quadratic polynomial at the current point; then it is minimized. In this method the convergence rate is fast and near quadratic, but low robustness is a significant shortcoming. Therefore, in the present work, around the area with complex curvature the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm switches to the steepest descent algorithm until the local curvature is proper to make a quadratic approximation, then it approximately becomes the Gauss–Newton algorithm which can significantly speed up the convergence. Thus, the LM method takes advantage of both the steepest descent and Gauss–Newton methods.In mathematical terms, the sum of squared error problem is as follows:(4)S(P)=fTf;fT=(f1,f2,…,fm);(5)PT=(P1,P2,…,Pn);(m>n)where f represents error vector and P indicates independent vector. The problem of minimizing squared error is involved with finding vector P* so that S(P*) will be minimized. Updating vector P within iterations is done as represented below:(6)Pi+1=Pi−(H+λ*diag[H])−1∇f(pi)where H denotes the Hessian of vector function, λ indicates the damping factor and ∇f represents the gradient of vector function f. Then damping factor is adjusted within the search process. In other words, if there is a rapid reduction of S(P), the damping factor will decrease to increase Gauss–Newton algorithm dominance, but when an iteration gives insufficient reduction in the objective function, λ will increase to bring the algorithm closer to the steepest descent method.The problem encountered in the present study is highly dimensional with a high degree of nonlinearity. To tackle such problems, first it is necessary to have an algorithm with a high power of exploration. The population-based GA has been shown to play this role effectively. After a probably full covering of the search space and approaching the global minimum, the need for a good exploitation arises. GA is not very suitable for a precise exploitation; as it needs a high computational effort to do so. However, LM is a classical method with good power of exploitation which preserves high robustness due to the simultaneous application of Gauss–Newton and steepest descent methods. Therefore, it seems to be a good idea to design a Hybrid method of GA and LM. Accordingly, after a precise exploration by GA, problem solving devolved to a LM using GA results as the probable near minimum starting values. Fig. 2represents the flowchart of the Hybrid method. Switching from GA to LM is done after a pre-determined iterations limit.To evaluate the Hybrid method, parameters identification of tire lateral force has been chosen. Magic formula for tire lateral force in pure slip condition (see Appendix A) as well as experimental data [17] were used to establish the objective function. Eq. (7) is the objective function in mathematical terms:(7)S(Y)=∑g=1l∑i=1n∑j=1m[FyMagicFormula(Y,αj,FZi,γg)−FyMeasured(αj,FZi,γg)]2whereY=PCy1PDy1,PDy2,PDy3PEy1,PEy2,PEy3,PEy4PKy1,PKy2,PKy3PHy1,PHy2,PHy3PVy1,PVy2,PVy3,PVy4α, γ and Fzare the side slip angle, camber angle and vertical force, respectively. Also m is the number of side slip angle in which lateral force is evaluated for every vertical force in a determined camber angle. In addition, n and l are number of vertical forces and number of camber angles, respectively. Y, the so-called Magic Formula coefficients, are the unknown parameters which are expressed in detail in [5].In this case study, 82 interval points for side slip angle (−25°<α<25°) in each vertical load case (Fz=[1, 3, 4.5, 6, 8]kN), are considered. The Hybrid method has been applied to a model with a 0° camber angle. Cost function convergence history using the first step of Hybrid method, namely GA, has been depicted in Fig. 3. Whole convergence history using the Hybrid method has been presented in Fig. 4, which shows how the second step of the Hybrid method (Levenberg–Marquardt) can improve performance of the algorithm. GA is very capable of exploring the whole search space, but after a while as depicted in this figure, the convergence speed is significantly reduced. Thus obtaining the exact value of the minimum point will be computationally demanding. Therefore, the algorithm switches into the LM method which is very powerful in quickly finding the exact minimum value (with the condition that it is fed with good starting values). Fig. 5shows the fitted lateral force model using GA for 0° camber angle. As well illustrated in this figure, the GA does not converge precisely. Therefore, it may lead to inaccurate modeling during the optimization process. Furthermore, Fig. 6represents fitting of the same model using the complete Hybrid method. Comparing these two recent figures indicates that the Hybrid method gives higher fitness in comparison with GA.In many engineering and practical optimization problems the cost function value for global optimum is unknown. But in curve fitting problems the global optimum cost function value is known and theoretically is zero. However in practice, because of inherently noisy experimental data, or inaccurate modeling reaching zero may not be possible. As in the former section observed, the best possible minimum cost function value for the lateral tire force optimization was approximately 1e6, as a result of noisy data and accumulated errors. Due to the quality of curve fitting (the fitted model describes experimental data as expected), this minimum point can be experimentally accepted as a near global minimum for this problem.In order to show the possibility of being trapped in local optimum, only a simple LM optimization algorithm is employed. Considering this gradient-based method, if the relative change in cost function value is less than a threshold (stopping criteria), it is possible to draw the conclusion that a local optima has been founded. Mathematically stated, the stopping criteria should be as follows:(8)Frel=|f(xi+1)−f(xi)|1+|f(xi)|;Frel<εfwhere Frelis the relative change in cost function value,fxiis the value of cost function in xi, i is indicating iterations in the algorithm and ɛfis a positive small number denoting the threshold for stopping criteria. LM algorithm alone is used to tackle the lateral tire force parameter estimation problem (without GA as a previous step) and 18 uniform random numbers in the interval0,1(X1x180) have been used as starting values for the algorithm.Optimization results implicate that there are lots of local optima for this optimization problem with a search space of 18 dimensions. To report the observations, four random initial values sets (four sets ofX1x180) have been particularly chosen which guided the LM algorithm to local optimum. The value of ɛf=1e−9 has been set to satisfy the solver's stopping criteria. Relative change in cost functions value (Frel) versus successive iterations for all four cases are depicted in Fig. 7(Frelhas been shown in log scale to clearly cover variations). In all four cases, the stopping criteria has been met (Frel=ɛf), convergent cost function (f(xfinal)) is not a minimum possible value and further iterations cannot help improve the cost function. These results are a clear implication of getting stuck in a local optimum. In Table 1, four sets of initial values(X1x180), iterations and final cost function value for each case has been reported.Fig. 8shows experimental data and fitted model in four cases. It is clear from this figure that the model obtained using simple LM algorithm for tire lateral force optimization with the random starting values reported in Table 1 cannot describe experimental data.To further establish GA usage justification, a statistical evaluation of the LM method and the GA+LM (GA associated with LM) method has been conducted. Both algorithms have been run 100 times and the results have been summarized in Table 2. A 92% and 89% improvements can be observed in average and standard deviation (STD), respectively, if GA is associated with LM to solve the tire parameters identification problem, and besides, average time expenditure GA+LM is even smaller than simple LM according to Table 2. Therefore as the GA+LM increases the chance of finding a better near global minimum in less time than the LM alone, it can be stated that GA+LM is more efficient.In this section, the performance of the Hybrid algorithm in comparison to other existing methods has been evaluated. The following items explain details of this comparative study:•Parameter identification of tire lateral force with [0°, 2°, 4°] camber angles has been chosen as a case study. Tire test data [17] includes 82 interval points for side slip angle (−25°<α<25°) in each load case (Fz=[1, 3, 4.5, 6, 8]kN).All algorithms have been evaluated in the same hardware platform (CPU 2GHz).Hybrid algorithm parameters are as follows:1)GA: Roulette wheel selection, NP (number of population) =50, MG (maximum generation)=700, Pc (crossover probability)=0.88, Pm (mutation probability)=0.098, Pe (elite probability)=0.02, σ0=0.1, α0=0.1.LM: MI (maximum iterations)=1000, ɛf(stopping criteria)=1e−9Accuracy: quality of agreement for Hybrid method, SVO [13], and IOAsat[18] with experimental data [17] (for 4° camber angle) has been illustrated in Fig. 9. This figure shows that both the IOAsat and Hybrid method have good agreement with experimental data. However, to give a quantitative comparison the mean square error (MSE) between experimental data and the tire model identified with the presented Hybrid method, SVO [13], IOA [17] and IOAsat[18] has been compared for three camber angles (0°, 2°, 4°) in Table 3. Although the quality of curve fitting in all methods are good, the quantitative comparison (Table 3) shows that the presented Hybrid method offers more fitted results on experimental data. This better agreement for the Hybrid method is thanks to the LM method which refines promising existing solution as well as possible.Convergence speed: the time expenditure for the presented Hybrid method has been compared to that of [17]. Detailed information related to the comparison of time requirements can be found in Table 4. The comparison indicates that the convergence speed for the present algorithm is significantly better than the one reported in [17] (IOA). No data about the time requirement has been presented in [18] (IOAsat). The predominance of the Hybrid method in this regard is also obvious. After dealing with accuracy and speed comparisons, tuned parameters obtained using SVO, IOA, IOAsat and the Hybrid method for five vertical loads (1, 3, 4.5, 6,8kN) and three camber angles are listed in Table 5.In the previous section, the predominance of the Hybrid method in comparison with other presented algorithms was affirmed. This section deals with the extrapolation power of MF identified with the proposed Hybrid method. To this end, an objective function corresponding to the lateral force model with 0° camber angle and four vertical loads (1, 3, 4.5 and 6kN) – rather than five loads – was applied. The Hybrid method has been adopted to minimize the described objective function so that the resulting corresponding tuned parameters could be obtained. Thereafter, lateral force values with obtained parameters for a vertical load of 8kN (as a test case) have been compared to the corresponding experimental data. The comparison shows an excellent agreement. Fig. 10represents the extrapolation power of MF identified with the present method. After tuning parameters through four vertical loads and extrapolating the lateral force for the fifth one, the overall accuracy of the model was observed and has been provided in Table 6. Comparison to the results presented in section 3.4 indicates that the results corresponding to extrapolation case are quite satisfactory. Algorithm parameters are as follows: roulette wheel selection method, NP=50, MG=300, Pc=0.6, Pm=0.38, Pe=0.02, σ0=0.1, α0=0.1, IM=1000, ɛf=1e−9.In the previous sections, a set of experimental tire force data have been used to construct an objective function in order to identify tire parameters using Magic Formula modeling. It was shown that the Hybrid algorithm can identify parameters and the obtained results have been compared with those of other methods available in the literature. Accordingly, the superiority of the Hybrid method has been indicated. In this section, the performance of the Hybrid method will be examined with a new approach illustrated in Fig. 11. A set of valid tire parameters33Tire: 205/60 R15 and pressure 2.2 bar.(X0 in Fig. 11) [35] were employed into the Magic formula to generate the tire lateral force data. Thereafter, white noise (i.e. normal random numbers with 0.015 standard deviation) was added to the data samples in order to generate artificial experimental data. Using this noisy data, the cost function (for identification problem) was constructed. Then, the Hybrid algorithm was applied to this optimization problem. This process reveals the performance of the Hybrid method if the identified parameters (X in Fig. 11) are approximately equal to original valid tire parameters (X0).The above approach can be applied to parameter identification of different tire forces/Torques including pure longitudinal, aligning torque, combined longitudinal and lateral forces. In the following, results of the method examination have been presented.Objective function composed of tire experimental data and MF for longitudinal force, is mathematically expressed as:(9)S(X)=∑g=1l∑i=1n∑j=1m[FxMagicFormula(X,κj,FZi,γg)−FxMeasured(κj,FZi,γg)]2whereX=PCx1,PDx1,PDx2,PEx1,PEx2,PEx3,PEx4,PKx1,PKx2,PKx3,PHx1,PHx1,PVx1,PVx2κ, γ and Fzare, respectively, longitudinal slip ratio, camber angle and vertical force. In addition, m is the number of slip ratio in which longitudinal force is evaluated for each vertical force in a certain camber angle. n and l are numbers of vertical forces and camber angles, respectively. Here, X refers to Magic Formula coefficients for pure longitudinal force. Fig. 12results if the Hybrid method is applied to minimize Eq. (9). This fact indicates a qualitatively well fitted model to experimental data. Table 7represents a comparative list of original MF coefficients which are used to generate artificial experimental data as well as calculated MF coefficients. Furthermore, detailed information of objective function, quantitative accuracy of the fitted model and also time required for optimization process are represented in Table 8. Algorithm parameters are as follows: roulette wheel selection method, NP=50, MG=700, Pc=0.8, Pm=0.18, Pe=0.02, σ0=0.2, α0=0.1, IM=1000, ɛf=1e−9.Objective function composed of tire experimental data and MF used to model aligning torque is mathematically represented as:(10)S(Z)=∑g=1l∑i=1n∑j=1m[MzMagicFormula(Z,αj,FZi,γg)−MzMeasured(αj,FZi,γg)]2whereX=QBz1,QBz2,QBz3,QBz4,QBz5,QBz9,QBz10,QCz1,QDz1,QDz2,QDz3,QDz4,QDz6,QDz7,QEz1,QEz2,QEz3,QEz4,QEz5,QHz1,QHz2,QHz3,QHz4Z is the Magic Formula coefficients for aligning torque. All the remaining parameters used here have been introduced in the previous sections. It is worth noting that the aligning torque model is composed of both lateral force and specified aligning torque parameters [5], but in this case lateral force parameters are assumed to be known and not included in the searching process. The presented Hybrid method is used to optimize the aligning torque. The results of this process are well-depicted in Fig. 13. Comparison of the estimated results with those of the artificial experiments shows excellent agreement of the optimized model. The coefficients of the priori known model and estimated model are listed in Table 9. Moreover, Table 10shows the time requirement and contributed error in the optimized model (quantitative analysis). The results confirm both precision and swiftness of the presented method. Algorithm parameters are as follows: roulette wheel selection method, NP=100, MG=600, Pc=0.5, Pc=0.48, Pm=0.02, σ0=0.2, α0=0.1, IM=1000, ɛf=1e−9.Objective function composed of tire experimental data and MF for Combined longitudinal force is mathematically written as:(11)S(XC)=∑g=1l∑i=1n∑j=1m∑f=1s[Fx,cMagicFormula(XC,κj,αf,FZi,γg)−Fx,cMeasured(κj,FZi,γg)]2whereXC=RBx1,RBx2,RCx1,REx1,REx2,RHx1In this formula s denotes the number of side slip angles. Other parameters of the formula were introduced in the previous sections. It is worth mentioning that combined longitudinal force is composed of both longitudinal force and modification coefficients [5], but in this case MF longitudinal parameters are assumed to be known and are not included in the searching process. The Hybrid method is applied to minimize Eq. (11). Fig. 14indicates a qualitatively well fitted model to experimental data. Table 11represents a comparative list of original MF coefficients – used to generate artificial experimental data – as well as the identified MF coefficients. In the same manner, Table 12shows the accuracy of the results as well as the time expenditure through the optimization process. Algorithm parameters are as follows: roulette wheel selection method, NP=30, MG=1000, Pc=0.8, Pm=0.15, Pe=0.05, σ0=0.1, α0=0.01, IM=1000, ɛf=1e−9.Objective function composed of tire experimental data and MF used for combined lateral force can mathematically be written as:(12)S(YC)=∑g=1l∑i=1n∑j=1m∑f=1s[Fy,cMagicFormula(YC,κj,αf,FZi,γg)−Fy,cMeasured(κj,FZi,γg)]2whereYC=RBy1,RBy2,RBy3,RCy1,REy1,REy2,REy3,RHy1,RHy2,RVy1,RVy2,RVy3,RVy4,RVy5All the parameters used here have been introduced in the previous sections. The combined lateral force is composed of lateral force parameters as well as modification coefficients [5]. However, in this case MF longitudinal parameters are assumed to be known and not to be included in the searching process. The present Hybrid method is applied to minimize Eq. (12). Fig. 15illustrates the results of the excellently fitted combined forces into experimental data. In addition, a comparative list of original MF coefficients as well as calculated MF coefficients has been presented in Table 13. Finally, Table 14shows both accuracy of the presented model and the corresponding time expenditure for the optimization process. Algorithm parameters are as follows: roulette wheel selection method, NP=30, MG=400, Pc=0.8, Pm=0.15, Pe=0.05, σ0=0.1, α0=0.1, IM=1000, ɛf=1e−9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
