@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm using fuzzy membership chromosome for categorical data clustering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integrate the non-dominated Pareto sorting in multi-objective genetic algorithm.Consider both clustering compactness and fuzzy separation in the objective function.Utilize the fuzzy membership chromosome to reduce the computational time of solution selection.Evaluate the algorithm on the real life datasets collected from UCI.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Categorical attributes,Multi-objective optimization,Genetic algorithm,Fuzzy clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this research, a data clustering algorithm named as non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-fuzzy membership chromosome (NSGA-FMC) based on K-modes method which combines fuzzy genetic algorithm and multi-objective optimization was proposed to improve the clustering quality on categorical data. The proposed method uses fuzzy membership value as chromosome. In addition, due to this innovative chromosome setting, a more efficient solution selection technique which selects a solution from non-dominated Pareto front based on the largest fuzzy membership is integrated in the proposed algorithm. The multiple objective functions: fuzzy compactness within a cluster (π) and separation among clusters (sep) are used to optimize the clustering quality. A series of experiments by using three UCI categorical datasets were conducted to compare the clustering results of the proposed NSGA-FMC with two existing methods: genetic algorithm fuzzy K-modes (GA-FKM) and multi-objective genetic algorithm-based fuzzy clustering of categorical attributes (MOGA (π, sep)). Adjusted Rand index (ARI), π, sep, and computation time were used as performance indexes for comparison. The experimental result showed that the proposed method can obtain better clustering quality in terms of ARI, π, and sep simultaneously with shorter computation time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A clustering procedure is a process to partition a given dataset into several subsets based on a similarity or dissimilarity measure. The standard distance measurement such as Euclidean distance is used to calculate the distance between two points of the given dataset in the clustering algorithm. However, there is not any natural order or distance among the parties that can be directly applied on the categorical dataset. Categorical attribute such as gender and blood type can be identified as ordinal or non-ordinal are very common in real world dataset. Each categorical attribute is represented with a small set of unique categorical values such as [A, B, AB and O] for the blood type attribute. Due to the discreteness and unordered of categorical data, a new clustering algorithm is needed to accommodate the dissimilarity measurement of categorical data.Several methods were proposed to handle dissimilarity measurement on categorical data. For example, converting categorical data to numerical data and calculating the dissimilarity by the existing dissimilarity method is one way to handle the categorical data clustering. However, if the data is nominal with no ordering, the assigning numerical value might cause bias or misleading on clustering result [1]. Another approach is counting the value occurrence (frequency-based) to calculating the dissimilarity. For instance, K-modes algorithm, which is modified from K-means algorithm [2–4] uses modes instead of mean as centroid of a cluster [5]. Because the frequency-based dissimilarity can be adaptive to all kinds of categorical data without the limitation, in this research, K-mode clustering method is utilized on studying on categorical datasets.For either continual or categorical data clustering, most of clustering algorithms rely on optimizing a single objective function such as the intra-distance within a cluster to obtain the data partition. For example, genetic algorithm (GA) based clustering method which is based on the rule of Darwinian evolution generally uses a single objective function to search for a better data partitioning in a dataset. The clustering result based on the single objective function might be only good on one perspective (lower total intra-distance in a cluster), but not be able to fulfill other clustering objective such as enlarging the separation among clusters. Please note the ideal clustering result might be the data partitioning where data points in one cluster should be closer to each other (compactness), and each cluster is far away from other clusters (more separated).To solve the real-world problems where multiple objectives might exist, developing a clustering algorithm to solve the clustering problems which have more than one objective function concurrently is necessary. There are several validity measures were introduced in [6] such as Minkowski score and adjusted Rand index (ARI) for internal cluster measures; Xie-Beni index and ℑ index for external cluster measure. Besides, there are two indices to evaluate the clustering results proposed in [7] including the compactness of the clusters and separation among the clusters. Furthermore, a combination of both criteria can be considered at the same time for clustering problem on real world data.Some researchers have used a linear combination technique to integrate the multiple criterions to a single objective for clustering [8]. However, the weights for each objective functions are required in advance and it might not be easily defined the relative weight of different clustering criteria. Therefore, the compactness and separation should be optimized separately instead of joining them into a single measure for optimization.The major purpose of this research is to develop a clustering algorithm which is able to handle multi-objective optimization on a categorical data. Based on the literature review, several multi-objective clustering algorithms such as GA based fuzzy K-means algorithm (GA-FKM) [9] were studied. Particularly, multi-objective genetic algorithm MOGA (π, sep) [2] which aims to optimize the compactness and separation simultaneously by fuzzy GA algorithm is our learning benchmark. After reviewing the performance of MOGA (π, sep), we proposed a new method called non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-fuzzy membership chromosome (NSGA-FMC) which uses different chromosome settings against MOGA (π, sep) and has a relatively simple solution selection algorithm by taking advantage of using fuzzy membership chromosome. In this research, the performance of the proposed NSGA-FMC is compared based on the different performance measures: ARI, compactness π, fuzzy separation sep, and computational time.The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the literature review in categorical clustering and fuzzy K-modes clustering algorithm. In Section 3, the proposed NSGA-FMC algorithm is introduced and compared to MOGA (π, sep). In Section 4, the experimental results are presented to demonstrate the clustering quality and efficiency of the proposed algorithm. Finally, the conclusion and future research direction are shown in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this research, a genetic algorithm-based multi-objective fuzzy clustering method for categorical data named NSGA-FMC has been proposed. The proposed method uses K-modes to perform data clustering on categorical data, and also optimizes two objective functions which are the fuzzy compactness (π) and the fuzzy separation (sep) of the clusters, simultaneously. The proposed algorithm is designed by using the fuzzy membership matrix as chromosomes and combining them with a more efficient solution selection technique which chooses a solution from non-dominated Pareto front. The proposed algorithm was compared with the GA-FKM and MOGA (π, sep) using three UCI real-life categorical datasets by four performance measures: ARI, π, sep, and computational time. Moreover, the statistical significance test based on t-statistic has been conducted to compare the performance measures of clustering.Based on the experimental results, the proposed NSGA-FMC has better performance in terms of ARI, π and computational time simultaneously than GA-FKM and MOGA (π, sep). It seems that the proposed chromosome settings can improve the clustering result while compared with other algorithms. Although NSGA-FMC utilizes relatively larger chromosome structure that may occupy larger memory space, the cost of memory space turns out to contribute on improving its efficiency. As addressed in experimental result session, NSGA-FMC outperforms other algorithms in terms of computational time. Due to the innovative chromosome design under multi-objective criteria, the proposed NSGA-FMC not only maintains the promising clustering quality in terms of clustering correction, compactness and separation, but also have faster computation.As a scope for future research, we can use more real-life datasets to verify NSGA-FMC's accuracy and stability. For the multi-objective function, we can use other algorithms than NSGA-II, such as PESA-II [27] or new algorithm based on the multi-objective to compare the solution selection quality. More fuzzy validity indices can be added in the simultaneous optimization to explore other clustering objective functions.