@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
What drives purchase intention for paid mobile apps? – An expectation confirmation model with perceived value

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Confirmation was positively related to perceived value and satisfaction.Free alternatives to paid apps negatively affects a user’s intention to purchase.Increasing value-for-money will increase intention to purchase apps.Intention to purchase apps was different between users and potential users.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile apps,Expectation confirmation model,Continuance,Paid apps,Purchase intention,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While many reports predict huge growth potential for the mobile application (app) market, little is known about user intention to purchase paid apps. This study amends the expectation confirmation model and incorporates app rating, free alternatives to paid apps and habit as belief-related constructs to predict user behavior. The proposed model was empirically evaluated using a survey of 507 respondents about their perceptions of app usage. The results indicated that confirmation was positively related to perceived value and satisfaction. Value-for-money, app rating and free alternatives to paid apps were found to have a direct impact on intention to purchase paid apps. Specifically, there was a significant difference between potential users and actual users. The results may provide further insights into app marketing strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the increasing number of smartphone subscribers has driven the usage of mobile application software for mobile devices, commonly referred to as mobile “apps”. Originally, “app” referred to software for general productivity and information retrieval purposes, including email, calendar and contact management, and stock market quote and weather information lookup. However, a huge surge in user demand and the widespread availability of developer tools has driven a rapid expansion to include other categories of apps including games, ebooks, utilities, social networking platforms and others providing access to information on business, finance, lifestyle and entertainment. The global mobile app market is expected to reach US$25 billion by 2015 (Markets and markets 2010). In-Stat (2011) also projects 48 billion mobile application downloads annually by 2015. Despite the explosive growth of mobile application downloads, free apps accounted for up to 89% of global downloads in 2012 (Gartner 2012), indicating that the market for paid apps is still in its infancy.According to Gupta (2013), the average smartphone user spends 82% of his mobile minutes using apps, with the remainder split between calling, e-mailing, and texting. Each of the leading smartphone operating system providers (Android, iOS, Windows Mobile, etc.) also hosts an app marketplace from which users can download apps (Google Play, App Store and Windows Phone Store). To attract more users, many app publishers offer a basic/trial version of their apps for free and then charge a fixed monthly subscription fee for premium services. Others offer the full version for free and derive their revenue from advertising or in-app purchases that unlock additional functionality such as advertisement removal or value-added content. Therefore, to reduce risk and uncertainty in buying a paid app, users generally start by using a trial or free version of a paid app first to become familiar with its content and functionality. Based on this initial experience with the trial or free version, they then determine whether or not to purchase the paid version (Whitfield 2013). This is a typical digital business strategy for content providers (Singer-Oestreicher and Zalmanson 2013). Consequently, the factors that contribute to user intention to purchase paid apps are an important consideration for app publishers and marketers.The purpose of this study is to examine apps users’ purchasing intention by modifying and extending the expectation confirmation model (ECM) since try-first and purchase-later behavior is similar to those typically studied by ECM. This study broadly defines intention to purchase paid apps as the user’s willingness to purchase paid apps, pay to eliminate ads, implement in-app purchases or pay to secure additional functionality or content following an initial acceptance decision. Moreover, given the range of apps domains (e.g., productivity, entertainment, social networking, etc.), perceived usefulness in an ECM, an extrinsic motivation, may not comprehensively reflect the motivation of the user’s app purchase behavior. Therefore, we devised a broader view of perceived value that included not only performance but also emotional value, social value, and value-for-money. Furthermore, given the competitive marketing environment for mobile apps and the unique try-before-buy business model, this study proposes that additional variables, such as app ratings, free alternatives to paid apps and user habits, may enhance our understanding of continuance behavior.In addition, previous studies have verified that the determining factors of IT/IS adoption differ between potential users and experienced users (Dwivedi and Irani 2009, Teo 2006, Teo et al. 2009, Hsu and Lu 2007). Hence, this study also aims to identify factors that influence purchasing intention for experienced users (i.e., users who have purchased apps before) and potential users (users who have not made prior purchases). Since different groups may exhibit different app preferences and purchasing behavior, the results can provide further insights for the design of app marketing strategies. This study applied a structural equation model (SEM) to assess the empirical strength of the relationships in the proposed model. The factors studied here may be of importance in understanding the user’s intention to purchase paid apps. For app developers to increase the sale of paid apps, they must understand what factors contribute to user intention to purchase paid apps. The findings of this research not only help apps practitioners develop better user-accepted paid apps and promote new apps to potential customers, but also assess the validity of a revised ECM for IS researchers.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a theoretical overview; Section 3 proposes the research model and develops the hypotheses tested in this study; Section 4 describes the research method; and Section 5 provides the results of empirical tests. Finally, Section 6 presents a discussion of the findings, conclusions and some implications for researchers and practitioners.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
