@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genetic algorithm with advanced mechanisms applied to the protein structure prediction in a hydrophobic-polar model and cubic lattice

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The novel genetic algorithm for the protein structure prediction problem.The local search for improving the energy values of the conformations with local movements of one or two consecutive monomers throughout the entire conformation.Opposition-based mechanism that transforms conformations into opposite directions and corresponding amino acid sequence to inverse sequence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein structure prediction,Hydrophobic-polar model,Cubic lattice,Genetic algorithm,Clustering,Crowding,Repair mechanism,Local movements,Opposition-based mechanism,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a genetic algorithm applied to the protein structure prediction in a hydrophobic-polar model on a cubic lattice. The proposed genetic algorithm is extended with crowding, clustering, repair, local search and opposition-based mechanisms. The crowding is responsible for maintaining the good solutions to the end of the evolutionary process while the clustering is used to divide a whole population into a number of subpopulations that can locate different good solutions. The repair mechanism transforms infeasible solutions to feasible solutions that do not occupy the lattice point for more than one monomer. In order to improve convergence speed the algorithm uses local search. This mechanism improves the quality of conformations with the local movement of one or two consecutive monomers through the entire conformation. The opposition-based mechanism is introduced to transform conformations to the opposite direction. In this way the algorithm easily improves good solutions on both sides of the sequence. The proposed algorithm was tested on a number of well-known hydrophobic-polar sequences. The obtained results show that the mechanisms employed improve the algorithm's performance and that our algorithm is superior to other state-of-the-art evolutionary and swarm algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of protein structure prediction (PSP) represents the computational problem of how to predict the native structure of a protein from its amino acid sequence [1]. Protein function is determined by its structure. With the wrong structure, a protein cannot correctly fulfill its function [2]. With current algorithms and computational resources it is possible to predict the native structures of relatively small proteins and to help in drug design and proteomics [1]. The PSP problem is one of the more important challenges of this century [3] and because of its nature it attracts scientists from different fields such as physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics, and computer science. However, despite large research efforts in recent decades, further improvements are still possible for this problem [2].The PSP problem is a hard combinatorial optimization problem, even under an hydrophobic-polar (HP) simplified model [4] that has been proved to be NP-complete [5]. Researchers have developed a great variety of simplified protein models [6–8]. These models reduce the number of degrees of freedom, take into account only specific interactions and therefore speed up the calculations. Although these models are incomplete, they allow for the development, testing, and comparison of various search algorithms and they offer a global perspective of protein structures. They can be helpful in confirming or questioning important theories [9].This paper presents the genetic algorithm (GAPSP) for constructing the native tridimensional structure of a given amino acid sequence under an HP model and cubic lattice. This algorithm belongs to the ab initio protein prediction type of methods which predict structures from scratch and do not require any information about related protein structures. The proposed GA is extended with crowding and clustering mechanisms, because the PSP problem is multimodal by nature. The crowding is employed for maintaining the diversity of the population and for preserving good solutions to the end of the evolutionary process. The clustering is used to divide a whole population into more subpopulations that can locate different good conformations [10]. Additionally, our algorithm includes a repair mechanism which transforms infeasible conformations to feasible ones. Feasible conformations do not occupy a lattice point with more than one monomer. Thus, the repair mechanism detects collision (a lattice point that is occupied with two or more monomers) and tries to repair it or form a contiguous self-avoiding path within the lattice. A backtracking algorithm is used for this purpose, as proposed in [11]. For every detected collision, a repair mechanism tries to move a monomer from an already occupied point to an unoccupied neighborhood point. If there are no such points available, then it repeats this process for the previous monomer.In order to speed up the convergence of the algorithm and to improve the energies of the generated feasible conformations, the algorithm uses local search that includes two operators of local movement. Local movement is a transformation of protein conformation whereby only a few monomers are locally moved from one point to another while the remaining monomers remain on their points. The introduced operators try to improve the energy of the conformations with local movements of one or two consecutive monomers. Local movements that have been described in the literature are used either as genetic operators that are applied on randomly chosen positions [12] or as macromutations within local searches [9]. In contrast to these operators, our operators try to locally move only one or two consecutive monomers, where at least one of them is an H–monomer, through the entire protein conformation. Used mechanisms inside an algorithm change conformation in a specific direction. Therefore an opposition-based mechanism is introduced to transform conformations of the next generation into opposite directions using inverse amino acid sequence. This mechanism is based on the assumption that inverse sequence allows the algorithm to easily improve conformation of the monomers at the beginning or at the end of the sequence.The main contributions of this paper are: (1) the proposed new GA algorithm for the PSP problem, (2) the introduced local search or local movement operators that try to improve the energy of the conformations with local movements of one or two consecutive monomers throughout the entire conformation, and (3) a proposed opposition-based mechanism that transforms conformations into the opposite direction and the corresponding amino acid sequence into its inverse sequence. The proposed algorithm is tested on different well-known HP sequences and compared with the state-of-the-art evolutionary and swarm algorithms. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm is superior to its competitors.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The existing evolutionary and swarm algorithms for the PSP problem are briefly described in Section 2. Sections 3 and 4 describe the hydrophobic-polar model and the proposed algorithm in sufficient detail. The experimental setup and results are presented in Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
