@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical study on the feasibility of dynamic evolving neural-fuzzy inference system for approximation of compressive strength of dry-cast concrete

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
For the first time, dynamic evolving neural-fuzzy system (DENFIS) was used to predict the compressive strength of dry-cast concretes.For comparison purposes, 6 nonlinear regression, 6 neural network, 5 ANFIS, 3 online first-order TSK DENFIS, 3 offline first-order TSK DENFIS, and 3 offline high-order TSK DENFIS models were developed.DENFIS model with high-order TSK inference system was found to be more robust than first-order TSK online and offline models.High-order DENFIS model could be trained to produce more reliable prediction results in comparison with neural network, ANFIS and nonlinear regression models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Predictive model,DENFIS,ANFIS,Neural network,Regression,Compressive strength,Dry-cast (No-slump) concrete,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper assesses effectiveness of dynamic evolving neural-fuzzy inference system (DENFIS) models in predicting the compressive strength of dry-cast concretes, and compares their prediction performances with those of regression, neural network (NN) and ANFIS models. The results of this study emphasized capabilities of online first-order and offline high-order Takagi–Sugeno (TSK) type DENFIS models for prediction purposes, whereas offline first-order TSK-type DENFIS models did not produce reliable results. Comparison between the produced results of an elite high-order DENFIS model with those predicted by the selected NN, regression and ANFIS models showed effectiveness of DENFIS model than the regression model, while its performance was similar to or slightly better than the other artificial prediction tools.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, the need for robust models which can precisely estimate properties of materials has been increased due to the requirements of design procedures. Sophisticated methods and tools are required to encounter with the complex and dynamic real-world problems in engineering and material sciences. Such methods should be designed in a flexible manner to be able to model and operate in interactive and intelligent environments. This is especially crucial in solving artificial intelligence (AI) problems such as adaptive speech and image recognition, multimodal information processing, adaptive prediction, adaptive online control, intelligent agents on the world-wide web [1,2], and modeling the materials properties [3].Amongst different AI modeling techniques, artificial neural networks, fuzzy systems and evolutionary algorithms have been the most applicable methods. Recently, novel approaches have been proposed using hybridization of these methods. The main reason has been to take advantage of each individual technique toward improved performance, enhanced reliability, and automated architecture design. Primary hybrid systems were inspired of merging neural networks and fuzzy systems which known as neuro-fuzzy systems [4], and combination of genetic algorithms with fuzzy systems called genetic-fuzzy systems [5]. Systems composed of polynomial fuzzy systems and neural networks were proposed as FPNN [3,6]. FPNNs are the self-organizing meta rule-based systems composed of fuzzy neural networks (FNNs) and polynomial neural networks (PNNs). In these systems, while the FNN demonstrates the premises (If-Part) of the fuzzy model, the PNN is implemented as its consequence (Then-Part).AnYa [7,8] as fuzzy systems with nonparametric antecedents was proposed as an attempt to revise and simplify the antecedent part of both Mamdani and Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy rule-based systems. In AnYa-based systems, the antecedent part, which plays a key role in learning, is traditionally either predetermined by regular partitioning or clustering or is optimized by supervised learning like error back-propagation or genetic algorithms. AnYa includes a nonparametric antecedent part of a new type which also simplifies the linguistic expression removing the need for logical “AND”, and the ambiguity related to the choice of the t-norm operator. In addition, the neural networks interpretation (which in the case of Takagi-Sugeno (TS) model is of a five-layer network) is simpler and reduces to a four-layer structure [9]. Angelov and Filev introduced an online identification approach for the TS model [10]. They used subtractive clustering along with a concept of potential to define the antecedent parts of the rules. In their evolving Takagi–Sugeno (ETS) learning algorithm, the rules may be replaced or increased based on what they called the ‘potential’ of incoming data. The parameters of consequent parts of rules are updated through recursive optimization. In fact, ETS are characterized by the continuous online learning for rule base learning [11]. Modified and extended versions of ETS approach called as ETS+ were also suggested by Angelov et al. [12,13]. The results of modeling with ETS+ demonstrated its superiority for modeling real data stream in precision, simplicity, interpretability, and computational resources used. A hierarchical on-line self-organizing learning algorithm was also proposed by Angelov to identify a TS fuzzy model [14]. The rules are generated according to the desired accuracy measured by output error and a boundary criterion. The rules may be pruned by observing an error reduction ratio criterion [14,15]. Recently a model called dynamic evolving neural fuzzy inference system (DENFIS) has been proposed in the area of AI modeling which has successfully been applied for simulation and prediction purposes [16]. This model is similar to the evolving fuzzy neural network (EFNN) model in some degree. DENFIS inherits and develops so-called EFNNs dynamic features which make it suitable for online adaptive systems [16,17].Concrete is known as a composite construction material with very complicated behaviors. It's a truly versatile material, as it consists of a family of ingredients with a large range in color, density, strength and durability characteristics. It is not only versatile depends on its ingredients, mixture proportions, types of production, and other influencing factors, but also its properties are developed during the time. The minimum duration needed to assess concrete properties is 28 days which can be extended to several years; particularly in the case of durability properties. As such, modeling concrete properties as functions of its mixture ingredients and proportions has been recognized as an important topic for research.Among concrete properties, compressive strength is a major mechanical property which has been used as the foremost property for estimating its quality. Compressive strength is influenced by a number of factors including concrete ingredients, mixture proportions, ratio of water-to-cementitious materials, type of production, age, and curing condition with a high degree of uncertainty. Due to its importance, it has been subjected to prediction tools for several years. Conventional methods of compressive strength prediction were mainly based on the linear and nonlinear regression methods [18–20]. It should be noted that these models were empirical ones and designed, tuned and formulated in the framework of linear or nonlinear functions like polynomials, partial polynomials and exponentials [18,21–23]. Recently, artificial intelligence-based techniques, like artificial neural networks [24–26] and so-called adaptive network-based fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) [27–29], have successfully been applied in this area.In light of suitable performance of DENFIS models for prediction purposes and because of the need for predictive models, this paper aims to introduce DENFIS models for approximation of the compressive strength of concrete and compare their efficiencies with those of regression, neural network and ANFIS models. As such, different DENFIS, regression, neural network and ANFIS models are used as prediction tools of the current study. The compressive strength and mixture proportions of dry-cast (no-slump) concrete are used for training and testing the models. No-slump concrete is commonly defined as concrete having slump of 0 to 25mm [30,31] with wide applications in production of prefabricated concrete products [30] such as concrete masonry units, paving blocks, prefabricated curbs, pipes and the like [32–37].As a statistical tool for investigating relationships between independent and dependent variables, regression modeling aims to develop empirical model(s) for system identifications and experimental studies. In such systems, estimation is based on search methods and optimization process which tries to minimize the norm of a residual vector. In this paper, a general parametric regression system proposed in the form of y=f(βi×xi) where f is the model's representative function, y is the model's output or dependent variable, βiare the parameters of the model, and xiare the independent variables.Artificial neural networks (ANN) are information processing structures that consist of a number of simple processing elements (PEs or “neurons”) with densely parallel interconnections. Each PE can receive weighted inputs from many other PEs, and communicate its outputs, if any, to many other PEs. Information is thus represented in a distributed fashion, across the weighted interconnections.To implement a neural network for modeling purposes, a set of input data are repeatedly presented to the network during a training session and the system learns how to simulate the target output values thought a training algorithm. There are various training algorithms available for such learning process based on backpropagation (BP) approach. Levenberg–Marquardt-type BP (LMBP) algorithm, proposed as a highly accurate algorithm in the literature, was used in this study [18].Basic architecture of an ANN system, which utilizes the LMBP as training algorithm, is presented in Fig. 1.ANFIS is the famous hybrid neuro-fuzzy network for modeling the complex systems [27–29]. ANFIS incorporates the human-like reasoning style of fuzzy systems through use of fuzzy sets and a linguistic model consisting of a set of If-Then fuzzy rules. The main strength of ANFIS models is that they are universal approximators [4,38] with the ability to solicit interpretable If-Then rules.The framework of ANFIS is shown in Fig. 2. For simplicity of illustration, only two inputs (x, y) and one output foutare considered in this figure.Dynamic evolving neural-fuzzy inference system (DENFIS) is a novel method which has rarely been used in modeling properties of concrete. In this regard, more details of this system are presented in the following subsections:The DENFIS models, both online and offline models, use Takagi–Sugeno (TSK) type fuzzy inference engine [39]. Such inference engine is composed of fuzzy rules indicated in Eq. (1), as follows:(1)ifx1isR11andx2isR12and…andxqisR1qthenyisf1(x1,x2,…,xq)ifx1isR21andx2isR22and…andxqisR2qthenyisf2(x1,x2,…,xq)⋮ifx1isRm1andx2isRm2and…andxqisRmqthenyisfm(x1,x2,…,xq)where “xjis Rij,”; i=1, 2,…,m, and j=1, 2,…,q, are m×q fuzzy propositions as m antecedents defined form m fuzzy rules. xj; j=1, 2,…,q are antecedent variables defined over universes of discourse. Xj; j=1, 2,…,q, and Rij; i=1, 2,…,m; and j=1, 2,…,q are fuzzy sets defined by their fuzzy membership functionsμRij; Xj→[0, 1]; i=1, 2, …,m, and j=1, 2,…, q. y is a consequent variable, and polynomial functions fi; i=1, 2,…,m are employed. In both DENFIS online and offline models, all fuzzy membership functions are triangular type functions which define as follows:(2)μ(x)=mf(x,a,b,c)=0,x≤ax−ab−a,a≤x≤bc−xc−b,b≤x,c0,c≤xwhere b is the value of the cluster center on the x dimension, a=b−d×Dthr, and c=b+d×Dthr, d=1.2 to 2; where the threshold value, Dthr, is a clustering parameter.If the consequent functions are crisp constants, i.e. fi(x1, x2, …xq)=Ci;i=1, 2, …, m, such system will be called a zero-order Takagi–Sugeno type fuzzy inference system. The system is called a first-order Takagi–Sugeno type fuzzy inference system if fi(x1, x2, …xq), i=1, 2, …, m, are linear functions. If these functions are nonlinear functions, it is called high-order Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy inference system.For an input vectorx0=[x10,x20,…,xq0], the result of inference y0 (the output of the system) is the weighted average of each rule's output indicated as follows:(3)y0=∑i=1mwifi(x10,x20,…,xq0)∑i=1mwiwherewi=∏j=1qμRij;i=1,2,…,m,j=1,2,…,q.In this part, the learning process of online first-order Takagi–Sugeno type DENFIS model is presented. This model uses the first-order Takagi–Sugeno type fuzzy rules [16]. The linear functions in the consequences can be created and updated by linear least-square estimator (LSE) [40] with learning data. Each of the linear functions can be expressed as follows:(4)y=β0+β0x1+β2x2+…+βqxqA learning data set, which is composed of p data pairs {([xi1, xi2, …xiq], yi), i=1, 2, …, p}, is used to obtain the linear functions. The least-square estimator ofb=[b0, b1, b2, …., bq]Tis calculated by applying the following equation:(5)b=(ATA)−1ATywhere(6)A=1x11x12…x1q1x21x22…x2q..........1xp1xp2…xpqand(7)y=y1,y2,…ypTIn the DENFIS models, a weighted least-square estimation method is used as follows [16,40](8)bw=ATWA−1ATWyandWis distance matrix in which wjmeasured as distance between jth example and the corresponding cluster center, j=1,2,…,p. Eqs. (5) and (8) can be rewritten in the following forms:(9)P=(ATA)−1b=PATy(10)Pw=(ATWA)−1bw=PwATWyA weighted recursive LSE with a forgetting factor is usually defined as follows:Let the kth row vector of a matrixAis denoted asakTand the kth element ofyis denoted as yk. Thenbcan be calculated iteratively as follows:(11)bk+1=bk+wk+1Pk+1ak+1yk+1−ak+1TPkPk+1=1λPk−wk+1Pkak+1ak+1TPkλ+ak+1TPk,where k=n, n+1, … p−1; wk+1 is the weight of (k+1)th example defined by 1−dk+1 (dk+1 is the distance between the (k+1)th example and the corresponding cluster center); and λ is forgetting factor which typical value is between 0.8 and 1. The initial values of Pnand bnare calculated using Eq. (9).In DENFIS, the rules are created and updated within the input space partitioning obtained with the use of the so-called evolving clustering method (ECM) [16], and Eqs. (2) and (10). If no rule insertion is applied as an initialization procedure, the following steps are used for creating the first m fuzzy rules and calculating their function's initial values ofPandb:(1)Take the first n learning data pairs from the learning data set.Apply online clustering using ECM to obtain m cluster centers.For every cluster centerCi, find m data points pi, i=1, 2, …, m,which their positions in the input space are the closest to the center.To obtain a fuzzy rule that corresponds to a cluster, create the antecedent of the fuzzy rule with the position of the cluster center and Eq. (2). Use Eq. (9) to obtain the values ofPandbfrom the pidata pairs and create the function y as the consequence of the fuzzy rule. The distances between pidata points and the cluster center are taken as the weights in Eq. (9).In the above steps, m, n and p are parameters of online learning process, and the value of p should be greater than the number of input elements q, i.e. p>q.With new data pairs entered into the system, new fuzzy rules may be created and some existing rules may be updated. A new fuzzy rule is created when a new cluster center is created by the ECM algorithm. The antecedent of the new fuzzy rule is formed with the use of Eq. (2). Alternatively, existing fuzzy rules are updated by using Eq. (11) for a new data pair if the distances from the rule nodes (represent the rule antecedents and the input vector in the input space) are not greater than 2×Dthr. The distances between these rule nodes and the data point in the input space are taken as the weights in Eq. (11). Antecedents of fuzzy rules may be changed by the ECM algorithm. A fuzzy rule then will have a new antecedent calculated with the use of Eq. (2).The Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy inference system utilized in DENFIS is a dynamic inference. In addition to dynamically creating and updating fuzzy rules, the DENFIS online model has some major differences from the other inference systems. For each input vector, the DENFIS model chooses m fuzzy rules from the whole fuzzy rule set to forma current inference system. This operation depends on the position of the current input vector in the input space. In the case of two input vectors that are very close to each other, especially in the DENFIS offline model, the inference system may have the same fuzzy rule inference group. In the DENFIS online model, however, the corresponding inference systems may be different even if two input vectors are exactly the same. It is due to the reason that these two input vectors are presented to the system at different time moments, so the fuzzy rules used for the first input vector might have been updated before the second input vector has arrived. Another major difference is that the antecedents of the fuzzy rules chosen to form an inference system for input vector may vary depending on its position in the input space.As the main objective of this research is to assess the performances of online and offline DENFIS models in predicting compressive strength of the dry-cast concrete, it was needed to collect data and prepare a database for training and testing the models.Dry-cast concrete mixtures were made using different proportions of Portland cement, silica fume, water, siliceous filler, and coarse and fine aggregates. The chemical and physical properties of the used materials are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. Table 3shows the mixture proportions and 28-day compressive strength of the produced dry-cast concretes. Totally, 96 records of dry-cast concrete were used to prepare the training–testing database. Of 96 samples, 79 and 17 samples were randomly chosen for training (interpolation) and testing (extrapolation) of the proposed models, respectively. The structure of the input–output of the modeler systems is schematically shown in Fig. 3. In this figure, the input parameters include amounts of Portland cement (C), silica fume (SF), water (W), fine aggregates (FA), coarse aggregates (CA), and filler (FI) by weight per unit volume of concrete. The output parameter is 28-day compressive strength of dry cast concrete (28-day CS). Table 4summarizes ranges of input and output data used for the modeling purposes.It should be noted that a simple linear normalization was applied on the rough input/output data to convert the real input/output values in the interval of [Minimum, Maximum] to the corresponding input/output values in the interval of [0.1, 0.9]. This normalization was done to prevent the saturation problem and consequently avoid low rate of training of the models [18,41,42].Three norms were used for comparative evaluation on the performance of the studied models. These norms were non-dimensional error index (NDEI) [42], average of absolute error (AAE) and correlation factor (CF) [18] between model's results and actual data. The NDEI and CF are calculated as follows:(12)NDEI=1N∑i=1N(T(i)−O(i))2σ(T)(13)CF=∑i=1N(T(i)−T¯)×(O(i)−O¯)∑i=1N(T(i)−T¯)2×∑i=1N(O(i)−O¯)2where T(i) is the desired (actual) output, O(i) is the predicted output, σ(T) is the standard deviation of the target series,T¯is the mean value of desired outputs,O¯is the mean value of predicted outputs.The obtained correlation factors vary between −1 to 1. When the CF is closer to ±1, it means higher correlation between the actual data and model's output. On the other hand, the lower NDEI stands for the better results with lower errors.Average of absolute error (AAE) was used as another index to evaluate performance of models in training and testing. The AAE is estimated according to Eq. (14).(14)AAE=∑i=1nEr(i)nwhere n is the number of samples, and Er is the error percentage for each sample defined as follows:(15)Er(i)=T(i)−O(i)T(i)×100

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The current study was intended to evaluate the capability of dynamic evolving neural-fuzzy inference system (DENFIS) in predicting compressive strength of no-slump concrete mixtures and compare their performances with those of regression, neural networks, and ANFIS models. Three groups of DENFIS models; namely DENON, DENFO and DENHO which, respectively, used online first-order, offline first-order and high-order TSK inference systems; were proposed for prediction purposes. Different neural network, ANFIS and regression models were developed for comparison purposes. The prediction performances of the elite DENFIS model were compared with those of the elite regression, neural network and ANFIS models. Based on the results of the current study, the following conclusions can be drawn:-Based on the results of training performances, the DENON and DENHO models were able to predict the compressive strength, while DENFO models were identified as unsatisfactory models. The DENHO models showed better performance indices than those of the DENON models.Decreases in the distance value for the DENHO models, as the best DENFIS models, increased the accuracy of training.DENHO2, as the model using high order TSK inference system and distance value of 0.05 showed the best performance amongst the DENFIS models. Neural network model with 5 neurons in each hidden layer, ANFIS model with Bell-shape (or triangular or Gaussian) membership function and polynomial regression model were selected as the elite models of the other prediction tools.Comparison between performance of the selected models emphasized the capability of the proposed high-order DENFIS model. Its performance in prediction of testing data was similar to or slightly better than that of the elite neural network and ANFIS models. The performances of all elite artificial models were significantly better than that of the elite regression models.