@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy fault tree analysis for patient safety risk modeling in healthcare under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The present study analyzes healthcare related systems faults due to medical errors using available uncertain data.A novel fuzzy fault tree analysis(FFTA) has been developed for this purpose which applies fault tree, trapezoidal fuzzy number, alpha-cut set, weakest t-norm (Tw ) based approximate arithmetic operations to find the fuzzy probability of top event.Computed results have been compared with results obtained from existing techniques.Results suggest that newly developed FFTA reduce the accumulating phenomenon of fuzziness by adopting the weakest t-norm (Tw) based approximate arithmetic operations.Critical components of the system have been ranked by using the Tanaka et al.'s approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Healthcare,Fuzzy sets,Trapezoidal fuzzy number,Fault tree analysis,The weakest-t-norm (T,ω,),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nowadays healthcare becoming more important aspect for everybody. Healthcare institutions now giving more attention to their patients’ safety by reducing the frequency of medical errors and trying to provide all kinds of best facilities to them. Clinical processes can be understood as a series of interactions between patients, providers, and technologies. Therefore, there are some chances exist for medical errors due to the involvement of human beings and machines. A number of tools exist to prospectively analyze processes in healthcare which generally needs precise numerical data. In general, available or extracted data is not precise and sufficient to assess the clinical processes upto a desired degree of accuracy due to various practical and economic reasons. Thus, collected data may have some sort of uncertainties and quantification of these uncertainties should be done very carefully before analysing further. In this paper, a new fuzzy fault tree approach has been presented for patient safety risk modeling in healthcare. This approach applies fault-tree, trapezoidal fuzzy numbers, α-cut set, and the weakest-t-norm (Tω) based approximate arithmetic operations to obtain fuzzy failure probability of the system. The effectiveness of the developed approach is illustrated with two different kinds of problems taken from literature related to healthcare. Also, Tanaka et al.'s approach has been used to rank the critical basic events of the considered problems. Computed results have been compared with results obtained from other existing techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As the living standard of human beings increases due to the increase in their economical and social levels, the need in healthcare is also increasing. Here, the term healthcare can be defined as a series of processes with a number of interrelated interventions leading to a particular outcome. For example, for a patient to receive the correct medication, there is a process in which a drug is first prescribed, then dispensed and then administered as shown in Fig. 1[1]. In order to execute the safe medication treatment process, each of the steps shown in Fig. 1 must be completed correctly by giving full consideration to patient safety. However, a Joint Health Commission report indicates that medical errors result in the death of between 44,000 and 98,000 patients every year and concludes that healthcare is a high risk, error prone industry [2]. The healthcare institutions are exceedingly complicated systems where the likelihood of happening accidents, errors, close calls, sentinel events, failures, and adverse events are always exist. One possibility to have a safer healthcare system is to support the healthcare processes such as prescribing, medication administration by information technology (IT). Research showed that IT applications can have a potential to reduce clinical errors (e.g. medication errors, diagnostic errors), to support healthcare professionals (e.g. availability of timely, up-to-date patient information), to increase the efficiency of care (e.g. less waiting for patients) and to improve the quality of care [3]. In recent years, healthcare systems have been involved in a number of different changes, ranging from technological to normative ones, all asking for increased efficiency [4].Since patient safety related problems are major concern for healthcare institutions around the world, so the healthcare institutions have to pointed out the main reasons of different kinds of medical errors and to find out the ways for reducing their frequency. In healthcare, more proactive risk analysis techniques should be applied for better and safe medication processes [5]. There are several examples where reliability analysis methods such as root cause analysis (RCA), failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA), fault tree analysis (FTA) and event tree analysis (ETA) have been applied for patient safety risk modeling in healthcare [3,6–9]. Fault tree analysis has been extensively used as a powerful technique in health related risk analysis from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives [8–10]. Hyman and Johnson [7] presents a FTA of the patient harm-related clinical alarms failures. They have also addressed human factor issues associated with setting, observing, and responding to alarms. Park and Lee [8] constructed a FTA of handwashing process to investigate the causes for faults in hygiene management. They suggested FTA as a good alternative approach to hazard analysis in hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP) system implementation. Abecassis et al. [9] used FTA for preventing wrong-site surgery. They also suggested that FTA can be adapted by institutions or specialties to lead to more targeted interventions to increase redundancy and reliability within the preoperative process. Raheja and Escano [10] pointed out some medical error prone areas where FTA can be implemented. Some of the suggested healthcare areas where FTA can be used are equipment failures and malfunctions, material faults, human errors, environment-related risks, management deficiencies, communication and measurement errors, etc.A conventional FTA is completely understood by the basic events represented by exact values of failure probabilities and logical gates used to combine all the basic events as per their relationships, and applies Boolean algebra to estimate system top event failure probability [11,12]. In practice, the exact values of system components’ failure probabilities are difficult to obtain for any large and complex system due to lack of sufficient amount of data and thus the problem is associated with data uncertainty [13,14]. In most of the medical error related problems, uncertainty factor is not quantified significantly. As, there are mainly two causes of uncertainty, one is due to randomness (aleatory) while other is associated with lack of knowledge and information (epistemic) [15]. Uncertainty due to randomness is dealt with probability theory while later one is quantified using fuzzy set theory which was introduced by Zadeh way back in 1965 [16]. Fuzzy sets theory has been successfully employed to analyze the fault tree of various types of engineering and health related systems [3,17]. Generally, triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs) and fuzzy arithmetic operations are utilized to assess fuzzy probability of top event for any complicated system under vague environment due to simplicity in calculations [18]. Tanaka et al. [19] in their pioneering work developed a fuzzy fault tree analysis (FFTA) method by replacing crisp probability in traditional FTA with trapezoidal fuzzy number (TPFN) to obtain system's fault interval. Singer [20], Cheng and Mon [21], Chen [22], Hong and Do [23] and Fuh et al. [24] analyzed fuzzy reliability of non-repairable two grinding machines working next to each other by utilizing different types of approaches. Singer [20] used LR-type fuzzy number to quantify uncertainties and utilized extended algebraic operations while Cheng and Mon [21] applied α-cut interval arithmetic operations. Chen [22] proposed a new and faster method to analyze fuzzy system reliability using fuzzy number arithmetic operations, where the reliability of each system component is represented by a triangular fuzzy number (TFN). Hong and Do [23] utilized Tω(the weakest t-norm)-based addition and multiplication while Fuh et al. [24] used level (λ,1) interval-valued fuzzy numbers to examine the fuzzy reliability of the system. Mon and Cheng [25] considered different types of fuzzy membership functions and nonlinear programming approach to analyze the fuzzy reliability of a non-repairable sump-pump system. Huang et al. [26] proposed posbist FTA method for the situation when historical data are scarce or the failure probability is extremely small. Ferdous et al. [27] presented a methodology for a fuzzy based computer-aided FTA and applied their approach to analyze the fuzzy reliability of an activated carbon filter safeguard system. Some researchers use vague sets while some of them applied intuitionistic fuzzy sets for assessing the failure probabilities of different types of systems under uncertain environment [28–33]. To handle uncertainty in healthcare related problems, vague and intuitionistic fuzzy sets may not be very good choices as they rely on hesitation theory. In the present study, an attempt has been made to compute the fuzzy failure probabilities of healthcare systems due to medical errors by developing an FFTA using available uncertain data. To quantify uncertainty, present study uses TPFN for representing basic events’ uncertain failure probabilities. For computing system top event fuzzy failure probability, Tωbased approximate fuzzy arithmetic operations given by Lin et al. [34] for TFN have been extended for TPFN and then applied. Here, Tωbased approximate fuzzy arithmetic operations have been used because they give lesser fuzzy accumulation and consequently based on more accurate computed results, appropriate action plans could be chosen to reduce the frequency of medical errors in healthcare systems.This paper is organized in six sections. Basic concepts related to the present study is given in Section 2. Section 3 briefly describes the process of existing FTA and FFTA while proposed FFTA is developed in Section 4 with detailed procedural steps. In Section 5, the proposed FFTA along with three other existing techniques have been applied to two different kinds of healthcare related problems taken from literature namely a medication pump failing to deliver medicine to a patient, and execution of redundant processes during inpatient transfers to radiology, respectively. The computed results have been compared graphically and given in tabular form. In Section 5, Tanaka et al.'s [19] approach has also been applied to find the most and least critical basic events for the considered problems. The concluding remarks are given in Section 6.This section is devoted to giving brief idea about some basic concepts related to fuzzy sets theory including definitions of fuzzy sets, fuzzification, trapezoidal fuzzy number, fuzzy arithmetic operations, t-norm, the weakest t-norm (Tω), Tωbased approximate arithmetic operations and defuzzification, respectively.Fuzzy sets were first introduced by Zadeh [16] in 1965 for quantifying uncertainty due to imprecision and vagueness. According to fuzzy sets theory, an element possess varying degrees of membership to the fuzzy set on the real continuous interval [0,1]. Mathematically, a fuzzy setA˜in the universe of discourse U can be defined as a set of ordered pairs and is given by,(1)A˜={(x,μA˜(x)):x∈U}where,μA˜(x)∈[0,1]is the degree of membership of an element x in the fuzzy setA˜.In practice, the accurate values of any model parameters reflecting a real system are not known precisely due to unavailability of sufficient amount of data and complete knowledge about the system, and thus the issue is a concern of uncertainty. In order to quantify uncertainty, fuzzification of model parameters’ values or collected data are done by system experts. In the process of fuzzification, crisp data is transformed into fuzzy data with the help of fuzzy membership functions. In literature, a variety of fuzzy membership functions exist for performing fuzzification including triangular, trapezoidal, Cauchy and Gaussian, etc. [25]. For analysing safety and healthcare related problems, trapezoidal fuzzy membership functions or more simply trapezoidal fuzzy numbers (TPFNs) are often utilized to provide more precise descriptions and to obtain more accurate solutions [27]. In this paper, TPFNs are used for quantifying data uncertainty associated with basic events. Mathematically, a TPFNA˜is expressed asA˜=(a1,a2,a3,a4)and defined by the following membership function(2)μA˜(x)=0,x≤a1x−a1a2−a1,a1≤x≤a21,a2≤x≤a3a4−xa4−a3,a3≤x≤a40,x≥a4which can be pictorially represented by Fig. 2[36].LetA˜=(a1,a2,a3,a4)andB˜=(b1,b2,b3,b4)be two positive trapezoidal fuzzy numbers (i.e. a1>0, b1>0), then the four basic fuzzy arithmetic operations used in the study are given in Table 1.A t-norm is a binary function, t:[0, 1]×[0, 1]→[0, 1] which satisfies the axioms of (i) commutativity, (ii) associativity, (iii) monotonicity and (iv) boundary condition [34].In literature, various kind of t-norms exist such as min(x, y), x×y, max(0, x+y−1) and Tω(x, y). This study uses only Tωnorm (Eq. (3)) due to its shape preserving characteristics while applying fuzzy arithmetic operations [23].(3)Tω(x,y)=x,ify=1,y,ifx=1,0,otherwiseAnother advantage of Tωnorm based approximate fuzzy arithmetic operations is that they give smaller fuzzy accumulation within uncertain environment [34]. These advantages inspired researchers to use Tωnorm for successfully decreasing growing phenomena of fuzziness in reliability assessment of complex systems.Lin et al. [34] gave Tωbased approximate fuzzy arithmetic operations defined on TFNs. Following same logical approach, this section introduces Tωbased approximate fuzzy arithmetic operations defined for TPFNs. LetA˜=(a1,a2,a3,a4)andB˜=(b1,b2,b3,b4)be two positive TPFNs, then Tωnorm based four basic fuzzy arithmetic operations used in this study are given in Table 2.Defuzzification is the process of converting a fuzzy quantity into a precise numerical quantity. In literature, various methods have been developed for this purpose [36]. Among the many methods available in literature for defuzzification, present study utilizes center of gravity (COG) method. LetμA˜(x)be the membership function of the output fuzzy setA˜, then the algebraic expression of the COG method is given by(4)A¯=∫xμA˜(x)dx∫μA˜(x)dxwhere,A¯is the defuzzified value of the output fuzzy setA˜. Eq. (4) can be applied to find the defuzzified value of a TPFN. LetA˜=(a1,a2,a3,a4)be a TPFN then its defuzzified value can be computed by following expression [35].(5)A¯=∫a1a2x−a1a2−a1xdx+∫a2a3xdx+∫a3a4a4−xa4−a3xdx∫a1a2x−a1a2−a1dx+∫a2a3dx+∫a3a4a4−xa4−a3dx=a32+a42+a3a4−a12−a22−a1a23(a4+a3−a2−a1)FTA is an extensively used technique in risk analysis [11,12]. This technique was developed in 1962 at Bell Telephone Laboratories in USA for safety evaluation of the Minuteman launch control system. A fault tree is a logical and graphical description of various combinations of failure events to estimate the probability of an accident from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Qualitative analysis of a fault tree helps to find out its minimal-cut sets while its quantitative analysis computes the failure probability of top event using its basic events’ exact failure probabilities. A conventional FTA can be easily understood by the basic events representing core causes of system failures while logic gates (OR and AND) are used to represent logical relationships between the basic and top events. The AND gate is used to represent the occurrence of an event requires the happening of all its related causes simultaneously while, the OR gate means that the occurrence of an event requires the happening of any of its related cause. Boolean algebra is applied to estimate system top event failure probability. Once the FTA is constructed for the system, its quantitative analysis can be performed by following the traditional assumptions and applying mathematical operations given in Table 3(first row) for n basic events with failure possibilities qi's.FTA is based on the assumption that there are sound and clear success and failure states in a system and that failures occur at random. So, the quantitative evaluation of the top event in FTA is highly dependent on the quality of knowledge such as failure probabilities of basic events and interdependence between them. The estimation of precise values of basic events’ failure probabilities are scarce or either difficult to acquire. In this context, fuzzy fault tree analysis (FFTA) which is an extension of classical FTA may be used [14]. A FFTA can be implemented when:•there are no such clear boundaries exist between failure and success states of the system,the probability of system failure cannot be calculated precisely due to the lack of sufficient amount of data and due to the existence of uncertainty in the data,there is subjective evaluation of the reliability.To implement fuzzy sets in proposed FFTA, we used following Definitions 4.1 and 4.2 to implement OR and AND operations, respectively.Definition 4.1LetA˜=(a1,a2,a3,a4)andB˜=(b1,b2,b3,b4)be two TPFNs then the failure possibilityF(A˜∪B˜)forA˜>0andB˜>0can be defined using OR operator [19,36] as(6)F(A˜∪B˜)=1˜⊖Tω[(1˜⊖TωF(A˜))⊗Tω(1˜⊖TωF(B˜))]Definition 4.2LetA˜=(a1,a2,a3,a4)andB˜=(b1,b2,b3,b4)be two TPFNs then the failure possibilityF(A˜∩B˜)forA˜>0andB˜>0can be defined using AND operator [19,36] as(7)F(A˜∩B˜)=F(A˜)⊗TωF(B˜)To measure the degree of influence of every bottom event in the FFTA, this paper utilizes V measure introduced by Tanaka et al. [19] and defined as follows:Definition 4.3Letq˜Tdenote the fuzzy failure probability of the system top event which depends on its components’ fuzzy failure probabilities. If system is constituted by n number of components whose fuzzy failure probabilities (q˜i) are TPFNs then the fuzzy failure probability of system top event is given by the equation,(8)q˜T=q˜T(q˜1,q˜2,…,q˜i,…,q˜n)≡(qT1,qT2,qT3,qT4)whereq˜T=(qT1,qT2,qT3,qT4)is a TPFN.Letq˜Tibe the fuzzy failure probability of system top event after preventing system ith component failure (i.e.q˜i=0˜) then the value ofq˜Tiis given by the equation,(9)q˜Ti=q˜Ti(q˜1,q˜2,…,0˜,…,q˜n)≡(qTi1,qTi2,qTi3,qTi4)whereq˜Ti=(qTi1,qTi2,qTi3,qTi4)is a TPFN.Then the index V, measures the difference betweenq˜Tandq˜Ti, and defined as(10)V(q˜T,q˜Ti)=(qT1−qTi1)+(qT2−qTi2)+(qT3−qTi3)+(qT4−qTi4)>0V(q˜T,q˜Ti)indicates the extent of improvement in eliminating the failure of the ith component. IfV(q˜T,q˜Ti)≥V(q˜T,q˜Tj)then preventing failure of ith component is more effective than the preventing failure of jth component of the system.The following steps are performed for developing proposed FFTA.Step 1.Construct fault-tree logic diagram.Construct fault-tree diagram by fault-tree logical symbols and trace back the entire process from top to bottom events.Step 2.Obtain bottom events failure possibilities in the form of TPFNs.Possible failure of each bottom event is obtained by aggregating experts knowledge and experience, and represented in terms of TPFNs.Step 3.Calculate system top event fuzzy failure probability usingTwbased fuzzy arithmetic operations on TPFNs.Using fault-tree diagram and possible failure of bottom events represented in TPFNs, the system top event fuzzy failure probability can be computed utilizingTwbased fuzzy arithmetic operations given in Table 2, and expressions given in Table 3 (third row) for OR and AND gates which are based on Eqs. (6) and (7), respectively. Also, the defuzzified value of system top event can be easily computed using its fuzzy failure probability and Eq. (5).Step 4.Compute system top event fuzzy reliability.Compute system top event fuzzy reliability which is equal to one minus the fuzzy failure probability of the top event.Step 5.Find the most and least influential bottom events of the system reliability.Using the definition of index V given in Eq. (10), calculateV(q˜T,q˜Ti)∀iby eliminating the ith bottom event in the fault-tree diagram, and find the most and least influential events by findingmaxiV(q˜T,q˜Ti))andminiV(q˜T,q˜Ti))values, respectively for the whole system.Step 6.Analyze the results and give suggestions based on it for improving the system performance.To illustrate the proposed method of FFTA, two different kinds of examples have been taken from literature related to healthcare. The first example is a medication pump failing to deliver medication [1] while the second example of execution of redundant processes during inpatient transfers to radiology is adopted from Ong and Coiera [37].The FTA of a medication pump failing to deliver medication to a patient is shown in Fig. 3[1]. This fault tree model has four combinations of failures leading to the top event i.e. medication not delivered to patient. Immediately below the top event is an OR gate meaning that any individual item below the gate is sufficient by itself to cause the next higher level failure state. For example, pump failure, clamp not removed from tube, pump not activated, and tubing kinked by patient movement are each independently associated with the top event. In this example, the pump and the alarm work together. Pump failure event occurs due to two events (the pump stops and the alarm does not alert to the practitioner regarding the pump stoping) connected by an AND gate. The pump stops due to either an electrical power failure, a pump motor failure, or tubing occlusion.The fault tree in Fig. 3 is typical of how the equipment designer might see the problem. The designer has produced an outstanding product design whose output is concordant with a six sigma level of reliability (three defects per million). For the equipment manufacturer, a pump failure (undetected stopping of the pump) is the top level event of interest. In the healthcare setting, human behaviors and errors are very important contributors to failure of the system. In this fault tree, we have considered three human errors plus one patient factor. Marx and Slonim [1] considered the values of failure probabilities of all the basic events as 0.001 (column 3 of Table 4). However, this could not be possible for real system, and so we have considered these values as different TPFNs as given in Table 4 (column 4).For connecting the fault tree diagram of any problem, this research uses logical node to describe “and” gate with the sign of ∩, and “OR” gate with the sign of ∪. The fault tree shown in Fig. 3 can now be equivalently expressed by following mathematical equation.(11)T1=K1∪F1∪G1∪H1=(I1∩J1)∪F1∪G1∪H1=((A1∪B1∪C1)∩(D1∪E1))∪F1∪G1∪H1Let qjrepresent the failure possibility of bottom event j, then the mathematical expression for failure possibility (qT1) of top event “Medication not delivered to the patient” can be formulated by using Eq. (11) and expressions given in Table 3 (first row). The formulated mathematical expressions for system top event failure possibility is given in the following equation.(12)qT1=1−[(1−qK1)×(1−qF1)×(1−qG1)×(1−qH1)]=1−[(1−qI1×qJ1)×(1−qF1)×(1−qG1)×(1−qH1)]=1−[(1−(1−(1−qA1)×(1−qB1)×(1−qC1))×(1−(1−qD1)×⋯(1−qE1)))×(1−qF1)×(1−qG1)×(1−qH1)]Traditionally, probability method is adopted for dealing with the uncertainty [1,12]. However, we know that probability can only quantify the randomness of success or failure events. This research calculated the failure possibility of top event “Medication not delivered to the patient” using Eq. (12) and collected data tabulated in Table 4 (column 3) as follows:(13)qT1=1−[(1−(1−(1−qA1)×(1−qB1)×(1−qC1))×(1−(1−qD1)×⋯(1−qE1)))×(1−qF1)×(1−qG1)×(1−qH1)]=1−[(1−(1−(1−0.001)(1−0.001)(1−0.001))(1−(1−0.001)(1−0.001)))⋯⋯(1−0.001)(1−0.001)(1−0.001)]=0.00301After the above calculation, we find that the failure probability of top event “Medication not delivered to the patient” is approximately 0.00301 [1] and the reliability of “Medication delivered to the patient” is 0.99699.Huang et al. [26] posbist FTA method is applicable when the failure probability of a system is extremely small or when essential statistical data are scarce. The method could be applied to predict and diagnose a system failures and evaluate its reliability and safety. Using Eq. (11) and crisp failure possibilities given in Table 4 (column 3), calculations have been done for Huang et al. [26] approach to access the failure possibility of top event “Medication not delivered to the patient” which are as followings:(14)Poss(I1)=max(Poss(A1),Poss(B1),Poss(C1))=max(0.001,0.001,0.001)=0.001(15)Poss(J1)=max(Poss(D1),Poss(E1))=max(0.001,0.001)=0.001(16)Poss(K1)=min(Poss(I1),Poss(J1))=min(0.001,0.001)=0.001Then, the top event failure possibility can be calculated as(17)Poss(T1)=max(Poss(K1),Poss(F1),Poss(G1),Poss(H1))=min(0.001,0.001,0.001,0.001)=0.001Thus, the failure possibility of top event “Medication not delivered to the patient” is 0.001 and the reliability of “Medication delivered to the patient” is 0.999.Sometimes it is difficult to assign a unique crisp numerical value between 0 and 1 to a failure probability. In that situation, the failure probability can be defined as a closed interval [0,1]. Specifically, to quantify the uncertainty, fuzzy sets theory can be used. To compute the fuzzy failure probability of top event, Tanaka et al. [19] approach can be used. To implement this approach, fuzzy arithmetic operations given in Table 1, the definitions of OR and AND gates given in Table 3 (second row), and the fuzzy failure probabilities of the fundamental events given in Table 4 (column 4) have been used. The mathematical calculations are given below.(18)q˜T1=1˜⊖[(1˜⊖(1˜⊖(1˜⊖q˜A1)⊗(1˜⊖q˜B1)⊗(1˜⊖q˜C1))⊗(1˜⊖(1˜⊖q˜D1)⊗⋯(1⊖q˜E1)))⊗(1⊖q˜F1)⊗(1⊖q˜G1)⊗(1⊖q˜H1)]=(0.0015445,0.0020481,0.0039078,0.0047126)The computed fuzzy probability or possibility of failure of top event “Medication not delivered to the patient” is (0.0015445, 0.0020481, 0.0039078, 0.0047126) while the fuzzy reliability of “Medication delivered to the patient” is (0.9952874, 0.9960922, 0.9979519, 0.9984555). The defuzzified values of fuzzy failure probability and fuzzy reliability are 0.0030598 and 0.9969402, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
