@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal power flow under both normal and contingent operation conditions using the hybrid fuzzy particle swarm optimisation and Nelder–Mead algorithm (HFPSO–NM)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The HFPSO–NM algorithm is considered and successfully applied to solve different types of OPF problems.The simulation results of the proposed algorithm are compared to those in the reported literatures.Illustrate the convergence capability characteristics of proposed method.A novel algorithm is proposed and the results clearly show accuracy of the technique comparing to other algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal power flow,Fuzzy logic,Particle swarm optimisation,Nelder–Mead method,HFPSO–NM,Voltage stability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we solve the optimal power flow problem using by the new hybrid fuzzy particle swarm optimisation and Nelder–Mead (NM) algorithm (HFPSO–NM). The goal of combining the NM simplex method and the particle swarm optimisation (PSO) method is to integrate their advantages and avoid their disadvantages. The NM simplex method is a very efficient local search procedure, but its convergence is extremely sensitive to the selected starting point. In addition, PSO belongs to the class of global search procedures, but it requires significant computational effort. In the other side, in the PSO algorithm, two variables(Φ1,Φ2)are traditionally constant; in this case, due to the importance of these two factors, we decided to obtain these two as fuzzy parameters. The proposed method is firstly examined on some benchmark mathematical functions. Then, it is tested an IEEE 30-bus standard test system by considering different objective functions for normal and contingency conditions to solve optimal power flow. The simulation results indicate that the FPSO–NM algorithm is effective in solving the mathematical functions and the OPF problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Economic operation is one of the serious problems for all power systems. Optimal power flow (OPF) is a powerful tool for the strategic planning and operation of power systems. The solution of the OPF problem leads to the selection of an objective function in networks and generator operation constraints for economic and safe operation [1,2].Many optimisation techniques have been developed to solve the OPF problem, which is a non-linear optimisation problem with static constraints. In addition, the OPF problem has been considered in power system research because of the enhancement of classical mathematics methods. The classical mathematics-based programming methods, such as linear programming, non-linear programming, quadratic programming (QP), the interior point methods (IPMs) and the Newton-based method, have been completely investigated in the literature [3–5]. The OPF problem has more than one local optimum because it is an extremely non-linear and multi-modal optimisation problem. In addition, there are no criteria to select a local optimum as the global optimum. Hence, local optimisation techniques are not suitable for such optimisation problems. Therefore, conventional optimisation methods, which are based on gradients and derivatives, are not able to determine the global optimum.Generally, the OPF problem is an optimisation problem with a non-convex, non-smooth and non-differentiable objective function. Many intelligent optimisation methods have been developed to overcome the above mentioned issues and limitations of the classical methods for solving the OPF problem. A wide range of evolutionary optimisation algorithms, such as the evolutionary programming algorithm (EP) [6], improved evolutionary programming (IEP) [7], the improved genetic algorithm (IGA) [8], simulated annealing (SA) [9], Tabu search (TS) [10], differential evaluation (DE) [11–14], modified differential evaluation (MDE) [15] and biogeography-based optimisation (BBO) [16] have been used to solve the OPF problem.Recently, a novel optimisation algorithm called particle swarm optimisation (PSO) has been presented to solve many optimisation problems of power systems [17–19], PSO belongs to the class of global search procedures but requires significant computational effort. The PSO algorithm is a population-based approach that utilises a set of candidate solutions, called particles, that move along the search space. The trajectory followed by each particle is guided by the particle's own memory and its interaction with other particles. The specific method of adjusting the trajectory of each particle is modelled after the means by which a flock of birds or a school of fish interact with each other. This interaction is used in guiding the particles towards good minima in the search space of the problem. At the end of the algorithm's execution, a few of the particles have converged to the optimal solutions. In addition, the PSO algorithm has been applied to determine optimal power flow [17,20]. Traditionally, in the PSO algorithm, two acceleration variables(Φ1,Φ2)are constant; in this case, due to the importance of these two accelerations, we decided to obtain these two as fuzzy parameters [21].It is an indubitable fact that for several problems a simple Evolutionary algorithm might be good enough to find the desired solution. As reported in the literature, there are several types of problems where a direct evolutionary algorithm could fail to obtain a convenient (optimal) solution [22]. This clearly paves way to the need for hybridisation of evolutionary algorithms with other optimisation algorithms, machine learning techniques, heuristics etc. Some of the possible reasons for hybridisation are as follows [23]:1.To improve the performance of the evolutionary algorithm (example: speed of convergence).To improve the quality of the solutions obtained by the evolutionary algorithm.To incorporate the evolutionary algorithm as part of a larger system.Accordingly, all algorithms that search for an extremum of a cost function perform exactly the same, when averaged over all possible cost functions [24]. According to the Wolpert and Macready [24], if algorithm A outperforms algorithm B on some cost functions, then loosely speaking there must exist exactly as many other functions where B outperforms A. Hence, from a problem solving perspective it is difficult to formulate a universal optimisation algorithm that could solve all the problems. Hybridisation may be the key to solve practical problems.In recent years, BF–NM method has been used to solve engineering optimisation problems [32]. Nelder and Mead proposed the Nelder–Mead (NM) simplex and local search method, which was designed to solve the constrained optimisation problem without using gradient information. The NM simplex method is a very efficient local search procedure, but its convergence is extremely sensitive to the selected starting point. In this paper, the goal of combining the PSO and NM methods is to integrate their advantages and avoid their disadvantages [25]. The NM algorithm exploits local information and converges to the nearest optimal point [26], while the PSO algorithm belongs to the class of global search procedures.This paper introduces the application of the combination of the fuzzy PSO and NM (HFPSO–NM) algorithms to solve the OPF problem, which has not been previously applied to solve the OPF problem in the literature. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the formulation of the OPF problem. In Section 3, the constraints and control and state variables limits are presented, while Section 4 describes the fuzzy logic, PSO method and NM approach followed by the details of the proposed algorithm. Simulation results are presented in Section 5, and these results are compared to other methods, that were used for solving the OPF problem. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section 6.The OPF problem solution determines a certain objective function subject to various equality and inequality constraints [27]. Mathematically, the OPF problem can be presented as follows:(1)minF(x,u)subjectto:g(x,u)=0hmin≤h(x,u)≤hmaxwhereF(x,u),g(x,u)andh(x,u)are a cost function and the equality (power flow equations) and inequality (practical limit of control and state variables) constraints, respectively. In addition, u and x are control (independent variables) and state (dependent variables) variables, respectively. Generally, the control variables of power systems are the output active power of generators except the slack bus, the voltage of the generator bus, transformer taps, phase shifters and the reactive compensator. In addition, the state variables are the voltage magnitude of the load buses, the angle magnitude of the buses, transmission line loading, the output reactive power of generators and the active power of the slack bus.Equality and inequality constraints have been considered for solving the proposed OPF problem.Active and reactive power balance constraints are considered as follows:(2)PGi−PDi−∑j=1nViVjYijCos(θij−δi+δj)=0(3)QGi−QDi+∑j=1nViVjYijSin(θij−δi+δj)=0wherePGi,QGiare the active and reactive output powers of the generator at the ith bus. In addition,PDi,QDiare the active and reactive output powers of the load at the ith bus, andYijandθijare the elements i−j of the admittance matrix.These constraints satisfy the security and operational limits of the power system; these constraints are expressed as follows:(1)Active power limits(4)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimax,i=1,…,GNwherePGimax,PGiminare the maximum and minimum limits of the active power for each generator, respectively. The number of generators except at the slack bus isGN.Voltage magnitude limits(5)Vimin≤Vi≤Vimax,i=1,…,GNwhereVimaxandViminare the maximum and minimum voltage of the generators, respectively.Tap changing transformers(6)Timin≤Ti≤Timax,i=1,…,TNwhereTimaxandTiminare the maximum and minimum of the tap changing transformers, respectively. The number of tap changing transformers isTN.Reactive power injection sources(7)Qcimin≤Qci≤Qcimax,i=1,…,CNwhereQiminandQimaxare the minimum and maximum of the reactive power injection sources, respectively. The number of reactive power injection sources isCN.(1)Reactive power limits(8)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimax,i=1,…,GNQGimax,QGiminare the maximum and minimum limits of the reactive power for each generator, respectively.Active power limit of the slack bus(9)PG1min≤PG1≤PG1maxPGlmax,PGlminare the maximum and minimum limits of the active power of the slack generator.Voltage magnitude limits of the load buses(10)Vimin≤Vi≤Vimax,i=1,…,NLwhereVimaxandViminare the maximum and minimum voltage of the load buses, respectively. The number of load buses isNL.Transmission line loading(11)SLi≤SLimax,i=1,…,LNwhere, value ofSLimaxis the limit of transmission line loading for each line.In this paper, to solve the OPF problem, the hybrid fuzzy particle swarm optimisation algorithm and the Nelder–Mead method are used to minimise the cost function. Therefore, in this section, the fuzzy logic, PSO algorithm and NM method are introduced.Particle swarm optimisation (PSO) is an evolutionary computational technique which was introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 [28]. This optimisation method implements the natural swarm behaviour seen in many species of birds returning to roost, group of fish, etc. The PSO method may be used to find optimal (or near optimal) solutions to numerical and qualitative problems [21,28,29]. PSOs methods are inspired by particles moving around in the defined Search-Space. The particles in a PSO method have a position and a velocity. The PSO method remembers the best position found by any particle. Additionally, each particle remembers its own previously best-found position. A particle moves through the specified solution space along a trajectory defined by its velocity, the draw to return to a previous promising search area, and an attraction towards the best location discovered by its close neighbours. Particle swarm optimisation has been used for a wide range of search applications, as well as for specific optimisation tasks. PSO method can be easily model in most programming languages and has proven to be both effective and fast when applied to a diverse set of non-linear optimisation problems.The most striking difference between PSO and the other evolutionary soft computing algorithms is that PSO chooses the path of cooperation over competition. The other algorithms commonly use some form of decimation, survival of the fittest. In contrast, the PSO population is stable and individuals are not destroyed or created. Individuals are influenced by the best performance of their neighbours. Individuals eventually converge on optimal points in the problem domain. Traditionally, the PSO has no crossover between individuals and has no mutation, and other individuals never substitute particles during the run. Instead, the PSO refines its search by attracting the particles to positions with good solutions.Each particle remembers its own best position found so far in the exploration. This position is called the personal best and is denoted by Pbest. Additionally, among these Pbest, there is only one particle that has the best fitness, called the global best, which is denoted by Gbest. The velocity and position update equations of PSO are given by(12)Vi(t+1)=W⋅Vi(t)+Φ1⋅rand1⋅(Pbest,i(t)−Xi(t))+Φ2⋅rand2⋅(Gbest,i(t)−Xi(t))(13)Xi(t+1)=Xi(t)+Vi(t+1),i=1,…,nwhere Xi: The position of the ith particle; Vi: The velocity of the ith dimension; n: The dimension of the optimisation problem (number of decision variables); t: The numerator of iteration;(Φ1):Personal learning factor is a random number within the range [0,1], and is used to close the particle to the best value achieved by itself (Pbest);(Φ2):Social learning factor is also a random number within the range [0,1], and is used to close the particles with the best value achieved by the entire population (gbest).It is important to note thatΦ1andΦ2are factors which is assumedΦ2=Φ1. It is considered to equal tendency of particles for attaining the values of Gbestand Pbest. In this regard,Φ1andΦ2are two positive constants same references [30,31] are selectedΦ1=Φ2;rand1andrand2:Two separately generated uniformly distributed random numbers between 0 and 1; and W: Constriction Factor balances the local and general search of the PSO algorithm.In addition, constriction Factor is limited to the range 0.4–0.9 to increase the search space of the PSO algorithm. It is also considered as follows:(14)wt+1=wmax−wmax−wmintmax×twheretmaxis the maximum number of the iteration.The general procedure of the proposed FPSO–NM method is presented in this section. The method can be described as follows [21]:1.It receives a mathematical function to be optimised.It evaluates the role of PSO method.Fuzzy system receives the Error and Derivate of error (DError) as inputs to evaluate if it is necessary to change the parameters in the PSO.There is a fuzzy system that is used to change parameters of the PSO in this case change the value of social acceleration(Φ1)and cognitive acceleration(Φ2).Repeat the above steps until the termination criterion of the algorithm is met.The basic idea of the HFPSO–NM scheme is to combine the advantages of the individual methods using a fuzzy system to improve the parameters of the PSO when is necessary. As can be seen in the proposed HFPSO–NM method, it is the internal fuzzy system structure, which has the primary function of receiving as inputs (Error and DError) the result of the HFPSO–NM outputs. The fuzzy system is of Mamdani type because it is more common to use in this type of fuzzy control and the defuzzification method is the centroid. In this case, we are using this type of defuzzification because good results have been achieved in reference [21]. The membership functions are of triangular form in the inputs and outputs. Also, the membership functions were chosen of triangular form based on past experiences in this type of fuzzy control. The fuzzy system consists of 9 rules. For example, one rule is if error is High and DError is High then best value is High.Eq. (12) shows the fundamental part of the traditional PSO algorithm; where(Φ1)and(Φ2)are represented by constant values. Eq. (1) is modified for achieving the goal, and then, convert part of it in fuzzy parameters. Traditionally these two variables are constant, in this case, due to the importance of these two accelerations, we decided to obtain these two as fuzzy parameters. These values are fuzzy because they are changing dynamically when the PSO is running, and is defined by expressions(15)Φ1=∑i=1rΦ1μiΦ1(Φ1i)∑i=1rΦ1μiΦ1whererΦ1number of rules of the fuzzy system corresponding to(Φ1).(Φ1i)output result for rule i corresponding to(Φ1).μiΦ1is membership function of rule i corresponding to(Φ1).(16)Φ2=∑i=1rΦ2μiΦ2(Φ2i)∑i=1rΦ2μiΦ2whererΦ2number of rules of the fuzzy system corresponding to(Φ2).(Φ2i)output result for rule i corresponding to(Φ2).μiΦ2is membership function of rule i corresponding to(Φ2).Fuzzy system: In this case, we are using a fuzzy system and the structure of this fuzzy system is as follows:Number of Inputs: 2Number of Outputs: 2Number of membership functions: 3Type of the membership functions: TriangularNumber of rules: 9Defuzzification: CentroidA simple method has been developed for determining a local minimum point from a function of several variables by Nelder and Mead [25,26,32]. The NM method is used to compare the objective function values inn+1of the vertexX(k),k={1,2,…,n+1}to solve the n-dimensional optimisation problem. In a two dimensional space, the triangle shape is continuously constructed in each step to achieve a solution. The solutions (related to three vertex of triangle) are evaluated in each step and the worst solution W is determined. In addition, the centroid of the NM method is computed as,(17)C=(∑X(k))nwhere, the worst point W is kept out from the summation. Then the worst point is reflected along the centroid. The reflected solution is given by,(18)R=C+(C−W)Usually, the worst point W is replaced with the reflected point R. In addition, if the reflected point is better than any solution in the triangle, the triangle is further expanded as,(19)Re=C+η(C−W)where, η is called the expansion coefficient having the value greater than one.However, if the reflected solution R is worse than W, the triangle is contracted and the reflected solution is placed on the same side of the centroid. When solution R is not worse than W, but worse than any other solution in the triangle, the triangle is still contracted, but the reflection is allowed to remain on the other side of the centroid. Reflection is carried out as follows,(20)Rc=C±k(C−W)where, k is called the contraction coefficient having the value less than one.The solution W can be replaced with the each new vertex R, Re, or Rcfrom the next step onwards. The simplex algorithm is allowed to run for multiple steps before being terminated. Fig. 1shows a schematic of the Nelder–Mead algorithm in two dimensions.Integrating the advantages and avoiding the disadvantages of the NM method and the particle swarm optimisation algorithm is the main goal of combining these algorithms. The NM method is a very efficient local search procedure, but its convergence is extremely sensitive to the selected starting point. The PSO algorithm belongs to the class of global search procedures, but it requires much computational effort. Consequently, the new hybrid algorithm obtained by combining these two algorithms not only has high convergence speed but also is insensitive to the selected starting point. Fig. 2shows the schematic representation of the proposed hybrid fuzzy PSO–NM algorithm [25,26].The following steps are presented to implement the hybrid PSO–NM algorithm to solve the OPF problem:1.Determine the technical data of the power system and the parameters of the PSO and NM algorithms.Convert the optimisation problem along the constraints to the optimisation problem without constraints in a manner that it is presented as follows:(21)minF(x,u)+∑j=1NeqKjg(x,u)−02+Γ(22)Γi=Ui(h−hlim)2ifviolated0otherwisewherehlimis the maximum and minimum of limit h, which is the state variables limit.Generate the population (swarm) randomly. With respect to references [25,26], the entire initial population size is selected to be 3N+1, which is determined as follows:(23)Population=X1⋮Xi⋮X3N+1whereXi1×N={P1,…,PGN,V1,…,VGN,T1,…,TN,Qc1,…,QcCN}and the dimension of space research (control variables size) is N.Calculate the cost function for each particle.Sort the particles based on the value of the cost function. The particle with a better objective function value is positioned above the others.Select the top N+1 particles to feed into the NM algorithm and calculate the cost function for each particle to improve the (N+1)th particle.Feed the remaining particles of population (2N) into the PSO algorithm. Calculate the cost function for each particle.Combine the results of the PSO and NM algorithms and select the best solution among all of the particles.Terminate the hybrid algorithm if the convergence criterion is satisfied.Fig. 3illustrates the flowchart of hybrid fuzzy PSO–NM method to solve the OPF problem.In this subsection, we report some benchmark mathematical functions on the HFPSO–NM method. We tested the HFPSO–NM method against the ANMS [33] method on the following unconstrained optimisation problems of varying dimensions from the Moré–Garbow–Hilstrom collection [33]. In this regard, three functions are considered as follows:1.Rosenbrock: Extended Rosenbrock function;Singular: Extended Powell singular function;Trig: Trigonometric function;We summarise the numerical results in Table 1. From this table the HFPSO–NM method clearly outperforms the ANMS method when they are used to solve this set of higher dimensional problems. We can see that HFPSO–NM beats the ANMS method on all problems.The IEEE 30-bus system has 6 generating units and 41 transmission lines. The total active and reactive powers of the system are 283.4MW and 126.2 Mvar, respectively. The system has 4 transformers with off-nominal tap ratio at lines 6–9, 6–10, 4–12, and 28–27. In addition, buses 10, 12, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 24, and 29 have been set as shunt VAR compensation buses. The single-line diagram of the system is presented in Fig. 4. The complete data of this system, consisting of the system data, the minimum and maximum limits for the control variables and the initial operating points, are listed in reference [11]. The PSO and NM method parameters are presented in Table 2.The generating units use fossil fuels, such as coal, natural gas, and oil, to produce electrical power. The quadratic function model is applied to exhibit the fuel cost curve of generators [11,15,34]. The objective function is shown as follows:(24)F=∑i=1GNai+bPGii+ciPGi2where a1, b1 and c1 are the fuel cost coefficients of the generating unit at bus i, which is listed in [11,17]. The HFPSO–NM and PSO–NM methods are used to solve the OPF problem, and the simulation results are compared with the MDE [12], improved GA [8], PSO [17], DE [11], BBO [15] and Gradient method [15] algorithms. The simulation results using the proposed method and other algorithms are presented in Table 3. When using the proposed HFPSO–NM method, the fuel cost is determined to be equal to 794.9545 $/h, while the best fuel cost determined by using the BBO algorithm is 799.1116 $/h. Therefore, the best solution determined by the HFPSO–NM method is less than the solutions determined by other intelligent algorithms. Fig. 5shows the fuel cost convergence curve of the proposed algorithm, which demonstrate the high accuracy and speed of the HFPSO–NM method to achieve the optimal solution. Meanwhile, convergence performance of proposed algorithm along with other methods in case 1 to show the effectiveness is shown in Fig. 6.If the OPF problem is solved to minimise only the fuel cost, it will not be an adequate procedure to achieve the appropriate voltage profile. Therefore, in this case study, the cost function consists of two parts: voltage deviation improvement and the fuel cost of the generating units, where the voltage deviation improvement is obtained by minimising the load bus voltage deviations from 1.0 per unit. The objective function can be expressed as(25)F=∑i=1GNai+bPGii+ciPGi2+w∑j=1NLVj−1.0where w is a weighting factor set to balance the two objectives to prevent one objective's dominating another. The value of w in this case is set to 100 [15]. The coefficientsai,biandciare considered to be the same as those in case study 1. The simulation results due to HFPSO–NM and PSO–NM methods for the case study are presented in Table 4. To show the effectiveness of proposed algorithm, simulation results are compared with the PSO, DE and BBO algorithms. As listed in Table 4, the fuel cost of the generating units and the deviation voltage are 803.5278 ($/h) and 0.0859 (pu), respectively. These values are reduced by 0.183% and 18.74% compared with the best result of previous reports (BBO) [15] in Table 4, which are responsible for 804.9982 ($/h) and 0.1020 (pu), respectively. Fig. 7presents the fuel cost convergence curve of the proposed algorithm.Voltage stability problems have been converted to significant interests of many researchers because it can investigate the ability of a power system to keep admissible voltages at each bus of power system under both normal and contingency conditions. Voltage instability occurs when a contingency, such as change in system conditions, causes a progressive and uncontrollable decrease in voltage. Lately, voltage instability has been recognised as a major reason of some well-known voltage collapses in the power network. Therefore, enhancement of voltage stability plays a very significance role for reconfiguration and operation of power system. The L-index is considered to evaluate the voltage stability limit with respect to easier implementation than the other techniques [35]. The calculation procedure of the L-index can be found in the reference [16].In this condition, the objective function is introduced as Eq. (26) to increase the voltage stability far from the point of collapse (POC). The objective function is shown in Eq. (26):(26)F=∑i=1GNai+bPGii+ciPGi2+wLmaxwhere as used in references [11,16], w andLmaxare a weighting factor that are considered to be 6000 and maximum of the L-index, respectively. In addition, the coefficientsai,biandciare considered to be the same as in case study 1. The simulation results are listed in Table 5and are compared to the results of the DE, PSO and BBO algorithms to demonstrate the effectiveness of the HFPSO–NM and PSO–NM methods. The total fuel cost and maximum of the L-index using the proposed algorithm are 801.7488 ($/h) and 0.1023 (pu), respectively, which are lower than the best result reported in the literature (BBO) of 805.7252 ($/h) and 0.1104 (pu). The convergence curve of the objective function is shown in Fig. 7.In this condition, the outage of line (2–6) is considered to simulate a contingency condition in this paper [8,11]. The enhancement of voltage stability is a major concern that is considered in Eq. (26). The coefficientsai,biandciare considered to be the same as those in case study 1. The simulation results of this case study using by HFPSO–NM and PSO–NM methods are presented in Table 5 and are compared with the DE algorithm. The values of fuel cost and the maximum L-index using the HFPSO–NM are 805.7573 ($/h) and 0.1078 (pu), respectively, which are less than the best results from previous research (DE), 810.2661 ($/h) and 0.1347 (pu). Furthermore, in comparison with the DE algorithm, the fuel cost and the L-index using the HFPSO–NM method have decreased to 0.556% and 25%, respectively, which demonstrates the accuracy and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. As a result, the proposed algorithm demonstrates its ability to minimise the objective function and to improve the voltage stability in the contingency condition. The convergence curve of the objective function is illustrated in Fig. 8.Multiple fuel sources, such as coal, natural gas and oil, have been used by many thermal generating units to produce electricity. The fuel cost functions of these units may be separated into piecewise quadratic cost functions for the different fuel types. Therefore, in this case study, the objective function is considered to be a piecewise fuel cost function. In addition, the optimisation problem is becoming to a non-convex problem with respect to the discontinuous values at each boundary. In this case study, multiple fuel sources that consist of two different types of fuel cost curve in two different operating regions have been considered for units of generation 1 and 2. Mathematically, the cost curves of generators 1 and 2 are as follows:(27)fi=ai1+bPGii1+ci1PGi2PGimin≤PGi≤PGi,1ai2+bPGiii2+ci2PGi2PGi,1min≤PGi≤PGi,2⋮aik+bPGiik+cikPGi2PGi,k−1min≤PGi≤PGimaxwhereaik, bikandcikare the fuel cost coefficients of the ith generator unit, which have k types of fuel cost curves. The objective function is explained in Eq. (27):(28)F=∑i=12aik+bPGiik+cikPGi2+∑i=3GNai+bPGii+ciPGi2The fuel cost coefficients at buses 1 and 2 are listed reference [11] and other generator units have the same values as those of case study 1. The simulation results are listed in Table 6. Simulation results of HFPSO–NM and PSO–NM methods are compared with the BBO, PSO, MDE and DE algorithms. The fuel cost value obtained by the HFPSO–NM method is 647.618 ($/h), which is less than the value from the best previous research (BBO), 647.7437 ($/h). Note that for investigating the quality of the solution that was reported in the previous papers, the fuel cost that had been obtained using the PSO method [17] was 647.69 ($/h). With respect to the determined optimal parameters, if bus 1 is considered to be the slack bus, the fuel cost becomes 733.3111 ($/h), and if bus 5 is considered to be the slack bus, the fuel cost becomes 647.8301 ($/h) [15]. Thus, the simulation results of the PSO algorithm in this case study are not acceptable. The convergence curve of the objective function is shown in Fig. 9.With respect to the importance of the valve point-loading effect in the fuel cost function of power plants, this effect is added to the fuel cost function as the absolute value of the sinusoidal function. Therefore, the fuel cost of the ith generating unit considering the point effect is determined as follows:(29)fi=ai+bPGii+ciPGi2+|disin(ei(PGimin−PGi))where the a1, b1 and c1 are coefficients of the ith generating unit. In this case study, the units of generation 1 and 2 are considered to have valve-point loading effects on their curves which fuel cost coefficients of these units shave been shown in Reference [16] and other fuel cost coefficients have the same values as those of case 1. In addition, the reactive power injection sources have been eliminated in this case study to consider the same conditions as References [12,15].(30)F=∑i=12ai+bPGii+ciPGi2+|diSin(ei(PGimin−PGi))+∑i=3GNai+bPGii+ciPGi2The simulation results are listed in Table 7. The obtained simulation results by HFPSO–NM and PSO–NM methods are compared to the BBO and MDE algorithms to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. The fuel cost value obtained by the proposed algorithm is 912.0229 ($/h). In addition, the best solution from the previous research (BBO) is 919.7647 ($/h). Note that the fuel cost has been reduced by 0.85% by the proposed algorithm. The convergence curve of the objective function is shown in Fig. 10.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
