@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The integration of classification tree and Sequence Alignment Method for exploring groups of population based on daily time use data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study proposes a method of classifying homogenous groups of population in the time use database.The model utilizes activity sequence patterns and socio-economic data in the time use data.An Integration of Classification tree And Sequence alignment method is proposed.The advantage is the ability to handle sequential, continuous, and discrete variables.The model was applied with real world data, using the 2004 Bangkok time use data from Thailand.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Activity-travel pattern analysis,Classification tree,Sequence Alignment Method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Searching homogenous groups of individuals is one of the important steps in activity based travel demand modeling development. This study proposes an Integration of Classification tree And Sequence alignment method (ICAS) as a new classification method. The main advantage is the ability to explore all sources of lifestyle variations that have various data types including: sequential data, continuous variables, and discrete variables. These data are, for example, activity sequential patterns, socio-economic characteristics, and socio-demographic characteristics. Results from ICAS can also be used as both an activity classifier and an activity generator in an activity based travel demand modeling system. The proposed ICAS concept was evaluated with real world data, using the 2004 Bangkok time use data from Thailand's National Statistical Office (NSO).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For more than a decade, the activity based modeling approach has increasingly received attention in transportation research. The activity based modeling approach extends the conventional trip based travel demand model by considering the real factors that cause people to travel, the activities that people carry out at different places and times. In this case, modeling inputs require disaggregate data of individuals rather than aggregate data of traffic analysis zones.Therefore, the approach of searching homogenous groups of individuals who have similar activity patterns and lifestyles prior to developing the model is obviously important. This research classifies approaches in dividing homogenous groups of populations into two categories, activity schedule analysis (ASA) and Lifestyle classification (LSC). ASA is rooted from the famous Hägerstrand's time geography concept and mainly concentrates on the activity schedule data. On the other hand, LSC mainly focuses on various elements based on activity and travel behavior, which are related to fundamental human values and needs. Each of these alternatives has certain advantages and disadvantages in providing effective measures of individual activity patterns. The following sections discuss ASA and LSC in detail.ASA mainly focuses on a measurement of human activity characteristics and patterns. The earliest contribution is the development of a space-time path by Hägerstrand [1]. The space-time path is a three-dimensional orthogonal system. The system consists of a two-dimensional plane which indicates positions of an individual (spatial dimensions) and a vertical dimension axis which represents time taken by the individual at each position (a temporal dimension). Hägerstrand's concept of a space-time path, later known as time-geography, helps researchers to demonstrate human activities under constraints such as physical limitations and time [1–4]. Some transportation research adopts the time geography concept in various contexts such as improvements of the space-time path visualization [5–7] and the exploration of human activities and interactions [8,9].Advances in information technology and the increasing number of available activity datasets push research on activity schedule analysis, such as the exploration of activity patterns from a large dataset. The objective is to answer questions such as who shares similar activity patterns. In this case, the classical time-geography concept is found to lack a quantitative method which is powerful enough to analyze a huge volume of information supplied by activity diaries [10]. For this reason, applications of quantitative methods were proposed. These applications treat an activity dataset as multidimensional data. Most conventional applications used in this research are the multivariate group identification methods, such as clustering or pattern recognition algorithms. Using cluster analysis, the activity patterns are represented in relatively small numbers of homogenous classes which are generalized based on the selected variables [11–15]. The clustering methods are promising and can be used to classify groups of individuals who share similar activity patterns. However, two arguments exist. Firstly, the methods cannot consider sequences of activities during the day. Secondly, they do not consider the information of activity locations, leaving off the information from the time-geography concept. Sequence Alignment Methods (SAMs) and Multiple-Sequence Alignment Methods (MSAMs) were proposed to solve these two arguments.SAMs are used to determine the degree of difference between sequences of information. The methods have been widely applied in bioinformatics to analyze similarity in sequences of DNA, RNA, or protein [16,17]. Several studies in other fields such as social science [18,19], tourism [20], geography [21], and pattern recognition [22] also applied the methods to identify groups of behavior patterns according to their interest. In transport research, Wilson [10] firstly applied SAM to analyze travel behavior patterns. The study concluded that the method can successfully identify groups of behavior patterns in a population dataset. Following his study, many researchers applied SAM to analyze activity schedule data [21,23,24]. However, SAMs only consider the uni-dimensional data and fail to consider other dimensions of activity patterns such as activity locations, which also exist in a sequential pattern and directly relate to the activity schedule. This missing ability of SAM is solved by the application of MSAMs [25–27]. In addition, the motif search is also another approach to alleviate the limitations of SAMs [28]. On the other hand, to avoid the computational burden when applying SAMs, the integration of a cluster analysis method and a sequential analysis method was suggested [12,29].Previous research on ASA showed several alternatives to derive homogenous groups of individuals who have similar activity patterns. After gathering the homogenous groups of the sampled population, further lifestyle variations are then considered, based on the person or household characteristics. In each homogenous group, the activity patterns are related to the individuals’ or households’ attributes and used as a response variable in the activity travel behavior model [5]. By considering only activity patterns prior to develop the models, there are possibilities that persons with different attitudes and preferences are categorized into the same homogenous group. For example, Fig. 1presents the daily activity of two persons from Bangkok's time use data. They have different socio-demographic characteristics, but conducted similar activity patterns. ASA will recognize these two in the same homogenous groups. Hence, failure to integrate person or household characteristics in the classification process may lead to impractical models. For example, discrete choice models assume inputs from homogenous group of populations with similar socio-economic and household characteristics. However, it is impractical to calculate average values of socio-economic and household characteristics from a group classified by ASA and apply them directly to discrete choice models.In LSC, the activity analysis is defined as “a framework in which travels are analyzed as daily or multi-day patterns of behavior, related to and derived from differences in lifestyles and activity participation among the population”. Lifestyles are also defined as the representation of individual preferences of his/her daily activity and travel decisions [30]. Kitamura [31] defined the term “lifestyles” occurring in the literature with two meanings: (a) activity and time-use patterns and (b) values and behavioral orientation. Hence, variables that are used to describe lifestyles depend on data availability and study objectives. These variables can be the activity characteristics, time use data, socio-demographic characteristics, and socio-economic characteristics. Additionally, there are three main approaches in the literature that were used to classify homogenous group of population with lifestyle variations [14]. The cluster analysis methods which were applied to these alternatives differ on choices of input variables. The first approach only concentrates on individual and household socio-economic and demographic characteristics, which is opposite to ASA, as discussed in Section 1.1. While ASA only concentrates on evaluations of activity schedule data, this alternative takes all considerations of lifestyle characteristics such as household structure, work participation, and household type. The second approach uses short-term daily activity-travel characteristics and long-term household socio-economic and demographic characteristics to classify lifestyles. Finally, the third approach mainly concentrates on the additional use of long-term information of individual activity participation. Among these approaches, the second approach is often used because the first approach fails to consider the activity schedule data while the third approach requires costly input data which are normally not available. More information of these approaches can be reviewed from Lin et al. [14] and Kitamura [31].Further, the cluster analysis methods are good in classifying groups of sampled individuals but they cannot be used to allocate un-sampled individuals, the synthetic population, to the lifestyle clusters [14]. Presently, attention to this modeling capability has increased because of the growth in demand of the agent based travel demand model. To this problem, Support Vector Machine (SVM) was purposed to allocate those synthetic populations into the created lifestyle clusters [14]. Using results of the lifestyle clusters created from the cluster analysis methods, SVM can be used to develop a classification function that is only based on the socio-economic and socio-demographic characteristics. Additionally, Classification and Regression Tree (CART) is another alternative that can be used to classify group of sampled individuals with lifestyle variations and to allocate the un-sampled individuals to the previous classified group. CART is also used as the activity generator model in TRansportation ANalysis SIMulation System (TRANSIMS) [32,33].From previous discussions on the past research in LSC, the cluster analysis methods are generally applied to create lifestyle clusters. Additionally, SVM and CART also have advantages over the cluster analysis methods by providing the activity classifier and the activity generator. These modeling approaches deliver both efficient classification results and a competent synthetic population classifier. However, as the modeling techniques are based on the cluster analysis or the classification methods, the models are unable to consider similarity of the activity sequential patterns. Even though this problem is already well recognized in ASA research by applying SAMs or MSAMs, the problem still exists in LSC research. LSC research requires variables such as age, household income, employment status, and gender. Since these variables are not in sequential format, they cannot be directly considered using SAMs and MSAMs.The advantages and disadvantages from both ASA and LSC research were already discussed in the previous sections. Three groups of algorithms are found in the literature including (a) cluster analysis, (b) Classification and Regression Tree, and (c) sequence/multiple sequence alignment method. The strength and weakness of each algorithm can be summarized as follows.The first group of algorithms is cluster analysis (CA). The examples from the literature are the application of graph based cluster [11], the application of k-medoid clustering [12], the application of nearest neighbor and Thiessen polygon methods [13], and the application of factor analysis and k-mean statistic [14]. In particular, the CA searches for a homogenous group of population by considering interested household or individual characteristics. However, the limitation of CA is its ability to only consider “the sequential variables (vector) of activity data” or “discrete or continuous variables of lifestyle variations”, not both of them. Further, CA only concentrates on classifying the given data. Hence, its outcome is the group of classified input data. These results cannot be directly used as the classifier tool (the activity classifier) for other population data, which is a need for the transportation activity based travel demand model. In this case, SVM was purposed to extended the CA classifying ability [14].Additionally, the second group is the classification algorithms. The examples, from the literature, are the application of Classification and Regression Tree (CART) using activity time duration as the dependent variable [32] and CART using travel time duration as the dependent variable [33]. The advantages of using CART algorithms are the ability to classify groups of populations by considering “discrete or continuous variables of lifestyle variations” and its results can be later used as the activity classifier for the transportation activity based travel demand model. However, recently, its abilities are still not able to support the consideration of “the sequential variables (vector) of activity data”.Further, the third group is the application of SAMs for pairwise alignment [21,23,24] and MSAMs for multiple alignments [25–27]. These alignment methods are able to evaluate “the sequential variables (vector) of activity data”. SAMs are applied with uni-dimensional data. They are used to measure the minimum efforts required to change one sequence into another. On the other hand, MSAMs are used to expand the ability of SAMs, which are limited to uni-dimensional data. MSAMs can consider more dimensions of activity patterns such as activity locations. These alignment methods alone or with the integration of the cluster analysis methods cannot explain other sources of lifestyles variations such as socio-economic and socio-demographic characteristics. Additionally, the same as the CA's outcomes, results from the models (SAMs/MSAMs) only represent the homogenous groups of populations who have similar activity patterns. It cannot be used as an activity classifier or an activity generator. Table 1summarizes problems and needs from the existing methods used in the literature.From Table 1, the strength and weakness for each method the are clearly presented. Hence, in order to relax the above limitations, this research proposes a model that shares advantages of CART and sequence alignment methods. The proposed model is the Integration of Classification tree And Sequence alignment method (ICAS). This integration is aimed at improving the capability of the classification algorithm to handle sequential patterns in the activity schedule data, while it is still able to consider other sources of lifestyle variations. Additionally, because the ICAS model is rooted in the classification tree, the tree resulting from the model can be used as the classifier for the un-sampled population. Table 2compares abilities of ICAS model to others in the literature.The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. Section 2 presents the ICAS modeling framework and its basic algorithms. Section 3 demonstrates the applications of the ICAS model with the time use data in Bangkok, Thailand. Finally, the conclusion and future research are presented in Section 4.Two basic algorithms adopted in ICAS are presented in this section. These two algorithms are the SAMs and the classification tree. These algorithms are discussed in detail as follows.SAM is a technique that develops a measure for the distance or similarity between two sequences of characters [34]. The value of distance or similarity between a pair of sequences is measured by scores from objective functions. Several objective functions have been applied in SAMs by researchers. However, the simplest objective function is a function derived from the cost–benefit approach. The cost–benefit approach evaluates various scores in the ways that a pair of sequences can be compared. Three scores are generally specified: (1) the benefit of aligning a pair of sequences that contain the same character in both sequences (match score), (2) the cost of aligning a pair of sequences that contain different characters in the sequences (mismatch score), and (3) the cost of aligning a character in one sequence with a gap in the other sequence (gap score) [35]. Two most common cost–benefit functions found in the literature are the maximized benefit function and the Levenshtein distance or edit distance which minimizes the costs [17,36]. It is an arbitrary choice by researchers whether to select the alignment that maximizes the benefits or to select the alignment that minimizes the costs. It also depends on how to define scores of benefits (match score) and costs (mismatch, and gap scores). Rosenberg [35] suggested that the simplest scoring scheme in general applications can be defined as 1,0,0 for match, mismatch, and gap scores, respectively. In transport studies, Wilson [10,34] also presented his examples on the analysis of travel behavior by defining the simplest scoring scheme of 1,0,0 with the choice of maximized benefit function (maximize the benefit of matching activities). Similar results are expected if the scores are defined as 0,1,1 and use the minimized cost function (minimize the cost of mismatching activities and gaps). For example, another study presented by Wilson [37] defined the scores in his study as 0,1,1 and the minimized cost function was used. Several transport studies also used the Levenshtein distance or edit distance [20,25,38–40]. However, no previous studies strongly suggested the use of their cost–benefit functions and the scoring schemes over the others. To evaluate the possibility in integrating SAM and the classification tree, this study proposes to use the maximized benefit function and the simplest scoring scheme presented earlier.In this study, the standard Needleman–Wunsch algorithm was applied. The algorithm was used to perform a global alignment (find the best fit) of two activity sequences. Each pair of activity sequences in the database were setup in a two dimensional matrix and the best alignment was selected from the path which gave the maximum total alignment score. Dynamic programming was applied to implement this recursive calculation. The Needleman–Wunsch algorithm used in this study is summarized as follows.•Given two input strings, x and y, a matrix F is defined such that an entry F(i,j) is the score of the optimal alignment x(1,…, i) and y(1,…, j).Define S as a substitution matrix where S(i,j) represents the score of matching elements i and j. (This study applied the match score=1 and the mismatch score=0).G=gap penalty value. (This study applied G=0).Start with the initialization of F(0,0)=0.Recursively calculate the matrix from top left to bottom as the following equation:(1)F(i,j)=maxF(i−1,j−1)+S(i,j)F(i−1)+GF(i−1,j)+GThe maximum score path is traced back from the lower right corner to the upper left corner of the matrix.The result is the maximum score path which represents the best alignment.Consider an example to see how the algorithm performs. The daily activity sequences of two persons are given from 7:00am to 5:00pm as follows (H: home, W: work, S: shop, R: recreation, and E: eating).Person A: HWWEWWREHPerson B: HSSEWWEHHHThe matrix F is constructed by lining up one of the sequences across the top of the table (Person A's activity sequence) and lining up the other sequence by the side of the table (Person B's activity sequence). Also, the scores are given as matching bases between two sequences=1, mismatching bases=0, and gap=0. The scoring of F(0,0)=0 at the beginning of the alignment is initialized. This setting of the gaps at the beginning of the alignment will help to force the sequence to be aligned end to end. Additionally, to set up the endgaps, the first row and column of the matrix F were calculated by introducing gap scores at the beginning of each sequence (in this example gap score=0). Fig. 2illustrates this initialization processes. Additionally, three values in Eq. (1) were then calculated for all other cells in the matrix. The complete matrix for this example is shown in Fig. 3. Finally, the Needleman–Wunsch global alignment is found by tracing back the optimal path from bottom right corner to its opposite corner in the matrix. Hence, the result matrix in Fig. 3 gives the optimal alignments. These alignments have the same alignment scores of 6. The example alignments which are results from the matrix in Fig. 3 are as follows.Person A:H--WWEWWRRE--HPerson B:HSS--EWW--EHHHPerson A:HWW--EWWRRE--HPerson B:H--SSEWW--EHHHThe classification tree or decision tree is one of the machine learning methods. The algorithm explores the binary tree structures and attempts to discover the rules which can best classify the dependent variables. In other words, the algorithm allows researchers to create classification rules (IF-THEN rules) based on the explanatory variables. The classification tree used in this study extends the CART algorithm which is implemented in TRANSIMS. Unlinking the CART algorithm used in TRANSIMS, the improved CART algorithm developed in this study is able to handle both discrete and continuous explanatory variables. The ICAS algorithm can also consider the combinations of categories in a discrete explanatory variable (categorical variable) during the process of splitting the population into sub groups. For example, the variable of Religion (RG) has four categories including: (1) Buddhism, (2) Christianity, (3) Islam, and (4) others. In this case, the ICAS algorithms will consider all seven possible combinations in the splitting criteria (“1&2,3,4” “2&1,3,4” “3&1,2,4” “4&1,2,3” “1,2&3,4” “1,3&2,4” “1,4&2,3”). The algorithm consists of two main steps: training the tree and pruning the tree.(a)Training the treeTo create the classification tree, the algorithm starts with the root node which contains all observed data. The data are split into two groups (two sub nodes) based on the splitting criterion. These sub nodes become the active nodes, and the splitting processes are repeated until all nodes are terminated by the given condition.Additionally, the splitting criterion is to find the best splitting variable and its best splitting value based on maximized similarity of the activity sequences within each node. This study uses the similarity measure as applied in the medoid based clustering [12]. For each splitting variable and splitting value, the representative sequences (medoid) of three data groups are determined. One is from the root (parent) node and the other two are from the sub (child) nodes. Fig. 4illustrates the concept of the representative sequence (medoid) in a population group. Consider a set of n activity sequences in the parent node (N). The parent node N is split into two child nodes, N1kand N2kt, based on the splitting variable (k) and the splitting value (t). The similarity measure of each node is the summation of alignment scores between each sequence in the group and its medoid, which is the maximum total alignment score.Given,Yij=alignment score of sequence i compared to sequence jS(N)=maximum total alignment score in the parent node (N)(2)=max∑jYij,i,j∈NS(N1kt)=maximum total alignment score in the child node (N1kt)(3)=max∑jYij,i,j∈N1kt(4)=max∑jYij,i,j∈N2ktS(N2kt)=maximum total alignment score in the child node (N2kt)The gain of the total alignment scores is then evaluated based on these three representative sequences as presented in Eq. (5).(5)Δkt(N)={S(N1kt)+S(N2kt)}−S(N)The split variable and its value that give the maximum gain of the total alignment scores, argmaxΔkt(N), are then selected as the best split criterion.The steps of creating the binary tree in this study can be summarized as follows.•The dependent variable (Y) is the activity sequence of an individual.The independent variables (X1, X2,…, Xk) are attributes from the population data, including household characteristics, socio-economic characteristics, and demographic characteristics.For the continuous variables, tk(N)=set of all splitting values of kth independent variables in node N, t∈tk(N) and k∈K. Each parent node N is split into two child nodes {N1kt, N2kt} where N1kt={i∈N:Xik≥t} and N2kt={i∈N:Xik<t}.For the discrete variables, tk(N)=set of all discrete values of kth independent variable in node N, t⊂tk(N) and k∈K. Each parent node N is split into two child nodes {N1kt, N2kt} where N1kt={i∈N:Xik∉t} and N2kt={i∈N:Xik∈t}.Additionally, two main steps of growing a classification tree are:(1)For each terminal node in active state which can be further split into smaller nodes, select the best splitting variable (k) and splitting value (t) based on the maximum gain of the total alignment score, maxΔkt(N).Split all nodes until reaching stopping criteria, (a) minimum number of individuals in each node (nmin) or (b) gain of the total alignment score is smaller than the established threshold value.Pruning the tree (the cross validation)A trained tree may become too specific to the training data (an over-fitted tree). To avoid this problem, the over-fitted nodes should be eliminated. The elimination of the over-fitted nodes can be done by merging the pair of nodes that have the same parent. In other words, the tree building processes are reversed. Instead of splitting the tree from the root node, the trained tree will be merged from the leaf or the terminal nodes. This process is known as tree pruning.Additionally, this study utilizes cross validation or rotation estimation to determine the optimal tree pruning level. Cross validation is the evaluation method of learning algorithms by dividing data into two segments, training dataset and validating dataset. The training and validating datasets will cross over in successive rounds. This process will help to guarantee that each datum will be validated at least once. A 10-fold cross validation is applied in this study. The data are first partitioned into 10 equally sized segments or folds. Subsequently, 10 iterations of training and validation are performed such that, in each iteration, a different fold of data is held-out for validation while the remaining nine folds are used for learning (training the tree) [41].For the validation process, in each rotation, the trained tree will be pruned up one level at a time until its parent node. In each pruned level, the validating dataset are classified throughout the tree. Then, the same idea of the representative alignment is applied. However, instead of finding out the best representative alignment, the objective is to find out how the validating alignment is represented in the classified group. In this case, the total pairwise alignment score is used as the indicator. In the cross validation processes, several alignments are validated for each pruned tree. Therefore, the average of the representative scores is calculated and used as the performance indicators of the pruned trees. The main objective is to indicate how the tree classifies the validating data to suit the group of data in the terminal node. This paper calls this average score as the Average Sequence Alignment Score (ASAS), as shown in Eq. (6). Finally, to select the optimal pruning level, ASAS scores and their associate pruning level from all validated trees are graphed together and the regression curve is estimated. The optimal pruned level is determined as the pruned level which gives maximum ASAS from the estimated regression curve.(6)AverageSequenceAlignmentScore(ASAS)=∑p∈P∑q∈QYpq/QPGiven, P=a test dataset, Q=a subset of training dataset which belongs to a classified terminal node. Ypq=a sequence alignment score of individual's activity sequence p (from test dataset) and individual's activity sequence q (from training dataset) at the classified terminal node. |Q|=number of individual's activity sequences in a subset of training dataset which belongs to a classified node. |P|=number of individual's activity sequences in a test dataset.As mentioned earlier, SAM is integrated into the classification tree in this study to guarantee that the classification processes will be done by considering not only the similarity in proportion of activity time durations but also similarity in activity sequences. This integration is named in this paper as ICAS. Three main steps in ICAS are: (1) calculating the similarity matrix, (2) evaluating the optimal tree pruning level, and (3) training the final classification tree. Fig. 5presents the ICAS modeling framework. Each step is discussed as follows.Step 1: Calculating the similarity matrixTo reduce the computational times, the similarity matrix or the inter-pair distance matrix is calculated in this step. The matrix presents the pairwise scores of all alignments in the sampled database. The result matrix is used as the alignment score lookup table which is later used in the classification tree building processes. In this step, SAM which is discussed in Section 2.1.1 is applied.Step 2: Evaluating the optimal tree pruning levelThe main objective of this step is to find the optimal tree pruning level. The input is the population data from the entire database and the similarity matrix created in step 1. In this step, the processes of training the tree, pruning the tree, and the cross validation, which are discussed in Sections 2.1.2a and b, are applied.Step 3: Creating the final classification treeAfter gathering the optimal tree pruning level in step 2, this step will rebuild the classification tree by using the entire database (no partitioned data). The fully trained tree will then be pruned up to the optimal pruning level obtained from step 2. In this step, the tree growing and pruning processes discussed in Sections 2.1.2a and b are applied. The output from this step is the final classification tree. The final classification tree shows the classification results and can be used as the model of activity classifier.The capital city of Thailand, Bangkok, is selected as the study area. Bangkok was established more than 200 years ago. The city originally was developed on the banks of river and canals. Bangkok Metropolitan Region (BMR) occupies an area of 1568km2 which accounts for 0.3% of the entire area of the nation. The city also has a complex urban environment constituting a mix of commercial, residential, and industrial establishments. Nowadays Bangkok and its surrounding areas experience a vibrant and flourishing economy. The city grew rapidly and the number of population in the city is now 6.5–10 million [42,43]. Bangkok was cited as one of the highest of the Asian cities in terms of total vehicle ownerships. Cars are 56% of vehicles, which is higher in vehicle use than the average of Asian cities [44]. Fig. 6presents the location of the capital city of Bangkok, Thailand which is the study area in this paper.The 2004 time use survey data from the National Statistical Office (NSO) were utilized in this study. The data were sampled from different parts of Thailand, including Bangkok metropolitan area, central region, northern region, north eastern region, and southern region. In this research, Bangkok time use data was utilized. Daily activity schedule of 2573 individuals from 1013 households were recorded in the dataset. Additionally, 15% are single person households; 37% are two person households; 23% are three person households; and 25% are more than three person households. The data also includes both population socio-demographic attributes and daily activity attributes.Table 3presents a summary of population socio-demographic attributes used in this study. In Table 3, two attributes that are not internationally defined and should be noted in further details are the relation to household (REL) and the education (EDU). The relation to household (REL), variable indicates how interviewed persons relate to the householder. In Thailand, the most traditional family structure is the extended family. This family structure is bigger than the single family and the nuclear family. In the extended family, parents and their children's families live in the same household. Therefore, the REL variable offered several choices of answer for various types of households including the extended family. For education (EDU), the attributes of this variable present a combination between educational levels and educational programs. In Thailand, five educational levels are: elementary, secondary school, diploma, university, and others. The others are education that is not in the government educational system, such as short courses or certificate programs. The programs in each educational level, except others, are academic programs, technical programs, vocational programs, and teacher training programs.For daily activity attributes, the time use data were originally coded based on the International Classification of Activities and Time-Use Statistics (ICATUS) standard. However, the original activity codes which classify activities into 190 types are too complex for modeling purposes. Hence, the original ICATUS activity codes were re-grouped into 37 activity types. Table 4summarizes the activity codes that are used in this study. Finally, the data were summarized into two tables for using in the model development processes. These tables are connected by the personal identification data (PID). Fig. 7presents the relational database used in this study. The first table is the population data. The table is comprised of 11 attributes of personal socio-demographic characteristics. The second table contains the information of daily activities. Each record in the table represents an individual daily activity sequence, in a 10-min period.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
