@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bi-objective optimization of three echelon supply chain involving truck selection and loading using NSGA-II with heuristics algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cost minimized in a mix-product three echelon supply chain while maintaining service level.A heuristic algorithm is used for optimal truck selection and loading along with NSGA-II.Type and number of truck moving in each path in each time period is determined.Number of products of each type carried by each of these trucks is also calculated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Genetic algorithm,Supply chain management,Multi-objective programming,Heuristic,Transportation,Logistics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper models a three echelon supply chain distribution problem considering multiple time periods, multi-products and uncertain demands. To take the problem closer to reality we consider multiple truck types and focus on the truck selection and loading sub-problem. Truck selection is important because the quantity of goods to be transported varies regularly and also because different trucks have different hiring cost, mileage and speed. Truck loading is important when considering the optimal loading pattern of products having different shapes and sizes on trucks, which themselves have distinct loading capacities. The two objectives considered here are the cost and responsiveness of the supply chain. The distribution problem is solved using the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II). However, the genetic algorithms compromise the optimality of the sub-problems while optimizing the entire system. But the optimality of truck selection and loading sub-problem is non-compromisable in nature. Hence a heuristic algorithm is used innovatively along with the NSGA-II to produce much better solutions. To make our model more realistic, the distribution chain is modelled as a push–pull based supply chain having multiple time periods and using demand aggregation over time. Using a separate algorithm also gives the advantage of utilizing the difference in nature of the push and pull part of the supply chain by giving every individual truck different objectives. Real life like data is generated and the optimality gap between the heuristic and non-heuristic approach is calculated. A clear improvement in objectives can be seen while using the heuristic approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Two of the major concerns of all the FMCG companies is to reduce the total cost of managing its supply chain and improving its responsiveness, i.e., trying to deliver the products to the retailers within the promised time. The two objectives are mutually conflicting, as a more responsive supply chain will typically incur higher costs and vice versa. In the last few years a number of firms have employed the approach of a push–pull based supply chain to improve upon both the cost and responsiveness simultaneously.The small retailers do not hold a lot of inventory with them and respond to true customer demand rather than forecast demand. So when they place an order to the warehouses for different products, they expect that order to be fulfilled within a certain time to avoid stock outs. The company also wants to avoid such scenarios to avoid losses. This warehouse–retailer part of the supply chain acts as a pull-based supply chain. The major focus here is to improve the responsiveness of the supply chain, even if that incurs higher costs. The plants, on the other hand, prefer to base their production and distribution decisions on long term forecasts. They make their deliveries to the warehouses at fixed pre-determined intervals. This plant–warehouse part of the chain is known as a push-based supply chain. The major focus here is to minimize the costs. When these two parts are integrated together in a chain, what results is known as a push–pull based supply chain, with the warehouses being the boundary between the two parts.A major factor which affects both the responsiveness and cost of the supply chain is the type of truck selected to make the transportations. For the pull part, we will prefer to use trucks which make the delivery quickly even if the resulting hiring and transportation cost is a bit higher. For the push part, we will prefer to use trucks that can carry more goods at a lower cost irrespective of how long it takes to deliver them. It is also observed that companies give preference to certain retailers over others. They might want to provide them with faster service, i.e., use better trucks to make deliveries for them. Therefore, the objectives of the trucks are different based on their destination. Also, to minimize the cost, we must make sure that the transportation is made using minimum number of trucks. This requires that the products are loaded onto the trucks in a proper pattern. To solve all these problems we will use a truck selection and loading heuristic algorithm.A lot of work has been done in the past on warehouse–retailer or plant–warehouse–retailer transportation problem in which objective of time has been considered along with cost [1–4]. The aim of most of these papers has been to determine the number of goods of different type moving between two locations. But none of them has considered multiple truck types and their selection, despite of it having such a huge impact on both costs and delivery timings. In this paper, our aim is to find out (i) number and type of trucks selected for making delivery between any two locations in each time-period, (ii) number of goods of each type loaded onto each truck of the selected type for every delivery and (iii) inventory level in each warehouse at the end of every time-period.To solve the distribution problem we use an evolutionary genetic algorithm. The truck selection and loading sub-problem is considered while calculating the objective values. We need to use a separate heuristic algorithm for this because the GA's compromise the optimality of sub-problems while optimizing the entire system and optimality of truck selection and loading sub-problem is non-compromisable in nature. Also, they cannot be modified to consider the fact that the trucks on different paths have different objectives.The overall model is that of a multi-echelon plants, warehouse and retailer problem (MPWRP). Minimizing the total cost of such system involves minimizing the production, transportation, warehousing and risk penalty cost. The transportation cost is optimized under the constraints of capacity and availability of trucks as well as the delivery time constraints. The problem of availability of trucks is overcome by outsourcing it to exogenous freight carriers. Warehouses place their demands by cumulating their supplies to the warehouse over previous time-periods. The aggregation of demand across time periods reduces its variability. The demands of the retailer are uncertain but are considered to be level demand having no trends or seasonality.The major contribution of this paper is threefold. Firstly, by considering multiple products and trucks along with multiple plants, warehouses, retailers and time-periods in a push–pull based supply chain, we take the existing models closer to the real life scenario. Secondly, by using the heuristic algorithm we are able to improve upon the performance of the supply chain as compared to just the genetic algorithm. Thirdly, this paper explores the possibility of treating the trucks in different parts of the supply chain differently. The simplicity of the truck selection algorithm allows us to not only configure it according to the push or pull part of the chain, but also according to the individual paths in which they are operating.FMCG's have to move products of different weights and volumes together all the time. Also, the choice of truck types available to make the transport is vast. They can use any desired truck loading pattern as long as the volume and weight constraints of the truck are not violated. As the number of product types and number of available truck types increases, the possible truck loading pattern grows exponentially. There are two possible ways of finding an optimal solution: exact algorithm and heuristic algorithm.What an exact algorithm does is precisely defined. The solution may or may not be the best but the kind of solution we will get is known. However, for hard problems, such as the one considered here we may not be able to get an acceptable solution in an acceptable time. In such cases we can get a good enough solution much faster by applying some educated guesses: that is a heuristic. A heuristic algorithm is used here instead of an exact algorithm because an exact algorithm has a run time in the order of hours. And considering the fact that the genetic algorithm would need to calculate the fitness values for many solutions over many generations, it will be impractical to use an exact algorithm.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains a brief literature review of the work done in the field. Section 3 contains the detailed problem description and Section 4 contains the mathematical formulation of the problem. Section 5 is about the NSGA-II and has sub-sections discussing about the truck selection and loading problems. Section 6 contains the solution methodology in which we consider how to apply the algorithm to our problem. In Section 7 we present the results and compare both the methods. Section 8 concludes the results and talks about the possible improvements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
