@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intelligent techniques for secure financial management in cloud computing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new intelligent technique for cloud computing information management was defined.A new class of CFMSiC systems (Cognitive Financial Management Systems in the Cloud) dedicated to cloud-based semantic management of financial data was described.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intelligent techniques,Financial management,Secure management,Cloud computing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This publication presents new classes of financial management systems. These systems will serve as examples of systems for the cognitive analysis of financial data with particular emphasis on analysing financial ratios. Semantic analysis will be an innovative component in financial management systems which will enhance the traditional solutions by adding elements of cognitive data interpretation and analysis. The systems thus built will constitute a class of intelligent management systems. Intelligent financial management systems will also be used to conceal data of a confidential and strategic nature. For this type of solutions, advanced information sharing schemes will be proposed to enable splitting the information among a defined group of secret trustees in an either equal or privileged way. In addition, a scheme for sharing financial data between groups of secret trustees who can jointly reconstruct the shared financial (strategic) information will be proposed. In addition, a new class of financial management systems will be defined which will be optimal for financial data management processes. The new solution will consist of CFMSiC systems (Cognitive Financial Management Systems in the Cloud) dedicated to cloud-based semantic management of financial data.Motivation of the author’s study and this paper is to propose new aspects of the intelligent techniques dedicated for secure financial management in cloud computing. The most important research question is: which secure techniques are the optimal for secure strategic financial data management? To answer to this question it is important to conduct accurate analysis, which shows the efficiency in guaranteeing the secrecy of cognitive data analysis. Also, is necessary to discuss about the advanced techniques dedicated to secure strategic data in financial management processes. As a results of the author’s research, in this paper will be presented a strategic data sharing protocols in advanced threshold schemes, a sharing data schemes with a division into groups using advanced threshold schemes, and presentation of these solutions in a new class of information systems – in a CFMSiC systems (Cognitive Financial Management Systems in the Cloud) dedicated to managing financial data in the cloud.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Financial data security is the main aspect in financial management processes (Buchanan and McMenemy 2012, Menezes et al. 2001, Ogiela and Ogiela 2014c). Systems which ensure the security of financial data represent one of the basic elements of efficient and safe management. As it is necessary to ensure the security of financial management processes, the data management systems currently operated by commercial organisations and enterprises are increasingly frequently focused on securely storing, processing, analysing and transmitting data (Buchanan and McMenemy 2012, Hachaj and Ogiela 2013, Ogiela and Ogiela 2012, TalebiFard and Leung 2011).Data security issues do not relate only to the tasks of securing financial information, but also to the security of personal data, strategic data, competitive market data, the implementation of new technologies etc. However, financial data security represents the most important aspect of efficiently managing an enterprise or an organisation (Ogiela and Ogiela 2014a, 2009).The security of management systems stems from the security of the data protection algorithms used (Ogiela 2014, Ogiela and Ogiela 2011, 2014a). Data protection algorithm secure data from unauthorised access, theft, disclosure and forwarding information to unauthorised individuals.Data protection algorithms make use of cryptographic protocols to secure information from being stolen or disclosed without permission. They use of cryptographic protocols to protect data in IT systems (Menezes et al. 2001; Ogiela 2013b,c; Ogiela and Ogiela 2008), including data management systems, is aimed at protecting data from unauthorised users and from unauthorised access to it. However, the solutions applied do not always guarantee that data will be secure. Consequently, cognitive solutions are used to protect information and efficiently manage data (Ogiela 2008, 2013a).Data management systems (Laudon and Laudon 2002, Ogiela 2013a, Ogiela and Ogiela, 2015) are most frequently used to efficiently collect data, process it and store it. Smart data management systems are supplemented with cognitive data analysis. This type of data is much more exposed to theft and disclosure to unauthorised individuals. The reason is that cognitive analysis leads to a process of understanding not only the analysed data, but also the reasons for the events that have occurred and of assessing the future situation.Cognitive analysis serves to determine the meaning of the analysed datasets by describing and interpreting their semantic content. It is an analysis used to determine whether the analysed data is of major importance for the development of the enterprise/organisation or not. It thus allows the unambiguous elimination of those aspects of the analysis process which do not have major importance for the development of the enterprise or organisation.Ensuring the security of this type of systems is therefore of major importance for the correct (secure) process of managing information, including primarily financial data.The security of financial management systems is assured by the cognitive analysis implemented in these management systems and the cryptographic analysis aimed at ensuring the security of this data.Systems semantically analysing financial data and ensuring its security belong to the cognitive system group. This class of systems has been described in publications (Ogiela 2013a, 2014; Ogiela and Ogiela 2014a,c, 2015, in press) which presented their characteristic features and the drivers of data management processes at enterprises.Information management processes in traditional financial data management systems comprise the following stages (Fig. 1):•creating data sets from data collected by the enterprise or the organisation,data analysis – an analysis of the enterprise/organisation operations:○economic analysis – financial analysis (the financial standing of the enterprise/organisation, the asset situation of the enterprise/organisation, revenues and expenses, cash flow), technical–economic analysis (production volumes, tangible fixed asset value, employment levels, material management, technical and technological progress),environmental analysis – in a holistic perspective, in a detailed perspective and of the relations between the enterprise and its environment,they use of data held,data storage.The traditional scheme of the information systems is shown in Fig. 1. This type of information systems allow to collect different data sets, describe the data, analyse the data (the financial data analysis and technical, economic analysis), and also use data for different purposed. Information management processes performed in traditional data management systems are extended towards cognitive aspects of data analysis.Unlike traditional management systems, financial data management processes in intelligent, cognitive data management systems comprise the following stages:•searching for and collecting financial data using access to data from various sources, including: in-house data collected at the enterprise or organisation, and data obtained from outside the enterprise or organisation,semantic analysis of financial data: data analysis based on the interpretation of the cognitive aspects of the analysed data,semantic reasoning,future standing evaluation – prediction from analysed data.Cognitive financial data management systems analyse data by interpreting its meaning. In this regard, this class of systems deploys computer intelligence to carry out data analysis processes, thus extending the processes of traditional financial data management by adding cognitive analysis elements (Fig. 2).In Section 2 will be presented the cognitive analysis aspects in selected financial management systems. In Section 3 will be described the intelligent secure techniques in financial management processes. In Section 4 will be presented the financial management aspects in the cloud and a new class of intelligent systems – Cognitive Financial Management Systems in the Cloud (CFMSiC) dedicated to managing financial data in the cloud.In financial data management systems, semantic analysis is executed using mathematical linguistic techniques whose fundamental part consists in developing the appropriate mathematical formalism used for the semantic analysis (Ogiela and Ogiela 2011). In financial data management systems founded on numerical data, grammatical formalisms in the form of sequential grammars have been proposed for semantically analysing data (Ogiela and Ogiela 2011, 2014b).The essence of this approach is to build a sequential grammar made up of the following components:•a set of terminal symbols (terminals),a set of non-terminal symbols (non-terminals),a set of grammar productions,a grammar start symbol belonging to the set of non-terminals.The formal definition of the grammar makes it possible to identify the possible standings of the enterprise that can materialised based on the analysis carried out. These standings are determined by the set of productions which implies every considered situation.Cognitive systems analyse the standing of the enterprise using the information collected in a system database and obtained from the specific enterprise and its environment. Cognitive analysis processes are aimed at extracting – from the sets of analysed data – the significant information, e.g. concerning the current standing of the enterprise, its future standing, the threats that may appear, as well as the reasons for the current successes or the present or future failures (Fig. 3).The author of this publication has been studying financial management systems for several years. She has classified them into numerous classes of systems supporting financial data management processes.The general system class called CFAIS – Cognitive Financial Analysis Information Systems – was divided into four subclasses (Ogiela 2013a):•UBMLRSS (Understanding Based Management Liquidity Ratios Support Systems) – cognitive systems for analysing enterprise liquidity ratios which will reason about the resources and the solvency of the working capital of the company as well as about its current operations based on the semantic analysis of a set of ratios,UBMPRSS (Understanding Based Management Profitability Ratios Support Systems) – cognitive systems for analysing profitability ratios which will reason about the financial efficiency of business operations of a given unit based on the relationship between financial results and the sales of goods and services as well as the cost of sales,UBMARSS (Understanding Based Management Activity Ratios Support Systems) – cognitive systems for analysing turnover ratios which will reason about how fast assets rotate and how productive they are,UBMFLRSS (Understanding Based Management Financial Leverage Ratios Support Systems) – cognitive systems for analysing financial leverage ratios (financial debt ratios) which will reason about the sources financing the company’s assets and the proportion of external capital by analysing short-term and long-term liabilities, as well as the effectiveness of outlays and the interest paid.Subclasses of CFAIS financial management systems were then further split according to the type of financial data analysed. The subclass of CFIAS-UBMLRSS systems was divided into the following systems:•UBMLRSS-Gl– for analysing ratio values (Ogiela 2013a) – the value of the current ratio, the value of the quick ratio,UBMLRSS-GL – for analysing ratio values (Ogiela 2014) – the value of the current ratio, the value of the quick ratio, the value of the cash ratio,UBMLRSS GUBMLRSS(cu-q-mp)– for analysing ratio values (Ogiela and Ogiela 2015) – the value of the current ratio, the value of the quick ratio, the value of the mature payables ratio,UBMLRSS GUBMLRSS(cu-ca-mp)– for analysing ratio values (Ogiela and Ogiela 2015) – the value of the current ratio, the value of the cash ratio, the value of the mature payables ratio,UBMLRSS GUBMLRSS(q-ca-mp)– for analysing ratio values (Ogiela and Ogiela 2015) – the value of the quick ratio, the value of the cash ratio, the value of the mature payables ratio,UBMLRSS-GL2 – for analysing ratio values (Ogiela and Ogiela 2014c) – the value of the current ratio, the value of the quick ratio, the value of the cash ratio, the value of the treasury ratio.•UBMPRSS-P1 – for analysing ratio values – the return on net assets, the return on gross assets, the return on gross assets including interest,UBMPRSS-P2 – for analysing ratio values – the return on fixed assets, the return on working assets, return on clear assets.In addition, an analysis was conducted to merge the above subclasses of CFIAS systems. A semantic analysis in the combined subclasses of financial management systems was proposed (Ogiela and Ogiela in press):•UBMLRSS-UBMPRSS-G(q-irr) – for analysing ratio values – the value of the quick ratio, the value of the internal rate of return,UBMLRSS-UBMPRSS-G(mp-irr) – for analysing ratio values – the value of the mature payables ratio, the value of the internal rate of return,UBMLRSS-UBMPRSS-G(cu-irr) – for analysing ratio values – the value of the current ratio, the value of the internal rate of return,UBMLRSS-UBMPRSS-G(ca-irr) – for analysing ratio values – the value of the cash ratio, the value of the internal rate of return,UBMLRSS-UBMPRSS-G(mp-q-irr) – for analysing ratio values – the value of the mature payables ratio, the value of the quick ratio, the value of the internal rate of return,UBMLRSS-UBMPRSS-G(cu-q-irr) – for analysing ratio values – the value of the current ratio, the value of the quick ratio, the value of the internal rate of return,UBMLRSS-UBMPRSS-G(ca-q-irr) – for analysing ratio values – the value of the cash ratio, the value of the quick ratio, the value of the internal rate of return.This publication proposes a new subclass of cognitive systems analysing financial data – the UBMARSS (Understanding Based Management Activity Ratios Support Systems) for analysing the values of asset turnover indicators.Asset turnover indicators are used to measure the operating efficiency of a given enterprise. The best measure of this kind of efficiency is given by asset turnover indicators which describe the opportunities for, and the ability of the given enterprise to generate revenues.Asset turnover indicators are divided as follows:•total asset turnover indicator – vta,fixed asset turnover indicator – vfa,working asset turnover indicator, – vwa,liquid asset turnover indicator – vla.Systems for the semantic analysis of financial data are exemplified by the UBMARSS-G(ta-la) subclass which analyses selected turnover indicators, namely the following two:•total asset turnover – vta,liquid asset turnover – vla.VN(ta-la)– denotes the set of non-terminal symbols:VN(ta-la)={ASSET_TURNOVER, LOW_TURNOVER, MEDIUM_TURNOVER, HIGH_TURNOVER},VT(ta-la)– denotes the set of terminal symbols:VT(ta-la)={a,b,c}, where: a∈[0;1], b∈(1;3], c∈(3;+∞)Sta-la∈VN(ta-la), Sta-la=ASSET_TURNOVERPta-la– denotes the set of productions:ASSET_TURNOVER→LOW_TURNOVER | MEDIUM_TURNOVER | HIGH_TURNOVERLOW_TURNOVER→AA | AB | ACMEDIUM_TURNOVER→BA | BB | CAHIGH_TURNOVER→BC | CB | CCA→aB→bC→c.The next subclass of systems for semantically analysing asset turnover indicators is called UBMARSS-G(ta-wa) and is used to analyse the values of the following turnover indicators:•total asset turnover – vta,working asset turnover – vwa.This is an example of a two-factor analysis. In order to semantically analyse selected turnover indicators, a formal definition of a sequential grammar was proposed:Gta-wa=(VN(ta-wa),VT(ta-wa),Pta-wa,Sta-wa)where:VN(ta-wa)– denotes the set of non-terminal symbols:VN(ta-wa)={ASSET_TURNOVER, LOW_TURNOVER, MEDIUM_TURNOVER, HIGH_TURNOVER},VT(ta-wa)– denotes the set of terminal symbols:VT(ta-wa)={a,b,c} where: a∈[0;1], b∈(1;3], c∈(3;+∞)Sta-wa∈VN(ta-wa), Sta-wa=ASSET_TURNOVERPta-wa– denotes the set of productions:ASSET_TURNOVER→LOW_TURNOVER | MEDIUM_TURNOVER | HIGH_TURNOVERLOW_TURNOVER→AA | AB | ACMEDIUM_TURNOVER→BA | BB | CAHIGH_TURNOVER→BC | CB | CCA→aB→bC→c.Another example of systems which semantically analyse the values of turnover indicators is the UBMARSS-G(ta-wa-la) system subclass. These systems analyse the standing of the enterprise based on three selected turnover indicators, namely:•total asset turnover – vta,working asset turnover – vwa,liquid asset turnover – vla.In order to semantically analyse selected turnover indicators, the following formal definition of a grammar was proposed:Gta-wa-la=(VN(ta-wa-la),VT(ta-wa-la),Pta-wa-la,Sta-wa-la)where:VN(ta-wa-la)– denotes the set of non-terminal symbols:VN(ta-wa-la)={ASSET_TURNOVER, LOW_TURNOVER, MEDIUM_TURNOVER, HIGH_TURNOVER},VT(ta-wa-la)– denotes the set of terminal symbols:VT(ta-wa-la)={a,b,c} where: a∈[0;1], b∈(1;3], c∈(3;+∞)Sta-wa-la∈VN(ta-wa-la), Sta-wa-la=ASSET_TURNOVERPta-wa-la– denotes the set of productions:ASSET_TURNOVER→LOW_TURNOVER | MEDIUM_TURNOVER | HIGH_TURNOVERLOW_TURNOVER→AAA | ABA | ACA | AAB | AAC | BAA | CAA | ABBMEDIUM_TURNOVER→BAB | BBB | BAC | CAB | CAC | ABC | ACB | ACC | BBA | BCA | CBA | CCAHIGH_TURNOVER→BCB | CBB | BBC | CCC | CCB | BCC | CBCA→aB→bC→c.Cognitive data analysis techniques are used to conduct the semantic analysis of varied datasets. The essence of this type of analysis is to interpret the semantic aspects of the analysed sets and extract the meaning from datasets.An example of the operation of UBMARSS systems is shown in Fig. 4.Fig. 4 presents three examples illustrating the operation of an UBMARSS system. These examples illustrate the results produced by the above three selected subclasses of systems for semantically analysing asset turnover ratios.In the first example, total asset turnover and liquid asset turnover indicators have been analysed. In this case, the high value of ratios indicates a fast turnover, which means that the enterprise is using its assets efficiently. In addition, this system draws conclusions that the inventory level is good, where this inventory includes materials, finished products and production in progress, and that the level of receivables is optimal.In the second example, total asset turnover and working asset turnover indicators have been analysed. In this case, the high values of these ratios also indicate a fast turnover, an efficient use of the assets by the enterprise, and also a good financial standing of this enterprise and the right relationship between the production and sales levels.The third analysed example combines the analyses from the two earlier ones, because it analyses the value of three selected turnover indicators: of total assets, of working assets and of liquid assets. In this case the system also identified a fast turnover, an efficient use of the assets by the enterprise, a good financial standing of this enterprise and the right relationship between the production and sales levels. In addition, the system concludes that the inventory level is favourable and the value of receivables is optimal.The above examples make it possible to define the characteristic features of intelligent financial management systems for enterprises. This class of systems not only manages financial data, but mainly semantically interprets the analysed financial figures.Financial management systems which make use of semantic analyses manage financial information more effectively because this type of processes is supplemented with elements of computer data understanding which helps:•address the financial information to the right unit,directly identify the reasons for the current standing (whether good or bad),eliminate the “hot potato” forwarding of information between the wrong units,immediately act to eliminate the causes of the poor condition of the enterprise.Semantic layers of analysed sets/data consist of information which can be extracted from the analysed sets and which determines the significance of analysed data and its relevance in the entire interpretation and analysis process. Hence, cognitive analysis serves to extract features that are significant in data analysis processes.Techniques of securing information processed and stored in financial data management systems make use of cryptographic threshold schemes for data sharing (Bernstein and Wild 1999; Menezes et al. 2001; Ogiela and Ogiela 2008, 2012; Schneier 1996). Traditional (m,n)-threshold schemes represent a situation in which specific information is split between n participants of the protocol and into n shadows, each of which is assigned to one participant. At the same time, to reconstruct the split information, any m (m⩽n) of shadows chosen from among n shadows into which the information was split must be combined. Such algorithms are used to ensure the secure storage of information and protect it from unauthorised access. Any financial data can be split according to this scheme using cryptographic algorithms (Shamir 1979, Tang 2004).In order safeguard financial data which is shared in threshold schemes, it is good to implement more complex solutions which will make the financial figures completely secure.Such solutions include modified threshold schemes. An example of such schemes consists in splitting financial data between n participants of a data sharing protocol and distributing the shares in a privileged way to selected protocol participants. Thus, if information is split into n shares, one participant or a selected group holds more shadows then the remaining participants. The selected participant or their group holds more than one shadow each, while the remaining participants only hold one shadow each. Thus the shared financial information can be reconstructed by combining any m shadows which can be held by m different trustees of secrets shares, but can also be held by a number of protocol participants smaller than m, who, once they have combined their shares, obtain m shadows (Fig. 5).Fig. 5 shows the process of splitting data between n protocol participants (n=6), illustrating an equal distribution of shadows between 6 protocol participants, each of whom receives only one shadow. A (4, 6)-threshold scheme was chosen for reconstructing the shared information, which means that combining any 4 out of 6 shadows is enough to restore the shared information. Fig. 5 also shows examples of two privileged shadow distributions.The first one portrays a situation in which six shadows are assigned to only four protocol participants. Two participants receive a privileged number of shadows, i.e. either of them gets two shadows, while the remaining two participants get only one shadow each. In order to reconstruct the shared information, any 4 out of 6 shadows must be combined. The information can be restored by two protocol participants who hold two shadows each, or two protocol participants holding one shadow each with either of the participants who hold two shadows.The second example illustrates a situation in which six shadows are assigned to 3 protocol participants in different ways, i.e. the first of them receives three shadows, the second two and the third only one shadow. Combining any four shadows is sufficient to restore the information which means that this information can be reconstructed by the participant who holds three shadows after he/she combines his/her shares with those of any other protocol participant. In this case, the participant holding half of all shadows can be certain that the information will not be reconstructed without their shares.To ensure the security of the split information and the certainty that this information will not be reconstructed by a possibly untrusted group of secret trustees, it is necessary to introduce solutions which prohibit the reconstruction of this information. If opposing groups form in an enterprise or an organisation, and these groups are at the same time decision-makers in processes of financial information management, a data sharing scheme which will protect this data from being disclosed by a selected group of people should be developed. The reason for this is the possible situation in which a selected group of individuals, having combined the shares, recreates the shared secret and takes further action without the knowledge and the permission of the remaining participants (its opponents). In this scenario, it is necessary to introduce a solution that would prohibit this type of data management processes. An advanced threshold scheme constitutes such a solution. It is necessary to develop a scheme in which we determine the number of groups into which all secret trustees, who are simultaneously the decision-makers in financial information management processes, should be split. If two fundamentally different groups of opponents form among the decision-makers, then protocol participants should be divided into two groups in such a way that in each group an independent threshold scheme is defined, allowing the shared information to be reconstructed. It is thus necessary to define an (m1, n1)-threshold scheme for the first group and an (m2, n2)-threshold scheme for the second group of secrets trustees. In the first group, the shared information will be restored by combining any m1 shares of the secrets from among n1 of all shadows in this group. In the second group, a part of the shared information will be reconstruct by combining any m2 shares of protocol participants from among n2 of all shadows in this group. Under this scenario, to reconstruct the whole shared financial information, it is necessary to combine m1 shares from among n1 shadows and m2 shares from among n2 shadows. Any m1 shares from among n1 shadows are sufficient to reconstruct the polynomials that were used to assign individual shadows to protocol participants, but will not be sufficient to restore the entire information. Similarity, combining any m2 of n2 shadows will not be sufficient to reconstruct the shared information either (Fig. 6).Fig. 6 shows the situation in which data is shared in financial management systems with a division into two secret trustee groups. The first group includes for secret trustees each of whom holds one shadow, whereas the second group consists of five secret trustees, each of whom also holds one shadow. To reconstruct the information, it is necessary to use the (3, 4)-threshold scheme in group I and a (4, 5)-threshold scheme in group II. Combining the shares produced by these schemes in particular groups makes it possible to reconstruct information I.Any scheme can be used to share financial information in financial management systems. It is possible to define any number of secret trustee groups and any threshold scheme for each of the groups allowing the shares to be combined and thus the shared information to be reconstructed. The scheme presented in Fig. 6 illustrates a situation in which shadows are equally divided among protocol participants in each of the groups. If reconstructing the shared data requires the participation of selected trustees in this process, it is also possible to use a privileged distribution of shadows in the discussed schemes.In financial data management systems, the process of data sharing with a division into groups using advanced threshold schemes will not be disclosed by one of the groups without the knowledge and the involvement of representatives of the second group. Applying this kind of solution prevents the arbitrary action of selected secret trustees, e.g. within one group, as a result of which the financial data cannot be managed by a selected group of managers to the detriment of others.Financial data management systems semantically analyse financial figures using cognitive analysis processes to describe, interpret, assess and reason about the standing of the enterprise based on an analysis of its financial ratios. This type of analysis is aimed at acquiring information about the current standing of the enterprise/organisation, the reasons for this standing, the influence of the previous standing and the projected future standing. This analysis is also to determine the influence of the environment on the standing of the enterprise in the past, the present and the future. The information processed in financial data management systems is frequently secret or restricted which means that it is subject to information concealment processes. The processes of concealing information apply to the above methods of protecting information from an authorised individuals. These tasks are better performed by algorithms for financial information sharing.This publication presents Cognitive Financial Management Systems in the Cloud (CFMSiC) dedicated to managing financial data in the cloud. In this class of systems, a significant role is played by the following processes:•semantic analysis of financial data,financial information management at an enterprise or an organisation,financial information splitting and sharing,concealing financial information in processes of financial data management,managing information in the cloud.The processes of data analysis, information management and data sharing can be carried out by the enterprise internally or in the computing cloud. They use of cloud solutions significantly simplifies data management processes (Fig. 7).Cloud-based management is a solution which streamlines enterprise management processes including financial management processes. Its main advantages are:•optimising the cost of management processes by taking advantage of variable costs, andreducing the cost of purchasing own company hardware necessary for traditional management.The cost reduction also applies to the cost of implementations, purchases of the necessary licences for the software being used, and improvements of the processes carried out to raise their efficiency. Using the necessary software in cloud resources significantly reduces the operating costs of the enterprise.In this context, processes of financial data management in the cloud:•reduce the cost of data management processes, andare a solution which is independent of the time when, and the place where the management processes are carried out.All processes associated with managing financial figures can be carried out from any place and device, at any time. They thus improve the execution of management tasks without limiting this execution to one or several selected places, but making it as free as possible, because the only thing necessary is an Internet connexion.Financial data management in the cloud has the following advantages:•streamlining the management process, as financial figures are accessible without limits to authorised individuals;lower costs of financial management processes resulting from not having to – buy hardware to run the traditional financial management system of the enterprise, purchase licences and software for units operating a traditional financial management system;the ability to working from home which improves processes of effective financial management.Financial data management systems moved into the cloud also reduce the cost of collecting data necessary to build knowledge bases (databases) of systems for the cognitive analysis of financial figures. Knowledge bases used to carry out the semantic analysis are very extensive. Consequently, keeping all data on hardware located at the enterprise increases the cost of purchasing the hardware, software and maintaining the necessary facilities. Managing financial data in the cloud also ensures data security, because the cloud is assigned to a given company and the cryptographic data sharing algorithms used by the enterprise to protect its data make it impossible to reconstruct the information sent into the cloud.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This publication has presented financial management systems with particular emphasis on the types of cognitive systems for financial data management. Financial data management systems have been divided into four main classes according to the type of data analysed in each class. This publication has also defined systems for the semantic analysis of asset turnover indicators and introduced formal definitions for this class of intelligent financial management systems. In addition, schemes for sharing financial data acquired from cognitive data analysis systems have been defined. The principles of concealing information in data sharing schemes with an equivalent and a privileged distribution of information and with the split of information between groups jointly reconstructing the split information have also been identified. All these components have allowed the definition of a new class of systems, Cognitive Financial Management Systems in the Cloud (CFMSiC), dedicated to the cognitive management of financial data in the cloud. Apart from the formal definition of this class of systems, the way this system operates has been defined and the characteristic features of this type of system have been identified. Traditional financial management systems have been enhanced by adding new elements which significantly improve the process of managing data itself, but also support the analysis of this data contained in the system, its concealment and hence its secure storage, and optimise the cost of running the entire financial management systems.