@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Differential evolution aided adaptive resource allocation in OFDMA systems with proportional rate constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose use of CMODE for resource allocation in OFDMA systems.We use CMODE for both joint as well as separate subcarrier and power allocation.Proposed solutions achieve better capacity as compared to traditional methods.Because of lower complexity the proposed schemes are faster as compared to traditional methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Orthogonal frequency division multiple access,Differential evolution,Resource allocation,Sum capacity,Computational complexity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA) is a promising technique, which can provide high downlink capacity for the future wireless systems. The total capacity of OFDMA systems can be maximized by adaptively assigning subcarriers to the user with the best gain for that subcarrier, with power subsequently distributed by water-filling. In this paper, we propose the use of a differential evolution combined with multi-objective optimization (CMODE) algorithm to allocate the resources to the users in a downlink OFDMA system. Specifically, we propose two approaches for resource allocation in downlink OFDMA systems using CMODE algorithm. In the first approach, CMODE algorithm is used only for subcarrier allocation (OSA), while in the second approach, the CMODE algorithm is used for joint subcarrier and power allocation (JSPA). The CMODE algorithm is population-based where a set of potential solutions evolves to arrive at a near-optimal solution for the problem under study. During the past decade, solving constrained optimization problems with evolutionary algorithms has received considerable attention among researchers and practitioners. CMODE combines multi-objective optimization with differential evolution (DE) to deal with constrained optimization problems. The comparison of individuals in CMODE is based on multi-objective optimization, while DE serves as the search engine. In addition, infeasible solution replacement mechanism based on multi-objective optimization is used in CMODE, with the purpose of guiding the population towards the promising solutions and the feasible region simultaneously. It is shown that both the proposed approaches obtain higher sum capacities as compared to that obtained by previous works, with comparable computational complexity. It is also shown that the JSPA approach provides near optimal results at the slightly higher computational cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The advent of new generation of communication technologies has ushered in an era of higher data rates and better reliability. The challenges to ensure the fulfillment of these requirements arise from the limited availability of frequency spectrum, the total transmit power and the nature of the wireless channel. In order to meet the need of high data rates and reliable data services, orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA) also known as multiuser OFDM, has been selected as the multiple access scheme for 4th generation wireless networks, e.g., IEEE 802.16 worldwide interoperability for microwave access (WiMAX) and long term evolution (LTE).OFDM is a promising modulation technique which mitigates the effect of frequency selective fading, inherent in high data rate environments. It is basically a type of multicarrier modulation scheme, based on the idea of dividing a given high-bit-rate data stream into several parallel lower bit-rate streams and modulating each stream on separate carriers often called subcarriers, or tones. Multicarrier modulation schemes eliminate or minimize inter-symbol interference (ISI) by making the symbol time large enough so that the channel-induced delays are an insignificant fraction of the symbol duration. Therefore, in high-data-rate systems in which the symbol duration is small, being inversely proportional to the data rate, splitting the data stream into many parallel streams increases the symbol duration of each stream such that the delay spread is only a small fraction of the symbol duration. The number of subcarriers should be selected in such a way that each subcarrier has a bandwidth less than the coherence bandwidth of the channel, thus each subcarrier experience relatively flat fading.OFDM can also be used for multiple accesses [1,2]. OFDMA adds the property of multiple access to OFDM and allows multiple users to share an OFDM symbol, each owning a mutually disjoint set of subcarriers. Users in OFDMA systems generally experience independent channel fading, i.e., a subcarrier that appears in deep fade to one user at a given time may appear good for other users at that same time. OFDMA can take advantage of this channel diversity among users in different locations by adaptively assigning subcarriers to the users depending on channel conditions. Allowing users with better channel conditions to transmit data on that subcarrier results in increased throughput.Resource allocation in OFDMA [3–13] includes subcarrier allocation, power allocation, and bit loading. The resource allocation problem can be modeled as an optimization problem subject to various quality of service (QoS) constraints. Developing efficient resource management techniques for such a setup have drawn enormous attention in recent years.Traditional mathematical programming techniques used to solve constrained optimization problems (COPs) have several limitations when dealing with the general nonlinear programming problem. Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been found to be successful in solving a wide variety of optimization problems. However, EAs are unconstrained optimization techniques and require additional mechanisms to deal with constraints.Constraint optimization evolutionary algorithms (COEAs) [14,15] consist of two major parts: a search mechanism and a constraint handling approach. The performance of COEAs depends largely on these two components. The goal of the search mechanism is to enhance the exploration and exploitation capabilities of the population, while the constraint handling approach is devoted to incorporate the constraints into the EAs. CMODE combines multi-objective optimization with DE [16] to deal with constrained optimization problems. Since DE is simple and straight forward to implement and has fewer number of control parameters, the space complexity of DE is low. The gross performance of DE in terms of accuracy, convergence, speed and robustness makes it an attractive choice for resource allocation in OFDMA. Being computationally less expensive than genetic algorithm (GA) [6] and particle swarm optimization (PSO) [3], CMODE is better placed to quickly arrive at an optimal allocation. Thus, in this paper, we propose the use of CMODE for resource allocation in downlink OFDMA system, with proportional rate constraints.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives the OFDMA system model. Section 3 provides a brief overview of related work and compares CMODE algorithm with GA and other traditional algorithms. In Section 4 the use of CMODE algorithm for resource allocation in downlink OFDMA systems is presented. Simulation results are illustrated in Section 5 and conclusions and future scope are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed the use of CMODE algorithm to solve resource allocation problem in the downlink of OFDMA systems. The results produced by the simulations indicate that the proposed schemes perform better in terms of sum capacities as compared to linear [12], method in [13], GA [6], and immune algorithm [21]. The sum capacity increases with the increase in number of iterations and population size to reach the near optimal solution. This result suggests that CMODE aided resource allocation can provide significant gain in capacity even with small number of iterations and population size. Moreover, in CMODE aided subcarrier allocation, the search and subcarrier allocation is performed simultaneously as compared to traditional methods [12], [13] where the subcarriers are first sorted in accordance of their gains and then allocation is performed. This significantly reduces the complexity of CMODE aided allocation. The complexity of our algorithm was assessed to be O(NpGN) as compared to O(KNlog2N) for that of linear [12], [13] and O(NpG(NQ+NZ)) in immune [21]. Hence, it is concluded that the proposed algorithm is order of magnitude faster as compared to the method in [6,12,21,13]. This fact makes CMODE aided subcarrier allocation a suitable choice for practical wireless systems such as WiMAX (802.16e) where the convergence rate plays a very important role as the wireless channel changes rapidly. The fact that the channel is assumed to be constant during allocation makes convergence rate a very important parameter for wireless systems. The future scope of this paper could be to use multiple antennas on both transmitter and receiver site, which can provide further gain in capacity because of spatial multiplexing.