@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Biased random key genetic algorithm for the Tactical Berth Allocation Problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We address the Tactical Berth Allocation Problem.This paper presents an effective biased random-key genetic algorithm for the Tactical Berth Allocation Problem.The problem instances tackled in this paper consist of both literature data and instances generated taking into consideration more realistic features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Container terminal,Berth allocation,Biased random keys,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Tactical Berth Allocation Problem (TBAP) aims to allocate incoming ships to berthing positions and assign quay crane profiles to them (i.e. number of quay cranes per time step). The goals of the TBAP are both the minimization of the housekeeping costs derived from the transshipment container flows between ships, and the maximization of the total value of the quay crane profiles assigned to the ships. In order to obtain good quality solutions with considerably short computational effort, this paper proposes a biased random key genetic algorithm for solving this problem. The computational experiments and the comparison with other solutions approaches presented in the related literature for tackling the TBAP show that the proposed algorithm is applicable to efficiently solve this difficult and essential container terminal problem. The problem instances used in this paper are composed of both, those reported in the literature and a new benchmark suite proposed in this work for taking into consideration other realistic scenarios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The competition between sea-freight container terminals has hugely grown due to the increased transport of goods along the main maritime routes of containers and the important economic role played by the container ports in countries and regions. According to a United Nations Conference on Trade And Development (UNCTAD) study [30], the average container traffic growth in the last two decades is around 10%. This growth of containers traffic leads to port terminals to manage a larger number of incoming ships at a competitive price. In order to achieve this goal, container terminals are forced to improve their management capabilities and resources utilization with the objective of enhancing productivity to compete with other port terminals. For this reason, an inefficient utilization of some key-factor resources like berths and quay cranes (QCs) might be translated into a delay of the yard-side and land-side operations, resulting in lower global productivity of the container terminal.From a general point of view, the loading and unloading processes in a container terminal consist of several phases as indicated by Steenken et al. [36], Stahlbock et al. [35] and Monaco et al. [25]. Whenever a ship arrives to the port, it is allocated to a specific berth, where a set of quay cranes are required to perform its loading and unloading operations. The unloaded containers are stored on the yard in order to continue their route by trains, trucks or other ships. Meanwhile, the allocated ship may be loaded with transshipment containers which will continue their route to other container terminals. The processes described above present a high dependence among the tasks and operations that are carried out in them. Concerning the operations of the Tactical Berth Allocation Problem studied in this paper, the ships are allocated in berthing positions and the time of their stay in port depends on the number of quay cranes assigned for serving them. In this regard, the quay crane productivity depends on the number of ships assigned to it, while the berths productivity depends on the waiting time and service time of the ships. According to Expósito et al. [12], most of the time spent by a container ship in a terminal is used to perform the loading and unloading tasks by quay cranes. Given this important relationship between these operations, and as indicated by Bierwirth et al. [4], integrating both logistic problems is a common task in the management of container terminals. Their effective resolution will suppose important savings for the container terminal due to the fact that the berthing operations are one of the tasks with the highest impact on the service costs.Regarding modern container terminals, one of the most important problems is the coordination between the storage of transshipment containers and the loading and unloading of ships. When terminal managers attempt to address this problem they also pursue at the same time to reduce the unnecessary use of transport resources. Furthermore, they also consider the direct dependence of the processes involved, specially with the allocation of cranes as they are responsible for the loading/unloading of containers. In this concern, as the number of cranes assigned to ship docked at a determined berth is reduced, the stay of the ship at port lengthens. This can cause a deviation of the berthing position or scheduling of an incoming ship that needs to pick up some transshipment containers deposited at that berth. The consideration of this issue and its appropriately resolution would suppose an improvement in container traffic management, thus the transshipment traffic comprises an increasing proportion of the maritime terminal total traffic. Moreover, this improvement in the management results in an advantage that is frequently taken into account in the decision making of the shipping lines and shippers since the terminal transshipment capacity is a decisive characteristic as indicated by Bevskovnik et al. [3].This paper proposes a new alternative to solve the TBAP involved processes (berth and quay allocation) jointly. The proposed method is based on the development of a biased random key genetic algorithm (BRKGA). Its goal is to provide a high-quality solution in short computational times with the aim of providing terminal managers a useful tool which will make berth and quay crane allocation decisions more suitable and efficient. The effectiveness of the approach has been assessed by comparing its results with the best-known algorithmic methods reported in the related literature. Furthermore, in order to test the efficiency of the BRKGA algorithm in different scenarios, a set of new instances is proposed.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A literature review is provided in Literature review. The TBAP description is presented in The Tactical Berth Allocation Problem. The algorithm proposed in this paper is introduced in Biased random key genetic algorithm. Computational results section is devoted to summarize the computational experiments carried out in this work. Final section describes the conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A Genetic Algorithm based on Random Keys for solving the Tactical Berth Allocation Problem is proposed in this paper. Additionally, with the aim of making a more comprehensive study of the behaviour of the proposed algorithm, a benchmark suite which considers some real-issues in maritime container terminals is presented.From the computational experiments carried out in this paper it can be concluded that the problem is difficult to solve even for small-sized problem instances via a general-purpose solver such as CPLEX. The solution approaches proposed in the related literature provide feasible solutions with the disadvantage of requiring greater computational time as the dimensions of the instances grow. Nevertheless, BRKGA is able to provide high-quality solutions in short computational times. It also shows that it is adaptable for practical-size problems used nowadays. In this regard, it can be highlighted that the computational effort required by this solution approach is not strongly influenced by the dimensions of the instances since it provides a wide flexibility for solving different size instances in terms of computational time. This feature makes BRKGA worthy for practical cases where, on one hand, the number of ships may vary due to delays or changes in shipping routes and, on the other hand, the number of berths can change depending on how are they planned or intended to be used by the terminal; that is, in practice, depending on the received container traffic, terminal managers can dispense or establish restricted time windows for some berths in order to save port resources and reduce costs. In addition to the potential benefits of applying the BRKGA to real cases, it can also be used as a suitable tool in the negotiation between the container terminal managers and the shipping companies while services are being agreed. The terminal planners would be able to get a perspective of how the range of proposed services would affect the entire maritime terminal while the negotiations are being achieved. In this concern, the use of exact techniques, as can be seen from the computational results, requires a high computational effort which would cause a delay or slow-down in the decision-making process during the negotiations between the terminal and the shipping companies. The BRKGA is then appropriate for quickly getting all the possible services that the terminal could hold and offer to the shipping companies without compromising its performance or the contracts already agreed.These facts justify the use of BRKGA as an algorithm for solving the TBAP in real-world contexts; particularly, in those integrated designs in which this problem appears as a subproblem and it has to be solved frequently. Therefore, the use of efficient procedures that provide near-optimal solutions within short computational times is preferable.