@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intensity normalization of DaTSCAN SPECT imaging using a model-based clustering approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel method for intensity normalization of DaTSCAN SPECT brain images.The proposed methodology is based on spatial Gaussian mixture models (GMMs).The intensity values in the non-specific regions are filtered by the GMM.Intersubject differences in the non-specific regions are reduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parkinson's disease,DaTSCAN SPECT images,Computer aided diagnosis (CAD),Intensity normalization,Gaussian mixture models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel method for intensity normalization of DaTSCAN SPECT brain images. The proposed methodology is based on Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) and considers not only the intensity levels, but also the coordinates of voxels inside the so-defined spatial Gaussian functions. The model parameters are obtained according to a maximum likelihood criterion employing the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. First, an averaged control subject image is computed to obtain a threshold-based mask that selects only the voxels inside the skull. Then, the GMM is obtained for the DaTSCAN-SPECT database, performing space quantization by populating it with Gaussian kernels whose linear combination approximates the image intensity. According to a probability threshold that measures the weight of each kernel or “cluster” in the striatum area, the voxels in the non-specific region are intensity-normalized by removing clusters whose likelihood is negligible.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a severe neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal pathway. This leads to a corresponding loss of dopamine transporters (DaTs) in the striatum [1]. DaTs are proteins situated at the presynaptic terminal of dopaminergic neurons which are responsible for the re-uptake of dopamine. Thus, DaT imaging using single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) has been introduced as a valuable tool to evaluate PD patients [2–4]. In order to visualize dopamine lost, different radio-ligands can be used, such as I-Ioflupane (better known as DaTSCAN [5–7] or [123I]FP-CIT [8]), [123I]-β-CIT, [123I]IBZM [9] and [Tc-99m]-TRODAT-1 [10] which binds to the striatum's dopamine transporters. The quantitative measurement of DaTs using those neuroimaging tracers is based on a ratio-equilibrium analysis in which, a ratio of radioactivity concentration is used as an index of transporter density in the striatum as compared to that in a non-specific brain region. Previous studies have demonstrated that specific binding regions (any of the striatal structures) were more intense in healthy subjects than in PD subjects [11,12]. This difference is quantified by the binding potential (specific/non-specific binding ratio (BR)) [13,14] which can be calculated as:(1)BR=CVOI−CNSCNSwhere CVOIis the mean count per voxel in the volume of interest (striatum, putamen or caudate nucleus) and CNSrepresent the mean count per voxel in the non-specific binding region (occipital cortex) [15]. This binding ratio is generally used for normalization purposes in different functional brain images [16], such as DaTSCAN SPECT images. The intensity normalization (IN) guarantees that the differences between images of different subjects are due to physiological reasons and brain functioning, and not due to the baseline calibration of the gamma camera applied for the acquisition [17]. The conventional way of normalizing intensity is to use the brain region that is not significant as a differentiating criterion between ill subjects and healthy ones for all images. Since the discriminant region for PD is the striatum, the occipital region is usually chosen as reference because of negligible DaT density [18]. However, DaTSCAN images contain considerably fewer anatomic details and omit structural details about the location of the occipital cortex (the normalization region). Therefore, for comparison purposes, the whole brain area is also considered, minus the striatum as a non-specific cortex region [19–21]. Thus, the IN consists of comparing the uptake value in areas of specific activity (binding to dopaminergic transporters) to the value in areas of non-specific activity (vascular activity) between subjects. Several approaches for intensity normalization may be found in the literature [22–25]. These approaches are based on general normalization of 3D functional images and may be adapted for the normalization of a particular type of images, such as the ones used in this work for the PD diagnosis. For instance, ANCOVA normalization [26] appears to be a reasonable choice for PET count data when forced normalization is warranted. However, it is not robust to violations of linearity assumptions, it has a slight correlation with interindividual count variance, and it is very sensitive to outliers [25]. Histogram equalization approach [27] is based on the cumulative distribution function of the brain image intensity and tends to modify the histogram to match the desired template. Further analysis reveals that this approach provides good results similar to the ratio method [25]. Finally, in [8], a normalization to the maximum intensity value is performed for each image individually by referring each voxel to the average value of a set of the highest intensity voxels. This method may introduce problems in some images that can have peak intensity values due to noise, as shown in the DaTSCAN images. The current normalization methods, such as specific-to-non-specific binding ratio [24], depends on time consuming operator-intensive work and expertise skills in manually placing the regions of interest (ROI). This method is based on dividing each voxel intensity by the mean intensity value in the so-defined non-specific (NS) region [28]. This region includes a very large intensity range since more structural areas apart of the occipital cortex are considered.However, this paper shows a novel method for automatic intensity normalization of FP-CIT SPECT images using Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) in order to (i) eliminate operator-dependent manipulations [29] and (ii) avoid the manual preselection of relevant information by means of statistical analysis [14]. In addition, the GMM has the advantage of simplifying the analytical treatment of the problem. The main novelty with respect to previous approaches [28] is that the proposed method locally decomposes the image intensity into Gaussians in the spatial domain in order to automatically select ROIs. In this sense, the proposed strategy allows us to modulate or filter the voxel intensity in the NS region by discarding the clusters whose probability is below a normalized threshold in the specific region (striatum). We consider these deleted Gaussians as a reference region because almost all of them are located in areas with a low uptake value, i.e. the occipital cortex. Thus, GMM is used as a filtering strategy to remove artifacts and noise [30,31], preserving the image details after the preprocessing stage. The proposed method was implemented using Matlab software, as well as, the experiments carried out to evaluate it. The principal contributions in the field of soft computing that are presented in this paper are related to the topic “probabilistic computing” and its applications in biomedical engineering, data mining, decision support systems, image processing and pattern recognition. A probabilistic model (i.e. a GMM) is used for modeling the intensity of the brain image and to enhance the average intensity gap between the specific and the non-specific areas in the sense of increasing the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for intensity normalization purposes. Moreover, the influence of the probabilistic computing technique shown in this paper is evaluated within a pattern recognition system developed for computer aided diagnosis of the PD. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the image database used in this work. Section 3 outlines the noise model adopted for DaTSCAN SPECT images. Section 4 shows GMM-based image modeling. Section 5 describes the proposed IN method using a model-based clustering approach. Finally, the experimental results and discussion are given in Section 6 while some conclusions are drawn in Section 7.The database, consisting of 189 SPECT images from 189 subjects (94 normal controls (NC) and 95 Parkinsonian syndrome (PS)), was obtained 3–4h after injecting 185MBq (5mCi) of the Ioflupane-I-123 radioligand. During this period, the thyroid was blocked using a Lugols solution. The scans were obtained using a General Electric gamma camera, Millennium model, equipped with a dual head and general purpose collimator. A 360° circular orbit was made around the cranium, at three-degree intervals, leading to 60 128×128 images per interval. The brain images were reconstructed using the filtered back projection (FBP) algorithm, applying a Hanning filter (cut-off frequency equal to 0.7) and were obtained with trans-axial slices. All SPECT images were spatially normalized using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) 8 software [32] yielding a 73×73×45 three-dimensional functional activity map for each subject. Once the images have been properly normalized, they were visually labeled by three nuclear medicine specialists from the hospital using only the information contained in the images, without any other medical information. The criteria followed, reached by consensus among the three specialists, were: a study was considered to be normal when bilateral, symmetrical uptake appeared in caudate and putamen nuclei, and abnormal when there were areas of significant reduced uptake in any of the striatal structures. It is worth noting that most of the patients are borderline cases. Finally, quantitative evaluation was not regarded for image assessment [33]. The images were acquired by the “Virgen de la Victoria” hospital (Malaga, Spain) from January 2003 until December 2008 (see Table 1for demographic details).In general, the uptake value in the NS region should be small. Contrariwise, there is an uptake in this region for reconstructed DaTSCAN images due to the presence of several noise sources, such as Gaussian noise [34,35]. In this paper, a noise model, very similar to the one proposed in [36], is considered and assumed to be from the scanner itself:(2)Ii=μiρi+Niwhere the observed signal (Ii) is supposed to be an un-corrupted signal (μi), scaled by some scanner multiplicative bias (ρi) with added Gaussian noise (Ni) that is independent of the bias. As a result, the real intensity μifor each voxel can be defined as:(3)μi=ρi·(Ii−Ni)where the multiplicative bias is assumed to be inversely proportional to the mean intensity in the NS region. In the same line of reasoning, almost all the IN methods in DaTSCAN imaging, i.e. the one based on the BR, usually assume the bias to be inversely proportional to the number of count per voxel in the NS regionρi=1CNSneglecting the independent noise [28,37]. With this definition, the BR provides the real intensity in each voxel. In this paper the NS region, that is commonly determined by visual inspection, is automatically selected by some specific clusters, as shown in the following sections.GMMs are an efficient method for classification and density estimation [38–40]. The basic assumption is that the given data xi, i=1, …, Nbis drawn from a probability distribution p(x), which is modeled by a sum of k Gaussian distributions [41]:(4)p(x)=∑n=1kωnfn(x|θn)where fn(x|θn) is the density of the n-th Gaussian with parameter vector θnand the ωnare the weight factors or mixing proportions, with ∑nωn=1. The normal distributions fn(x|θn) in d dimensions are given by:(5)fn(x|θn∈{μn,Σn})=1(2π)d|Σn|×exp−12(x−μn)TΣn−1(x−μn)where μnis the expectation values and Σndenotes the covariance matrix. To estimate the set of mixture parameters, the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) is usually considered since no other estimation method is asymptotically more efficient [42]. This procedure consists of adapting these parameters in order to maximize the likelihood of a mixture model with k components:(6)L(θ|x)=∏i=1Nbp(xi|θ)where θ={θn}, for n=1, …, k, and x={xi}, for i=1, …, Nb, which corresponds to the probability to observe the given samples xi. If independent and identically distributed random variables are assumed [40,43], the MLE can be used in a modified way, as shown in [44] and in the following section.Recently, GMMs have been successfully applied to the field of functional imaging for voxels of interest (VOI) analysis and image compression [7,44,45]. The main idea of this method is to assign each spatial coordinate xj, j=1…Nb, a probability proportionally equal to hj/Itot, where hjis the intensity value of xj, and Itotis the total intensity of the image:(7)Itot=∑j=1NbhjUnder this assumption, the likelihood can be generalized to:(8)L(θ|x)=∏j=1Nb[p(xj|θ)]hjSince we have hji.i.d observations of data points at xj. Finally, the complete-data log-likelihood to be minimized using the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm [46,47] is:(9)ℓ(θ|x)=∑j=1Nb∑n=1khjlog(ωnfn(x|θn))Once the model parameters {ωn, θn} are determined [48], the intensity of each voxel at x can be recovered by:(10)IGauss(x)=Itot·p(x)=Itot·∑n=1kωnfn(x|θn)Thus, the reconstructed images approximate the original images by conserving the total intensity through the superposition of k Gaussians. In Fig. 1, the effect of this modeling process is shown. The GMM method performs a space quantization of each image by populating it with Gaussian kernels whose linear combination approximates the image intensity. In principle, a histogram bin is associated to each voxel coordinate xjof the DaTSCAN image, such that its intensity I(xj) corresponds to the histogram height hj.The previous GMM modulates the voxel intensity of the image as shown in (10). This probabilistic model can be used to enhance the average intensity gap between the specific and the non-specific areas in the sense of increasing the SNR for normalization purposes. During the image reconstruction, classical filtering techniques can be used [49,33], however, as the uptake is reduced in abnormal studies, the images will contain fewer counts and still appear to be noisy in DaTSCAN SPECT imaging.Let Ω be the indexed set of Gaussians. From (10) the following expression can be derived by splitting Ω into two subsets:(11)IGauss(x)=Itot·∑n∈Ωsωnfn(x|θn)+∑n∈ΩNωnfn(x|θn)where Ωsand ωndenote the subsets of clusters modeling the un-corrupted signal and the noise components, respectively, in (2). If this spatial model holds, the Gaussian noise (Ni) may be removed from (3) by pruning the clusters belonging to ωn. The whole normalization procedure is illustrated in Fig. 2. In this way the proposed IN method consists of the following steps:•Raw SPECT data are registered to a common template using SPM in order to ensure that any given voxel in different images refers to the same anatomical position across the brains [8,28,27].A GMM is obtained by using a maximum likelihood (ML) approach for modeling the intensity profile of the original image. In this sense, the intensity profile of each DaTSCAN SPECT image is approximated by a sum of Gaussians (model-based clustering or parcellation approach [45]).A striatal mask is computed by thresholding the average image of control subjects. Then, the coordinates of each voxel belonging to the striatum, denoted byΓ={xjs}for j={1, …, Ns} are selected, where Nsis the number of voxels within the striatum.The resulting mixture model is used for IN according to a cluster selection strategy. Clusters are selected by means of a normalized probability threshold that measures the weight of each kernel on the striatum area and the IN is actually carried out by only adding the relevant clusters in the image reconstruction. Thus, a statistical criterion is defined for the set Ωs, that is, to determine which clusters of the GMM are relevant in Γ. If the total intensity is assumed to be uniformly distributed in the image, the probability of each coordinate is pu(xj)=1/Nb≡η≅4·10−6, where Nbis the total number of voxels. Thus, the partial probability value of a given voxel in Γ that satisfies:(12)fn(xjs|θn)<ηn∈Ωreflects a deviation from the uniform threshold value, that is, a negligible contribution to (4). A cluster n∈ΩNis considered as irrelevant if this inequality holds for a large fraction α of Ns(see Appendix A for further details):(13)card{Γn}≥α·Nswhere Γndenotes the subset of non-activated voxels for the cluster n, that is, the subset of voxels that satisfies (12). The irrelevant clusters are removed from the probabilistic model by setting its weight ωnto zero. Otherwise the cluster n∈Ωsis considered as relevant (the cluster with activated voxels in Γ) and contributes to the mixture distribution.Fig. 3shows a normalized average image after the filtering process by means of GMM (right column). Different normalized probability threshold values can be used to obtain the intensity normalization in the NS region. According to these normalized thresholds, the relevant clusters that contribute to the intensity of the striatal region can be preserved (central column) and the remaining ones are removed. Moreover, the probability threshold equal to the uniform value (η=4·10−6) entails the IN in the NS region and it idyllically preserves the shape and the intensity of the striatal signal. It is theoretically chosen, as mentioned above. However, the remaining values affect the shape of the striatum. In accordance with this procedure, we provided a filtered GMM image reconstruction that: (i) preserves the intensity in the specific region, and (ii) automatically normalizes the intensity in the NS areas such that the inter-subject intensity differences are reduced and the irrelevant clusters that may represent different noise sources are automatically removed, as shown in the experimental section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The core idea of this work is to normalize intensity values in DaTSCAN images using a novel method based on the GMMs, which is widely used in many pre-processing techniques, such as ROI selection, density estimation, etc. In our work, we used the GMM method to remove the Gaussian noise from the DaTSCAN images, and to reconstruct these images by populating them with Gaussian kernels whose linear combination approximates the original image intensity. In addition, we modulated the intensity values in the NS region by filtering the GMM-reconstructed images according to a probability threshold. Using the proposed GMM-based image filtering approach, the relevant clusters that contribute to the striatum, the brain area involved in PD diagnosis, are retained. However, the non-relevant clusters selected in the normalization region (occipital cortex), are automatically removed. We have proved the system's ability to acquire brain images with similar intensity distribution in the NS region. In addition, the proposed normalization method outperforms the existing approaches based on BR, as it improves the normalization, increases the separation between the specific region and NS regions and reduces the inter-subject intensity differences in the NS region. Moreover, it demonstrates also its ability and robustness in PD pattern detection as it provides good value of accuracy. Finally, this method could be used for visual assessment in clinical practice; since it is not dependent on any pathological information about the specific disease, it can be applicable to other types of neurodegenerative diseases as well. It might also be applied to other image modalities, such as positron emission tomography (PET).