@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Energy-efficient topology control algorithm for maximizing network lifetime in wireless sensor networks with mobile sink

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formulate the problem of Maximizing the Minimum Lifetime in WSNs with Mobile Sink (MML-MS).We propose a tree-based heuristic topology control algorithm to address the MML-MS problem.Our distributed algorithm can only use local information to mitigate the imbalance of the loads.We save the transmission power of nodes by reducing the amount of their relaying data.Comparing with existing algorithms, our algorithm can prolong more than 15% network lifetime.Our algorithm has a lower computation complexity by getting rid of the redundant computation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maximum lifetime,Energy balancing,Mobile sink,Anchor nodes,Topology control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Uneven energy consumption is an inherent problem in wireless sensor networks characterized by multi-hop routing and many-to-one traffic pattern. Such unbalanced energy dissipation can significantly reduce network lifetime. In this paper, we study the problem of prolonging network lifetime in large-scale wireless sensor networks where a mobile sink gathers data periodically along the predefined path and each sensor node uploads its data to the mobile sink over a multi-hop communication path. By using greedy policy and dynamic programming, we propose a heuristic topology control algorithm with time complexity O(n(m+nlogn)), where n and m are the number of nodes and edges in the network, respectively, and further discuss how to refine our algorithm to satisfy practical requirements such as distributed computing and transmission timeliness. Theoretical analysis and experimental results show that our algorithm is superior to several earlier algorithms for extending network lifetime.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, mobile data gathering by deploying a mobile sink in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) has attracted much interests from researchers [1]. A WSN is a multi-hop wireless ad hoc network with hundreds or thousands of unattended sensors. Since most sensor nodes are powered by limited disposable batteries, the energy consumption becomes one critical constraint in WSNs. The mobile sink could be a mobile robot or a vehicle equipped with powerful transceiver, battery, and large memory. The purpose of deploying the mobile sink is to reduce the communication expense among sensor nodes. In large-scale WSNs, to ensure that the sensed data are delivered to the base station in time, the mobile sink could not move nearby every sensor node and collect data one by one, thus only sensors that are deployed near the mobile sink's trajectory can directly send data to the mobile sink and other nodes should transmit their data to the mobile sink in a multi-hop manner, as shown in Fig. 1. This results in highly nonuniform energy usage among sensors. The energy of the sensors near the trajectory is depleted much faster than that of others since these sensors need to relay much more packets for the sensors far away from the trajectory. As a result, after these sensors fail, the network becomes disconnected even though most sensors still have plenty of energy.Based on those observations, we focus on how to prolong network lifetime in large-scale WSNs with mobile sink. We adopt the definition of network lifetime as the time until the first node exhausts its energy, which has been widely used. We assume that the trajectory is pre-determined by the algorithms [2,3] or it is fixed due to environmental restriction. Comparing with prolonging network lifetime in WSNs with static sinks, the problem of maximizing network lifetime in WSNs with mobile sink has its particular difficulties:(1)The trajectory may be irregular and the nodes which take charge of forwarding data to the mobile sink may be far away from each other, thus the corona-based algorithms such as EBDG [4] are infeasible.Lack of central node increases the difficulty of coordination among sensor nodes, especially for the design of distributed algorithms.In this paper, we consider taking advantage of topology control to select forwarding path and transmission power for each sensor node. The key idea of topology control is that, instead of transmitting with the maximal power, the nodes in a wireless multi-hop network collaboratively determine their transmission powers and define the network topology by forming the proper neighbor relation under certain criteria. In our algorithm, we try to reduce transmission powers of the nodes that have less residual energy. For such nodes have heavier loads, we consider reducing the amount of their relayed data so that the lifetime of all these nodes is maximized. Compared with existing algorithms such as MNL [5] and LOCAL-OPT [6], experimental results show that the network lifetime can be prolonged more than 15% by our proposed algorithm. Another advantage of our algorithm is having a lower computation complexity by getting rid of the redundant computations to the greatest extent.In addition, we show that our algorithm can be implemented in a distributed manner where only using local information can mitigate the imbalance of the loads and prolong network lifetime to a certain extent. Furthermore, we improve our algorithm by considering the forwarding delay because it exists in real data gathering environments.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of the related work. We then define the problem in Section 3 and present algorithms in Section 4 and 5. Section 6 shows experimental results. The last section concludes this paper and discusses possible directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a tree-based heuristic topology control algorithm, called MLS, to maximize network lifetime in WSNs with mobile sinks. MLS determines the parent node of each sensor node by growing a tree from a fictitious root node. At each iteration, MLS adds an edge to the growing tree so as to minimize the relative load of the node that currently has the maximum relative load and at the same time reduce the load of other nodes. In order to choose the most appropriate edge at each iteration, MLS introduces the concept of load set and defines how to compare two load sets. MLS cumulatively calculates the load set so that most of the redundant computation is eliminated. The time complexity of MLS is O(n(m+nlogn)). It can drop to O(n2logn) if the range of the residual energy is a finite set. Furthermore, we propose a distributed algorithm and a delay constrained algorithm to suit real situations. Experimental results show that our algorithms can significantly outperform several existing algorithms.In future, we will work along the following two directions. The first one is to further improve our distributed algorithm with the help of a small quantity of global information. The second one is to consider the WSNs where the trajectories of mobile sinks are controllable since the policy of anchor node selection is integrated with topology control algorithms, the network lifetime can be further prolonged.