@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design of optimal PID controller using hybrid differential evolution and particle swarm optimization with an aging leader and challengers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose a modified PSO-DV algorithm using aging mechanism.The algorithm is tested on 12 benchmark functions.The algorithm is used for determining the optimal parameters of PID controller.Comparisons with different evolutionary algorithms show that the algorithm is efficient and robust.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aging,Differential evolution (DE),Particle swarm optimization (PSO),PID controller,Three tanks liquid level system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new algorithm designed to find the optimal parameters of PID controller. The proposed algorithm is based on hybridizing between differential evolution (DE) and Particle Swarm Optimization with an aging leader and challengers (ALC-PSO) algorithms. The proposed algorithm (ALC-PSODE) is tested on twelve benchmark functions to confirm its performance. It is found that it can get better solution quality, higher success rate in finding the solution and yields in avoiding unstable convergence. Also, ALC-PSODE is used to tune PID controller in three tanks liquid level system which is a typical nonlinear control system. Compared to different PSO variants, genetic algorithm (GA), differential evolution (DE) and Ziegler–Nichols method; the proposed algorithm achieve the best results with least standard deviation for different swarm size. These results show that ALC-PSODE is more robust and efficient while keeping fast convergence.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
PID controller is a widely used controller in industry because of its simplicity and robustness. PID controller is still favorable to be used with more than 90% of industrial controllers [35,36]. However, finding the optimal parameters of PID controller is very difficult especially in non-linear control system as in liquid level control systems. So, several methods have been proposed to tune PID controller. One of these methods is Ziegler and Nichols (Z-N) method [1]. It is the oldest method and simplest one. However, it is often hard to determine optimal PID parameters with Z-N formula in many industrial plants. Z-N method fails to provide an acceptable performance because it provides a large overshoot and settling time, so that the values of the PID parameters are often subsequently refined in accordance with the operator's experience [37]. Recently, many evolutionary algorithms such as differential evolution (DE), genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) have been employed to tune PID controller in various plants [2–7]. However as PSO is straight forward, has less parameters to be tuned and its low computational cost with high performance makes it commonly used in the industrial applications [43].PSO is an evolutionary computation technique introduced in 1995 [8]. PSO is inspired from imitating the behavior of flock of birds. In PSO, each particle p in the flock is initialized with randomly chosen velocity Vpand position Xpin search domain with n dimension. At each iteration, each particle is accelerated toward its own historically best position (pbestp) and the best particle found by the swarm (gbest) [9]. The update equations in PSO are:(1)Vpd(t+1)=ωVpd(t)+C1r1(pbestpd−Xpd(t))+C2r2(gbestd−Xpd(t))Xpd(t+1)=Xpd(t)+Vpd(t+1)where r1, r2 are random numbers uniformly distributed in [0,1]. ω is the inertia weight, C1and C2 are acceleration constants, and d is the dth dimension of the search domain.Although PSO has fast convergence behavior, there is some deficiency in PSO performance. This is due to that all particles learn from gbest. If gbest falls in local optima the whole swarm may follow it and this would lead to premature convergence.Various attempts have been made to overcome the shortcoming of PSO. One of these attempts is hybridizing PSO with other search techniques [10–17] to benefit from advantages of each algorithm. The hybridization between DE [18] and PSO looks a promising optimizer. This hybridization tries to benefit from good global search capability of DE and high speed convergence of PSO.DE is a simple evolutionary algorithm for global optimization proposed by Price and Storn [18]. The DE-variants perturb the current population members with the scaled differences of randomly selected and distinct population members. Therefore, no separate probability distribution has to be used for generating the offspring [19]. Although DE is very simple, it is proved to be efficient in many applications.In the past decade, numerous hybrids of DE and PSO have been made [20–23]. Particle swarm optimization with differentially perturbed velocity (PSO-DV) is considered one of the embedded hybrid algorithms [21]. In this algorithm a differential operator (borrowed from DE) has been tightly coupled with the velocity update scheme of PSO. This differential operator can be considered as additional mutation to guarantee more diversity to PSO and hence avoid local optimum problem. Unlike the PSO scheme, a particle is shifted to a new location only if the new location yields a better fitness value. Due to this restriction, some of the particles may get stagnant in the search space. PSO-DV algorithm tries to solve this problem by replacing these stagnated particles with randomized particles.As DE is embedded in PSO, the operating manners of DE and PSO optimizers cannot be separated explicitly. We cannot separate their contribution to fitness improvement since DE and PSO are integrated into a hybrid optimizer. So, PSO-DV usually implies a higher risk of design failure [20].Recently, a new PSO approach has been introduced based on aging concept [24–28]. It applies the age index on a particle (or a group of particles) in the swarm. If the particle cannot contribute effectively in searching space (i.e. it gets old), it should be replaced. Thus, the age of the particle is considered as an important indicator of its quality. The way of adjusting the life span of a particle and selecting a new one is an important step.PSO with an aging leader and challengers (ALC-PSO) [28] is an age-based PSO algorithm. ALC-PSO mimics the aging concept in the nature. As the leader of the colony becomes old, it gives the opportunity to another individual to lead the colony. In this algorithm, when the swarm falls in local optima, this means that gbest gets old and cannot lead the swarm. ALC-PSO searches about another promising particle (called a challenger) to replace gbest. To do that, it travels randomly in one way direction for a predetermined number of attempts to select a challenger. The most important feature of ALC-PSO is maintaining fast convergence of PSO. However, it is often hard to get acceptable diversity to search more and more promising area of search space.In this paper, an effective approach called hybrid differential evolution and particle swarm optimization with an aging leader and challengers (ALC-PSODE) is presented. ALC-PSODE modifies PSO-DV by using another mutation borrowed from ALC-PSO (as helping agent) to solve stagnation of particles problem and improve the performance of PSO-DV. Using one dimensional mutation of ALC-PSO can prevent gbest moving to the position of randomly mutated particle. This can protect the swarm from unacceptable divergence. To validate ALC-PSODE algorithm, it is first tested on twelve benchmark functions. Then it is used to tune PID controller.In this paper, Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 presents the ALC-PSODE algorithm. In Section 4, ALC-PSODE is tested on twelve benchmark functions against six evolutionary algorithms. Section 5 describes the linearized model of liquid level system. Section 6 describes the application of ALC-PSODE to tune the PID controller and test it against various controllers. Finally, section 7 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
