@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparison of neural network application for fuzzy and ANFIS approaches for multi-criteria decision making problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multi-criteria decision making model is established for supplier evaluation and selection problem.Neural Networks (NN) for fuzzy multi criteria decision making and Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) models are compared for multi-criteria decision making in supplier evaluation and selection problem solution.ANFIS model increases residual and reduces Means Squared Error (MSE) compare to the NN solution model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ANFIS,Decision making,Neural Networks,Supplier Evaluation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) is used for multi-criteria decision making in supplier evaluation and selection problem. The contemporary supply-chain management is looking for both quantitative and qualitative measures other than just getting the lowest price. After evaluating a number of distinct suppliers, determining the reliable suppliers by ANFIS model with better approximation will support decision makers. To this end, ANFIS is evaluated for different data sets with the attributes of the suppliers and their scores that are gathered from a previous study conducted for the same problem under the name of Neural Network (NN) application for fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making model. In the proposed ANFIS model built for determining supplier score, linear regression analysis (R-value) and Mean Square Error (MSE) were 0.8467 and 0.0134, respectively, while they were 0.7733 and 0.0193 for NN for fuzzy. ANFIS gives better results according to MSEs. Hence, it is determined that ANFIS algorithm can be used in multi-criteria decision making problems for supplier evaluation and selection with more precise and reliable results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In an increasingly complex world, decision support systems are aimed to give leverage to the users in operational, tactical or strategic problems they face to increase efficiency. On the other hand, as alternatives of choice become more complicated and are characterized by numerous attributes as well as multiple objectives, the problem of combining these various aspects into a single measure of utility gets more difficult and less practical.Today, there are many multi-criteria decision making methods in use to facilitate decision makers’ supplier evaluation and selection task. Ho et al. [1] reviewed the literature of the multi-criteria decision making approaches for supplier evaluation and selection from 2000 to 2008. In Ho et al's study solo or hybrid techniques used in supplier evaluation and selection problems are listed as Case-Based Reasoning (CBR), Fuzzy Set Theory, Analytic Network Process (ANP), Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), Simple Multi-Attribute Rating Technique (SMART), Mathematical Programming, Genetic Algorithm (GA), and they also provided the proportion to the population of the techniques covered in that time period. According to the importance of the supplier selection and evaluation process, a number of studies on this subject have been published since 2008 too. Most of these researches use sole or combined soft computing constituents for better results. According to Jang et al. [2], Soft Computing (SC) is an innovative approach to build intelligent systems that can mimic humanlike expertise within a specific domain, adjust themselves to the changing conditions, and provide traceability and reasoning capability in its decision processes. Neural Networks, Genetic Algorithm, Fuzzy Set Theory, Simulated Annealing and Conventional Artificial Intelligence can be counted as soft computing constituents. Since Ho et al.’s [1] literature review, new studies with integrated and individual approaches concerning supplier evaluation and selection problem have been published. These are Golmohammadi and Mellat-Parast [3]’s study about AHP and Gray-based decision making models; fuzzy set supported models [4–13] and neural network supported models [14,15]. According to Ho et al. [1], ANFIS method has not been used in this area since 2008. However, Güneri et al. [16] used an ANFIS based new model for supplier input selection problem which outperforms then Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) in terms of Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE).In supplier selection and evaluation process, the number of criteria with different weights and position that can be taken into consideration is too much. Companies have to take into account their strategies, business priorities, stakeholders and customers’ requirements. Some of the requirements are quantitative, and some are qualitative in nature. In order to find a global optimum of that much requirements, Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) approaches are inevitable.MCDM problem in supplier selection includes tangible and intangible factors which cause uncertainty [17]. This uncertainty often addresses subjective human preferences to determine the categories when using the same word as a label for a set [18]. Moreover, Saghaei and Didehkhani list various challenges in their study. Some of those challenges are [19]:•Most of the MCDM models cannot consider the inner dependencies and relations among criteria, so the validity of these models, where these inner dependencies exist, is questionable.Most of the MCDM models need predetermined weights of criteria. In particular, when there is more than one decision maker (DM), it is very hard to obtain reliable weights of criteria.In case of ambiguity about the structure of criteria and sub-criteria, it is not reasonable to use structural approaches like AHP. To handle these challenges, neural networks and especially ANFIS which are efficient models for function approximation, clustering and pattern recognition [19].Robust properties of both Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and Fuzzy Set Theory are integrated into ANFIS. ANFIS automatically produces adequate rules with respect to input and output data and takes advantage of the learning capability of neural networks [16]. While there are lots of criteria with different weights and position in supplier selection and evaluation process, it does not appear possible to take into account all criteria in a proper manner. However, in training procedure of ANFIS the weights of criteria and the position of criteria are not important; ANFIS chooses the best combination of criteria for the best solution with minimum error [19].In this paper, MCDM problem and ANFIS are explained first in supplier selection and evaluation process. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: “Discussion” section gives discussion of the proposed ANFIS model and Golmohammadi's NN model; “Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS)” section provides a brief description of ANFIS; “Experimental data” section describes experimental data used in both Golmohammadi's NN and the proposed ANFIS models; “Model design” describes the designed ANFIS model in detail, and in “Results of NN application for fuzzy method” section results of NN application for fuzzy method are discussed. “Results of ANFIS model” section discusses the training and test results of ANFIS model, and in “Comparison of NN for Fuzzy and ANFIS” section comparisons of NN for fuzzy and ANFIS models’ findings can be found. Finally, “Conclusion” section discusses the major conclusions and findings of the study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
