@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using the gray wolf optimizer for solving optimal reactive power dispatch problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Gray wolf optimizer (GWO) is employed in solving the optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problems.Three case studies have been utilized to show the effectiveness of GWO.GWO able to find minimum loss and voltage deviation solution than those determined by other techniques.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gray wolf optimizer,Loss minimization,Voltage deviation minimization,Meta-heuristic technique,Optimal reactive power dispatch,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the use of a new meta-heuristic technique namely gray wolf optimizer (GWO) which is inspired from gray wolves’ leadership and hunting behaviors to solve optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problem. ORPD problem is a well-known nonlinear optimization problem in power system. GWO is utilized to find the best combination of control variables such as generator voltages, tap changing transformers’ ratios as well as the amount of reactive compensation devices so that the loss and voltage deviation minimizations can be achieved. In this paper, two case studies of IEEE 30-bus system and IEEE 118-bus system are used to show the effectiveness of GWO technique compared to other techniques available in literature. The results of this research show that GWO is able to achieve less power loss and voltage deviation than those determined by other techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electrical power system is such a complex network which mainly consists of generation, transmission and distribution network to supply the electricity to variety of load demands. It is expected to operate at minimum consumption of resources, thus giving maximum security and reliability. In recent developments on power system research, optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) has received an ever-increasing interest, in particularly from the electric utilities due to its significant influence on the security and economic operation issues. ORPD can be categorized as a sub problem of the optimal power flow (OPF) calculations. ORPD is one of the important nonlinear problems in power system which includes continuous and discrete control variables which satisfying both equality and inequality constraints. In order to determine minimum loss in a system, several main variables need to be controlled and set accordingly such as the voltage of generator buses, the value of shunt reactive elements and transformer tap setting.Years back from [1–4], the ORPD problems had been discussed and later been solved by applying numbers of classical methods or techniques such as linear and non-linear programming, quadratic programming as well as Newton method of solutions. Compare to classical methods, recent development in meta-heuristic application techniques have given vast choices which producing better results in solving ORPD problem. As a summary, meta-heuristic techniques can be broken down into three categories which are based on swarm intelligence (SI), evolutionary computation (EC) and physics-based [5]. For SI, particle swarm optimization (PSO) [6,7] and artificial bee colony (ABC) [8] together with the variants of honey bee mating optimization (HBO) [9] have been applied in solving ORPD. Refs. [10–15] are the techniques that have been used to solve ORPD fall under EC category while harmony search algorithm (HSA) [16] and improved HSA [17] as well as gravitational search algorithm (GSA) [18,19] are the techniques based on the physics approach. There are also efforts to solve ORPD using hybrid techniques such as hybrid differential evolution with ant system [20] and hybrid of modified imperialist competitive algorithm with invasive weed optimization (MICA-IWO) [21].This paper proposes the use of a new meta-heuristic technique based on the SI approach called gray wolf optimizer (GWO) in order to solve ORPD problem. This technique has been proposed by [5] which mimic the hunting behavior of gray wolves. The organization of this paper is as follows: Section 2 discusses the problem formulation of ORPD while brief description of GWO technique is presented in Section 3. It is followed by ORPD implementation in solving ORPD problem in Section 4. Section 5 presents the simulation results and discussion. Finally, Section 6 states the conclusion of this paper.The basis of formulating ORPD problem can be first described as follows:Minimize f(x, u)(1)s.tg(x,u)=0h(x,u)≤0where the function of f(x, u) is the objective function, g(x, u)=0 is the equality constraint, h(x, u)≤0 is the inequality constraint, x is the vector of dependent variables and u is the vector of control variables. In this paper, the objective function to be minimized is the total transmission loss, F1 and voltage deviation at load buses, F2expressed as follow [16]:(2)F1=PLoss(x,u)=∑L=1NlPLoss(3)F2=VDx,u=∑i=1NdVi−Vispwhere Nl is the number of transmission lines, Viis the voltage at load bus-i,Vispis the specified value which is usually set to 1.0p.u and Nd is the number of load buses.The equality constraint equations suggested in [16] are still valid to give the power balanced of load flow, as follows:(4)PGi−PDi=Vi∑j∈NiVj(Gijcosθij+Bijsinθij)(5)QGi−QDi=Vi∑j∈NiVj(Bijcosθij−Gijsinθij)On the other hand, the inequality constraints can be represented in terms of operating constraints, as follow:•Generator constraints: Real and reactive power generation as well as generation bus voltages are restricted by their upper and lower limits, as follow:(6)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimaxi=1,…,NG(7)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimaxi=1,…,NG(8)VGimin≤VGi≤VGimaxi=1,…,NGwhere NGis the number of generators.Transformer tap setting is restricted by their lower and upper limits, as follows:(9)Timin≤Ti≤Timaxi=1,…,NTwhere NTis the of transformers.Reactive compensators (Shunt VARs) are restricted by their limits as follows:It is vital to highlight that in this paper, a different approach has been taken in order to obtain the objective function. To ensure the accurate result of total transmission loss and no violation of the constraints can be achieved smoothly, load flow program by MATPOWER software package [22] is used to assist the analysis.gray wolf optimizer (GWO) was first introduced by [5]. As a new swarm intelligence (SI) technique, the GWO has been proven to be competitive with the other remarkable optimization algorithm which includes gravitational search algorithm (GSA), differential evolution (DE) and many others. In nature, gray wolf (Canis lupus) belongs to Canidae family. It is considered as a top level of predators and residing at the top in the food chain. They live in a pack which consists of 5–12 wolves on average. In the group, strict dominant hierarchy is practised where the pack is leads by the alphas, followed by the beta which is the subordinate wolves that responsible to assist the alpha in decision making.The beta reinforces the alpha's commands throughout the pack and gives feedback to the alpha. Meanwhile, the lowest ranking of gray wolves is called omega which commonly plays the role of scapegoat. They also are the last wolves that allowed eating the prey. If a wolf is not alpha, beta and omega, he or she is called a delta. The role of delta wolves are as scouts, sentinels, elders, hunters and caretakers. The hierarchy of gray wolves is depicted in Fig. 1. The steps of GWO which are social hierarchy, tracking, encircling and attacking prey are presented in the next sub-section.As to model the GWO algorithm, the fittest solution can be described as the alpha (α) followed by the second and third best solutions as beta (β) and delta (δ), respectively. Meanwhile, the rest of the candidate solutions are considered as omega (ω). GWO has set the hunting (optimization) is guided by α, β and δ while the ω wolves just following them.When the wolves do hunting, they tend to encircle their prey. The following equations depicted the encircling behavior [5]:(11)D→=C→⋅X→p(t)−X→(t)(12)X→(t+1)=X→p(t)−A→⋅D→where t is the current iteration,X→is the position vector of gray wolf,X→pis the position of the prey andA→andC→are coefficient vectors calculated using the following expressions [5]:(13)A→=2a→⋅r→1−a→(14)C→=2⋅r→2where r1 and r2 are random vectors between 0 and 1 anda→is set to decreased from 2 to 0 over the course of iterations.The three best solutions so far are saved and then the other search agents (omega wolves) update their positions according to the current best position. These situations are expressed in the following expressions:(15)D→α=C→1⋅X→α−X→,D→β=C→2⋅X→β−X→,D→δ=C→3⋅X→δ−X→(16)X→1=X→α−A→1⋅(X→α),X→2=X→β−A→2⋅(X→β),X→3=X→δ−A→3⋅(X→δ)(17)X→(t+1)=X→1+X→2+X→33To sum up, the optimization approach for GWO is starting with creating a random population of gray wolves which can be called as candidates of solution. During the simulation, alpha, beta and delta wolves estimate the possible position of the prey. The parameter ofa→in Eq. (13) can be modeled as exploration and exploitation processes by decreasing the value from 2 to 0. Candidate solutions are diverged from the prey if|A→|>1and converged toward the prey if|A→|<1. Finally GWO algorithm is terminated by the criterion that has been set initially.The usage of GWO into solving the ORPD problem includes the finding of the optimal values of control variables to minimize the objective function while fulfilling all the constraints mentioned previously. Initially, the number of search agents (gray wolves) and the maximum iteration are set. The vector of population can be expressed as follows:(18)X=x11⋯xn1⋮⋱⋮x1p⋯xnpwhere n is the number of control variables or positions of the wolves and p is the number of population or the number of gray wolves.In order to find the objective function (evaluation process), each position is mapped into the load flow data and load flow program is executed to obtain the loss. The same procedure is used to evaluate the voltage deviation at load buses for the second objective function expressed in Eq. (3). The best fitness i.e. minimum loss and position (variables) are stored as alpha's score and position. The second best fitness and position are stored as beta's score and position followed by the third best fitness and position are stored as delta's score and position. Then, the simulation is proceeds by evaluating the GWO processes (Eqs. (11)–(17)). The simulation is repeated until reaching the maximum iteration. The implementation of GWO for solving ORPD problem is depicted in Fig. 2.All simulations for solving ORPD problem using GWO are implemented using MATLAB on a Windows 7 Professional Intel® Core™ i3-2330M CPU @ 2.20GHz 6GB RAM. The GWO has been implemented on two case studies of IEEE-30 bus system and IEEE 118-bus system and the results are compared with various recent techniques in literature. The first case study of IEEE 30-bus system is based on [16] which consists of 13 control variables that need to be optimized and the second case study is based on [8] where 25 control variables that need to be optimized.The IEEE 30-bus system consists of six generators, 41 lines, four transformers that located at lines 6–9, 4–12, 9–12 and 27–28. For this case study, three reactive compensation devices are placed at buses 3, 10 and 24. The setting for minimum and maximum boundaries for transformer's tap setting, reactive compensation devices and generators voltages is tabulated in Table 1. For this case study, demands are set as follows:PLoad=2.832p.uQLoad=1.262p.uFor fair comparison, the results presented in [16,21] are mapped into the same load flow program to assess the total transmission losses. From this table, it can be seen that the optimize results of control variables obtained by GWO produces the lowest power loss among all techniques. Comparison with the HSA gives about 10% reduction of total power loss. The comparison with the hybrid technique also has been made, namely MICA-IWO together with the original techniques: imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA) and invasive weed optimization (IWO) in Table 2.Fig. 3shows the performance in term of loss (MW) vs. iterations for various numbers of agents of GWO. It is worth to highlight that the results presented in this figure is only the best results of each number of search agents among 30 free running simulations are selected. From this figure, it can be noted that 30 search agents is adequate to obtain good combination of control variables of ORPD within 150 iterations. Fig. 4shows the performance of GWO for 30 free running of simulations for 30 searching agents. The best, average and worst results are 4.5984MW, 4.6559MW and 4.8243MW respectively.For the second objective function, the performance of GWO for 30 running simulations is compared with the results obtained in [16] which is tabulated in Table 3. It can be noted that GWO able to obtain the best and average results of voltage deviation at load buses compared to others. Nevertheless, GWO also produces the worst deviation within 30 simulations. Fig. 5shows the Voltage deviation vs. Iteration for the best result obtained by GWO.For this case study, the data and the control variables are referring to [8]. The same demand for real and reactive loads as in previous case study except there are additional numbers of control variables that need to be optimized and also different boundary limits for transformer tap-setting and compensation devices. Table 4shows the results obtained using GWO and ABC [8] as well as the limits of the control variables. Again, for fair comparison, results obtained by [8] are mapped into the load flow program to assess the total system loss. From this table, it can be noted that the total loss obtained by GWO is superior compared to ABC. It is about 3.4% reduction of total loss which can bring a big impact in solving ORPD problems in power system. This table also shows that all control variables converged within their respective limits.To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed GWO in solving ORPD problem, the performance in term of best, average and worst results is depicted in Fig. 6. Fig. 7shows the performance of GWO for 30 free running of simulations. The best, average and worst results are 2.9377MW, 3.0168MW and 3.093MW respectively. Since this case study involving the optimal real power output for each generator, the second objective function which is the voltage deviation is not conducted.The IEEE 118-bus system data are obtained in [22]. This system consists of 54 generators, 9 transformers, and 14 reactive compensation devices which total up to 77 control variables that need to be optimized. The load demand is 4242MW and 1438MVar on 100 MVA base. The voltage limits, transformer tap settings and lower and upper limits for reactive compensation devices are depicted in Table 5.Table 6shows the detail results obtained by GWO together with the various techniques reported in [9]. The results exhibit the GWO is superior in term of minimizing the loss compared to others. However, GWO required more time to complete the simulation compared to others. From this table also, it can be noted that all the results are within the specified limits shown in Table 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
