@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of type-2 fuzzy logic system for load frequency control using feedback error learning approaches

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have designed a type-2 fuzzy logic system for load frequency control.For learning of type-2 fuzzy logic controller, feedback error learning approach has been used.We have shown that the type-2 fuzzy logic system controller can deal with uncertainties in a better way.A two area model of power system has been considered for simulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Load frequency control,Type-2 fuzzy logic system,Feedback error learning and restructure power system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the type-2 fuzzy logic system (T2FLS) controller using the feedback error learning (FEL) strategy has been proposed for load frequency control (LFC) in the restructure power system. The original FEL strategy consists of an intelligent feedforward controller (INFC) (i.e. artificial neural network (ANN)) and the conventional feedback controller (CFC). The CFC acting as a general feedback controller to guarantee the stability of the system plays a crucial role in the transient state. The INFC is adopted in forward path to take over the control problem in the steady state. In this work, to improve the performance of the FEL strategy, the T2FLS is adopted instead of ANN in the INFC part due to its ability to model uncertainties, which may exist in the rules and measured data of sensors more effectively. The proposed FEL controller has been compared with a type-1 fuzzy logic system (T1FLS) – based FEL controller and the proportional, integral and derivative (PID) controller to highlight the effectiveness of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the principle aspects of automatic generation control (AGC) of power system is the maintenance of frequency and power change over the tie-lines at their scheduled values. Therefore, it is a simultaneous load frequency control (LFC) [1]. In LFC problem, each area has its own generator(s), and it is responsible for its own load and scheduled interchanges with neighbouring areas. The tie-lines are utilities for contracted energy exchange between areas and they provide inter-area support in abnormal conditions. Area load changes and abnormal conditions lead to mismatches in frequency and scheduled power interchanges between areas. These mismatches have to be corrected by LFC, which is defined as the regulation of the power output of generators within a prescribed area [2–4]. Therefore, the LFC task is very important in interconnected and restructure power systems. It is well known that power systems are nonlinear and uncertain, where the parameters are a function of the operating point, and the loading in power system is never constant. To control these large scale power systems, the control algorithms must be able to deal with mechanical and electrical nonlinear dynamics and must be operated under imprecise and uncertain conditions, which are mainly caused by random load demands. It is obvious that the fixed gain controllers which are designed at nominal operating conditions fail to provide best control performance over a wide range of operating conditions. Thus, some classical adaptive controllers are presented for LFC in [5–8]. Despite the promising results achieved by these controllers, the control algorithms are complicated and require some on-line model identifications. Consequently, model-free approaches are generally preferred to both modelling and controlling purposes of these systems. The most common model-free approaches are using artificial neural networks (ANNs), fuzzy logic systems (FLSs) and fuzzy neural networks (FNNs) [9–14]. The FNN includes advantages of both FLS, in handling uncertain information, and ANN, in learning from process [14]. Although these controllers have shown promising results, they have not considered measurement noise and parametric uncertainties of the power system. The straightforward way to deal with these problems is using of type-2 FLSs (T2FLSs) [15]. The T2FLS is proposed as an extension of the T1FLS which is able to model the uncertainties that invariably exist in the rule base of the system [15]. In type-1 fuzzy sets, membership functions are totally certain, whereas in type-2 fuzzy sets membership functions are themselves fuzzy. In other words, a Type-2 fuzzy set can be visualized as a three dimensional, primary and secondary membership function. The primary membership is any subset in [0, 1] and there is a secondary membership value corresponding to each primary membership value that defines the possibility for primary membership. The advantage of the third dimension gives an extra degree of freedom for handling uncertainties [16,17]. In [18], Sepulveda and coworkers have shown that hardware implementations of T2FLS controllers are easier when high speed processing is required. But the important issue in the application of T2FLS is how to set the parameters of the consequent part as well as those of the antecedent part such as standard deviations and means. Therefore, a chemical optimization paradigm, particle swarm optimizations (PSO), an evolutionary method, simulated annealing and genetic algorithms (GA) have been employed to search for optimal values of these parameters [19–26]. In addition, the fuzzy Lyapunov synthesis method has been used to design the T1FLS and T2FLS controllers [27]. Although the aforesaid algorithms perform better, they are off-line and the parameters obtained by these approaches are optimal only at nominal operating points. In [28,29], the sliding mode control and the extended Kalman filter have been proposed for the on-line training of T2FLS. Furthermore, a decentralized controller based on T2FLS has been designed for LFC. But this controller has fixed structure and is very sensitive to noise effects [30]. However, the combinations of classic and intelligent controllers have become more attractive in recent years. In this case, the classic controller is used for stabilization and the intelligent part is designed to overcome the variations and uncertainties of the controlled system. The most important type of this controller is the feedback error learning approach (FEL) [31–34]. The original FEL strategy contains ANN controller in the feedforward path and a conventional feedback controller (CFC) (i.e. proportional–derivative (PD)) in the feedback path. This strategy can be considered as an adaptive and nonlinear controller. But as we know, the ANN controller is incapable of dealing with parameter uncertainties, noise and other sources of uncertainties. Therefore, the main contribution of this paper is to substitute the T2FLS controller in place of the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) neural network (or T1FLS) in the feedforward path. In the proposed FEL strategy, we have demonstrated that the performance of T2FLS is better than of its type-1 counterpart in the presence of higher levels of noise and uncertainties. Since uncertainty is inherent in the design of controllers for real world applications, in this work we have presented an approach to deal with this problem using T2FLS controllers. As they provide us with more parameters, they can handle uncertainties and measurement noise in a better way. In the proposed method, the CFC acts as a general feedback controller to guarantee the stability of the system and the output of this controller is used to train the T2FLS parameters. As the result, the information about the parameters of the controlled system (i.e. the Jacobean of the controlled system) is not needed to tune of the T2FLS parameters and this method consume less time in on-line applications. A two-area restructure power system is assumed for demonstration. The proposed controller has been compared with the T1FLS – based FEL approaches and PID controller through some performance indices. The integral of the square of the error (ISE), the integral of the time multiplied absolute value of the error (ITAE) and the integral of the time multiplied square of the error (ITSE) have been chosen as the performance indices. Simulation results indicate that the FEL strategy with T2FLS controller act better than T1FLS one in presence of uncertainties and measurement noise.The remaining of the paper is organized as follows: the dynamic model of a two-area restructure power system is presented in Section 2. An on-line adaptive controller based on FEL approaches for two-area restructure power system is derived in Sections 3 and 4. The simulation results are presented in Section 5. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 6.In a traditional power system structure, the generation, transmission and distribution is owned by a single entity called a vertically integrated Utility (VIU), which supplies power to the customers at regulated rates. All such control areas are interconnected by tie lines. Following a load disturbance within an area, the frequency of that area experiences a transient change, and the feedback mechanism comes into play and generates an appropriate rise/lower signal to the turbine to make the generation follows the load. In steady state, the generation is matched with the load and the tie line power and frequency are enforced to zero.In the restructured power systems, the VIU no longer exists, however, the common objectives, i.e. restoring the frequency and the net interchanges to their desired values for each control area are remained. In the vertically integrated power system structure, it is assumed that each bulk generator unit is equipped with secondary control and frequency regulation requirements, but in an open energy market, Gencos may or may not participate in the AGC problem. In that environment, Gencos sell power to various Discos at competitive price. Thus, Discos have the liberty to choose the Gencos for contract. The concept of a “generation participation matrix (GPM)” is used to make the visualization of contracts easier. The GPM shows the participation factors of each Genco in the considered control area and each control area is determined by a Disco. The rows of a GPM correspond to Genco and the columns correspond to control areas that contract power. For example, for a large scale power system with m control area (Discos) and n Gencos, the GPM will have the following structure:(1)GPM=gpf11gpf12…gpf1(m−1)gpf1mgpf21gpf22…gpf2(m−1)gpf2m..........gpf(n−1)1gpf(n−1)2…gpf(n−1)(m−1)gpf(n−1)mgpfn1gpfn2…gpfn(m−1)gpfnmwhere gpfijrefers to “generation participation factor” and it shows the participation factor of Genco i in load flowing of area j (based on a specified bilateral contract). The sum of all the entries in a column of this matrix is unity, i.e.(2)∑i=1ngpfij=1To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed control design and modelling strategy, a two control area power system is considered as a test system. It is assumed that each control area includes two Gencos and two Discos. A block diagram of the generalized LFC scheme for control area i will be obtained in a deregulated environment as shown in Fig. 1[35].The dashed lines show the demand signals based on the possible contracts between Gencos and Discos, which carry information as a Genco has to follow a load demand by the Disco.These new information signals were absent in the traditional LFC scheme. As there are many Gencos in each area, the area control error (ACE) signals have to be distributed among them due to their ACE participation factor in the LFC task and∑j=1nαij=1. In the Fig. 1 we have:Δfi frequency deviation,ΔPgigovernor valve position,ΔPcigovernor load set point,ΔPtiturbine power,ΔPtie_inet tie line power flow,ΔPdiarea load disturbance,K′piproportional gain constant,Tpipower system time constant,Tgigovernor time constant,Ttiturbine time constant,Tijtie line synchronizing coefficient between areas i and j,Bifrequency bias,Ridrooping characteristic,αijACE participation factor,N number of control areas,ΔPLjcontracted demand of area j,ΔPLoc_icontracted/un-contracted local demand in area i,w3ischeduled ΔPtie_iBased on Ref. [35], we can write the scheduled ΔPtie_i(w3i) for a N control area power system as follows:(5)w3i=∑(Totalexportpower−Totalimportpower)=∑j=1j≠iN∑k=1ngpfkjΔPLj−∑k=1n∑j=1j≠iNgpfjkΔPLiAccording to Fig. 1, it can be written:(6)ΔPtie−i,error=ΔPtie−i,actual−w3iand the elements of vector w4ican be expressed as,(7)w4i−1=∑j=1Ngpf1jΔPLj⋮w4i−n=∑j=1NgpfnjΔPLjThe generation of each Genco must track the contracted demands of Discos in steady state. The desired total power generation of a Genco i in terms of GPM entries can be calculated as:(8)ΔPmi=∑j=1NgpfijΔPLjThe input signal for controller, K(s) is ACE that can be defined from Fig. 1, and it can be expressed as follows:(9)ΔACEi=ΔPtie−i,error+BiΔfiThere are two different approaches for the application of ANNs or FLSs as an adaptive controller: A direct approach and a combination approach with a classical controller. In the first one, the ANN or FLS is trained (e.g. by back propagation (BP) algorithm) so that the error between the output of the system and desired signal become zero. An important issue in this approach is convergence, which depends on the selection of the initial value for the learning rate. Furthermore, to train the parameters of ANN or FNN, the Jacobean of the system (∂y/∂u) is needed [36], where y and u are the output and input of the controlled system, respectively. Therefore, the application of this scheme requires a thorough knowledge of the Jacobean of the controlled system. Two different methods exist for obtaining the information about the Jacobean of system: the use of an approximation [9] and the training of a neural network emulator [37]. It is clear that the first method does not give the exact information about the sensitivity of the plant and in the second method the computational burden can be very high in real time applications. Eventually, it is not an appropriate method for large scale systems such as LFC.In the second approach, the ANN (or FLS) and the CFC control the system simultaneously. The most important structure for these approaches is the FEL approach that was originally proposed by Kawato [32]. Fig. 2illustrates the original FEL architecture.The objective of the control is to minimize the error e between the command signal r and the plant output y. The input u of the plant consists of uffand ufbwhere uffis the output of the feedforward controller Ф(w) (w is tuneable parameter) and ufb is the output of the ordinary feedback controller. The main difference between the FEL strategy and the direct approach is the training error. In the FEL structure, the ufbis considered as the training error and is used for tuning Ф(w) parameters. It is obvious that if ufbis driven to zero, the tracking purpose of the closed loop system will be achieved. Also, unlike the direct approach, the Jacobean of system is not needed for tuning Ф(w) parameters. Hence, this structure is very useful for a large scale power system in real time applications. In [32,38], a three-layer neural network was adapted in the Ф(w). In [39], a dynamic neural network have been used in the feedforward path and shown to have better control performance compared to the conventional FEL strategy. Also, a recurrent fuzzy neural network (RFNN) which has a memory with adjustable weights, is adopted in Ф(w) to improve the performance of the overall system [14]. Due to the existence of uncertain parameters, measurement noise and unmolded dynamics, these problems must be considered in the controller design process. When a system has a large amount of uncertainties, the T1FLS controller may not be able to achieve the desired level of performance with a reasonable complexity of the structure [40]. In such cases, the use of the T2FLS controller is suggested as the preferable approach in many areas, such as forecasting time-series [40] and controlling the mobile robot [41].In this paper, the PD controller and the type-2 FNN (T2FNN) are used in the feedback and feedforward path, respectively. It must be mentioned that the T2FNN is the same as the T2FLS but with adaptability. In this strategy, the CFC plays a crucial role in transient state and is also used to train the T2FNN controller, while the T2FNN controller takes over the control of the system in the steady state. Since the integral term has bad effects on the transient state, the PD controller is a better choice than the proportional–integral–derivative (PID) or the proportional–integral (PI) controllers. The proposed controller structure for ith area (Ki(s) in Fig. 1) is illustrated in Fig. 3. As can be seen in this figure, the T2FNN acquires information in three ways: (1) the output of the PD controller that is used for training of T2FNN parameters, such as standard deviations, etc. (2) The ACE and (3) The ΔACE that serves as an additional input signal.In the FEL control strategy, the PD controller is essential to guarantee the global asymptotic stability of the whole system. Therefore, the PD controller must be well designed so that the system becomes stable. For this reason, in [31], Nakanishi and coworkers have presented a Lyapunov analysis in which the relation between the derivative control and the proportional control is (Kd2>Kp) which is a sufficient and necessary condition for the asymptotic convergence of the error signal and for a class of second order single input–single output (SISO) systems. Because the power system has some uncertainties, noisy data (data of sensors) and variable parameters, the T2FLS controllers seem to be a more promising method than its type-1 counterparts in dealing with these conditions. Therefore, the proposed FEL strategy has T2FNN in the feedforward path.There are two different approaches for FLSs design: type-1 FLSs (T1FLSs) and type-2 FLSs (T2FLSs). The latter is proposed as an extension of the former. While designing a T1FLSs, expertise and knowledge are needed to decide both the MFs and fuzzy rules. The linguistic terms that are used in antecedents and consequents have different meanings for different experts. Specialists often provide different conclusions for the same rule base. The T1FLSs, who's MFs are type-1 fuzzy sets, is unable to directly handle rule uncertainties. To deal with this problem, the concept of type-2 fuzzy sets was introduced by Zadeh as an extension of T1FLSs with the intention of being able to model the uncertainties that invariably exist in the rule base of the system [15]. Compared with T1FLSs, T2FLSs can better handle the vagueness inherent in linguistic words. The uncertainties are modelled by the use of a fuzzy MF. Therefore, T2FLSs are more suitable under circumstances where it is difficult to determine the exact MF for a fuzzy set, which is very useful to incorporate uncertainties [42,43].In type-1 fuzzy sets membership functions are totally certain, whereas in type-2 fuzzy sets membership functions are themselves fuzzy. Consequently at the type-2 fuzzy sets, the antecedents and the consequents of the rules are uncertain. While a type-1 membership grade is a crisp number in [0, 1], a type-2 membership grade can be any subset in [0, 1] which is called primary membership. Additionally, there is a secondary membership value corresponding to each primary membership value that defines the possibility for primary memberships [15]. Whereas the secondary membership functions can take values in the interval of [0, 1] in generalized T2FLSs, they are uniform functions that only take on values of 1 in interval T2FLSs. As we know, the computational burden of the general T2FLSs is very high. Therefore, the use of interval T2FLSs is more commonly seen in literature, due to the fact that the computations are more easily manageable.An interval type-2 fuzzy set,A˜, may be represented as [15]:(10)A˜=∫x∈X∫u∈JxμA˜(x,u)(x,u)Jx∈[0,1]where∬denotes union over all admissible x and u. Also,Jxis called primary membership function of x andμA˜(x,u)is secondary membership function value corresponding to each primary membership value that in the interval type-2 fuzzy sets allμA˜(x,u)are equal 1. As we know at the type-1 fuzzy sets, the membership function does not contain any uncertainty (Fig. 4(a)). In other words, there exists a clear membership value for every input data point. Therefore, for considering of uncertainty in the type-2 fuzzy sets at the antecedent and consequent membership functions, if the points on the Gaussian function in Fig. 4(a) are shifted either to the left or to the right, Fig. 4(b) can be obtained. In this figure, the membership function does not have a single value for a specific value of x.Fig. 4(b) shows a type-2 Gaussian MF with an adjustable uncertain mean in [m1,m2] and standard deviationσ. It can be described by(11)μA˜(x)=exp−12x−mσ2,m∈[m1,m2]It can be seen from Fig. 4(b), the type-2 fuzzy set has a region called a footprint of uncertainty (FOU) and bounded by an upper MF and a lower MF, which are denoted asμ_A˜(x)andμ¯A˜(x), respectively. The T2FLSs rules will remain the same as in T1FLSs but the antecedents and/or the consequents will be represented by interval type-2 fuzzy sets. So rule base and inference engine section of T2FLSs do not have any different with T1FLSs but the outputs of inference engine (consequent) are type-2 fuzzy set. For reducing type-2 fuzzy consequent to type-1 fuzzy consequent, some methods called type-reduction approaches are exploited which is more explained in [15]. For this study, the centre-of-set (COS) type-reduction method is utilized as follows(12)Ycos(x)=∫y1∈[yl1,yr1]⋯∫yM∈[ylM,yrM]∫f1∈[f_1,f¯1]⋯∫fM∈[f_M,f¯M]1(∑i=1Mfiyi)/(∑i=1Mfi)=[yl,yr]where Ycos(x) is an interval set determined by its two end-points: yland yr; also these parameters are calculated as follows:(13)yl=∑i=1Pf¯iyli+∑i=P+1Mf_iyli∑i=1Pf¯i+∑i=P+1Mf_iyr=∑i=1Nf_iyri+∑i=N+1Mf¯iyri∑i=1Nf_i+∑i=N+1Mf¯iandf_,f¯are the firing level;[yli,yri]corresponds to the centroid of the type-2 interval consequent set, which can be obtained by iterative approach which is stated in [15]; and M is the number of rules. Finally, the output of the type-reduction section (real output) is passed from defuzzifier; since fuzzy type-2 is an interval, mean of left and right point can be used as a defuzzifier which is obtained as follows:(14)fs=yl+yr2The structure of the T2FNN controller is illustrated in Fig. 5.As can be seen in this figure, the T2FLS includes inputs, fuzzifier, inference and rule base, type reduction, defuzzifier and output. The main difference between the T1FLS and T2FLS structure is the type reduction stage. In this paper, all of the parameters of the T2FLS are trained during the simulation process.The aim of the training algorithm is to adjust the T2FNN parameters, through the minimization of following cost function:(15)E=12∑ie2where(16)e=ufbi=ui−uffiwhere uiis the final control signal and equal to ΔPciand uffiis the output of T2FNN (fs). The index i indicates the control area i for power system in LFC. In fact, it is desirable that the output of the CFC (ufbi) reaches to zero. It must be mentioned that by enforcing this signal to zero, not only the T2FNN takes over the control of the power system but also the ACEibecomes zero. By using the back propagation (BP) learning algorithm, the weighting vector of the T2FNN is adjusted such that the error defined in (15) is less than a desired threshold value after a given number of training cycles. The well-known BP algorithm can be written briefly as follow:(17)W(k+1)=W(k)+η−∂E(k)∂W(k)where η and W represent the learning rate and tuning parameter of T2FNN, respectively. Let W=[m1, m2, σ, yl, yr]T is weighting vector of T2FNN. The gradient of E (.) in (15) with respect to an arbitrary weighing vector W is:(18)∂E(k)∂W(k)=−e(k)∂uffi(k)∂W(k)By recursive applications of the chain rule, at first the error term for each part of the T2FNN is calculated, and then the parameters in the corresponding part are adjusted. Considering the T2FNN (14) and the cost function defined in (15), updating procedure of the T2FNN's parameters is given by:(19)∂E(k)∂yri=−12e(k)ΔfRi∂E(k)∂yli=−12e(k)ΔfLiwhere(20)ΔfRi=f_i1≤i≤Nf¯i1+N≤i≤MΔfLi=f¯i1≤i≤Pf_i1+P≤i≤MAnd updating procedure of the antecedent part, i.e.m∈[m1,m2](for simplicity which is definedm[1,2]), is obtained bellow:(21)∂E∂m[1,2],ji=−e(k)2∂yr∂f_i+∂yl∂f_i∂f_i∂m[1,2],ji+∂yr∂f¯i+∂yl∂f¯i∂f¯i∂m[1,2],jiwhere(22)∂yr∂f_k=yrk−yr∑i=1Nf_i+∑i=1+NMf¯ik=1,…,N∂yr∂f¯m=yrm−yr∑i=1Nf_i+∑i=1+NMf¯im=1+N,…,Mand(23)∂f_i∂m1,ji=xj−∂m1,jiσj2ΔfRixj>m1,ji+m2,ji20otherwise∂f_i∂m2,ji=xj−∂m2,jiσj2ΔfRixj≤m1,ji+m2,ji20otherwise∂f¯i∂m1,ji=xj−∂m1,jiσj2ΔfLixj<m1,ji0otherwise∂f¯i∂m2,ji=xj−∂m1,jiσj2ΔfLixj<m1,ji0otherwiseAt these equationsm1,jiandm2,jiindicate the lower and upper mean of ith rule and jth antecedent part, respectively. Also, the same tuning procedure can be applied for updating of the means(σj). According to the above adaptation law, the Jacobean of the system is not required. Therefore, it is useful for the real time applications. Also, 9 rules are considered for the T2FLS at each area and each rule has 2 inputs and the initial value for antecedent and consequent parameters are considered as random numbers.For demonstrating the efficiency of proposed controller, some simulations are performed. For this purpose, a two control area power system, shown in Fig. 6, is considered as a test system. It is assumed that each control area includes two Gencos, which use the same ACEiparticipation factor. The nominal parameters of the two-area interconnected power system which have been used in the simulation are given in Tables 1 and 2. Also, the linear model of the nonreheating turbine shown in Fig. 1 is replaced by the nonlinear model that introduces a saturation element with d=0.02 as illustrated in Fig. 7. This replacement has been done in order to take the generation rate constraint (GRC) limit on the response speed of a turbine [44]. Furthermore, for considering of an uncertainty, we assume that the measured output of the system (ACEi) in each area is distorted by a random noise with normal distribution. For the ith area:(24)ΔACEi=ΔACEi+0.1randnThe function randn is obtained by using the Matlab's function, which generates random numbers with Gaussian distribution. The considered system is controlled by using three strategies:(i)The FEL strategy which has the T1FNN in the feedforward path;The PID controller without the feedforward controller;The proposed FEL which is demonstrated in Fig. 3.The PID controller coefficients, which are tuned with trial-and-error method, are (KPi=2.11, KIi=0.54 and KDi=2.18). Also, for evaluating the transient closed-loop response of the mentioned strategies, some criteria have been used such as integral of square error (ISE), integral of the absolute value of the error (IAE) and Integral of the time multiplied by the absolute value of the error (ITAE). These criteria indicate different characteristic of closed loop system. For example, the ISE magnifies large errors. The minimization of this integral should help to suppress large initial errors. The ITAE puts a heavy penalty on errors that persist for long periods of time.Case 1In this case, the closed loop performance is verified in step contracted load demand and changing in operating points of power system. It is assumed that a large step load is demanded by Discos of areas 1 and 2 as follow:ΔPL1=0.1pu,ΔPL2=0.2pu,ΔPL3=0.1pu,ΔPL4=0.2puThe nominal values for parameters of power system introduced in Tables 1 and 2. For considering of operating point changing, we assume the variable parameters are (Tp1,2=20, T12=0.345, B1,2=0.425). Furthermore, the Discos contract with the available Gencos according to the following GPM is assumed:GPM=0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.00.00.250.50.50.50.250.00.25The response of Δf1and Δf2are illustrated in Fig. 8. The simulation results indicate that the proposed FEL controller is superior to the other controllers. It should be noted that in the early periods of the FEL strategies, the main control signal comes from the PD controller which are tuned by a trial-and-error method (Kpi=5.11, Kdi=6.24). But after a short time period, it can be observed that the T2FNN is able to take over the control operation, thus becoming the leading controller. The actual generated powers of the Gencos, according to Eq. (8), reach desired values in the steady state.ΔPm1=gpf11ΔPL1+gpf12ΔPL2+gpf13ΔPL3+gpf14ΔPL4=0.25×0.1+0.25×0.2+0.25×0.1+0.25×0.2=0.15puandΔPm2=0.1pu,ΔPm3=0.2pu,ΔPm4=0.15puThe simulation results of the actual generated power of Gencos, ΔPgi, for the controllers under consideration are shown in Fig. 9. From this figure, it is obvious that the ΔPgireaches its actual values at t=2s. Due to the reasons already mentioned, the proposed T2FNN controller has better performance than others.According to contracts between areas, the scheduled steady state power flows, Eq. (6), through the tie line is −0.05pu. The actual tie line powers are depicted in Fig. 10.ΔPtie,1−2=[(gpf13+gpf23)ΔPL3+(gpf14+gpf24)ΔPL4]−[(gpf31+gpf41)ΔPL1+(gpf32+gpf42)ΔPL2]=[(0.25+0.25)0.1+(0.25+0.0)0.2]−[(0.0+0.5)0.1+(0.25+0.25)0.2]=−0.05puThis simulation is done in order to illustrate the performance of type-1 and type-2 fuzzy logic controllers, in presence of parameter uncertainties, noisy data, and time-varying parameters or other sources of uncertainties. Therefore, for power system, Dicoes may violate a contract by demanding more power than that specified in the contract. This excess power is reflected as a local load of the area (un-contracted demand). It is assumed that in addition to specified contracted load demands, the Disco 1 and Disco 2 demand 0.1 and 0.2pu MW (ΔPd1=0.1 and ΔPd2=0.2) as a large un-contracted load, respectively. The amount of these violated demands distributed among the Gencos according to values of the ACE participation factors αijand clearly, based on these values each Genco must be increased its generation. For example we set the amount of α (for all Gencos in each area) in the same value, αij=0.5. The un-contracted load of Discos is taken up by Gencos of their areas according to ACE participation factors in the steady state. For operating point condition, initially the off-nominal operation condition parameters (Tp1,2=14, T12=0.4, B1,2=0.2) are used for two-areas and then, in t=5s these parameters of both areas are changed to (Tp1,2=20, T12=0.25, B1,2=0.3). Also, at this time, the un-contracted load (ΔPd1=0.2 and ΔPd2=0.1) are applied.Also, the mentioned uncertainty in Eq. (11) is considered. It is assumed that a large step load is demanded by Discos of areas 1 and 2 as follow (contracted demands):ΔPL1=0.1pu,ΔPL2=0.1pu,ΔPL3=0.1pu,ΔPL4=0.1pu.Also, the Discos contract with the available Gencos according to the following GPM is assumed:GPM=0.250.00.250.250.250.250.250.00.00.50.50.50.50.250.00.25The response of Δf1and Δf2are shown in Fig. 11. It can be seen that the proposed FEL controller can handle the uncertainties and measurement noise before t=5s effectively with much better transient performance and smaller steady state error values compared to the T1FNN-based FEL and PID controllers. At time t=5s the power system parameters and loads change and FEL strategies are able to deal with these changes. It can be seen from this figure that the T2FNN controller has better performance than that of the T1FNN controller. Moreover, after this time, the PID controller becomes unstable and cannot deal with changes in the system parameters.In addition, the outputs of PD controllers (ufbi) for FEL strategies (training error) have been depicted in Fig. 12. It can be deduced from this figure that at the beginning, the amount of error is high. Then, the feedforward controller, in this study the T2FNN (or T1FNN), tries to enforce this signal to zero, thus becoming the leading controller after a short time period. Also, at t=5s, a change occurs in the system parameters and at this moment, the PD controller is activated for a second and then control of system is again assigned to T2FNN (or T1FNN). Because of the random parameters of the feedforward (T2FNN or T1FNN) controllers at the beginning, the oscillation of the Δfiis high and it takes a few times to reduce this oscillation. It must be mentioned that at t=5s the feedforward controller has already been trained, so it is easy to take control of the system after that time. Consequently, the oscillation of the Δfiafter t=5s is negligible.In addition, the adaptation process for[yli,yri], corresponding to the centroid of the type-2 interval consequent set for two-areas are shown in Fig. 13. As seen in this figure, in response to an abrupt change in the power system parameters, the T2FNN tries to adapt its parameters to cope with these variations. The values of the ISE, ITAE, and IAE indices related to the controller types for case 1 and case 2 are given in Table 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
