@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Study impact of various load models on DG placement and sizing using backtracking search algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A recently BSA-based approach is employed to assign DGs.Various load models are taken into consideration.The methodology is tested on the 69- and the 136-node two different radial distribution systems.Substantial decline in power losses and voltage scheme enhancement are cropped.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Distributed generation,Network losses,Load models,Backtracking search algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this article, a meta-heuristic technique based on a backtracking search algorithm (BSA) is employed to produce solutions to ascertain distributed generators (DGs). The objective is established to reduce power loss and improve network voltage profile in radial distribution networks by determining optimal locations and sizes of the DGs. Power loss indices and bus voltages are engaged to explore the initial placement of DG installations. The study cares with the DG type injects active and reactive power. The proposed methodology takes into consideration four load models, and their impacts are addressed. The proposed BSA-based methodology is verified on two different test networks with different load models and the simulation results are compared to those reported in the recent literature. The study finds that the constant power load model among various load models is sufficed and viable to allocate DGs for network loss and voltage studies. The simulation results reveal the efficacy and robustness of the BSA in finding the optimal solution of DGs allocation.total network active power losstotal network reactive power lossactive power losses of the line between the nodes i and jreactive power losses of the line between the nodes i and jresistance of the line between the nodes i and jreactance of the line between the nodes i and jtotal effective real power load fed through bus jtotal effective reactive power fed through bus jangle of impedance of line i–jinjected active and reactive power components at bus ivoltage magnitude and angle at bus i and j, respectivelydifference between δiand δjimpedance magnitude between bus i and jreal power generation at bus iconductance between bus i and jsusceptance between bus i and jreactive power generation at bus inumber of network busestotal number of linesnumber of distributed generators (DGs)maximum allowable number of DGs units along the network (user defined)number of connected loadsnumber of DG units connected to bus iinjected active power of ith DGinjected active power of ith DGactive power demand of load at bus ireactive power demand of load at bus iwith DGs installationswithout installations of DGslower limit of DG active output powerupper limit of DG active output powerlower limit of DG reactive output powerupper limit of DG reactive output poweractual line flow of line irated power capacity of line ipenalty for the voltage constraintspenalty for the line flow constraintpenalty for the maximum allowable DGs active powerpenalty for the maximum allowable DGs reactive powerpower loss decline of bus mpower loss index of bus mmaximum loss declineminimum loss declineload flowcumulative voltage deviationload real and reactive power exponents, respectivelyload bus voltage and load nominal voltage of bus j, respectivelyreal and reactive power at bus j, respectivelyreal and reactive operating point at bus j, respectivelypopulation sizeproblem dimensionuniform distribution [0, 1]lower bound of optimized parameter jupper bound of optimized parameter jtarget individual i in the population P

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Installations of DGs can be decisively implemented in power systems for grid strengthening, reducing network power losses, peak load shaving, improving voltage profiles, and so on [1]. In a typical distribution system, particularly, in developing countries, network losses are as much as 13–20% of total power generated is wasted in the form of power losses [2,3], which would cost millions of dollars every year. Electrical losses (active or reactive) in distribution utilities are generally of two types: technical and non-technical. The two bus system depicted in Fig. 1represents a distribution level feeder between buses i and j. The active and reactive power losses in line i–j are given by Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively:(1)Pijloss=Rij⋅(Peff,j2+Qeff,j2)|Vj|2(2)Qijloss=Xij⋅(Peff,j2+Qeff,j2)|Vj|2The feeder power loss is closely related to the reactive and active power flows for a given feeder (see Eqs. (1) and (2)). Therefore, the reductions of these power flows will positively lead to mitigate the network losses. Placement of DGs unit on the system can reduce network losses, similar to placement of capacitors. Studies indicate that poor selection of location and size would lead to higher losses than the losses without DGs [4,5].Commonly, the DG resources are classified into four categories based on the ability to deliver active and reactive powers [6]. The four different DGs types are considered in literatures [6,7]: (i) DG injects true power (P) only, (ii) DG injects reactive power (Q) only, (iii) DG injects true power (P) but absorbs reactive power, (iv) DG injects both active (P) and reactive (Q) power.In the last few years various techniques have been developed to find for the optimal location and size of the DG. In common practice, these techniques are categorized to: (i) analytical methods and (ii) evolutionary-based algorithms. Several analytical approaches minimizing line losses are proposed for the DG allocation [5–10] and optimal power flow [11,12]. For the same purpose of DG allocation, an evolutionary algorithm (EA) uses genetic algorithm and an ɛ-constrained method [13] and other heuristic algorithm methods through harmony search algorithm [14], particle swarm optimization [15,16], artificial bee colony algorithm [17], and differential evolution (DE) [18] and so on have been applied to sit single and/or multi-DGs for various objectives. In addition, the reader can be referred to [19,20], in which very comprehensive reviews covering the available DG placement models and various approaches with satisfactory classifications of researches are covered.EAs are sufficiently flexible to solve different types of optimization problems without going in depth to the problem. EAs should have global exploration and local exploitation abilities [21,22]. On the other hand, no single algorithm is consistently able to solve all types of optimization problems [23]. Backtracking search algorithm (BSA) is a new meta-heuristic algorithm developed by Civicioglu [24]. The BSA has a unique mechanism for generating a trial individual which enables it to solve numerical optimization problems successfully and quickly. The BSA uses three basic genetic operators: selection, mutation and crossover to generate trial individuals. The BSA has a random mutation scheme that uses only one direction individual for each target individual, in contrast with many genetic algorithms such as DE. The BSA picks the direction (randomly) individual from individuals of a randomly chosen previous generation [24].The development of an optimization methodology capable of defining DG unit's placement and sizing with the avalanche of DG penetration is a requisite. This study addresses the solution of DG allocation (bus number and size) using the BSA-based approach. One of main interests of the article is to examine the performance of the BSA to define the optimal locations and sizes of DGs. Power loss indices and bus voltages are utilized for the initial identification of DGs locations. DG injects PQ (active–reactive power) is considered to study its effects on network operating performance. The proposed methodology is applied to the 69-bus and the 136-bus radial distribution networks to test its effectiveness.Mathematically, the DG allocation problem can be formulated as a constrained nonlinear optimization model:(3)MinimizeF(X,U)+PenaltiesS.t.g(X,U)=0h(X,U)≤0F(X,U) is the objective function to be minimized (i.e. PLoss); g(X,U) and h(X,U) are the set of equality and inequality constraints, respectively. X is the state variables and U is the vector of control variables. The control variables are DG power outputs (P and Q). The state variables are voltage of buses, and line power flows.The objective function is adapted to decrease the system active power losses and inherently reactive power loss as well. Unquestionably, the minimization of network loss yields to enhance the network voltage profile. The CVD should be maintained as small as possible. The CVD is utilized to indicate the voltage profile improvement and calculated as specified in Eq. (4):(4)CVD=0if0.95≤|Vi|≤1.05∑i=1NB|1−Vi|elseThe total active power loss of the distribution network is computed using:(5)PLoss=∑i=1NB∑j=1i≠jNBRij.|Vi|2+|Vj|2−2|Vi||Vj|cosδij|Zij|2Subject to a set of equality and inequality constraints that would be satisfied as follows:(6)PGi−PDi=|Vi|∑j=1NB|Vj|(Gijcosδij+Bijsinδij)QGi−QDi=|Vi|∑j=1NB|Vj|(Gijsinδij−Bijcosδij)i∀NB(7)PDG,min≤PDG,i≤PDG,maxQDG,min≤QDG,i≤QDG,maxi∀NDG(8)NDG≤NDGmaxnDG,i/location≤1(9)|Vmin|≤|Vi|≤|Vmax|i∀NB(10)Si≤Siratedi∀nbr(11)∑i=1NDGPDG,i≤∑j=1NLPD,i∑i=1NDGQDG,i≤∑j=1NLQD,j(12)∑i=1NB−1∑j=2NBPijlossW_DG<∑i=1NB−1∑j=2NBPijlossWO_DG′j>iA penalty factors associated with each violated constraint are burdened to the objective function in order to force a solution to stay away from the infeasible solution space. On other words, the penalty functions are penalizing infeasible solutions. It is worthy to note that:(1)Active and reactive power balances are achieved by distribution LF calculations.The inequality constraints of DGs power limits are bounded within the lower and upper bounds of the proposed BSA-based approach (self-constrained).Other constraints (line flow constraints, bus voltage limits and maximum allowable DGs active and reactive power) are penalized the objective function as follows:The initial identification of buses for the DGs placement is estimated using power loss index (PLI) along with the bus voltages. The appraisal of these identified buses essentially helps in reduction of the search space for the optimization technique. In addition, the high possibilities of distribution LF divergence are diminished. In the first step, distribution LF solution for the base system is required to obtain the initial active power loss in the network. To determine the PLIs, calculate the power loss decline by inserting DG at each bus at a time. At that point, these loss reductions are normalized into [0, 1] and defined in Eq. (15).(15)PLI(m)=PLD(m)−PLDmaxPLD(m)−PLDminm∀NBThe buses of higher PLI and lower bus voltage values are likely identified for DGs placement. One drawback of this procedure is the burden of calculations [25], due to distribution LF requires running for times equal to the network buses before employing the BSA optimization method.The BSA is a population-based iterative EA designed to be a global minimizer. The BSA has a single control parameter and BSAs problem-solving performance is not over sensitive to the starting value of this parameter. The BSA can be explained by dividing its functions into five procedures: initialization, selection-I, mutation, crossover and selection-II. The structure of BSA is quite simple; thus, it is easily adapted to different numerical optimization problems. The main steps of the BSA are given in Appendix. However, details about the BSA procedures and Pseudo codes would be referred to [24]. The procedure of the BSA-based approach to allocate DG can be summarized in the flow-chart diagram shown in Fig. 2.To demonstrate the accuracy and the efficacy of the proposed methodology, several distribution test systems are employed. However, due to shortness of permissible space, only a few results are presented and discussed in this section. Two test systems with a number of scenarios are attempted: (i) the 69-node system and (ii) the real distribution system with 136-nodes. The data of the 69- and 136-node radial distribution systems are collected from [26,27], respectively. The single line diagrams showing the topologies of these networks are displayed in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively.The proposed approach is encoded using MATLAB release 2014a/®8.3 [28]. Simulations are accomplished on a Dell Laptop with Intel® Processor Core i5 CPU 2.40GHz. Due to the loading limits and high R/X ratio of radial distribution systems, the distribution LF flow calculations are solved using the backward/forward sweep computational technique [4,29], whose convergence is robust and guaranteed. From practical viewpoint, the proposed methodology is adjusted to combine practical voltage dependent load models. To quantify the influence of various load models on DG sizing, static load models are used to represent different categories of consumers. The active and reactive power load models [30,31] are defined mathematically using Eqs. (16) and (17), respectively.(16)Pj=Pj0|Vj||Vj0|α(17)Qj=Qj0|Vj||Vj0|βThe values of the true and reactive power exponents for constant power, industrial, residential and commercial loads are detailed in Table 1[31,32].The BSA-based approach, similar to other heuristic algorithms, generates several sets of solutions rather than a unique solution. Therefore, the presented values are the best selected numerals after 100 runs due to the nature of randomness. In addition, the selection of control parameters is ensued by trials and errors after intensive independent runs. The parameters adopted for the BSA-based algorithm for the test cases and the required inequality constraints are listed in Table 2.The scenarios are planned and outlined as follows:(a)Scenario (1): This scenario is considered as base-case with various types of load models.Scenario (2): Placement of single DG along the 69-node system with CP and CL models with comparisons. In addition, performance measures of the BSA are testified.Scenario (3): Placement of multiple DGs along the 69-node system with comparisons.Scenario (4): Single DG allocation on the 136-bus system with CP and CL models.The outcome of base distribution LF before DG installations with 100% loading is depicted in Tables 3 and 4for the test cases of the 69- and the 136-node radial distribution networks, respectively.The 69-node and the 136-node distribution feeders have minimum voltages of 0.9092PU and 0.9307PU, respectively. The CP load model has lowest minimum voltage and highest power losses among other models as publicized in Tables 3 and 4. Slight shift in bus's ranking is detected due to load models.After applying the proposed approach to define the optimal location size of one DG (out of 15 nominated buses), the obtained results are organized in Table 5.The BSA generates worthy results of network loss decline compared to the numerical results reported in analytical approach (AA) [6], improved analytical (IA) [7], exhaustive load flow (ELF) [33], and loss sensitivity factor (LSF) [34] as illustrated in Table 6.Good improvement in voltage profile is observed such that the minimum voltage of buses never decreases less than 97%. For better comprehension bus voltage profile and minimum, maximum and CVD magnitudes are depicted in Fig. 5and Table 5, respectively. The reader can observe that the results coincide to each other partially for various load models.To measure the performance of the BSA, Table 7shows the minimum (best), average and maximum (worst), median, standard deviation (SD) and variance values of the objective function after 100 independent trials. In addition, the average CPU elapsed time and success rate (which is equal to the number of success runs (within 2.5% of best result) over total runs) are revealed. Similar measures can be extended straightforwardly to other scenarios as well. The trend of the objective function with introducing one DG along the 69-node distribution system over the 100 trials is depicted in Fig. 6.The trends of convergence characteristics of the proximate optimal solution obtained by the BSA for this scenario (CP model) are shown in Fig. 7which proves that the BSA is not much sensitive to the mixrate.In this scenario, two types of load models are considered and the introduction of two DGs are employed. The numerical results achieved by the BSA approach are given in Table 8. The comparison confirms the effectiveness, good computation efficacy and the advantageous of the proposed BSA approach over the other techniques in terms of solution quality as specified in Table 8 as well.The voltage profile is significantly improved with a smooth uniform pattern along the network buses as plotted in Fig. 8, which is confirmed by the improvement in the CVD values before and after imbedding DGs (see Tables 3 and 6).The main target of this scenario is to demonstrate the effectiveness and validity of the proposed technique when applied to large-scale power systems. Both CP and IL models are endeavored in this scenario with hosting one DG. After applying the proposed optimization method to identify one DG (25 nodes are pre-identified as search space), the results are summarized and depicted in Table 9.The equality and inequality constraints have been verified and found within acceptable limits for all reported scenarios.The obtained sizes of DGs with different load models are very close to each other as appointed for all scenarios (refer to Tables 5, 8 and 9). Therefore, it is important to emphasize that CP load model is sufficient to optimally define the placement and size of DGs for the purpose of the network loss lessening. However, from stability view, it is significant to address load models and study their effects.The cropped numerical results presented demonstrate obviously the positive impact of DG units on the network loss decline, and the improvement in the voltage profile (see Figs. 5, 8 and 9). The effectiveness of DG units in reducing the current drawn from the upstream feeder is established as depicted in Tables 5, 8 and 9. It can be concluded that the BSA is capable of producing answers close to the optimal solution which are validated by the comparisons to other analytical methods.The proposed BSA-based approach requires very little effort in fine-tuning the control parameter, which makes it attractive from an implementation point of view. Additionally, the proposed approach is able to reach to the convergence point with minimum number of iterations steadily and smoothly.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new heuristic-based approach has been offered to define the optimal allocation of DGs units along radial distribution systems. The algorithm allows identifying the best places and sizes for DGs units, among number of nominated high potential buses, to reduce the network technical losses. Various scenarios of employing single and multiple DGs are presented incorporating voltage dependent load models. Constant power load model is suitable and sufficient to size and place DGs for the purposes of loss decline and voltage profile enhancement. The proposed BSA-based methodology has been assessed using two different test systems; 69- and 136-bus test systems. The cropped results proved the good performance and effectiveness of the proposed methodology in finding optimum solutions. The BSA may be suggested as a promising optimization algorithm to solve complex engineering optimization problems for the future researchers.The BSA algorithm is a straightforward strategy of heuristic optimization related to evolutionary computations. The BSA uses a greedy and in somehow less stochastic approach with floating point coding rather than the other heuristics procedures. The BSA's strategy for generating a trial population includes two new crossover and mutation operators. The BSA's strategies for generating trial populations and controlling the amplitude of the search-direction matrix and search-space boundaries give it very powerful exploration and exploitation capabilities. In particular, the BSA possesses a memory in which it stores a population from a randomly chosen previous generation for use in generating the search-direction matrix.The BSA has a simple structure that is effective, fast and capable of solving multi-modal optimization problems and that simplifies it to straightforwardly adapt to various numerical optimizations problems. The BSA has strong strategy for both a global exploration and local exploitation with good feature of avoiding local minima. The key steps of the BSA are itemized as follows:The BSA initializes the population P as defined in Eq. (A.1).(A.1)Pi,j=LBj+rand(…)⋅(UBj−LBj)i∀N&j∀DThe BSA's Selection-I stage determines the historical population oldP to be used for calculating the search direction. The initial historical population is determined using Eq. (A.2).(A.2)oldPi,j=LBj+rand(…)⋅(UBj−LBj)i∀N&j∀DAfter oldP is determined, the permuting function is applied to randomly change the order of the individuals in oldP using random shuffling function as formulated in Eq. (A.3).(A.3)oldP≔permuting(oldP)The BSA's mutation process generates the initial form of the trial population Mutant. The historical population is used in the calculation of the search-direction matrix; BSA generates a trial population, taking partial advantage of its experiences from previous generations.The BSA uses a non-uniform crossover strategy that is more complex than the crossover strategies used in many genetic algorithms. The BSA's crossover process produces the final arrangement of the trial population T. The initial value of the trial population is Mutant, as set in the mutation process. Trial individuals with better fitness values for the optimization problem are used to evolve the target population individuals. The BSA's crossover approach is quite dissimilar to the crossover strategies used in DE and its variants. The mix rate parameter (mixrate) in BSA's crossover process controls the number of elements of individuals that will mutate in a trial by using [mixrate.rand(…).D]. The function of the mix rate is quite unlike the crossover rate used in DE. Two predefined strategies are randomly used to define BSA's map. The first strategy uses mixrate. The second strategy allows only one randomly chosen individual to mutate in each. The BSA's crossover process is more complex than the processes used in DE.In selection-II stage, the trial populations Tis that have better fitness values than the corresponding Pis are used to update the Pis based on a greedy selection. If the best individual of P (Pbest) has a better fitness value than the global minimum value obtained, the global minimizer is updated to be Pbest, and the global minimum value is updated to be the fitness value of Pbest.The BSA has two control parameters that required user interferences for appropriate settings. These parameters are: (i) the population size, and (ii) mixrate. It is worthy to note that the mixrate typical values of 0.7–1.00 might work better for most applications. However, the size of population depends on problem dimension. The population size (N) can be computed [35] using Eq. (A.4) as initial suggestive value.(A.4)N=round〈4+3log(D)〉