@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of surface roughness during hard turning of AISI 4340 steel (69 HRC)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Various regression models were applied to the hard turning of AISI 4340 (69 HRC) steel.Random forest and Quantile regression models are used for modelling and machining for the first time.Feed rate is more dominant than cutting speed in influencing the surface roughness.Multiple regression models are robust when the surface roughness is below 1μm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hard turning,Regression modelling,Random forest regression,Quantile regression,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, 39 sets of hard turning (HT) experimental trials were performed on a Mori-Seiki SL-25Y (4-axis) computer numerical controlled (CNC) lathe to study the effect of cutting parameters in influencing the machined surface roughness. In all the trials, AISI 4340 steel workpiece (hardened up to 69 HRC) was machined with a commercially available CBN insert (Warren Tooling Limited, UK) under dry conditions. The surface topography of the machined samples was examined by using a white light interferometer and a reconfirmation of measurement was done using a Form Talysurf. The machining outcome was used as an input to develop various regression models to predict the average machined surface roughness on this material. Three regression models – Multiple regression, Random forest, and Quantile regression were applied to the experimental outcomes. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this paper is the first to apply random forest or quantile regression techniques to the machining domain. The performance of these models was compared to ascertain how feed, depth of cut, and spindle speed affect surface roughness and finally to obtain a mathematical equation correlating these variables. It was concluded that the random forest regression model is a superior choice over multiple regression models for prediction of surface roughness during machining of AISI 4340 steel (69 HRC).constant (intercept)normally distributed errorfeeddepth of cutthe number of trees in a random forest specificationnumber of variables to use at each tree split in random forestexpected increment in the responsespindle speed (RPM)tool nose radiusaverage value of machined surface roughnessper unit change in surface roughness for ith experiment

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hard turning (HT) process has now become a viable method to machine automotive components made of ferrous alloys with hardness above 45 HRC. On account of reduced lead time and production cost, HT eliminates some of the processing steps and procedures involved during classical machining processes for hard ferrous alloy materials; indeed, 80% of the cycle time was saved when hard turning a pinion shaft (59–62 HRC) [1,2]. AISI 4340 medium carbon (0.4% C) high strength martensitic steel is one such desirable material used very frequently to manufacture critical components in aerospace engineering and automotive transmissions, including the manufacture of bearings, gears, shafts, and cams, which require tighter geometric tolerances, longer service life, and good surface finish [3]. In order to carry out a deterministic machining operation, a machine tool with high rigidity, and a cutting tool with high toughness, hardness, and chemical inertness supplemented with appropriate machining conditions are necessary and this remains a valid consideration across all length scales [4,5]. In its current state, hard turning differs from conventional turning on account of a number of factors including the cutting tool, workpiece, or the process itself, all of which may influence the machining outcome.Owing to these complexities, the task to machine a component with determinisitic precision becomes challenging. In an attempt to understand the contribution of these variables during the hard turning of 69 HRC steel with a CBN cutting tool, 39 trials were performed in this work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study presents a new modelling approach to predict the average value of machined surface roughness during hard turning of AISI 4340 steel (69 HRC) with a CBN cutting tool. For the first time, the random forest regression modelling has been applied to the machining domain and an excellent correlation has been found between the model and the in-house experimental results, as the standard deviation of the predicted values from the 39 experimental result sets was only 0.0465. Among the other trials, the best value of the machined surface roughness obtained was 0.502μm at a feed rate of 0.08mm/rev, 0.1mm depth of cut, and cutting speed of 1608 RPM. Based on the comprehensive models developed and proposed in this work, the following conclusions could be made:1.A novel modelling approach, i.e. random forest regression, has been presented and applied to the machining process for the first time. This model was found to be more accurate than multiple regression models in predicting surface roughness.Multiple regression models were found more accurate for prediction only when the expected surface roughness is below 1μm. Beyond this value the results showed higher deviation.Quite similar to other precision machining processes, the experimental outcome of 39 sets of trials of hard turning of AISI 4340 steel (69 HRC) showed that the value of machined surface roughness is most significantly impacted by the feed rate followed by the cutting speed and depth of cut. Although the feed rate was found to play a dominant role compared to the other two parameters, it cannot be lowered beyond a certain critical extent due to ploughing phenomena.Multiple regression models applied to the 39 experimental datasets obtained from in-house trials revealed the following mathematical equations which could respectively provide 92.5% and 95% accurate predictions of average value of machined surface roughness compared with the experimental results:Rai=−0.279+9.455fi+0.0539api+5.61×10ni−5Rai=−0.223+9.886fi+0.414api−1.93×10−5ni−5.91fi×api−5.02×10−5fi×ni−0.00188ni×api+0.00335fi×ni×apiwhere Raiis surface roughness, fiis feed, apiis depth of cut, and niis spindle speed for the ith experimental observation.While multiple regression models were found suited to address the question “how does feed, depth of cut, and spindle speed affect surface roughness?”, further robustness check was performed using another novel approach, quantile regression which answers the question “does feed, depth of cut, and spindle speed influence surface roughness differently for samples with lower surface roughness than for those samples with higher surface roughness?” It was found that the effect of feed on surface roughness is lower at lower levels of surface roughness and higher as surface roughness increases. The effect of cutting speed on surface roughness is in the opposite direction; it is higher at lower levels of surface roughness and reduces as surface roughness increases.