@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated classification and localization of daily deal content from the Web

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The identification of effective and computationally inexpensive set of features that are able to discriminate between Web pages that consist of daily deal information and those that do not.The construction and systematic comparison of different learning machines based on the identified features that can efficiently classify pages as containing daily deal information with emphasis on both recall and precision.The development of a segmentation algorithm capable of determining the number of daily deals present on a given Web page, and accurately localizing those segments of the page that consist of information about one particular deal.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web classification,Segmentation,Information extraction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Websites offering daily deal offers have received widespread attention from the end-users. The objective of such Websites is to provide time limited discounts on goods and services in the hope of enticing more customers to purchase such goods or services. The success of daily deal Websites has given rise to meta-level daily deal aggregator services that collect daily deal information from across the Web. Due to some of the unique characteristics of daily deal Websites such as high update frequency, time sensitivity, and lack of coherent information representation, many deal aggregators rely on human intervention to identify and extract deal information. In this paper, we propose an approach where daily deal information is identified, classified and properly segmented and localized. Our approach is based on a semi-supervised method that uses sentence-level features of daily deal information on a given Web page. Our work offers (i) a set of computationally inexpensive discriminative features that are able to effectively distinguish Web pages that contain daily deal information; (ii) the construction and systematic evaluation of machine learning techniques based on these features to automatically classify daily deal Web pages; and (iii) the development of an accurate segmentation algorithm that is able to localize and extract individual deals from within a complex Web page. We have extensively evaluated our approach from different perspectives, the results of which show notable performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The World Wide Web has given rise to a digital marketplace where goods and services of all varieties are sold. This arena is no longer the domain of solely traditional brick and mortar retail outlets. Forrester research predicts, by 2017, Americans will spend $370 billion via e-commerce, up from $262 billion in 2013; it is also expected that e-commerce growth will outpace sales growth at bricks-and-mortar stores over the next five years [1]. Perhaps the greatest indicator of this phenomenon is the emergence of deal collectors and deal aggregation services. Deal collector sites, such as GROUPON, have staffed 10,000 employees to locate special product offers that bargain hunters are on constant lookout for [2]. A plethora of such sites have lead to the creation of deal aggregators—sites that track bargains found by multiple deal collectors. Even Google, arguably the reigning king of search engines, has its own deal locator service known as Google offers. However, Google's dominance in information retrieval has yet to extend to Google offers which is still in its infancy with only a beta deployment to a handful of cities. This suggests there is still an opportunity to make a significant impact in this category of Web search.For deal aggregator Websites to be successful, they need to effectively handle the challenge of identifying and indexing a large majority, if not all, of the daily deals that are offered in different place across the Web. Unlike traditional e-commerce Websites such as Amazon and eBay, daily deal Websites have features that are unique such as:1.High frequency of change: The content of daily deal Websites is updated very frequently, e.g., deals can be posted on a deal Website and expire only after a couple of hours. Therefore, the detection and dissemination of deal information is very time sensitive.Lack of content classification: Daily deals are often posted on deal Websites in the form of a long list of items often without proper categorization. Unlike other e-commerce Websites that list categorically similar items besides each other, daily deal Websites often have other criteria for listing items such as the amount of time remaining before the expiry of a deal; therefore, items in a list could be quite heterogeneous.Scarcity of product or service description: The deals that are listed on daily deal Websites often do not contain the complete description of the products or services that are offered. Typically, it is only an overview that is provided and the users are encouraged to visit the actual product or service Web page for more detailed information.Given such characteristics, many deal aggregators rely highly on human intervention to identify and extract daily deals from the Web. It is upon employees of daily deal aggregators to manually or semi-manually browse through daily deal Websites and collect the information in a timely and accurate manner. Clearly, this is a time-consuming, expensive and tedious task. Our main objective in the work presented in this paper is to address this challenge in order to reduce deal aggregators’ heavy reliance on human intervention for finding daily deals. With this research objective in mind, we propose intelligent deal crawler technology that is able to quickly and accurately crawl the Web, identify Web pages that contain deal information, and properly segment such Web pages into localized segments that contain only one individual daily deal. These localized daily deals are indexed as to contribute to the automated aggregation of a daily deal dataset. In particular, our work offers the following contributions:1.The identification of effective and computationally inexpensive set of features that are able to discriminate between Web pages that consist of daily deal information and those that do not.The construction and systematic comparison of different learning machines based on the identified features that can efficiently classify pages as containing daily deal information with emphasis on both recall and precision.The development of a segmentation algorithm capable of determining the number of daily deals present on a given Web page, and accurately localizing those segments of the page that contains information about one particular deal.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews background literature as it pertains to Web page classification and segmentation. Section 3 provides an overview of our proposed approach, which is followed by the description of the selected discriminant features and technical details of the proposed approach. We report on five different forms of extensive evaluation that we have performed on various aspects of our approach in Section 4. The paper is then concluded with some important points of discussion, future work and concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
