@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Change points detection in crime-related time series: An on-line fuzzy approach based on a shape space representation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The method provides both a dynamic detection and fuzzy querying of change points in crime-related time series.The approach is flexible and intuitive.Geometric properties expressed with linguistic variables can be used to query change points.The method can be used on-line and does not rely on training sets.The computational costs are very low and depend only on the degree of the approximating polynomials.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Change points detection,Qualitative description of data,Time series analysis,Fuzzy logic,Crime analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The extension of traditional data mining methods to time series has been effectively applied to a wide range of domains such as finance, econometrics, biology, security, and medicine. Many existing mining methods deal with the task of change points detection, but very few provide a flexible approach. Querying specific change points with linguistic variables is particularly useful in crime analysis, where intuitive, understandable, and appropriate detection of changes can significantly improve the allocation of resources for timely and concise operations. In this paper, we propose an on-line method for detecting and querying change points in crime-related time series with the use of a meaningful representation and a fuzzy inference system. Change points detection is based on a shape space representation, and linguistic terms describing geometric properties of the change points are used to express queries, offering the advantage of intuitiveness and flexibility. An empirical evaluation is first conducted on a crime data set to confirm the validity of the proposed method and then on a financial data set to test its general applicability. A comparison to a similar change-point detection algorithm and a sensitivity analysis are also conducted. Results show that the method is able to accurately detect change points at very low computational costs. More broadly, the detection of specific change points within time series of virtually any domain is made more intuitive and more understandable, even for experts not related to data mining.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The analysis of time series naturally arises in crime analysis as well as in any data-driven domain. Finding sudden changes in criminal activities is a particular task known as change points detection. In this paper, a flexible on-line change points detection method for helping crime analysts to easily and understandably monitor changes is proposed. Change points are detected in two steps: the segmentation of the time series and the querying of points with a fuzzy inference system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A method for the detection of change points within crime-related time series was described and tested with different data sets. The combination of a meaningful representation, a dynamic segmentation, and a fuzzy inference system delivers the possibility, even for experts not related to data mining, to intuitively find change points by describing geometric properties in linguistic terms. More broadly, the considerable flexibility of the method makes possible the use of the method in any application domain, with a great potential in crime analysis.Future work suggest further investigation on the use of mining methods to automatically discover the most appropriate membership functions of the inference system in order to mimic the behavior of existing algorithms. This alternative could present a gain in the accuracy of the detected change points, however, the opposing view is a loss in the understandability of the inference system.Also, an implementation of a crime trends monitoring process in a real environment should be tested and the results assessed in real time by crime analysts.