@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimising small-world properties in VANETs: Centralised and distributed overlay approaches

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel problem for optimising connectivity in VANETs is defined.The problem is solved by two multi-objective evolutionary algorithms, using global knowledge, on a number of snapshots of the network.Several heuristics were designed to be implemented in the system and solve the problem.The performance of the heuristics is assessed by comparing them with the solutions from the multi-objective algorithms on the selected snapshots.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-objective optimisation,VANETs,Small-world,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Advantages of bringing small-world properties in mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) in terms of quality of service has been studied and outlined in the past years. In this work, we focus on the specific class of vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) and propose to un-partition such networks and improve their small-world properties. To this end, a subset of nodes, called injection points, is chosen to provide backend connectivity and compose a fully-connected overlay network. The optimisation problem we consider is to find the minimal set of injection points to constitute the overlay that will optimise the small-world properties of the resulting network, i.e., (1) maximising the clustering coefficient (CC) so that it approaches the CC of a corresponding regular graph and (2) minimising the difference between the average path length (APL) of the considered graph and the APL of corresponding random graphs. Two accurate evolutionary algorithms (namely, NSGAII and MOCHC) are used to find an upper-bound of high quality solutions to this new multi-objective optimisation problem, on realistic instances in the city-centre of Luxembourg. The obtained sets of solutions are then used to assess the performance of five novel heuristics proposed to solve the problem, i.e., two centralised and three decentralised. The results provided by these heuristics turned out to be extremely accurate with respect to the solutions found by the evolutionary algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs) are composed of mobile devices which spontaneously communicate with each other without any previously existing infrastructure. In MANETs, the limited radio range of the nodes, as well as their mobility, cause a highly fluctuating topology which can induce a severe degradation of the quality of service (QoS) or even lead to network partitioning, i.e., there is no available path between some pair of nodes. In order to leverage such issues, many authors proposed to study or create small-world properties, i.e., high clustering coefficient and small mean-shortest path length, in wireless networks as they are assumed to improve some QoS metrics, like end-to-end throughput [1] or robustness to failure [2]. The main problem is however to find a practical way to establish any communication link in an ad hoc network, which is characterised by bounded transmission ranges. In this aim, we introduce the notion of injection points, which are nodes equipped with an additional communication interface. All injection points are assumed to be fully connected, meaning that any injection point can directly communicate with another one.In this work, we focus on a special case of MANET called Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANETs), in which vehicles can either communicate with each other, in a peer to peer fashion, or with road-side units that allow access to backend systems. The scenario we will simulate for our experiments is the centre of Luxembourg city. The motivation for this scenario is mainly that Luxembourg city centre is covered by Wi-Fi access points, spread all over the city [3]. This pre-existing infrastructure will allow us to actually implement the notion of injection point in a later stage.The objective is thus to determine the best set of vehicles to join the overlay network in order to unpartition the corresponding network graph and maximise its small-world properties. The corresponding optimisation problem is a three-objectives one, where (1) the number of injection points is to be minimised to limit communication overhead, and small-world properties are to be optimised, i.e., (2) the clustering coefficient (CC) is maximised so that it approaches the CC of a corresponding regular graph and (3) the difference between the average path length (APL) of the generated graph and the APL of corresponding random graphs is minimised.This article is an extension of some previous original work published in [4], which contribution was twofold. First, we proposed a new paradigm based on an overlay-graph approach to cope with Watts original re-wiring process [5]. This new approach is a more realistic variant of the injection network model initially proposed in [6–8]. Second, the problem was tackled for the first time in a multi-objective fashion with a well-known algorithm, namely the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm-II (NSGAII) [9], in order to obtain a set of good compromise solutions. Therefore, we solved the problem in a centralised way, assuming that global knowledge of the network is known.This article proposes to extend our previous contributions as follows. First, we compare the results of NSGAII with an additional Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm (MOEA), the multi-objective version of the CHC algorithm (MOCHC) [10], specifically designed for combinatorial problems. The obtained fronts are then merged into a single one to provide a more accurate and diverse set of reference solutions. Two problem instances are also studied in addition to the original four. These results provide empirical upper-bounds on the small-world properties attainable in these scenarios. The suitability of such centralised approaches in real world VANETs might be debatable. Indeed assuming global knowledge of a VANET is hardly obtainable due to its distributed and self-organising nature. The second contribution therefore consists in several heuristics to solve the problem in a dynamic and computer-efficient fashion. Their results are then compared with the reference fronts obtained with the metaheuristics. Finally we also propose to study the stability of the injection point set in a dynamic context using a novel quality metric to assess their performance.The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In the next section, a literature review on the usage of small-world properties in wireless networks in general and in MANETs/VANETs in particular is provided. Then, Section 3 introduces the injection points problem and the corresponding optimisation model. The different multi-objective metaheuristics used to tackle this problem and create the reference front are presented in Section 4. Section 5 then describes the centralised and decentralised heuristics proposed to solve the same problem in a dynamic context. The experimental environment is described in Section 6 followed by the analysis of the obtained results in Section 7. Finally, the last section contains our conclusions and perspectives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We tackled in this work the un-partitioning of VANETs and their connectivity optimisation. For that, we proposed the use of road-side units to build an overlay network of backend connected nodes, called injection points, such that the small-world properties of the resulting VANET are optimised.In our preliminary work, we introduced a formulation for this new multi-objective problem, and two different scenarios representing realistic networks in the city centre of Luxembourg were used. The problem instances were handled with the well-known NSGAII algorithm to find highly accurate tradeoff solutions.In this work, we first extended our previous study with two larger problem instances and another multi-objective evolutionary algorithm: MOCHC. The performance of the two algorithms in this complex problem was evaluated, and we found that NSGAII was more accurate, while MOCHC provided a more diverse (and still accurate) set of solutions. The use of such algorithms using global knowledge of the network in reality might be arguable, because it would require the use of centralised servers to find solutions in real time, as well as high communication overheads. However, these experiments offer a plethora of different tradeoff solutions to the problem, and it allows us to better know the problem and obtain theoretical bounds.Five heuristics were designed and compared versus the solutions provided by the evolutionary algorithms. Despite the compared solutions (and the previously existing ones in the literature) three of these heuristics are fully decentralised, meaning that they could be feasibly implemented in a real system. The results showed that the heuristics provide really competitive results, non-dominated with the best solutions found by the evolutionary algorithms during our experimentations.Additionally, the performance of the heuristics was compared in a dynamic environment, which is a realistic simulation of the network in the centre of Luxembourg city in the time periods between 6:00–6:15 a.m. and 7:00–7:15 a.m., according to several metrics as the number of injection points, their stability along the simulation, or the small-world properties of the resulting network.Future work will consider the design of novel heuristics that are not so restrictive in the number of injection points, with the hope that the small-world characteristics will be improved with respect to the solutions built by the proposed heuristics in this work.