@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal decisions on group buying option with a posted retail price and heterogeneous demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Assuming the demand is heterogeneous, we make optimal decisions on group buying facing a retail option.Customers are classified by their sensitivity on participating group buying.Only in the individualistic dominant market, there probably is a group buying option improving the total revenue.We also extend two types customer classification to multiple types in this paper.Sometimes, discrimination may increase revenue.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pricing,Group buying,Heterogeneous demand,Revenue maximization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Group buying is now a popular business mechanism whereby customers are encouraged to bargain together. Today’s group buying usually adopts a fixed group price rather than using a dynamic pricing mechanism and many retailers sell products using both a group buying and a posted price. Therefore, there are usually different shopping channels as the market can be divided into two segments, a group buying segment and an individual segment, according to consumers’ preference. However, sometimes the group buying option can decrease total revenue by influencing the individual market segment. Consequently, the seller has to decide: (1) whether to offer a group buying option and (2) if offering such an option, which combination is the best? In this paper, we classify customers into collectivist customers and individualistic customers depending on their different valuations of the time and energy spent in group buying communication and study the optimal pricing strategy according to actual market information. Although collectivist customers prefer to participate in group buying, our results show that this is true only in certain conditions in an individualistic dominant market where the potential demand of the individualistic customers is greater than that of the collectivist customers or the price coefficient of the individualistic customers is less than that of the collectivist customers. In these circumstances, the seller should provide a posted retail price together with a group buying option which can assist in customer discrimination, but in other conditions, the seller should only provide a posted retail price. Additionally, we have extended the two customer classifications to multiple classifications in this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the end of the 1990s, many e-commerce companies have been selling their products to consumers using group buying mechanisms. Under group buying, customers are encouraged to bargain together and quantity discounts are offered based on the customers’ aggregated purchasing quantity. On earlier group buying websites, the seller announced prices for different levels of demand (i.e. price-quantity schedules) and the buyers serially placed bids until the market cleared at a particular price. Generally, as the number of buyers increased, the price usually decreased. There have been many dynamic price histograms which indicate how prices change depending on the quantity of units sold and which tier the current price is at. Buyers as well as potential customers are also informed about the number of bids needed for a price to drop further. At the beginning, some of these websites enjoyed considerable success. However, most of the earlier group buying websites have ceased operations. Kauffman and Wang (2002) mentioned the following reasons for the failure of the earlier group buying websites: (1) the business model was too complex for the general consumer; (2) the auction cycle for group buying was lengthy and hindered impulse buying; (3) the transaction volume was too low leading to small discounts for consumers and thus it was difficult for earlier group buying websites to compete with large retailers from a price perspective.In November 2008, the limitations inherent in the earlier group buying websites were addressed in Groupon.com’s “Today’s Deal” group buying business model which first originated in Chicago. Under this new model, the seller fixes the group buying price and sets a required group size instead of using “dynamic price histograms”. Compared to the dynamic pricing system of the earlier group buying websites, customers facing the new model can see more clearly how much discount they can obtain if there are sufficient buyers. Additionally, the time for the new group buying mechanism is limited to a single day with another product offered the following day. Thus, the pressure of such a limited time motivates potential customers to monitor the websites on a daily basis. Because of the win–win situation to the shareholders of the system, just 18months after its launch, the approximate company value of Groupon.com had reached 1.35 billion dollars and this uptrend and success made this market very attractive (Erdoğmuş and Çiçek 2011). In a short time, many clone sites adopted Groupon.com’s business model and started their activities worldwide. By the end of June 2011, with almost 6000 “Today’s Deal” group buying websites, China was the most competitive online marketplace for group buying in the world (Zhao 2013).Almost all traditional group buying models, including Today’s Deal group buying, are non-coupon based. Another practical group buying business model is the coupon based model. Coupon based group buying is very different from traditional online group buying and is, in fact, an advertising model and therefore the discount is usually much higher than for regular non-coupon based group buying. For sellers considering whether to offer coupon based group buying, the key question is whether such large discounts can attract new customers who might regularly return and pay the full price on future visits. As a result, coupon based group buying is more suitable for a seller who has sufficiently low recognition among potential consumers. In comparison, non-coupon based group buying mainly benefits from price discrimination. To yield profitable price discrimination, consumers who are offered non-coupon based group buying must be more price-sensitive (with regards to the participating sellers’ goods or services) than the population as a whole. There has been a significant increase in non-coupon based group buying and we review those which are related to our study. However, coupon based group buying has received little attention in academic literature, even though there are increasingly more coupon based group buying businesses. To the best of our knowledge, the limited theoretical works, including Arabshahi (2011) and Edelman et al. (2011), which study coupon based group buying, have done so from the perspective of the coupon service and the perspective of the participating sellers.Although Today’s Deal group buying was initially a great success, since the latter half of 2011 a large number of group buying websites have had to lay off employees and have even collapsed in China. Further, insiders have predicted that 99% of group buying websites would be bankrupt in the future. By September 2012, the number of Chinese group buying websites had reduced to 2919, i.e. 42% from the same period in 2011, which means on average there were 5.9 websites disappearing every day (Zhao 2013). For Groupon.com, the situation was neither good or bad. Although about 60% of enterprise partners think that their group buying experience was successful, more than half don’t wish to cooperate with Groupon.com again (Wang 2013). With a reduction in freshness, consumers have become more rational. Therefore, more normal and solid business models are needed for the group buying business. To win during the wave of reform, Chinese e-commerce companies have transformed the Groupon.com mechanism and created new group buying business models. One successful model is the “Package Deal” group buying model, which is widely used in catering industry in China. Different from Groupon.com, Package Deal group buying packs a certain number T of the items on sale to form one sale unit and sells the unit as a whole at a fixed unit group buying price p. Of course, the group buying price for one item is discounted, i.e.,p<p0wherep0is the common retail price for one item.There are some main differences between the traditional group buying, Groupon.com’s Today’s Deal group buying, and the Chinese Package Deal group buying as follows:(1)Market MechanismsThe traditional group buying announces price-quantity schedules as(p1,q1),(p2,q2),…,(pn,qn)wherep1>p2>…>pnandq1<q2<…<qnat the beginning of a given selling period of[0,Γ]. All transactions occur at timeΓ. Suppose that the aggregated demand atΓis equal toqΓ, then the realistic price for all buyers is uniform and equal atpiwherei=arg{qi⩽qΓ<qi+1}andqn+1=∞. Specifically, ifqΓ<q1, then no transaction occurs.Today’s Deal group buying, similar to Groupon.com, announces only one price-quantity pair(p,q)for a given selling period[0,Γ]. Suppose that the aggregated demand atΓis equal toqΓ. IfqΓ⩾q, then all transactions occur at the same price p. Otherwise, ifqΓ<q, then there is no any transaction. Today’s Deal group buying mechanism is a special model of traditional group buying mechanism in which two price-quantity pairs(p1,q1)and(p2,q2)are announced withp2<p1=∞andq1<q2.Package Deal group buying announces both a required group buying size T of a package of item and a unit group buying price p for this bundled volume. Transactions occur as long as the required size T is realized. Different to traditional and Today’s Deal group buying, Package Deal group buying usually sets a longer selling period and transactions can be handled at any time during the selling period.Buyer Behavior and Demand realizationUnder traditional group buying, buyers as well as potential customers are informed about the number of bids needed for a price to drop further. Potential buyers anticipate that prices for a given item are going to drop in the near future and it is this anticipation of a price drop that motivates them to make their purchase so as to facilitate the process in which prices drop from a discount level to another one.Under Today’s Deal group buying, customers can perceive more clearly how much discount they can obtain than through traditional group buying. Additionally, the time for Today’s Deal group buying mechanism is usually limited to a single day and another product for the group buying option is offered the following day. Therefore, the limited time pressure motivates potential customers to monitor the websites daily.Under Package Deal group buying, customers are encouraged to work as “sales agents” to gather companion consumers. Because the product offered in Package Deal group buying, like a family meal package, is more suitable for friends to share, the product offered in Package Deal group buying is not suitable for consumers unfamiliar with sharing. That is, online buyers do not take into account other online shoppers and have to spend time and money to discuss whether or not to adopt the group buying option and pay not only the group buying price but also the communication costs.In this paper, we studied a Package Deal group buying model frequently used in the Chinese catering industry. This new group buying offers a homogeneous food service to different customers. For one class of customers, a posted price is offered and these customers pay for the food individually. For another class of customers, Package Deal group buying is offered and these customers have to gather enough companies (friends) to take advantage of the discount group price. Different to traditional group buying, this new group buying does not just sell the item at the end of the whole period. Instead, the special group buying sets a necessary group size T. As long as there are T customers, one transaction is done, so there is usually more than one group doing transactions during the selling period. This certain Package Deal group buying is widely used by the Chinese catering industry, such as the “Sichuan hotpot” nearby colleges or universities. “Sichuan hotpot” is a popular Chinese food, which is especially suited to schoolmates who wish to dine together. In China, almost all hotpot restaurants near schools offer Package Deal group buying options as well as a retail option. Generally, the group buying option is for students and the retail option is for other consumers, such as teachers. Sometimes, several schoolmates want to dine together and may search Package Deal group buying information together. Sometimes, one student gets the group buying information by chance and sends the information through group-chat communication tools. After receiving the information, all the schoolmates join the group buying discussion and then decide whether or not to dine together. Participants work as a team and spend almost the same time and money in the group buying process.For each group buying transaction, there is indeed an initiator, who is the first to notice the group buying information. However, this initiator is very different from the initiator in traditional non-coupon based group buying, who is usually just the seller and thus the initiator incurs the communication costs needed to inform and persuade enough buyers to realize one transaction. However, the initiator in the Package Deal group buying is the customer who first notices the group buying information and works as a “sales agent” to gather companion customers. After the initiator sends the group buying information to interpersonal information/knowledge sharing communities, such as, Facebook, Twitter, and ICQ, they then become a general customer and communicate with their friends to form a group buying team, meaning that all group members incur similar time and energy costs to decide on one group buying transaction. Further, the initiator is usually not the person who orders the item on behalf of the group unless the initiator acts as a host and pays for the Package item personally, which is not the focus of this paper. Thus, we can assume that the communication costs of the initiator would be almost the same as that of the other participants. In fact, the initiator in this certain group buying acts more like an informer, while the initiator in traditional group buying is more like an organizer. This is why the initiator’s communication costs in traditional group buying are generally much higher than the other participants, but the initiator in our model incurs almost the same costs as the other group buying members.Because one transaction is done as long as there are T customers, the more efficient communication, the more rapid transactions, which means that the main cost (including the waiting cost), except for the price, is the time and energy required to communicate with group members. Of course, the communication time and energy expended by each group member increases with group size T. From a practice perspective, it is easier and more possible to communicate with customers who have a similar evaluation about the communication time and energy needed, which in this paper we call the customer’s communication sensitivity. Because the communication time and energy increases with the group size T, we also regard the customer’s communication sensitivity as a communication cost sensitive coefficient of T. In fact, there could possibly be more than one communication sensitivity in the potential customers. The product offered in this new group buying method, such as a meal package provided by a Chinese restaurant, is suitable for friends with similar preferences to share, as these friends are also more likely to communicate with each other and therefore would most likely spend the same time and energy. Therefore, we assume that when customers make their decisions, they do not consider other unfamiliar groups with different communication sensitivities for their group buying option.When a group buying option is offered by a new hotpot restaurant, the expected probability that one group buys is larger if the consumers expect that there are other groups, especially when the required group size T is small. That is, group buying decisions mean that transactions that have already been made can influence customer behavior. Therefore, it is interesting to investigate the group buying advertising effect by considering the customers’ strategic behavior. However, for a mature hotpot brand, the original intention of using group buying is to improve revenue through price discrimination rather than to expand popularity through advertising. Because of this, we assume that group buying customers do not consider the actions of other groups when making their purchase and only focus on price discrimination.In this paper, we employ a sensitive parameterαto reflect the customer’s communication cost sensitive coefficient of T. We also assume that the value forαis different between customers for the same product and classify the customers into two segments according to the value ofα. Depending on the context, it is easier for customers with a less valueαto join one buying group, and thus we call these customers the collectivist market segment and the other segment the individualistic market segment. Based on these assumptions and actual demand information, we deal with the two proposed problems outlined in the previous paragraph. Given any product and certain market information, our model answers the following questions: (1) when is it appropriate to offer a posted retail price together with a group buying option? and (2) if offering such options, what is the better combination?In this paper, we studied the new non-coupon based group buying model and compare the communication sensitivity of different types of customers. Our results showed that customers with less sensitivity prefer to participate in group buying. However, given the same price coefficient, when the demand of lowly sensitive customers is larger than that of highly sensitive customers, it is not optimal to offer a group buying option. When the demand of highly sensitive customers is much larger than that of lowly sensitive customers, the seller should not offer a group buying option. Only when the demand from highly sensitive customers is moderately larger than that of lowly sensitive customers, should the seller adopt such a group buying option. When the demand of highly sensitive customers is moderately larger, the results of our study showed that the optimal group buying price can play a role in price discrimination. Our model differs from the existing mechanisms in previous literature by assuming (1) an individual retail price is always offered no matter whether a group buying option is adopted and (2) a fixed group price rather than a dynamic pricing mechanism is permitted.This paper is organized as follows. We review the related literature in Section 2. We introduce the basic model and analyze the players’, both the buyer and seller, behavior in Section 3. Section 4 studies an optimal sales strategy with two market segments and presents our main results for two market conditions, i.e., the collectivist dominant market and the individualistic dominant market. Section 5 discusses an optimal sales strategy for multiple market segments. Conclusions and future research directions are discussed in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
