@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A genetic algorithm based decision support system for the multi-objective node placement problem in next wireless generation network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new multi-objective node placement problem heterogeneous networks is introduced.The performance of a new VLGA is highlighted through the implementation of a DSS.The surveillance maritime case study is considered using real data instances.A comparison with an existing multi-objective model from the literature is performed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heterogeneous network planning,Variable-length genetic algorithm,Next generation network,Decision support system,Antenna placement problem,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The node placement problem involves positioning and configuring infrastructure for wireless networks. Applied to next generation networks, it establishes a new wireless architecture able to integrate heterogeneous components that can collaborate and exchange data. Furthermore, the heterogeneity of wireless networks makes the problem more intractable. This paper presents a novel multi-objective node placement problem that optimizes concurrently four objectives: maximizing communication coverage, minimizing the active structures’ costs, maximizing of the total capacity bandwidth and minimizing the noise level in the network. Known to beNP-hard, the problem can be approached by applying heuristics mainly for large problem instances. As the number of nodes to place is not determined beforehand; we propose to apply a multi-objective variable-length genetic algorithm (VLGA) that simultaneously searches for the optimal number, positions and nature of heterogeneous nodes and communication devices. The performance of the VLGA is highlighted through the implementation of a decision support system (DSS) applied to the surveillance maritime problem using real data instances. We compare the ability of the proposed algorithm with an existing multi-objective model from the literature in order to validate its effectiveness in dealing with heterogeneous components. The results show that the proposed model well fits the network architecture constraints with a better balance between the objectives applied to the surveillance problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid growth of mobile users’ expectations of a high quality of network service and the emergence of various wireless technologies has driven the need of a new network architecture. In fact, this new architecture aims at integrating and taking advantage of various networking techniques, such as the coverage of the cellular systems, the bandwidth of the wired networks and the flexibility of an ad hoc communication network. Thus, integrating such infrastructures allows users to balance among different network connections, decrease call blocking and dropping probability, increase systems’ capacity by deploying a minimum number of additional infrastructures with minimum costs and increasing the number of new technologies.Next Generation Networks (NGN) address new network requirements by creating a new wireless architecture capable to integrate heterogeneous components that can collaborate and exchange data in a cost effective and easy-to-manage process [10]. In this paper, heterogeneity refers to the set of different communication devices deployed in the network. However, the planning of this new infrastructure faces three major new challenges. First, a big increase of the demand for mobile communication services. Second, the need of new technologies of the next generation network requiring demand based planning methods. And finally, the high costs of mobile resources and the emergence of different wireless technologies. Therefore, efficient quantitative methods for supporting decisions regarding the location and the nature of the deployed technologies have become essential in order to synthesize efficient, economic and optimal network configuration.Purposes of NGN include: (i) building a network that provides the same or better levels of quality and reliability compared to vocal networks (ii) matching consumers’ expectations that can support heterogeneous services and (iii) creating cost effective and easy to manage networks. Given these challenges, NGN require a high degree of efficiency in the architectural approach. The main incentive is to find “the appropriate” ways to establish connectivity in the network topology achieving network effectiveness and reducing infrastructural deployment cost.Related works on optimizing the NGN planning in a heterogeneous infrastructure are scarce [9,5,10]. Multiple studies propose to integrate different types of networks, like: LAN and wireless LAN (WLAN) [30], Wi-Fi and Wi-Max [24], and the integration of Ad hoc and cellular networks in [25]. To the best of our knowledge, none has considered the mathematical modeling of the network management problem for NGN. The use of mathematical models for such a new problem definition allows to capture all real aspects of network management and environmental constraints.The proposed model can be seen as an extension of the classic antenna placement problem (APP) [17] to the multi-objective framework applied to the NGN infrastructure, which implies it isNP-hard. The problem is modeled as a multi-objective optimization problem while fulfilling system constraints. The mathematical formulation involves four objective functions: maximizing the communication coverage, minimizing the total network cost, maximizing bandwidth and minimizing the noise level.The Node Placement Problem for Next Generation Network (NPP for NGN) addresses two major aspects of network management. First, it maximizes the area's coverage within an heterogeneous network. To achieve this goal we attempt to maximize the number of users receiving signal. Nevertheless, this is constrained by the minimization of the deployed entities’ cost. Second, it improves the quality of signal and maximize information flows in the network. Thus we maximize the minimum bandwidth in the network while minimizing the level of noise.It's easy to see that the problem is highly combinatorial with an enormous number of alternative solutions and conflicting objectives. We propose to apply a multi-objective heuristic as a solution approach [7,18,26,27]. We choose to adapt multi-objective variable-length Genetic Algorithm (VLGA) [24] for its ability to tackle with high combinatorial problems.The main contribution of this paper is to design a network decision support system (DSS) that integrates an existing network infrastructure with heterogeneous resources and network demand. The DSS takes, as input, different entities to be assigned (a maximum number of nodes, devices and potential placement) in the area of interest, then, generates after multiple runs, different scenarios. Each scenario has a different network configuration that optimizes the objective functions detailed above. We then choose the configuration that fits more users’ demand and gave the best nodes’ distribution in the network. For each scenario, the DSS generates the efficient number of nodes to place, their appropriate positions, type of CDs to assign, and the efficient way to connect all components in order to create a robust heterogeneous network. The DSS, that integrates the VLGA, is applied to solve real data instances for the maritime surveillance application. A simulation environment called Inform Lab (IL) [2] is also adopted. The IL simulator is configured as a set of entities called agents. Each agent represents a connection node in our network structure that can be represented as a platform, a boat, a ship, a helicopter, and are connected to each other with a communication networks via a set of devices.In order to evaluate the out performance of the proposed NPP for the NGN, a comparison with Ting el al.'s [24] formulation is performed using the new DSS with the same problem instances. An illustration on the map of the more efficient solution for both formulations is then discussed.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature to heterogeneous networks and NGN. The NPP for NGN is described in Section 3. In Section 4, we present the proposed mathematical problem formulation presented as a non-linear integer program. Section 5 describes the proposed VLGA and detailed the DSS structure. In Section 6, computational results are presented and analyzed for NPP for NGN and Ting et al.'s formulations. Finally, conclusion and further works are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
