@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modified possibilistic fuzzy C-means algorithms for segmentation of magnetic resonance image

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Simultaneous estimation of bias field and pixel labels of MR images is focus of work.We have attempted to model the tissue class uncertainty using the notion of fuzziness and bias field by the typicality measures.Joint effect of fuzzy and typicality measure have been taken care to propose three new schemes namely BCPFCM, BCPNFCM and BCSP-NFCM.These schemes have been able to estimate the bias field and obtain the segmented images.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging,Bias field,Neighbourhood,Fuzzy C-means,Possibilistic C-means,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The brain magnetic resonance (MR) image has an embedded bias field. This field needs to be corrected to obtain the actual MR image for classification. Bias field, being a slowly varying nonlinear field, needs to be estimated. In this paper, we have proposed three schemes and in turn three algorithms to segment the given MR image while estimating the bias field. The problem is compounded when the MR image is corrupted with noise in addition to the inherent bias field. The notions of possibilistic and fuzzy membership have been combined to take care of the modeling of the bias field and noise. The weighted typicality measure together with the weighted fuzzy membership has been used to model the image. The above resulted in the proposed Bias Corrected Possibilistic Fuzzy C-Means (BCPFCM) strategy and the algorithm. Further reinforcing the neighbourhood data to the modeling aspect has resulted in the two other strategies namely Bias Corrected Possibilistic Neighborhood Fuzzy C-Means (BCPNFCM) and Bias Corrected Separately weighted Possibilistic Neighborhood Fuzzy C-Means (BCSPNFCM). The proposed algorithms have successfully been tested with synthetic data with bias field of low and high spatial frequency. Noisy brain MR images with Gaussian Noise of varying strength have been considered from the BrainWeb database. The algorithms have also been tested on real brain MR data set with axial and sagittal view and it has been found that the proposed algorithms produced segmentation results with less percentage of misclassification errors as compared to the Bias Corrected Fuzzy C-Means (BCFCM) algorithm proposed by Ahmed et al. [4]. The performance of the proposed algorithms has been compared with algorithms from other paradigm in the context of Tanimoto's index.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Intensity inhomogeneity poses a challenge in MR image segmentation. It appears as a slowly varying nonlinear field in MR images, known as the bias field, that changes the tissue statistics. Because of bias field, intensity of pixels of a particular class at other locations appears to belong to different classes. The conventional segmentation methods fail to classify such tissue classes affected by intensity inhomogeneity. However the bias field changes from frame to frame for a particular patient and also from patient to patient in the same MR system. To handle such problems, there is a need to model the nonlinear bias field to control the effect of nonlinearity so that tissue properties can be retained leading to accurate classification.It is known from literature that fuzzy-C means algorithm [1] has proved to be an efficient tool to model the uncertainty in the data set and achieve clustering. The limitations of FCM have been circumvented by Possibilistic FCM for clustering [2,3]. Fuzzy C means and its variants have been proposed in the literature to estimate the bias field and segment the brain MR images. The major limitations of these methods are: (i) sensitivity to number of clusters and choice of initial cluster centers, and (ii) mis-classification of different tissue classes in presence of noise and incorrect bias field estimation. But possibilistic partition depends upon the degree of compatibility or typicality, which some times give rise to coincident clusters. By and large, attempts have been made to accurately estimate the bias field [4] and thereafter subtracting the same from the original MR image to obtain bias free MR image for tissue identification. Many researchers over last one and half decade have modeled bias field as a multiplicative field in the observed MR image and have proposed novel strategies to obtain bias field and MR image segmentation. Even though there have been several existing algorithms, it remains a challenge to accurately estimate the bias field and the MR image segmentation.The objective of this research is to estimate the bias field and classify different tissue classes of brain MR images. Furthermore, the brain MR data has an embedded nonlinear field, the bias field, that makes the problem more compounded. Therefore, attempts have been made to propose novel algorithms in possibilistic and fuzzy framework to take care the bias field in MR data. In order to address the above issues, we have proposed three modified FCM algorithms to estimate the bias field, segment the images, and thereby obtain bias corrected segmentation. This work is the extension of our previous work [5]. We have considered two cases, firstly the MR image with bias field and secondly noisy MR image with bias field. Both, the spatial inhomogeneity resulting from the bias field and the uncertainty due to noise, have been modeled using the notion of jointly handling the data with fuzziness and typicality of the data set. In order to deal with both the above issues, we have introduced the concept of weighted fuzzy membership and weighted typicality for both the pixel in consideration and its neighbourhood. The corresponding objective function yielded our first proposed algorithm known as Bias Corrected Possibilistic FCM (BCPFCM). The fuzziness and typicality have specifically been considered for the neighbourhood pixels besides the pixel itself. This notion of differently reinforcing the neighbourhood pixel resulted in the algorithm namely Bias Corrected Possibilistic Neighborhood FCM (BCPNFCM). The fuzzy memberships and typicality measure have been considered separately for the neighbourhood pixels and the resulted algorithm is Bias Corrected Separately Weighted Possibilistic Neighborhood FCM (BCSPNFCM) algorithm. The updates of prototype, bias field, typicality and fuzzy memberships in all the three proposed algorithms have been found out. These updates have been used to estimate the bias field and the segmentation. The proposed algorithms could successfully be tested on synthetic images and also on real brain MR images from the BrainWeb database (brainweb.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/brainweb/) and from the IBSR database [6]. The results obtained by our proposed algorithms have been compared with that of BCFCM algorithm proposed by Ahmed et al. [4] where both bias field and segmentation has been obtained simultaneously. As regards segmentation accuracy, the performance of the proposed algorithms have been compared with algorithms from other paradigms in the context of Tanimoto's index and it has been observed the performance is comparable in some cases and in other cases the performance has been improved.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Estimation of bias field and thereby obtaining bias corrected images is the focus of this research, specifically with bias. Attempts have been made to propose novel schemes for simultaneous estimation of bias field and obtaining segmentation of brain MR images. In this regard, BCFCM algorithm has been proposed by Ahmed et al. [4], but we have proposed some improvement at this font. The notion behind the schemes is to jointly consider the typicality as well as the fuzzy membership measures to model the bias field and noise. The isolated points or noise have been taken care by differently weighing the above two memberships. We have also considered the fuzzy and typicality measures of the neighbourhood pixels together with the pixel under consideration. This has helped to model the slowly varying bias field with noise. The effect of neighbourhood pixels could be controlled through different parameters. In this process, we have also incorporated the local and global effect of fuzzy memberships and typicality, thus reinforcing the model to take care of noises. The proposed algorithms have been successfully tested on synthetic as well as brain MR images. The initial values of cluster centers for our different algorithms are not same rather they are different and are expected to evolve to eventually converge to the final cluster centers. The performance of the proposed algorithms has been found to be better than that of BCFCM [4] in terms of misclassification error. The only bottleneck of these algorithms is that the parameters have been selected on trial and error. Current research work focuses on estimation of these parameters together with the prototypes.