@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Krill herd algorithm for optimal location of distributed generator in radial distribution system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents KH algorithm to solve optimal placement of distributed generator (ODG) problem.ODG problem is studied with an objective of reducing power loss and energy cost.Three illustrative examples of radial distribution network are presented.Proposed method shows better results when compared with other techniques in terms of the quality of solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Radial distribution system,Distributed generators,Loss reduction,Evolutionary algorithms,Krill herd algorithm,Differential evolution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Distributed generator (DG) is recognized as a viable solution for controlling line losses, bus voltage, voltage stability, etc. and represents a new era for distribution systems. This paper focuses on developing an approach for placement of DG in order to minimize the active power loss and energy loss of distribution lines while maintaining bus voltage and voltage stability index within specified limits of a given power system. The optimization is carried out on the basis of optimal location and optimal size of DG. This paper developed a new, efficient and novel krill herd algorithm (KHA) method for solving the optimal DG allocation problem of distribution networks. To test the feasibility and effectiveness, the proposed KH algorithm is tested on standard 33-bus, 69-bus and 118-bus radial distribution networks. The simulation results indicate that installing DG in the optimal location can significantly reduce the power loss of distributed power system. Moreover, the numerical results, compared with other stochastic search algorithms like genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), combined GA and PSO (GA/PSO) and loss sensitivity factor simulated annealing (LSFSA), show that KHA could find better quality solutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The modern power distribution network is constantly being faced with an ever-growing load demand and it is observed that under certain critical loading conditions, the distribution system experience voltage collapse in certain areas. Moreover, at heavy loads, the reactive power flow becomes very significant which cause an increase in real power losses. The basic reason behind these huge power losses is resistive loss, as well as distribution system is operated at much lower voltages compared to transmission systems.Traditionally, capacitor and distributed generator (DG) are installed in power networks to compensate for power loss reduction, voltage profile improvement and voltage stability enhancement. Among these devices, DG is most widely used in distribution network because it has a unique property of supplying active as well as reactive power, whereas capacitor supplies only reactive power to the network. However, studies of DG over few years have indicated that the inappropriate selection of location and size of DG, may lead to greater system losses than the losses without DG [1]. Therefore, the optimal location and size of DG is an important task for the researchers.A mixed integer linear programming (MILP) [2] was introduced by Keane et al. to solve optimal DG allocation problem. Borghetti proposed (MILP) model [3] to minimize system real power loss of radial distribution network. Rueda-Medina et al. also proposed MILP [4] approach to solve optimal DG allocation problem at different load levels for the radial distribution network. The sensitivity factor based on equivalent current injection was employed in [5] for the determination of the optimum size and location of DG to minimize total power losses of radial systems. Khan et al. presented an analytical approach [6] to improve voltage profile and to minimize power loss of radial distribution network. The simulation results indicated that the proposed algorithm was capable of identifying the optimal location and size of DG in distribution system effectively. However, this analytical study is based on phasor current injection method which has unrealistic assumptions such as: uniformly, increasingly, centrally distributed load profiles. These assumptions may cause erroneous solution for the real systems. Rezaei et al. used dynamic programming (DP) technique [7] to place DG in the distribution system to minimize power loss, improve reliability and voltage profile of the system. Aman et al. presented power stability index (PSI) [8] for DG placement and sizing for distribution systems. The proposed method was implemented on 12-bus, modified 12-bus and 69-bus systems, and its performance was compared with golden section search (GSS) algorithm.However, all above mentioned classical methods suffer from the disadvantage of finding the optimal solution for the nonlinear optimization problem. Placement of DG in the radial distribution system is highly nonlinear optimization problem. Conventional optimization techniques are not suitable for solving such type of problems. Moreover, there is no criterion to decide whether a local solution is also a global solution. Large computational time is another drawback of most of these techniques.The advent of stochastic search algorithms has provided alternative approaches for solving optimal DG allocation problems. These population-based techniques exterminate most of the difficulties of classical methods. Many of these stochastic search algorithms have already been developed and successfully implemented to solve optimal DG placement problem. Vankatesh et al. proposed evolutionary programming (EP) [9] for optimal reconfiguration of radial distribution system to maximize loadability index. Popovic et al. proposed genetic algorithm (GA) [10] for optimal sitting and sizing of DG in distribution systems. Borges et al. [11] used a modified GA for determining the optimal size and location of DG in distribution systems, in order to minimize the electrical network losses and to guarantee acceptable reliability level and voltage profile. A hybrid GA [12] to minimize the sum of feeder investments, DG investments, energy loss cost and additional cost of DG sources were proposed by Ouyang et al. A dual GA (DGA) based approach [13] was implemented by Yang et al. to improve power quality and voltage deviations of radial systems. A multi-objective GA based algorithm for active distribution systems expansion planning was proposed by Martins et al. [14]. Lopez-Lezama et al. presented modified GA [15] to determine the location and contract pricing of DG units in distribution systems. A dynamic approach based on modified GA was proposed in [16] to minimize capital costs, operation costs, maintenance costs and cost of losses. EI-Zonkoly proposed PSO [17] to determine the size and location of multiple DGs in distribution systems with different load models. The proposed method was tested on 38-bus radial system and IEEE 30-bus meshed system to show the effectiveness. The modified discrete PSO [18] for planning of distribution networks considering DG and cross-connections (CC) to improve system reliability and to minimize line loss under load growth was introduced by Ziari et al. A multi-objective PSO (MOPSO) was developed in [19] to determine the optimal number, location and size of DG unit in distribution system. Jumping frog PSO (JFPSO) technique was proposed by Gomez-Gonzalez et al. [20] which employed discrete particle swarm optimization (DPSO) and optimal power flow (OPF) to minimize the economic objective function defined by mean of the connection of DG units. The proposed method was compared with DPSO and GA to show its superiority. Sahoo et al. applied fuzzy based multi-objective PSO algorithm [21] to minimize the total installation and operational cost and minimize contingency-load-loss index of 100-bus radial distribution system. Moradi et al. proposed combine GA and PSO technique (GA/PSO) [22] for optimal location and sizing of DG in a distribution system in order to improve voltage regulation, voltage stability and to minimize network power losses of 33-bus and 69-bus systems. Nayak et al. applied differential evolution (DE) [23] for optimal placement of DG on IEEE-69 bus radial system to minimize the total real power loss and to improve the voltage profile. Acharya et al. proposed loss sensitivity factor method [24] for minimizing the total power losses in primary distribution systems. An artificial bee colony (ABC) [25] algorithm to determine the optimal DG size and location in order to minimize the total power loss was proposed by Abu-Mouti et al. [25]. Sookananta et al. proposed ant colony optimization (ACO) [26] to find the optimal size and location of DG placed in the radial distribution network. An optimal DG allocation based ACO algorithm to find the reliability index of the radial distribution system was proposed by Wang et al. [27]. Arun et al. introduced a modified fuzzy based reconfiguration algorithm [28] to solve multi-objective OPF problem of radial distribution system. The proposed method was implemented of 69-bus test system to enhance voltage stability, improve the voltage profile and minimize losses of the distribution network. A market simulation-based method was presented in [29] to study the impacts of distributed generations on transmission expansion planning. Hengsritawat et al. presented a probabilistic approach [30] to design an optimal size of photovoltaic distributed generator (PV-DG) in a distribution system. The objective of proposed technique was to minimize average system active power losses, while considering power quality constraints. The proposed technique was tested on an actual 51 bus medium voltage distribution system in Thailand. Bhattacharya et al. proposed simulated annealing (SA) [31] to solve capacitor placement problem and they applied a fuzzy based technique to identify the best location of the capacitors in the radial distribution network. Kumar et al. proposed loss sensitivity factor simulated annealing (LSFSA) method [32] for optimal placement and sizing of DG in a large scale distribution system to minimize network power losses and to improve voltage stability. The proposed method was tested on 33-bus, 69-bus and 118-bus system and the results were compared with the results of GA, PSO and GA/PSO. A Multi-objective optimal DG placement based hybrid modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) to minimize total energy losses, energy cost and emissions was proposed by Mojarrad et al. [33]. Mohammadi et al. proposed GA-based Tabu Search method (GATS) [34] to solve optimal allocation problem of restructured distribution system. Niknam et al. in their recent endeavour presented multi-objective teaching–learning-based optimization (MTLBO) algorithm [35] to find the optimal location of automatic voltage regulators (AVRs) in distribution systems. A mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) for optimally allocating different types of renewable DG units in the distribution system so as to minimize annual energy loss was proposed in [36]. Kayal et al. proposed multi-objective PSO (MOPSO) [37] based wind turbine generation unit (WTGU) and photovoltaic (PV) array placement approach for power loss reduction and voltage stability improvement of radial distribution system. The above method was tested on 12-bus, 15-bus, and 33-bus and 69-bus radial distribution systems. Luis et al. [38] used a multi period AC optimal power flow (OPF) to determine the optimal accommodation of renewable DG (RDG) in a way that minimizes the system energy losses. Tan et al. developed a heuristic technique based methodology [39] to identify the optimal placement of RDG for a given system that can provide economic, environmental and technical advantages. Rotaru et al. presented clustering based approach [40] to obtain the optimal size of DG sources in electrical distribution systems. A power loss minimization based approach have discussed by authors in [41] for optimal sitting and sizing of DG.From the literature survey, it may be found that most of these population-based optimization techniques have successfully used to determine the size, placement, and loss minimization problem of DG in the radial distribution line. However, many of them suffer from local optimality and require large computational time for simulation. These motivate the present authors to introduce new, simple, efficient and fast population-based optimization technique to solve optimal DG placement problem of the radial distribution system.Recently a new optimization technique, known as krill herd algorithm (KHA) has been developed by Gandomi and Alavi in [42]. It is based on the concept of herding behaviour of krill individuals. In KHA, the time-dependent positions of krill individuals are modified by three basic phenomena namely (i) movement lead by other individual, (ii) foraging motion and (iii) random diffusion. The main advantage of KHA is fixed parameters are required for the working of the algorithm and it is capable of finding a global or near-global optimum solution in addition to have a very short simulation time, in the range of a few seconds. However, other artificial intelligence techniques such as the GA, TS, simulated annealing (SA), PSO require longer simulation times, in the range of several minutes. Moreover, for in a large scale real system having various nonlinearities, these algorithms need large number of iterations to obtain the global optimal solution. In KHA, the krill individual frequently changes the position towards the best fitness. Here, the objective function of the krill movement is determined by the minimum distance of each krill from food and from the highest density of herd. In this study, KHA is proposed to determine optimal size and location of multiple DG to minimize real power loss of 33-bus, 69-bus and 118-bus radial distribution networks. To show the effectiveness and superiority, the performance of the proposed technique is compared with other popular optimization techniques.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, problem formulation with constraints of optimal DG allocation problem is discussed. The proposed KHA method is briefly described in Section 3. The algorithm steps of KHA applied to optimal DG placement problem of radial distribution system are explained in Section 4. Simulation results and the comparative study are reported in Section 5. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6.The main objective of placement of DG in radial distribution system is to minimize network power losses while satisfying certain operating constraints. The objective function for the minimization of power loss may be described as:(1)OF=Minimize(PLOSS)where PLoss is the real power loss of the distribution network and is given by [24]:(2)PLOSS=∑m=1nb∑n=1nbrm,nUmUncos∂m−∂nPmPn+QmQn+rm,nUmUnsin∂m−∂nQmPn−PmQnwhere Pm, Qmare the net active and reactive power, respectively, at the mth bus; Pn, Qnare the net active and reactive power respectively, at the nth bus; rm,nis the resistance of the distribution line connected between the mth and the nth bus; Um, Unare the bus voltages at the mth and the nth bus, respectively; nbis the number of buses in the distribution network; ∂m, ∂nare the phase angle of voltage at the mth and the nth bus, respectively.With the increased loading and exploitation of the existing power structure, the probability of occurrence of voltage collapse are significantly greater than before and the identification of the nodes which prone to the voltage fluctuations have attracted more attention for the distribution systems. For operating a power system in a safe and secure manner, all insecure operating states must be identified well in advance to facilitate corrective measures to overcome the threat of possible voltage collapse. Therefore, voltage stability index should be within a specific limit to operate the distribution network in safe and secure manner. Voltage stability index of radial distribution system is given by [43]:(3)VSIm=|Un|4−4[Pmrm,n+Qmxm,n]|Un|2−4[Pmxm,n−Qmrm,n]2m=2,3,4,…,nbwhere VSImis the voltage stability index of the mth bus; xm,nis the reactance of the distribution line connected between the mth and the nth bus; rm,nis the resistance of the distribution line connected between the mth and the nth bus;Moreover, in the simulation study of this article, minimization of the energy loss is selected as the objective function for the placement of renewable energy generator (REG) based DG units. Reducing the energy loss of the radial distribution system is an important aspect for implementing REGs. The minimization of total energy losses of distribution system over a year is formulated as follows:(4)MinimizeELoss=Minimize365∑t=124PLoss(t)×Δtwhere ELoss is the energy loss over a year; PLoss(t) is the active power loss at the tth time interval; Δt is the time duration in each step.The above objective functions are subjected to following constraints:•Power balance constraint(5)Pm+jQm=UmIm*where Imis the current at the mth node.Voltage limitThe voltage constraint can be taken into account by specifying upper and lower limits of voltage variation at the nodes of the distribution system. This constraint can be expressed as(6)Ummin<Um<UmmaxwhereUmminandUmmaxare the lower and upper limit of bus voltage, respectively.Thermal limit(7)Im,n≤Im,nmaxwhereIm,nmaxis the maximum loading of the distribution line connected between the mth and the nth bus; Im,nis the current flowing through the branch connected between the mth and the nth branch.Real power limit(8)Pm,minDG≤PmDG≤Pm,maxDGwherePm,minDG,Pm,maxDGare the lower and upper limits, respectively, of active power of the mth DG.Reactive power limit(9)Qm,minDG≤QmDG≤Qm,maxDGwhereQm,minDG,Qm,maxDGare the minimum and maximum allowable reactive power, respectively, of the mth DG.The Krill herd algorithm (KHA) is a new efficient biologically-inspired population-based algorithm developed by Gandomi et al. [42]. The algorithm is based on the herding behaviour of krill individuals. Each krill moves through a multi-dimensional search space to look for a potential solution by moving towards the highest density of food. The distance of the highest density of food from the krill swarm is analogous to fitness value. Krill individuals move around in the multidimensional space and each krill adjusts its position based on three main processes namely movement induced by the presence of other individuals, foraging activity and random diffusion. The concept and mathematical formulation of these operators are briefly described below.In this process, each krill moves in the multi-dimensional problem space with a velocity, which is influenced by other krill individuals. The velocity of each krill is dynamically adjusted by the local, target and repulsive vector. The modified velocity of the ith krill is given by [42]:(10)Vinew=aiVimax+ωnVioldwhere(11)ai=ainew+aitarget(12)ainew=∑j=1NSfi−fjfw−fb×xi−xj|xi−xj|+rand(0,1)(13)aitarget=2rand(0,1)+iimaxfibestxibestwhereVimaxis the maximum induced velocity;Violdis the last induced velocity; ωnis the inertia weight of the motion induced;ainew,aitargetare the local and the target effect, respectively;fwand fbare the worst and the best position, respectively, of the population; fi, fjare the objective values of ith and jth individual, respectively and Nsis the neighbour surrounding the particular individual which is identified by sensing distance parameter (Sdi); To identify the neighbouring members of each krill individual, a sensing distance parameter (Sdi) is used. If the distance between the two individual krill is less than the sensing distance then that particular krill is considered as neighbour of the other krill. The sensing distance may be given by [42]:(14)sdi=15NP∑j=1NP|fi−fj|where NPis the population size; fiand fjare the position of the ith and jth member, respectively.Each individual krill adjusts its foraging velocity based on both of its own current food location and that of its previous experience about the food location which is mathematically expressed as follows [42](15)vfi=0.02∂i+ωxvfiold(16)∂i=21−iimaxfi∑j=1NSxjfj∑j=1NS1fj+fibestxibestwhere ∂iis the food attraction for the ith krill individual; ωxis the inertia weight of the foraging motion;vfioldis the previous foraging velocity of the ith krill.The diffusion process of the krill individuals is considered as a random phenomenon. It may be expressed in terms of a maximum diffusion speed and a random directional factor. It may be formulated as follows:(17)vdi=λvdmaxwherevdmaxis the maximum diffusion speed; λ is the random directional vector uniformly distributed between (−1,1).The position of the ith krill during the interval t to Δt may be given by [42]:(18)xi(t+Δt)=xi(t)+ct∑i=1N(Ui−Li)(Vi+vfi+vdi)where N is the total number of control variables; Ui, Liare the upper and lower limits of the ith control variable.Moreover, to improve the behaviour of the individual Krill, two adaptive genetic operators of DE are added to the proposed algorithm. These two operators are briefly described below:To improve the performance and convergence speed, the crossover and mutation operation of DE are integrated with krill herd. These two operations are expressed as follow:In this operation, based on crossover probability, each krill individual interacts with other krills to update its position. The jth components of the ith krill may be updated by(19)xi,j=xr,jifrand<crxi,jelsewherer=1,2,…,i−1,i+1,…,NSwhereCr=0.2fibestThe mutation operation creates mutant vectorsxi,jmby perturbing the vector xbest,jwith the difference of two other randomly selected vectors xo,jand xp,jas per following equation.(20)xi,jm=xbest,j+μ(xo,j−xp,j)The updated position ofxi,jmodis selected fromxi,jmand xi,jusing mutation probability μpas follows:(21)xi,jmod=xi,jmifrand≤μpxi,jifrand>μpwhereμp=0.05fibestThe procedure for implementing the KHA algorithm in solving optimal DG placement problem can be summarized by the following steps:Step 1: Read the system data, constraints, the population size (NP), the maximum number of iterations, the number of DGs to be installed in the distribution network and the KHA parameters namely foraging speed, maximum diffusion speed and the maximum induced speed.Step 2: The size of the DGs are randomly generated and normalized between the maximum and the minimum operating limits. The rating of ith DG is normalized to Pjas given below to satisfy the capacity constraint:(22)Pj=Pminj+r*(Pmaxj−Pminj)A requisite number of buses are selected randomly from all the buses and the DGs are installed in these selected buses. The positions of DGs are randomly generated as follows:where nb is the number of buses in the network.The location and rating of all the installed DGs comprise a vector which represents the initial position of each krill of the population set and it also represents a candidate solution for the optimal DG allocation problem. Each set of the feasible solution of matrix Mirepresents a potential solution which is given by:(23)Mi=[loci,1,loci,2,…,loci,j,…,loci,ND,Pi,1,Pi,2,…,Pi,j,…,Pi,ND]Depending upon the population size, initial solution M is created which is given by:(24)M=[M1,M2,…,Mi,…,MNP]Step 3: Run the load flow to find the power losses/energy losses (objective function) of the distribution network. In this article, a direct load flow algorithm based on the bus-injection to branch-current (BIBC) matrix and the branch-current to bus-voltage (BCBV) matrix [44] are used.Step 4: Update the motion of each krill individuals by adding the three motion index namely motion induced by other individual; foraging motion and random diffusion using (10), (15) and (17).Step 5: Modify the position of each krill individual using (20).Step 6: Applying crossover and mutation to update the position of each individual krill using (19) and (21). The position of each krill individual represents a potential solution as defined by (23) of optimal DG allocation problem.Step 7: Check whether the control variables violate the operating limits or not. If any independent variable is less than the minimum level it is made equal to minimum value and if it is greater than the maximum level it is made equal to the maximum level.Step 8: Go to Step 3 until the current iteration number reaches the pre-specified maximum iteration number.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
