@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Researching the development of Atanassov intuitionistic fuzzy set: Using a citation network analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identified the development trail of IFS discipline based on the historical graph.Citation analysis using basic statistics is provided.Discovered and solved the citation missing problem.Determined the position of crucial literatures via analyzing the citation network.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Citation network,Intuitionistic fuzzy set,HistCite,UCINET,SNA,Statistics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since Atanassov presented the intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS) in 1983, a great amount of extended content has been made by experts in IFS field and then the citations of a more formal paper, which developed from the first proposal and was presented in 1986, have been cited over 4000 times in Google Scholar ending November 6, 2014. However, the research on the development track of this discipline has not caused extensive attention among scholars in this discipline. Therefore, in this paper, we plan to determine the development track of this discipline based on some statistics and network analysis methodologies, as a new attempt. Note that we only take the citation information on IFSs ending November 6, 2014 into account. Therefore all of the data in this paper have time restriction. We derive a historical graph about the development course of IFS and use some basic statistics to identify some influential journals, authors, etc. Then we analyze a small range of influential literatures based on the SNA (social network analysis) theory to figure out the position of several cardinal IFS literatures. As result suggests, Atanassov [1] is the most influential paper in IFS field. Most literatures referring to IFS cited this paper and on the basis of it, increasingly scholars combine other subjects with IFS subject.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
IFS is formed from membership and non-membership degrees which present the extent of an element belong to certain attribute and the extent of an element not belong to certain attribute, respectively. What is more, the values of the membership degree and the non-membership degree are between 0 and 1. The bigger the value is the higher the degree presents. This representation method is good at solving a problem that people are not able to definite or evaluate an element with a crisp number. Using intuitionistic fuzzy information, we can indicate each element not so absolutely and we are given a certain degree of hesitation. As an important branch of fuzzy set proposed by Zadeh [2], IFS was paid a lot of attention by the experts in this field since it was presented by the Atanassov [3]. And Atanassov presented the concept of interval valued intuitionistic fuzzy set (IV-IFS) [4] to supply the vacancy of the concept of IFS and proposed more definitions and new operations [5,6] for IFS. Besides, some other new operations [7–11] extended from the Atanassov's research results increased in the next few years and these papers constructed the fundamental framework of the operations for IFS. What is more, increasingly concepts are linked with IFS such as entropy, similarity and distance [12–16]. These concepts enrich the function of IFS so intuitionistic fuzzy information can be compared and evaluated by more measures. In addition, with the rapid development of the society and economy, the environment of decision making becomes increasingly complex and there are more factors interfering decision makers’ judgments. This makes it increasingly difficult for decision makers using their knowledge structures to support their decision-makings. However, due to IFS's characteristics, it is used increasing frequently in the field of decision making. Szmidt and Kacprzyk [17] leaded IFS into group decision making (GDM) and the similar work was made by Wei [11] applied geometric aggregation operators into intuitionistic fuzzy environment. Further, IFS is also integrated into solutions to the multi-criterion decision making (MCDM) problem [9,18,19]. Moreover, IFS is also verified to be applied into medical diagnosis and pattern recognition [20,21] successfully. As we can see, this discipline has already grown from the fundamental definitions and operations to the more advanced case study which involving the real world information analysis. So we consider that we need to research on this discipline to determine the direction of the knowledge extension of this discipline, rationalize the association of a certain number of cardinal literatures and find some most influential literatures.As a pioneer, the paper written by Nikolova et al. [22] provided the development trail about IFSs in 2002. It is a comprehensive conclusion on IFSs, howbeit, with the rapid growth of researches on IFSs, a great deal of new development achievements have emerged during the twelve years. Therefore it is necessary to research the whole discipline again to supply the vacancy about the recent research results.We plan to identify the development trail of the IFS discipline from various angles such as journal, writer publication year, etc. and figure out the position of some influential IFS literatures. First we plan to draw a development vein of the history of a certain discipline's citations in order to show the relationship between different literatures in a certain field by the way of diagrammatic presentation. And through analyzing the relationship, we can roughly reconstruct the IFS development trail. Note that this software only analyzes the information from ISI web of science. After we derive the information about a great amount of literatures from ISI web of science, we can analyze the information based on HistCite [23]’s powerful computational and statistical capacity. We can obtain any of a literature's global citation score, local citation score, cited reference, local citation score exclusive of self-citation, etc. In addition, there are classifications according to yearly output, document type, institution, country and language. Further, we are able to obtain frequently-used words and the cited reference information referring to the citation we import into the software, which can avoid missing the important literatures in the process of getting literature records from ISI web of science.Second we construct a citation network including several literatures derived from HistCite using an informative visualization tool called UCINET, which is propitious to identify the position of some influential literatures. Our goal is to determine a most influential IFS paper and dig up some papers that play the role of middleman. Therefore we construct a citation network, where IFS literatures are points and the connections between IFS literatures are links. Thus we can analyze this network based on some SNA methods. First of all we give a brief introduction about SNA [24,25]. SNA aims at analyzing the association between social actors in the social network. Note that every social actor is related with links which are called social actors’ connection. In our paper, social actors and links refers to IFS literatures and their interconnection. In traditional, social researches are based on the sample survey. This method detaches every individual (social actor) from its social context, which omits researches on individual's connection. However, the complex social relation is not able to be analyzed only by the social actors’ information and sometimes this is incapable of revealing the nature of some social phenomena. But SNA is not like the sample survey and takes not only the social actors but also the connection between social actors into consideration. Hence the proposal of SNA supplies the black of the research on the connection between the social actors. What is more, there are a great number of statistics analysis measures in order to strengthen the power for supporting the network analysis.We return to the SNA methods. One of our goals is to identify the position of several influential literatures. In this paper, we use two concepts that frequently-used in SNA to achieve this goal. Through the network graph, we can see the interconnection between any one of the literature and the others. Also we can use two SNA methods, closeness and between-ness, to identify whether a point is a network's global centre point and to derive the extent of every point's effect as a middleman, respectively. By means of the computing the closeness, we can determine the network's global centrality. A literature's closeness is calculated according to its geodesic distances with the other literatures in this network. If a literature's geodesic distances are all shorter than the great majority of the literatures in the citation network, we call the literature is the global centre point of this network. The concept of between-ness is a little more complex than the first two, which presents the extent of a point in the middle of the other points in the network. In other words, if point A and point B are connected in the several geodesic paths and point C is on every geodesic path, point C increases the power of between-ness. Conversely, point C loses the power.Citation survey based on network analysis has been applied in many fields and we concisely state several successful cases in the following context. Emrouznejad and Marra [26] described the order weighted averaging (OWA) development trail. They derived the 30 most cited papers, 20 most cited authors and 20 most cited active journals in OWA field. Further, they relied on critical path method which is used for identifying the knowledge flow path in OWA field with the most influential literatures’ information they derived in HistCite. Besides, similar work has been done by Liu et al. [27] in the data envelopment analysis (DEA) field. Liu et al. applied search path count (SPC) into computing the number of a citation's links that constitute the citation's path. Using SPC, one of the main path analyze methods, they derived a more comprehensive list of the participants in DEA field. Another successful case about network analysis is the paper written by Kejžar et al. [28] which researching on clustering and classification. They constructed a collaboration network and utilized the main path, CPM path and line islands to analyze it. In addition, citation network analysis is also applied in the DNA theory, absorptive capacity field and surgical prosthesis [29–31].As you can see, the statistics analysis power of the citation network analysis based on various integrated network software has been shown in many applications. In this paper, we plan to research on IFS field using HistCite and UCINET from several angles differ from those mentioned above. And in Section 2, we use HistCite to derive IFS's development trail via a historical graph and state some statistics analysis referring to IFS papers briefly. In Section 3, a citation network including 30 influential IFS papers would be presented in order to determine citation association between 30 influential IFS papers and the position of several special papers. Further, some conclusion would be stated in Section 4.We searched all of the literatures in the ISI Web of Science according to the keywords, intuitionistic fuzzy sets and we got 1625 literatures about IFS. Due to the format problem, we missed information about 3 literatures in the process of importing the data to the software. But this subtle problem could be omitted in a vast data range.First we imported the information into the software and obtained the following historical graph (Fig. 1). Note that we analyzed the data according the local citation score (LCS) rather than global citation score (GCS). LCS indicates the number of a literature is cited in the current data set while GCS means the number of a literature is cited in the whole database. Therefore, if a literature's LCS is high, it is certainly important in the field you survey due to its high frequency of being cited by the literatures you import into the software. And if a literature's GCS is high, it means this literature is by scientist worldwide attention. It is possible that scholars in the fields that totally are not related to your research discipline would cite this literature. Hence LCS has higher reference value than GCS and the literature with highest LCS is likely to be the first paper in this field. So we use LCS to do the statistics research for the current data.Through Fig. 1, we can obtain 30 most cited papers in the IFS field and their interconnection of citation. As the graph shows that intuitionistic fuzzy set[1] is the most influential paper that was cited by the majority of the 30 papers. So this paper could be named the first paper in the IFS field according to Fig. 1. What is more, we state these 30 papers in details in Table 1.In Table 1, we can find that intuitionistic fuzzy set[1] is the most cited paper in IFS field because it has the highest LCS and GCS. These two scores indicate that this paper not only has great influence in IFS field but also is highly recognized by scholars in other related fields. Therefore we call Atanassov the founder of the IFS discipline. After proposing the concept of IFS, Atanassov presented IV-IFS [4] as an extended concept and this paper ranks second in Table 1. The rest of the 5 most cited papers are vague sets are intuitionistic fuzzy sets[35], distances between intuitionistic fuzzy sets[16] and some geometric aggregation operators based on intuitionistic fuzzy sets[9].However there is an issue of information missing about the citation information collection. If we search the key words, intuitionistic fuzzy set, in the Google Scholar, we would obtain 4765 results, which is much over the range of the literature information obtained from ISI Web of Science. So it illustrates that we missed a lot of literature which are possibly related to IFS. We need to expand the search range to ensure the integrality and the comprehensiveness of the IFS literature information. When we made statistics about the current literature information according to cited references, we found that we still had a certain number of IFS literatures that were not imported into HistCite. Note that cited reference means the number of the citations the authors cited and the authors refer to the authors who write the current literatures you selected in the ISI Web of Science. To fix this, we use a build-in function in HistCite. As mentioned above, the software provides the citations we did not consider. And we can make records by ourselves according to the citation information the software provides. In this paper, we only supply the citations in the range of the top 30 most cited papers. After we finished the record-making, we derived a new list of 30 most cited IFS papers. Similarly, we give the historical graph (Fig. 2) about the 30 new most cited IFS papers and their specific information in Table 2.From Fig. 2, we found that the paper written by Zadeh [2], the paper written by Goguen [32] and the paper written by Zadeh [33] are early than the paper belonging to Atanassov [1]. What is more, these papers’ LCSs are all relatively high in the current data. Especially the paper written by Zadeh [2], its LCS is only lower than that of the paper belong to Atanassov [1]. As mentioned above, the value of LCS indicates the extent of a literature's importance so these three papers have a relative large impact in the IFS field. Through the analysis, it is obvious that we missed several important IFS papers in the retrieval process. And this omission may be caused by inaccurate and incomprehensive keywords. Therefore the following measure is propitious to analyzing the discipline more comprehensively.Then we introduce the three papers concisely. No. 1 is fuzzy sets written by Zadeh [2] and strictly speaking, the concept of intuitionistic fuzzy set was proposed on the basis of fuzzy set. Intuitionistic fuzzy set is a branch of fuzzy set. No. 2 is L-fuzzy sets[32] and No. 3 is the concept of a linguistic variable and its application to approximate reasoning-I[33], which are all the extension of the fuzzy set and provide reference for the following researches in IFS field. Besides Wang and He [34] had proved that intuitionistic fuzzy set is equivalent to L-fuzzy set, which means the two papers are related to IFS once again. However these three papers were proposed far away from the year of the proposal of the IFS. Hence when we searched literatures in the ISI Web of Science using the keywords, intuitionistic fuzzy sets, we did not obtain the three papers’ records. We can clearly find this point via another historical graph (Fig. 3) displayed by gap years. So if you focus on a whole field including the previous academic knowledge accumulation, it is necessary to consider making records by dint of the citation information in cited references. And if you aim at studying a discipline development trail without considering its basic subject, it is more suitable for you to use the citation information obtained from ISI Web of Science. But generally speaking, the former can make sure the integrality and the comprehensiveness of the citation analysis.In addition, we obtained the sequences of journals, authors and yearly output, respectively, with respect to the current citation information. Through analyzing these data, we can determine the most active journal and author, also we can find the year with the largest number of published literature. Note that the current citation information is the information in Fig. 3. We arrange the journals, the authors and the yearly output according to the total local citation score (TLCS), the total local citation score excluding self-citations (TLCSx) and the records, respectively.We present the 10 journals with relatively high TLCS in Table 3. From Table 3, we find that fuzzy sets and system is the most influential journal and the journal Information science with the most records came in second. What is more, the journal in third place only has one paper fuzzy sets, which proves the importance of this paper again.In Table 4, we use TLCSx to arrange the authors because some authors may cite their own papers that were already accepted in ISI Web of Science. When we make the statistics of the citations, we should eliminate these papers that cite their own papers. According to this criterion, we analyze the information and derive some conclusion. The number of Atanassov's papers cited by other scholars is the largest, which proves Atanassov has the greatest influence in IFS field. But Atanassov's papers’ TLCS/t is much lower than Xu's in the case of their papers’ TLCSs are almost the same. One reason is that Xu's papers are more than Atanassov's. However, the primary reason is that Xu's papers are more active than Atanassov's. Atanassov has 43 papers and the 26 papers were published from 1986 to 2006, while Xu's papers were all published after the year of 2006 and Xu had 10 papers published at least between 2010 and 2014. Hence we can say that Xu is the most prolific scholar and is considerable active between 2010 and 2014 in the IFS field. In addition, though Zadeh only has 2 papers referring to IFS, he came to third. The two papers are fuzzy sets[2] and the concept of a linguistic variable and its application to approximate reasoning-I[33] mentioned above, which proves their influence again. Meanwhile the two papers were all published earlier than intuitionistic fuzzy set[1], which demonstrates that Zadeh is the founder of this whole discipline.In Table 5, it is obvious that IFS has been paid increasingly attention since the year of 2008 and the publications per year are no less than 130 since 2008. Besides the year with the largest number of published literature is 2013. And we can find that the total local citation score in the 2007, 2010 and 2011 is over 1000, which indicates the literatures published in these years are highly cited by the scholars in IFS field and there is a strong possibility that these literatures are very high quality literatures.In this section, we plan to further analyze the 30 most cited papers presented in Table 2. In order to do this, we construct a citation network containing these 30 papers and use two SNA methods to analyze the network. We present the network about the 30 most cited papers in Fig. 4via UCINET and analyze it in the following context.In Fig. 4, every paper is represented by a box and every box is linked by several lines, where each line has an arrow. If paper A cites paper B, there is a line between paper A and paper B and this line's arrow points to paper B. Therefore the more arrows a box owes the more times it is cited by the 30 papers. Easily find that the papers written by Zadeh [2], Goguen [32], Atanassov [1], Atanassov and Gargov [4], Gau and Buehrer [36], Chen and Tan (1994) [37], Bustince and Burillo [35], Szmidt and Kacprzyk [16], Hong and Choi [38] are most frequently cited by these 30 papers. The 8 papers mentioned above were all published before 2000 and made an important contribution for promoting the development of the IFS discipline, which are the reasons of being cited frequently.Next we plan to deal with the citation network using some SNA analysis methods including closeness and between-ness. Note that our network is a directed graph so we should consider the directions that each element points to. We have introduced the concepts of closeness and between-ness in Section 1.2. However dealing with a directed graph, we need to add some extra illustrations. Closeness is calculated by the sum of distances that a point possesses, where the distance refers to the geodesic between the point and another. If point A owning a small sum of distances is close to the great majority of the points in the network, it is likely to have the highest global centrality. Besides a directed graph has in-closeness and out-closeness, which represent the extent of the closeness that other points direct to the target point and the extent of the closeness that the target point directs to other points, respectively.We present the 30 papers’ in-closeness and out-closeness derived from UCINET in Table 6. From Table 6, we can see the in-closeness score of the paper written by Atanassov [1] is much higher than the rest of the 30 papers, which indicates it is cited most frequently by others. On the other hand, its out-closeness score is the lowest, which also makes sense because it is the foundation paper in IFS field. Similarly available, the paper written by Wei [11] has the lowest in-closeness score and the highest out-closeness score. This means Wei [11] cited more frequently than any of a paper in the network and due to the latest year of publication, the paper is not able to be cited by others in the network.As for the computation of between-ness, we do not consider the network is directed or un-directed because between-ness presents the extent of a point in the middle of the other points in the network. A point's between can be calculated as long as the point has lines in the network. And a point with less lines is possibly in the middle of the network. The higher the between-ness a point has the more power of controlling other points the point owns.We use UCINET to compute between-ness of our network and present the data in Table 7. From Table 7, we can derive that the papers written by Bustince and Burillo [35], Szmidt and Kacprzyk [16] rank first and second, respectively. The two papers have much higher between-ness scores than the others in the network, which indicates many papers in the network are on the two papers’ geodesics. If the two papers were not in the network, a certain number of papers would have no indirect association between each other.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
