@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective genetic optimization for fast, fuzzy rule-based credit classification with balanced accuracy and interpretability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel fuzzy rule-based classifiers (FRBCs) for financial data classification tasks are proposed.FRBCs are designed using multi-objective evolutionary optimization algorithms.Collection of FRBCs with various levels of accuracy-interpretability trade-off is generated.Benchmark financial data sets are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed system.Highly accurate, interpretable and fast financial decision support is provided by our approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Accuracy and interpretability of credit classification systems,Financial decision support,Multi-objective evolutionary optimization,Fuzzy rule-based systems,Genetic computations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Credit classification is an important component of critical financial decision making tasks such as credit scoring and bankruptcy prediction. Credit classification methods are usually evaluated in terms of their accuracy, interpretability, and computational efficiency. In this paper, we propose an approach for automatic designing of fuzzy rule-based classifiers (FRBCs) from financial data using multi-objective evolutionary optimization algorithms (MOEOAs). Our method generates, in a single experiment, an optimized collection of solutions (financial FRBCs) characterized by various levels of accuracy-interpretability trade-off. In our approach we address the complexity- and semantics-related interpretability issues, we introduce original genetic operators for the classifier's rule base processing, and we implement our ideas in the context of Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II), i.e., one of the presently most advanced MOEOAs. A significant part of the paper is devoted to an extensive comparative analysis of our approach and 24 alternative methods applied to three standard financial benchmark data sets, i.e., Statlog (Australian Credit Approval), Statlog (German Credit Approval), and Credit Approval (also referred to as Japanese Credit) sets available from the UCI repository of machine learning databases (http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml). Several performance measures including accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and some number of interpretability measures are employed in order to evaluate the obtained systems. Our approach significantly outperforms the alternative methods in terms of the interpretability of the obtained financial data classifiers while remaining either competitive or superior in terms of their accuracy and the speed of decision making.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Among the important issues in credit research area, credit classification that supports credit decision making plays a fundamental role [82]. In general, credit classification consists in categorizing credit applicants as either good (with credit accept decisions) or bad (with credit reject decisions). The classification is performed on the basis of credit applicant's characteristics such as annual income, type of bank account and bank balance, type of occupation, marital status, age and education. Naturally the required applicant's information may vary depending on, e.g., the amount of credit, its purpose, the legislation in a given country, etc. Credit classification is directly related to two critical financial decision making problems such as credit scoring (or rating) and bankruptcy prediction. Credit scoring modelling is focused on determining whether credit customers belong to either good or bad customer group. Sometimes, more specifically, the term ‘application scoring’ is used for predicting the repayment behavior of a credit applicant whereas the term ‘performance scoring’ is used for monitoring and predicting such a behavior of a customer with already granted credit [36]. Similarly, the objective of bankruptcy prediction modelling is to predict if a new customer (both individuals and companies can be considered) will go bankrupt or not. Hence, credit scoring and bankruptcy prediction can be regarded as corresponding to each other binary classification problems, i.e., the classification of a given applicant by a credit scoring model to, say, bad customer group corresponds, in a way, to forecasting by a bankruptcy prediction model that the applicant will go bankrupt [83].Credit classification techniques are usually evaluated in terms of three aspects [36,99]: their accuracy, their transparency and interpretability, and their computational efficiency (the speed of classification). The accuracy (i.e., the ability to adequately represent the modelled decision making process and to generate the highest possible number of correct decisions) for obvious reasons is the fundamental requirement; even a small increase in the number of correct decisions may result in significant savings [87]. The transparency and interpretability (i.e., the ability to generate a compact and understandable explanation and justification of the proposed decisions including the selection of the most essential input attributes) is important for both a decision maker and applicant. The decision maker can verify and possibly improve his or her knowledge and expertise in a given decision making domain, whereas the applicant obtains clear and understandable explanation of the decision made. It is particularly important when credit has been denied to the applicant since, according to the legislature in some countries, vague and indefinite reasons of credit denial are illegal [63]. As far as the speed of classification is concerned, according to [36], “an instant decision is much more appealing to a potential borrower than is having to wait for several days”. Obviously, if the credit decisions are made within fractions of seconds or seconds by various computerized systems, the differences between them in the classification speed are meaningless from the practical point of view.Huge credit scoring databases are available, e.g., according to [36], databases with well over 100,000 applicants characterized by more than 100 attributes are quite common, whereas performance scoring databases that contain information about past repayment behavior can even be much larger. It is obvious, that a great amount of knowledge on various aspects of financial decision making is buried within such data sets. Therefore, the development of effective financial knowledge discovery tools in such data or financial data mining methods has a strong rationale. The knowledge discovery tools are able to automatically reveal valid and understandable patterns, trends and decision making mechanisms hidden in financial data. As fas as the representation of such a knowledge is concerned, the most useful structures are conditional rules and particularly linguistic fuzzy conditional rules [17]. Their essential advantages are high modularity and readability as well as easy-to-grasp comprehension and interpretation by humans. However, the transparency and interpretability of rule-based systems become limited when excessive numbers of complex rules (with many antecedents) are generated. Therefore, both the accuracy as well as the transparency and interpretability (as discussed earlier in this section) are the main objectives in designing rule-based systems (in particular, fuzzy rule-based classifiers (FRBCs)) from financial data sets. Taking that into account, in this paper we present an original approach to designing FRBCs that is equipped with an effective mechanism of their accuracy-interpretability trade-off optimization. It means that FRBCs characterized by various optimized levels of such a trade-off can be obtained – including highly accurate systems of better interpretability (in regard to the existing approaches) – for financial decision support. It is worth emphasizing that such aspects have not yet been addressed in the literature on financial decision making. In order to achieve the assumed goals: (a) an automatic designing of FRBCs from financial data will be considered as a structure and parameter optimization task or search problem in a large search space and (b) a multi-objective evolutionary optimization algorithm (MOEOA) will be employed to solve that task. Evolutionary methods including genetic algorithms have been successfully applied for solving various complex-space-search and optimization problems, e.g. [14,28–31,40,73]. As far as the FRBCs’ accuracy-interpretability trade-off is concerned, both objectives are to some extent complementary/contradictory ones. Hence, it is possible to formulate a single-objective evolutionary optimization task using a fitness function defined as a combination of both objectives. As shown in [30] such a solution gives very good FRBCs’ accuracy-interpretability trade-offs in many areas of applications. Nevertheless, for obvious reasons, it explores only a limited part of the whole search space and thus some valuable solutions may never be discovered. MOEOAs that generate in a single run of the algorithm a set of solutions (approximating Pareto-optimal solutions) characterized by various levels of accuracy-interpretability trade-off are much better suited for the considered task.The proposed hybrid and synergistic combination of FRBCs and MOEOAs that maximizes their advantages while minimizing their limitations belongs to the computational intelligence (CI) [25,49] area that is a modern extension and generalization of the conventional artificial intelligence (AI) field. According to the authors of [12] (having extensive 14-years experience in the financial industry) “…AI techniques have rarely been used in credit rating research to generate comprehensive decision rules, particularly when compared with statistical methods…”. Therefore, our approach contributes to filling the knowledge gap related to effective modelling (with optimally balanced accuracy and interpretability) of financial decision making problems by means of modern hybrid computational-intelligence techniques.In MOEOA-based automatic designing of FRBCs from data still several open problems exist [19]. First, some measures of FRBCs’ interpretability must be defined (there are already well-defined and generally accepted measures of FRBCs’ accuracy). In the case of system's interpretability, which is much more subjective property than its accuracy, usually two aspects are considered [21]: the complexity of FRBCs’ rule bases and the semantics associated with membership functions of fuzzy sets representing linguistic terms that describe particular systems’ attributes. We propose an original measure of complexity-dependent interpretability including the average length of rules, the overall number of attributes, and the overall number of fuzzy sets (linguistic terms) in the system. We also present a computationally efficient implementation of the so-called strong fuzzy partition (SFP) condition [74] that perfectly meets the semantics-dependent interpretability constraints [21]. Second, we propose an original, special-coding-free, direct representation of the classifier's fuzzy rule base structure and original crossover and mutation genetic operators for its processing by the MOEOA used. Third, we present an implementation of our ideas in the framework of the well-known and presently one of the most advanced MOEOAs, i.e., Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) [15].A broad comparative analysis of our method and as many as 24 alternative approaches applied to three well-known benchmark financial data sets (Statlog (Australian Credit Approval), Statlog (German Credit Approval), and Credit Approval) is also carried out in this paper. The Credit Approval data set is sometimes referred to as Japanese Credit set (see, e.g., [83,94]); for this reason, we’ll call it Credit Approval (Japanese) data set. All data sets are available from the UCI repository of machine learning databases (http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml). The results of the aforementioned 24 alternative techniques are collected in three papers published in recent years in this journal, i.e., [83] of 2014 by C.-F. Tsai et al., [10] of 2012 by S.-Y. Chang and T.-Y. Yeh, and [69] of 2011 by Y. Peng et al. as well as in two other papers, i.e., [99] of 2013 by X. Zhu et al. and [94] of 2008 by L. Yu et al. Therefore, our paper continues and extends the up-to-date research in the important field of financial data mining and decision support.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the related works on financial data classification methods and the accuracy-interpretability trade-off issues in designing (fuzzy) rule-based systems from data. Section 3 presents our FRBC (its fuzzy knowledge base and fuzzy approximate inference engine) for financial decision making. Main components of the FRBC's genetic learning and MOEOA-based optimization procedure are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 presents the experimental results and the aforementioned broad comparative analysis. Finally, Section 6 formulates some conclusions and outlines our further research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Credit classification is an important component of critical financial decision making tasks such as credit scoring and bankruptcy prediction. The performance of various credit classification methods is usually evaluated in terms of their accuracy, interpretability, and the speed of generating decisions. The classifier's accuracy represents its ability to adequately represent the decision making process, whereas the interpretability – its ability to provide compact and understandable explanations and justifications of the proposed decision. Linguistic fuzzy classification rules – due to their easy-to-grasp interpretation by humans and high modularity – are particularly well-suited for the transparent representation of financial knowledge.In this paper, we propose an approach for designing, in an automatic way, fuzzy rule-based classifiers from financial data. In order to address the aforementioned evaluation criteria and taking into account that the classifier's accuracy and interpretability are to some extent contradictory requirements, we employ a multi-objective evolutionary optimization algorithm in the process of the classifier's construction. Within a single experiment, our approach generates a collection of non-dominated solutions that belong to the best approximation of the front of Pareto-optimal solutions of the considered decision-making problem. Our solutions (financial fuzzy rule-based classifiers) are characterized by various levels of accuracy-interpretability trade-off including classifiers of significantly superior interpretability while still remaining either competitive or also superior in terms of the accuracy in comparison with the existing classification methods. Moreover, our approach is also highly competitive in terms of the decision-making speed. After the completion of the genetic learning and the selection of a single classifier – due to computational simplicity of the fuzzy approximate inference engine – new decisions can be obtained almost instantaneously.The contribution of this paper includes the introduction of the approach that involves and optimizes both the accuracy and interpretability requirements already at the stage of designing the classifier from data. The overwhelming majority of the existing financial-data-classification methods concentrate almost exclusively on the accuracy issues. The important problem of formulating compact and understandable explanations and justifications of the proposed decisions is either not involved in the process of the classifiers’ design or it is ignored at all.Another aspect, as far as the contribution of this paper is concerned, is the introduction of several original components that are essential in designing fuzzy rule-based classifiers for various (including financial) applications by means of multi-objective evolutionary optimization. In particular, we introduce: (i) the new complexity-related interpretability measure, (ii) the efficient implementation of the conditions for the strong fuzzy partitions of the attribute domains in order to address the semantics-related interpretability, (iii) simple, special-coding-free, and thus computationally efficient representation of the classifier's rule base, (iv) original genetic operators for the processing of rule bases, and (v) the implementation of our ideas in the context of one of the presently most advanced multi-objective evolutionary optimization algorithms, i.e., the NSGA-II method.This paper also contributes to the important field of the attribute (feature) selection in decision making. Our approach is an effective tool for the attribute selection and, even more, for discovering in the domains of numerical attributes softly defined (by means of fuzzy sets) areas of attribute values that are essential in decision making process. Similarly, in the domains of selected categorical attributes (represented by sets of labels), also the essential subsets of labels are discovered.The multi-objective evolutionary optimization method is an important part of our approach. It directly affects the quality of the classifier's accuracy-interpretability balance. Therefore, our further research will concentrate on improving the optimization algorithm itself. Our generalization of the well-known Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm 2 (SPEA2) [100] proposed in [72] is the first attempt to achieve that goal. The generalization consists in exchanging the environmental selection procedure in SPEA2 by a new original algorithm which aims to determine the final non-dominated solutions with a high spread and well-balanced distribution in the objective space. Such an improvement supports our generalized multi-objective evolutionary optimization method in more effective addressing the accuracy-interpretability balance problems.