@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A directed artificial bee colony algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new method based on artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm is proposed in this study.The improvement is based on direction information produced for artificial bees.Performance of the proposed method has been examined on numeric functions.The experimental results show that proposed approach is more effective than some classical variants of ABC algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Swarm intelligence,Artificial bee colony,Direction information,Numerical optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm has been introduced for solving numerical optimization problems, inspired collective behavior of honey bee colonies. ABC algorithm has three phases named as employed bee, onlooker bee and scout bee. In the model of ABC, only one design parameter of the optimization problem is updated by the artificial bees at the ABC phases by using interaction in the bees. This updating has caused the slow convergence to global or near global optimum for the algorithm. In order to accelerate convergence of the method, using a control parameter (modification rate-MR) has been proposed for ABC but this approach is based on updating more design parameters than one. In this study, we added directional information to ABC algorithms, instead of updating more design parameters than one. The performance of proposed approach was examined on well-known nine numerical benchmark functions and obtained results are compared with basic ABC and ABCs with MR. The experimental results show that the proposed approach is very effective method for solving numeric benchmark functions and successful in terms of solution quality, robustness and convergence to global optimum.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Swarm intelligence is a subfield of artificial intelligence and the algorithms of swarm intelligence have been developed by inspiring natural behavior of real ants [1], bees, birds, fishes [2], etc. Artificial bee colony algorithm is one of the swarm intelligence algorithms and has been developed by using waggle dance and foraging behaviors of real honey bee colonies [3]. In the nature, the honey bees search and forage food sources around the hive and share position information about the food sources. The honey bees which work in the foraging labor are divided into three groups. First group is employed bees and they move to hive nectar foraged from food source and position information about the food sources. Second group consists of onlooker bees and onlookers forage food sources by considering information shared by employed bees. The last group of the bees is scout bees. 5–10% of a bee population is scout bee [3,4] and scout bees search new food source around the hive and share position information of found new food sources with the other bees. For sharing information, the bees use waggle dance in the dance area of the hive and the time and glow of the dance depend on amount and distance from hive of food source.Karaboga [3] used the aforementioned natural behaviors of the real honey bee in order to develop the artificial bee colony algorithm and solve numerical optimization problems. In the ABC algorithm, half of the population is first scout bee. For each scout bee, a new food source which is possible solution for the optimization problem is generated. After generating new food source position, all the scout bees become employed bees and all employed bees try to improve food sources by using interaction between them. If a food source could not be improved in a certain time named as limit which is a control parameter for ABC algorithm, the employed bee of this food source becomes a scout bee. For this scout bee, a new food source is produced and the scout bee becomes employed bee, again. The onlooker bees wait to be shared food sources position by the employed bees in the hive. After employed bees share position information about the food sources, each onlooker bee select one of the food source position and tries to improve the food source position.ABC algorithm is an iterative algorithm and only one design parameter of the optimization problem is updated by the each employed or onlooker bee at the each ABC iteration and updating only one design parameter has caused slow convergence for the algorithm. In order to overcome this issue, Akay and Karaboga [5] have proposed a control parameter called as modification rate-MR. In this work, we used directional information for each design parameter in order to cope slow convergence of the algorithm and the performance of the proposed approach is investigated on the well-known numerical benchmark optimization problems.The paper is organized as follows: Section 1 introduces the study and gives literature review on artificial bee colony algorithm. The basic ABC algorithm and modifications are explained in Section 2 and the experiments and experimental results are presented in Section 3. The study is discussed in Section 4 and finally, the conclusions and future works are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
