@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Decision rules for ambulance scheduling decision support systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper proposes some decision rules for emergency medical service scheduling.A lot of realistic considerations are included in the decision rules.Numerical experiments based on a simulator are performed to validate the effectiveness of the proposed decision rules.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Emergency ambulance,Ambulance scheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies some decision rules for ambulance scheduling. The scheduling decision rules embedded in the decision support systems for emergency ambulance scheduling consider the criteria on the average response time and the percentage of the ambulance requests that are responded within 15min, which is usually ignored in traditional scheduling policies. The challenge in designing the decision rules lies in the stochastic and dynamic nature of request arrivals, fulfillment processes, and complex traffic conditions as well as the time-dependent spatial patterns of some parameters complicate the decisions in the problem. To illustrate the proposed decision rules’ usage in practice, a simulator is developed for performing some numerical experiments to validate the effectiveness and the efficiency of the proposed decision rules.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ambulance scheduling for emergency requests is important to rescue people when their health is in risk of irreparable damage. The cost of medical resources and request volume are growing. Moreover, the traffic conditions in cities are extremely dynamic. All of these issues make the decisions on ambulance scheduling become more and more challenging. The control centers of ambulances are supposed to schedule ambulances from their bases (waiting locations) so that ambulance requesters can be reached in a time efficient manner. In reality, regulatory authorities usually established some performance criteria for the emergency medical resources transportation. In usual practice, the requests of the emergency ambulances have several different levels of priorities. As to each level of priority, the regulatory authorities require an ambulance to arrive at the requester (patient)’s place within a particular response time. A widely used criterion for the ambulance scheduling is that as to the high priority requests, ambulances need arrive at the patients’ place in 15min, which is a golden time and during which the patients should be timely transported to a proper healthcare center where appropriate medical team can give the patients sophisticated medical treatments. The most straightforward but useful decision rule is to allocate an ambulance that is the closest to the requester's place. However, this intuitive scheduling policy cannot guarantee a high percentage of the requests that can be responded within 15min. The criterion on the percentage of 15min response is more important than the criterion on the average response time. This study investigate how to design some good decision rules for emergency ambulance scheduling so as to guarantee a high percentage of 15min response, which is essential for the control centers of ambulance in cities. The challenges for designing highly efficient decision rules of ambulance scheduling lies in the dynamic environment where the spatial distribution of potential requesters varies in the time dimension while and the spatial patterns of traffic situations also vary in the peak hours and off-peak hours. Moreover, the traveling time of ambulances and their stay time at patients’ places are stochastic parameter. All of the above mentioned random and dynamic features of the environments further complicate the ambulance scheduling decision. Therefore, this paper makes an explorative study on designing highly efficient decision rules for scheduling ambulances.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper designs some decision rules of ambulance scheduling so that the ambulance requesters can be reached in a time efficient manner. Some experiments are also performed to validate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed rules. By comparing with the literature on the related topics, the contributions of this paper are mainly listed as follows. Most related studies on decision support systems for emergency medical scheduling only concentrate on the average response time. However, this intuitive scheduling policy cannot guarantee a high percentage of the requests that can be responded within 15min. In reality, the criterion on the percentage of 15min response is more important than the criterion on the average response time. Moreover, the proposed decision rules in this paper also consider a dynamic environment where the spatial distribution of potential requesters is changing along the time, and the spatial patterns of traffic situations in the metropolises are also different in peak hours and off-peak hours. The ambulance traveling and serving processes are also in a stochastic environment where the travel time for a certain journey may contain randomness; the service time at the request calls’ scenes and hospitals is also uncertain. The above mentioned dynamic and stochastic nature of the request arrivals and ambulance fulfillment processes as well as the environments makes this study different from the existing studies in the related areas. There are also limitations in this study. Some parameters are contained in the decision rules. How to optimize them is an interesting issue for the further researches.