@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of methods for estimating aquifer hydraulic parameters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed an Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) to estimate the aquifer hydraulic properties.ACO is efficient, and reliable for estimating various aquifer hydraulic parameters from the time–drawdown data.ACO provides better estimation of aquifer properties than the graphical and NLP techniques.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aquifer hydraulic parameters,Ant Colony Optimization (ACO),Genetic Algorithm (GA),Nonlinear programming (NLP),Pumping test,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An accurate estimation of aquifer hydraulic parameters is required for groundwater modeling and proper management of vital groundwater resources. In situ measurements of aquifer hydraulic parameters are expensive and difficult. Traditionally, these parameters have been estimated by graphical methods that are approximate and time-consuming. As a result, nonlinear programming (NLP) techniques have been used extensively to estimate them. Despite the outperformance of NLP approaches over graphical methods, they tend to converge to local minima and typically suffer from a convergence problem. In this study, Genetic Algorithm (GA) and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) methods are used to identify hydraulic parameters (i.e., storage coefficient, hydraulic conductivity, transmissivity, specific yield, and leakage factor) of three types of aquifers namely, confined, unconfined, and leaky from real time–drawdown pumping test data. The performance of GA and ACO is also compared with that of graphical and NLP techniques. The results show that both GA and ACO are efficient, robust, and reliable for estimating various aquifer hydraulic parameters from the time–drawdown data and perform better than the graphical and NLP techniques. The outcomes also indicate that the accuracy of GA and ACO is comparable. Comparing the running time of various utilized methods illustrates that ACO converges to the optimal solution faster than other techniques, while the graphical method has the highest running time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many parts of the world, groundwater has been used as a reliable source of water for numerous purposes such as irrigation, and domestic and industrial uses. Therefore, it is necessary to appropriately model the complex groundwater system in order to properly manage this vital resource. To do so, an accurate specification of aquifer hydraulic parameters such as transmissivity (T), hydraulic conductivity (K), storage coefficient (S), leakage factor (B), and specific yield (Sy) is needed since these parameters are commonly required in groundwater/aquifer flow modeling [1–7]. These parameters can be measured by laboratory experiments or in situ tests; however, the former is inaccurate, and the latter is expensive.An alternative option for the estimation of the aquifer parameters is through inverse modeling. In this procedure, some variables that can be obtained more accurately (e.g., hydraulic head); then, the aquifer parameters are inversely estimated from the measured variables. Pumping test is the most commonly used and standard technique for inverse modeling of groundwater parameters. In this test, time–drawdown measurements are analyzed via the analytical solutions such as Theis, corrected Theis, and Hantush models depending on the aquifer type in which the test is performed [8].Several approaches have been proposed to solve the above-mentioned inverse problem and obtain aquifer hydraulic parameters. The first group of approaches is graphical. The aquifer hydraulic parameters estimated by the graphical technique are of questionable reliability since a perfect curve matching is not anticipated and the match is typically approximate [1]. The traditional graphical technique is time-consuming, burdensome, and subjective [8]. The second group of approaches attempts to estimate aquifer parameters using nonlinear programming (NLP) techniques such as the steepest descent method, conjugate gradient method, Gauss–Newton method, Marquardt algorithm, etc. Although NLP methods often outperform the graphical approaches, they suffer from a number of shortcomings. Aquifer models are typically non-convex and nonlinear, and for such models, classical gradient-based optimization techniques may result in local optimum values rather than global ones. The gradient based techniques may cause instability and convergence problems due to the numerical difficulties. Moreover, their convergence to a global optima highly depends on the selection of initial search points. Furthermore, these techniques cannot find the local gradient for the problems with discontinuous objective function [4,9].To overcome the aforementioned shortcomings, the non-traditional methods such as evolutionary algorithms can be applied as they can handle highly nonlinear, even non-smooth problems and converge to the global rather than local optimum. In this study, two well-known evolutionary algorithms namely, Genetic Algorithm (GA) and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) are proposed to estimate the hydraulic parameters of three major types of aquifers (i.e., confined, unconfined, and leaky). An objective function is formulated for the inverse estimation using the observed hydraulic heads from pumping tests. Thereafter, GA and ACO are utilized to minimize the objective function by tuning the aquifer hydraulic parameters. These techniques have several advantages over gradient-based methods [10,11]: (1) They do not require a continuous objective function; (2) They often can find a near global optima and do not get trapped in a local-optimal solution; (3) They provide a number of near global optima solutions and hence give users the ability to assess the solutions and make a decision.GA has been applied in a number of groundwater optimization problems. El Harrouni et al. [12] used GA to manage pumping from wells and to estimate hydraulic parameters in heterogeneous aquifers. In a similar effort, Lingireddy [13] integrated GA and neural network to obtain aquifer hydraulic parameters. Samuel and Jha [8] and Jha et al. [4] examined effectiveness of GA in estimating aquifer parameters. They showed that GA is a viable and efficient technique that often overcomes the subjectivity, high computational burden and ill-posedness of traditional optimization methods. In a more recent attempt, Rajesh et al. [14] utilized GA, graphical, and sequential unconstrained minimization approaches to retrieve unconfined aquifer hydraulic parameters. Their results revealed that GA outperforms the other two methods.ACO has been successfully used in water resources optimization problems such as minimizing the capital costs associated with water distribution systems [15–18], design of irrigation networks [19], optimal groundwater monitoring design [20], multi-purpose reservoir operation [21,22], optimal design of open channels [23], underground seepage flow [24], and saltwater intrusion in the coastal aquifers [25]. To the best knowledge of the authors, the only study on the estimation of aquifer parameters with ACO was conducted by Li et al. [26], wherein the hydraulic conductivity and storage coefficient of a confined aquifer were estimated in a synthetic experimental framework. In comparison to their study, the present study uses ACO to estimate the hydraulic parameters of three aquifer systems (confined, unconfined and leaky) from real-world time–drawdown pumping test data. Moreover, the results of ACO are compared with those of graphical and NLP techniques. Each method is applied to 15 sets of real time–drawdown pumping test data (5 sets of data for each aquifer type). These data sets are taken from [27–33].This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the analytical models of groundwater used in this study are reviewed. The graphical, NLP, GA, and ACO methods are outlined in Section 3. Section 4 presents the formulation of the objective function. Section 5 provides the results and discussions. Finally, conclusions are reported in Section 6.Pumping test is a well-known tool to characterize a system of aquifers. The test is conducted by pumping water from one well and observing the response of aquifer (drawdown) in observation wells. The hydraulic-head drawdowns from the pumping test can be used for aquifer characterization and the estimate of parameters such as transmissivity (T), storage coefficient (S), hydraulic conductivity (K), leakage factor (B) and specific yield (Sy). Herein, the theoretical models for response of idealized aquifers to pumping are presented.The well-known Theis [34] solution describes radial flow to a fully penetrated pumping well in a homogeneous, isotropic confined aquifer of infinite horizontal extent which is pumped at a constant rate Q. Theis solution that is considered as one of the fundamental breakthroughs in the development of hydrologic modeling can be shown as follows,(1)s(r,t)=Q4πTW(U)where s(r, t) is the drawdown at a radial distance r from the pumping well at time t since the beginning of pumping, T is the transmissivity, S is the storage coefficient,U=r2S/4Tt, and W(U) is the Theis well function, which is given by(2)W(U)=∫U∞e−xxdxIn this study, the Theis well function W(U) is calculated via the Taylor series expansion for small values ofU(0<U≤1)and the Gauss–Laguerre quadrature for large values ofU(U>1)[35].Unconfined aquifers have a different response to the pumping test compared to confined aquifers. Therefore, the Theis model should be corrected in order to be used for unconfined aquifers. The corrected Theis model replaces s(r, t) on the left hand side of Eq. (2) withs′(r,t), wheres′is equal tos−(s2/2D0), andD0is the initial saturated thickness of the unconfined aquifer [36,37]. Theis and corrected Theis models are used in this study for confined and unconfined case studies, respectively.The leaky-aquifer theory has been evolved from the Theis equation. In two sets of papers, Hantush and Jacob [38] and later Hantush [39,40], the original differentiation between the Theis response for confined aquifers and the one for leaky aquifers was discussed. The analytical solution of Hantush and Jacob [38] can be couched in the same form as the Theis solution (Eq. (1)) but with a more complicated well function. In analogy with Eq. (1), the drawdown is computed via,(3)s(r,t)=Q4πTWU,rBwhere B is the leakage factor andW(U,r/B)is known as the leaky well function, which is given by(4)WU,rB=∫U∞1yexp−y−β2ydyin whichβ=r/(2B).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, the efficiency of Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), which usually ensures near-optimal or optimal solutions, is examined in estimating hydraulic parameters of confined, unconfined, and leaky aquifers from real time–drawdown pumping test data. An objective function is formulated based on the misfit between drawdown observations from pumping test and corresponding drawdown estimates from Theis, corrected Theis, or Hantush models, depending on the aquifer type. The ACO technique is utilized to estimate the hydraulic parameters of various aquifer systems by minimizing the objective function. Performance of ACO is compared with that of Genetic Algorithm (GA), graphical and nonlinear programming (NLP) methods using fifteen sets of published and unpublished real time–drawdown data of three aquifer systems (i.e., five sets for each aquifer system).The results show that ACO outperforms NLP and graphical methods for all three aquifer systems and thus is a more reliable technique for estimating the hydraulic parameters of confined, unconfined, and leaky aquifers. On average, for the five investigated confined aquifers, the RMSE of estimated drawdown from ACO is 11% and 33% less than the RMSEs respectively from the NLP and graphical methods. These values are 28% and 54% for the five unconfined aquifers and 40% and 49% for the leaky aquifers. Similarly, GA performs better than the NLP and graphical methods. For the five confined aquifers, on average, the drawdown estimates from ACO have a RMSE of 0.0772m, which is a 22% decrease of the RMSE of 0.0991m from the graphical method and a 9% reduction of the RMSE of 0.0844m from NLP. The results from ACO and GA are close and comparable. Results also suggest that the errors associated with the NLP approach are less than those of graphical method and thus NLP can estimate the hydraulic parameters more accurately than the graphical method.Comparing the running time of graphical, NLP, GA, and ACO indicates that ACO converges to the optimal solution faster than other methods, while the graphical approach has the lowest convergence rate.With the presence of large memory and high speed computers nowadays, the use of ACO approach is strongly recommended for estimating hydraulic parameters of aquifers from the pumping test data in lieu of the subjective and burdensome graphical and NLP methods.