@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective genetic optimization of interpretability-oriented fuzzy rule-based classifiers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper presents a multi-objective genetic approach to design interpretability-oriented fuzzy rule-based classifiers from data.The proposed approach allows us to obtain systems with various levels of compromise between their accuracy and interpretability.Original crossover and mutation operators, as well as chromosome-repairing technique to directly transform the rules are also proposed.The interpretability measure is based on the arithmetic mean of three components: the average length of rules, the number of active fuzzy sets, and the number of active inputs of the system.Effectiveness of the proposed technique in various classification problems is confirmed by experimental results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Accuracy and interpretability of fuzzy rule-based systems,Multi-objective genetic optimization,Evolutionary computations,Fuzzy systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper presents a multi-objective genetic approach to design interpretability-oriented fuzzy rule-based classifiers from data. The proposed approach allows us to obtain systems with various levels of compromise between their accuracy and interpretability. During the learning process, parameters of the membership functions, as well as the structure of the classifier's fuzzy rule base (i.e., the number of rules, the number of rule antecedents, etc.) evolve simultaneously using a Pittsburgh-type genetic approach. Since there is no particular coding of fuzzy rule structures in a chromosome (it reduces computational complexity of the algorithm), original crossover and mutation operators, as well as chromosome-repairing technique to directly transform the rules are also proposed. To evaluate both the accuracy and interpretability of the system, two measures are used. The first one – an accuracy measure – is based on the root mean square error of the system's response. The second one – an interpretability measure – is based on the arithmetic mean of three components: (a) the average length of rules (the average number of antecedents used in the rules), (b) the number of active fuzzy sets and (c) the number of active inputs of the system (an active fuzzy set or input means a set or input used by at least one fuzzy rule). Both measures are used as objectives in multi-objective (2-objective in our case) genetic optimization approaches such as well-known SPEA2 and NSGA-II algorithms. Moreover, for the purpose of comparison with several alternative approaches, the experiments are carried out both considering the so-called strong fuzzy partitions (SFPs) of attribute domains and without them. SFPs provide more semantically meaningful solutions, usually at the expense of their accuracy. The operation of the proposed technique in various classification problems is tested with the use of 20 benchmark data sets and compared to 11 alternative classification techniques. The experiments show that the proposed approach generates classifiers of significantly improved interpretability, while still characterized by competitive accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An automatic knowledge discovery from data with the use of linguistic fuzzy rule-based systems is currently a rapidly developing research area in the field of computational intelligence. The fundamental problem arising here is the construction of both accurate and interpretable (transparent) systems, i.e. the systems whose behavior is easy to understand and predict on the basis of their knowledge bases.Effective optimization for the two criteria simultaneously is often impossible [1]. Accuracy-oriented modeling is usually carried out at the expense of transparency and vice versa. Therefore, the research focuses on techniques that determine the suboptimal solution which takes into account the compromise between accuracy and interpretability of the system. The presented paper lines up with this research trend.The most significant aspect in the modeling process is the method of assessing the quality of a fuzzy system. This method has to comprise simultaneously both the accuracy and interpretability criteria. In particular, the selection of appropriate transparency measure has a significant impact on the performance of the automated knowledge discovery techniques from the data. The interpretability of the system can be considered in two aspects: the complexity and semantics of the system [2,3].The complexity of the system structure can be expressed by: (a) the number of rules in the rule base, (b) the number of antecedents in the rules, (c) the number of inputs used in the rules (these are the criteria concerning the complexity of the rule base), and (d) the number of fuzzy sets per single input/output, (e) the number of parameters describing the membership function, (f) the number of types of membership functions used in the system (these are the criteria concerning the complexity of the database), etc. Depending upon research needs, the measure of system complexity can include these factors either simultaneously or selectively.Semantics is expressed in the form of a set of requirements to be met by the system considered to be “interpretable”. Thus: (a) the rule base should be consistent, i.e. not contain rules logically contradictory or repetitive, (b) the number of rules with a high degree of activation for a small number of samples of the input data should be as small as possible. On the other hand, the requirements for the collection of fuzzy sets are as follows: (a) clear and unambiguous meaning of the fuzzy set labels imaging actual properties of the modeled environment (distinguishability), (b) the correct ordering of location of the membership functions of fuzzy sets (fuzzy ordering) in the domain of input or output attribute (the location of centers of fuzzy membership functions, in order from “the smallest” to “the biggest”, taking into account the linguistic relationships “less than”, “greater than” between fuzzy sets), (c) the assignment of a given fuzzy set collection to the same input (output) in all rules (rules operate on a common collection of fuzzy sets), (d) complementarity of fuzzy sets (the sum of the values of all membership functions of fuzzy sets assigned to a given input/output calculated for any domain value should be close to unity), etc. More detailed information on interpretability and semantic issues is available, e.g., in [3–8].In general, the development of universal measures directly assessing the complexity of the system or its semantics is very difficult. The evaluation of the complexity is subjective by nature and often depends on the individual properties of the modeled environment. The evaluation of semantics, for obvious reasons, seems to be even a greater challenge. Currently, the selection of a universal measure of the system transparency for the automation of the modeling process, is still an open issue [3].In response to these problems, in this paper we apply a multi-objective genetic optimization approach to design interpretability-oriented fuzzy rule-based classification systems from data. The learning process of the system uses a Pittsburgh-type genetic approach [9], in which the parameters of fuzzy set membership functions and the structure of the system's fuzzy rule base evolve at the same time. The paper is a continuation and extension of our earlier research [10–13].To evaluate both the accuracy and interpretability of the system two measures are used. The measures base upon the error of the system's response to the learning data (accuracy criterion) and the arithmetic mean of three components (interpretability criterion): (a) an average length of a fuzzy rule (in other words the average number of antecedents used in the rule), (b) the number of active fuzzy sets, and (c) the number of the system's active inputs (the active fuzzy set or the system's input is understood as the fuzzy set or the system's input used in at least one fuzzy rule). It is worth noting that unlike most alternative solutions, the proposed measure of interpretability does not directly include the number of rules in the rule base. Both measures are used as objectives in multi-objective (2-objective in our case) genetic optimization approaches such as well-known NSGA-II and SPEA2 algorithms. Moreover, for the purpose of comparison with several alternative approaches, the experiments are carried out with and without considering the so-called strong fuzzy partitions (SFPs) [14,15] of attribute domains. SFPs provide more semantically meaningful solutions, usually at the expense of their accuracy.In the proposed approach there is no special coding of the fuzzy rule base structure in the chromosome, as is the case of most alternative learning techniques where the rules are represented in the form of binary strings (e.g. [16,17]), integer vectors (e.g. [18]) or are encoded by means of highly specialized schemes (e.g. [19]; more on this can be found in [20]). In our approach, the rules are processed directly and for this reason special genetic crossover and mutation operators are designed. Lack of rule encoding and decoding, reduces computational complexity of the algorithm (in comparison with other learning techniques). In addition, direct analysis of uncoded rules allows easy control of the system's semantics. The paper also proposes chromosome-repairing mechanisms, which support this task as well. In the literature, there are very few similar solutions (e.g. system GIL [21]).The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief review of related works, Section 3 – the components of the fuzzy classification rule base, Section 4 – the details of the proposed learning technique. Finally, in Section 5 the performance of our approach in various classification problems is tested with the use of 20 benchmark data sets and compared to 11 alternative classification techniques.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented the approach to automatic design of interpretability-oriented fuzzy rule-based classifiers from data using multi-objective genetic optimization methods. In particular: (a) we proposed a new measure of the complexity of the classifiers’ structure, (b) we introduced, in an elegant way, the SFP condition to the process of learning of a classifier, to improve its interpretability with respect to its semantics, (c) we proposed a representation of the rule base free from complicated coding, and (d) we introduced original genetic operators to its processing. We also successfully used the above ideas in the context of well-known algorithms for multi-objective optimization, such as SPEA2 and NSGA-II.In our experiments, we first tested the performance of our approach using 20 data sets and two algorithms: SPEA2 and NSGA-II, whereby in both cases we considered building classifiers meeting the SFP constraint and not meeting it. Based on the statistical analysis of the obtained results one can conclude that SPEA2 allows us to obtain systems with much lesser complexity than NSGA-II, while maintaining a comparable accuracy.Secondly, we conducted a comparative analysis of the proposed approaches with alternative techniques. For purposes of comparison, we used the performance results of 11 different methods published in [79,80] together with two our approaches: SPEA2 not meeting the SFP condition and the version meeting it. As mentioned above, these two approaches turned out to be the best according to the complexity of classifiers. The statistical analysis of these results clearly shows, that according to the classifier complexity criterion, SPEA2 without SFP and with SFP turned out to be the best, whereas according to the accuracy criterion, SPEA2 without SFP should be considered to be comparable to the best of alternative approaches, i.e. MPLCS method in Table 6 and FARC+HD method in Table 8. However, SPEA2 with SFP turned out to be statistically worse than above the best two approaches, but one needs to underline, that alternative methods do not meet the SFP condition, which markedly improves their odds in the comparison. Moreover, competing solutions with much better accuracy should be considered inferior as they do not fit into the framework defining the scope of this work, i.e. because of their highly complex structures their interpretability is very poor.To conclude, it is worth mentioning that the obtained results concerning the accuracy of the classifiers can potentially be improved by using traditional methods of numerical optimization for a local adjustment of the obtained solutions. After the structure of the classifier is learnt with a genetic algorithm, these methods conduct a further optimization of the parameters of the membership functions of the fuzzy sets, whereby the set of the fuzzy rules remains constant during this process. Because these methods have no influence on the interpretability of the system, they were not discussed in this paper.