@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel differential evolution based clustering algorithm for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed work is a novel DE based clustering scheme for WSNs.The algorithm incorporates an additional step to enhance the performance.Experimental results demonstrate the superiority over existing algorithms.The performance is shown in terms of network life, energy consumption, etc.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks,Clustering,Differential evolution,Network life,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Clustering is an efficient topology control method which balances the traffic load of the sensor nodes and improves the overall scalability and the life time of the wireless sensor networks (WSNs). However, in a cluster based WSN, the cluster heads (CHs) consume more energy due to extra work load of receiving the sensed data, data aggregation and transmission of aggregated data to the base station. Moreover, improper formation of clusters can make some CHs overloaded with high number of sensor nodes. This overload may lead to quick death of the CHs and thus partitions the network and thereby degrade the overall performance of the WSN. It is worthwhile to note that the computational complexity of finding optimum cluster for a large scale WSN is very high by a brute force approach. In this paper, we propose a novel differential evolution (DE) based clustering algorithm for WSNs to prolong lifetime of the network by preventing faster death of the highly loaded CHs. We incorporate a local improvement phase to the traditional DE for faster convergence and better performance of our proposed algorithm. We perform extensive simulation of the proposed algorithm. The experimental results demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The radical advances in micro-electro-mechanical-system (MEMS) and wireless communication technology enable the development of wireless sensor networks (WSNs). WSNs have attracted enormous attention for their potential applications in diverse areas such as disaster warning systems, environment monitoring, health care, safety, surveillance, intruder detection, etc. [1,2]. A WSN consists of a large number of tiny, low power and inexpensive sensor nodes, which are randomly or manually deployed over an unattended target area. The sensor nodes are equipped with sensing, processing and communication component along with a power unit. These sensor nodes periodically collect local information of the targets, process the data and finally send it to a remote base station (called sink). The sink is connected to the Internet for the public notice of the phenomena.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have presented a DE based clustering algorithm for wireless sensor networks. The proposed approach has introduced an efficient vector encoding scheme and an extra phase called local improvement to improve the performance of the proposed clustering algorithm. We have also derived an efficient fitness function for extending network life time significantly. The fitness function takes care of energy consumption of both the gateways and the sensor nodes. The experimental results have shown that the proposed algorithm converges faster than the traditional DE and GA. We have also shown that it performs better than the exiting algorithms, i.e., the traditional DE and GA, LBC and GLBCA in terms of network life, energy consumption and number of dead sensor nodes. However, it performs inferior to the other existing algorithm namely EELBCA in terms of energy consumption and number of dead sensor nodes. In the proposed scheme, we have assumed that the gateways can directly communicate with the base station which may not be realistic for a large area network. Our future research will be in the direction of designing DE based energy aware clustering with multi-hop routing between the CHs and the base station.