@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Collective action for mobile payment platforms: A case study on collaboration issues between banks and telecom operators

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mobile payment requires collective action between banks and telecom operators.A case study on cooperation between all major Dutch banks and operators is analyzed.Differing strategic objectives between banks and operators hinder collective action.Lack of leadership, authority and commitment hindered collective action.Realizing joint m-payment platforms for banks and operators is highly challenging.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile payment,Collective action,Banks,Telecom operators,Collaboration,Near Field Communication,Service platform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mobile payment has long been discussed but has still not reached mass market in Western societies. Banks and telecom operators often struggle to develop platforms for authorization and authentication of mobile payment services. This paper analyses an in-depth case on collaboration between three major Dutch banks and three Dutch telecom operators who jointly developed a trusted service manager for mobile payment. Collective action theory and platform theory is combined to study the issues of collaboration and competition between banks and operators. We find that differing strategic objectives and interests, conflicts, lack of dependencies and governance issues led to dissolution of the mobile payment platform. These problems partly result from platform characteristics of openness to third parties, governance of relations with third parties and platform competition.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although mobile payment has been on the agenda for years, only few mobile handset-based or contactless card-based payment solutions have reached mass market in Western economies (Ghezzi et al., 2010). Various players are looking to dominate the advanced mobile payment market, including telecom operators, banks, credit card providers, payment providers and actors like Google (Ondrus and Lyytinen, 2011). Currently, market expectations are rising again thanks to increased penetration of Near Field Communication (NFC) on mobile phones (Juntunen et al., 2012).Although various service models for mobile payment exist, most assume a trusted service manager that handles authentication, authorization and account-settlement (Gaur and Ondrus, 2012). As direct and indirect network effects are highly important (Au and Kauffman, 2008), such a trusted service manager (TSM) should be accessible for a critical mass of both consumers and merchants (Ondrus and Pigneur, 2007ab, 2009). Not only banks are required to provide accounting and settlement of payments, but also telecom operators to provide secure connections and equip phones with NFC SIM-cards. As such, bringing mobile payment to mass market ideally requires collaboration between multiple telecom operators and banks (Au and Kauffman, 2008). Establishing collaboration between banks and telecom operators is highly challenging (Dahlberg et al., 2008). Banks and telecom operators have their own strategic interests, business models and ways of doing business in their respective industries. Both banks and telecom operators are used to dominate relationships with external parties in innovation projects.How competitors collaborate to achieve a common goal is the focus of strategic alliance literature (Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven, 1996; Gulati, 1998). In this paper, the common goal is to realize a mobile payment platform that is offered by all major banks and telecom operators. As such, especially collective action theory is relevant, which focuses on achieving a common goal that cannot be achieved by individual partners (Keohane, 1984). Collective action theory suggests various challenges to collaborating for a common goal: differing objectives and interests (Kollock, 1998), conflicts (Baland and Platteau, 1996; Streeck, 1990), interdependencies (Heckathorn, 1993; Marwell et al., 1988) and governance (Bianco and Bates, 1990; Ostrom, 2000; Sandholtz, 1993).Collective action theory has been applied previously to study how organizations collaborate to develop information systems and standards (Klein and Schellhammer, 2011; Markus et al., 2006). However, a TSM is a specific type of information system as it will be used to connect various user groups (i.e. consumers, merchants and payment service providers) and to offer various services (e.g., payment, proximity marketing, loyalty schemes). As such, a TSM can be conceptualized as a digital platform (Boudreau, 2006; Tilson et al., 2010). Platforms pose various challenges that can affect the theoretical constructs of collective action theory: trade-offs on how to deal with openness towards third party service providers (Eisenmann, 2008) and pricing (Rochet and Tirole, 2003) can lead to differing objectives and conflicts; network effects (Evans, 2010; Gawer and Cusumano, 2008; Roson, 2005) can affect interdependencies; and platform leadership (Evans et al., 2006; Messerschmitt and Szyperski, 2005; Williams and Tapscott, 2006) can affect governance. While there are several studies on collaboration between a single platform provider and complementors (Ghazawneh and Henfridsson, 2010; Perrons, 2009), there are only few studies on how multiple platform providers collaborate to jointly establish a platform (Nikayin et al., 2013).This paper examines how platform characteristics affect collective action problems in setting up mobile payment platforms by banks and telecom operators. Mobile payment is defined here as the use of a Near Field Communication (NFC) enabled mobile device or a contactless card on a SIM to conduct payment in a proximity setting by connecting to a server, perform authentication and authorization, make a payment, initiate accounting and finally confirm the completed transaction (Antovski and Gusev, 2003; Dahlberg et al., 2008; Ding and Hampe, 2003; Henkel, 2001). Mobile payments may be classified into those based on smart card schemes and those based on mobile smart devices (Ondrus and Pigneur, 2006). In practice this implies payments at point of sales as well as for instance transactions for public transport or access services, where face-to-face contact between buyer and seller is not necessary. The mobile payment system should be multi-functional rather than single-purpose systems like ticketing systems such as Oyster Card in the UK. Furthermore, mobile payment need not be limited in the amount of payment, i.e. both micro- and macro-payments are included.We study a unique in-depth case in the Netherlands where all major banks and telecom operators collaborated in developing a NFC-based mobile payment platform. We were able to access key informants in all participating organizations and external stakeholders through interviews. An interesting aspect of the case is that the banks and telecom operators started to develop the TSM in 2009, but ended the project in 2012. As such, the case is especially suited to study why collective action between banks and telecom operators was discontinued, and which platform-specific issues led to the end of collaboration.Theoretically, the paper contributes to collective action theory in information systems (Klein and Schellhammer, 2011; Markus et al., 2006) as well as platform theory (Boudreau, 2006; Tilson et al., 2010). Platforms are becoming increasingly relevant as a means to organize innovation in information systems (Yoo et al., 2010). Specifically, we bridge platform theory and collective action theory by studying how the characteristics of platforms affect collective action constructs (e.g., differing objectives and interests, conflicts, dependencies and governance).The paper also contributes to the domain of mobile payment research. Previous research on mobile payment focuses either on technology (Karnouskos, 2004), business model issues (Juntunen et al., 2012; Pousttchi et al., 2009) or consumer adoption, acceptance, and usage (Chen, 2008; Schierz et al., 2010; Zhou, 2012). Empirical studies on interorganizational collaboration for mobile payment platforms do not exist, as far as we are aware.Section 2 provides an introduction to the domain of mobile payment. In Section 3, we develop the theoretical framework for the study based on collective action theory and platform theory. In Section 4 we describe the case study method. Results and findings are presented in Section 5. Finally, discussion and conclusions are presented in Sections 6 and 7 respectively.NFC-enabled mobile payment uses the antenna, NFC controller and secure element located in the phone. The secure element can be integrated in the device (embedded), in the SIM card or in a micro-SD memory card. Consumers conduct payments by holding the phone in front of an NFC-enabled payment terminal.NFC payments have reached mass market in Japan, i.e. Osaifu-Keitai, where NTT Docomo enables the integration of electronic money, identity card, loyalty card, fare collection of public transport transactions or credit card on mobile phone with other mobile network operators and the trusted service manager. NFC payment is also offered in Korea (i.e., Hana SK Card), Hong Kong (i.e., Octopus Card). In Singapore (i.e., Smart Card and EZ-link), payments were initially made with RFID enabled cards (Mallat, 2007) but later evolved into NFC mobile payments. Since October 2008, over 200 trials, pilots, tests and commercial NFC and related services in fifty-four countries have been reported (NFC World, 2013). For example, experiments with NFC cards are initiated in the UK (i.e., Quick Tap and Mobile check out), France (i.e., Buyster and Cityzel), and the United States (i.e., Transcard, ISIS mobile wallet), while also in Kenya, Tanzania, and the Philippines the transition from SMS-based to NFC based payments is in progress (NFC World, 2013).Several service models exist for mobile payment that involve different actors (Chaix and Torre, 2012; Ondrus and Pigneur, 2006; Pousttchi et al., 2009; Zhong, 2009). However, most models assume a trusted service manager (TSM) that mediates between banks, telecom operators, and the mobile payment service provider. The TSM provides the generic functionality for service deployment and authentication. The TSM could be provided by a bank, telecom operator, payment service provider or independent organization. A TSM could be centralized or split in a part offered by the service provider and another part offered by the telecom operator. If a telecom operator is involved, the secure element of the TSM can be placed on the SIM card of the phone.In this paper, we conceptualize the TSM as the platform being developed. Jointly realizing the TSM through collaboration between banks and telecom operators is the object of collective action.Strategic alliance literature deals extensively with how (potential) competitors collaborate to achieve a common goal, such as improving social or strategic positions in the industry (Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven, 1996; Gulati, 1998), joint R&D (De Jong and Klein Woolthuis, 2008), joint technology development (Hagedoorn, 1993) or exchanging goods (Heide and John, 1990). Scholars have studied how stability and performance of alliances depend on tensions between competition and collaboration (Bengtsson and Kock, 2000), learning processes (Doz, 1996), opportunistic behavior (Parkhe, 1993), governance (Lee and Cavusgil, 2006; Oxley, 1997; Teng and Das, 2008) and trust (Cullen et al., 2000). Typically these studies are focused on how individual organization or the alliance can boost performance, but less on a collective good that creates value not only for involved partners but also for others, i.e. complementors or consumers.In this paper, the objective of collaboration between banks and telecom operators is to develop and implement a joint TSM for mobile payment. Such TSM is only viable if it can be accessed by customers of any bank and telecom operator (Au and Kauffman, 2008). Such collective goods that cannot be realized by individual actors are typically studied through the lens of collective action theory (Keohane, 1984; Oliver et al., 1985; Poteete and Ostrom, 2004).Collective action theory, first developed by Olson (1965), explains how people or organizations may collaborate for a common goal even if the incentives to do so are smaller than not collaborating. The common goal of a group for collective action is also referred to as shared goal, shared interest, common interest, collective interest or collective goal (Hardin, 1982; Oliver, 1993; Olson, 1971; Ostrom, 1990). In the field of sociology, the common goal is to establish social activities or movements (e.g. Klandermans, 2004; Oegema and Klandermans, 1994; Walsh and Warland, 1983). In the economic branch of collective action, the common goal is to provide a ‘collective good’ (i.e., a good which is in the interest of all members of the group and cannot be provided individually) (e.g. Monge et al., 1998; Von Hippel and Von Krogh, 2003). In the field of natural resource management, the common goal is to preserve a ‘common pool resource’ from overharvesting like a forest, water resource and grazing land (e.g. Agrawal, 2002; Matta and Alavalapati, 2006; Wade, 1987). In this paper, however, the common goal of collective action is to set up an interorganizational platform, i.e. a TSM platform, offered jointly by banks and telecom operators, that also creates value for third parties.While several issues that prohibit starting or continuing collective action are discussed in literature, we discuss four main issues here that are relevant to interorganizational collective action. First, how to deal with differing objectives and interests of the actors collaborating is a core challenge to collective action (Kollock, 1998; Oliver et al., 1985). In the context of standardization, Markus et al., (2006) find that organizations participating in collective action are not always united in their interests because of several reasons like belonging to different sectors of industry. Therefore, they suggest that to ensure participation of all relevant sectors and actors, it is critical to reconcile divergent interests of different group of participants. Another study by Klein and Schellhammer (2011) on development of inter-organizational information systems shows that interest heterogeneity can result in conflicts of interest which are detrimental to collective action.Second, conflicts may lead to rivalry which makes it challenging to achieve consensus among members (Baland and Platteau, 1996; Streeck, 1990). Conflicts are the concrete instantiations of problems that occur because of differing objectives and interests. A specific type of conflicts arises when actors not only collaborate but also compete (Brandenburger and Nalebuff, 1997). For instance, actors may cooperate in order to establish a common goal, while they will compete once that goal is realized.Third, interdependencies between actors are an important theme in collective action literature. Interdependencies result from differences between actors in terms of resources, time and money possessed. Interdependencies may especially trigger collective action as resourceful actors make collaboration attractive for others (Heckathorn, 1993; Marwell et al., 1988). If interdependencies are present, actors find it rational to collaborate, which in turn reduces the risk of free-rider behavior (i.e., joining the project without actually contributing) (Marwell et al., 1988). Studying 103 high-technology alliances, Walter et al. (2012) find that when the degree of interdependency between partners in alliances decreases, the partners perceive less necessity to get engaged in collective action. This suggests that lack of interdependency between actors reduces their incentives and willingness to participate in collective action (Monge et al., 1998).Fourth, governance of relations between actors engaged in collective action is relevant (Ostrom, 2000; De Reuver and Bouwman, 2012). Specifically, a clear authority or leadership structure is important to attract contributors, attain momentum and select the most promising partners for collective action (Bianco and Bates, 1990). Many researchers highlight the critical role of leaders, organizers or entrepreneurs to provide selective incentives and organize group activities for achieving the common goal or provisioning the collective good (Frohlich et al., 1971; Salisbury, 1969). Salisbury (1969) defines leaders as those who invest capital to create a set of benefits (i.e., selective incentives) for potential members to join a group. He adds that if the benefits fail or costs exceed the benefits for both potential members and leaders, the group will collapse. Marwell et al. (1988) discuss that in a centralized network with the presence of resource and interest heterogeneity, leaders can select the most prospect contributors and thus promote likelihood of collective action.The concept of ‘platform’ has recently emerged in literature on economics, business strategy and management, as well as information systems (IS). In the economics literature, the terms ‘two-sided market’, ‘two-sided platform’ or ‘multi-sided platform’ are being used to describe a product, system, service or organization that mediates interaction between two or more groups of agents (Ballon, 2009; Evans et al., 2006; Rochet and Tirole, 2003). In business strategy and management field, Gawer (2009) uses the term industry platform and defines it as “building blocks (they can be product, technologies or services) that act as a foundation upon which an array of firms (sometimes called business ecosystem) can develop complementary products, technologies or services”. IS scholars use different terms such as ‘digital infrastructures’ (Tilson et al., 2010) or ‘digital platforms’ (Eaton, 2012) to refer to large complex information systems, on which new services can be added to benefit from shared data resources (Tilson et al., 2010).What is common in all definitions of a platform across economic, business management and IS fields is that platforms have modular architectures in which core independent modules are being used and reused across multiple products and services (Baldwin and Woodard, 2009; Boudreau, 2006; Tilson et al., 2010). A TSM for mobile payment can be conceptualized as a platform as it can be used as it connects different user groups (i.e. consumers, merchants, payment service providers) and serves as a (technical) basis to offer various services (i.e. payment, loyalty schemes and proximity marketing).By mediating interactions between two or more groups of organizations, platforms create network effects (Ballon, 2009; Evans et al., 2006; Rochet and Tirole, 2003). Network effects arise when the desirability or functionality of a product depends on the number of complementary goods available for it (Schilling, 2009). Direct network effects (intra-side externalities) occur when users value a platform based on the number of users in the same group (e.g., between the users of social networking platforms). Indirect network effects (inter-side externalities) occur when the value of a platform for a group of users depends on participation of another group of users (e.g., indirect network effects between users of a game console and game developers) (Evans, 2010; Gawer and Cusumano, 2008; Roson, 2005). A TSM for mobile payment will exhibit network effects as different user groups need to be on board, such as consumers, merchants, banks and payment service providers.The distinct characteristics of platforms are relevant the four issues regarding collective action theory as discussed in Section 2.1.Platform providers follow different strategies regarding pricing and relationships with user groups. Regarding pricing, an important question is which user group pays for the platform, and whether one user group subsidizes the other (Rochet and Tirole, 2003). So-called ‘marquee users’ or ‘marquee buyers’ can be offered discounts to use the platform because they create positive network effects by attracting others to a platform (Parker and Van Alstyne, 2012; Rochet and Tirole, 2003). Regarding relationships with user groups, an important question is whether to open the platform to third party service providers or not (Eisenmann, 2008). While openness fosters innovation on the platform, control is needed to keep control over end-user data and critical resources (Boudreau et al., 2009; Gawer, 2009; Ghazawneh and Henfridsson, 2012). Which pricing and openness strategy is chosen partly depends on the strategic objectives and interests of the platform provider. If multiple actors collaborate to jointly offer the platform, pricing and openness strategy may thus become a source of differing strategic objectives and interests.If multiple actors jointly offer a platform, competition and collaboration tensions may arise. While the actors collaborate to offer the platform itself, they often compete on the level of service provisioning once the platform has been established. The tension between collaboration and competition on the level of platforms and platform-based services can thus become a source of conflicts. Although differing strategic objectives and interests can lead to conflicts, it is not necessarily the case. Conflicts are more concrete situations in which different strategic directions clash. Moreover, conflicts can result from for instance different ways of working, processes and systems, i.e. they can be broader than just differing objectives and interests.Both direct and indirect network effects (Evans, 2010; Gawer and Cusumano, 2008; Roson, 2005) increase the importance of keeping all banks and telecom operators on board of a TSM platform. For instance, if one of the banks would not participate in providing the mobile payment platform, network effects for payment service providers, merchants and the telecom operators would reduce. In this way, network effects increase interdependencies between platform providers.To attract different user groups, platform providers need to create a buzz in the market as well as establish trust in the platform (Gawer and Cusumano, 2002). Platform leadership strategies are considered as various approaches a platform leader takes to (1) create a multi-sided market around the platform; (2) enable multiple groups of participants to collaborate and compete around in the multi-sided market (Evans et al., 2006; Messerschmitt and Szyperski, 2005; Williams and Tapscott, 2006). Typical trade-offs include how to balance control over third parties against granting them the flexibility to be creative on the platform (Tilson et al., 2010; Tiwana et al., 2010). A related issue is how to balance power and control over application providers, while at the same time earning and sustaining their trust (Perrons, 2009). These issues of governance between platform provider and third party service providers may affect governance among platform providers themselves.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Collaboration between actors to set up joint digital platforms can be understood by combining concepts from collective action theory and platform theory. In this paper, we studied a case of joint mobile payment platform development between banks and telecom operators. We developed a theoretical model that explains the discontinuance of collective action, integrating concepts from platform theory and collective action theory. While collective action theory provides the basic concepts that play a role when interdependent actors collaborate (i.e. differing objectives and interests, conflicts, dependencies, leadership), these concepts are influenced by the specific characteristics of platforms (i.e. platform pricing, openness, competition, and governance).From a theoretical perspective, this study bridges collective action theory and platform theory. The theoretical model contributes to understanding the challenges when multiple organizations collaborate to develop joint e-commerce platforms. Digital platforms will increasingly become relevant in the field of e-commerce as generic functionalities like authorization and authentication are needed to develop services (El Sawy and Pereira, 2013; Yoo et al., 2010). In the battle for platform leadership, collaboration issues warrant more attention.From a practical perspective, this study may help to draw lessons on how to develop joint mobile payment platforms. Considering the several previous attempts to create a mobile payment service platform without success, such lessons are needed. Although we see that proximity mobile payment has a lot of potential, different objectives, conflicts, lack of interdependencies and governance issues did lead to a loss of momentum, and the slow-down and eventually dissolution of the project. Specifically the inclusion of multiple telecom operators appeared to be an issue. A more selective approach based on a careful analysis upfront of strategic interests from an international perspective could have led to a more manageable project.Practitioners should also be aware of platform-specific issues that trigger collection action problems. Whether to open a mobile payment platform to third party service providers and under which conditions should be discussed early in a platform development project. Moreover, agreement should be reached on whether the platform itself or the payment services on top of the platform are the core interest, in order to deal with differing strategic objectives. The same goes for discussing which of the partners is going to offer services on top of the platform. Platform competition is also a main managerial concern. Especially if new platform technologies emerge, the rationale and timeliness of the shared platform may suddenly be removed.This study has been important to understand the reasons for failure of the TRAVIK consortium. Moreover, no previous study that we are aware of has been able to access all relevant stakeholders of the major banks and telecom operators in one country that collaborate for a mobile payment platform.The high hopes for mobile payment in industry justify more research on why these mobile payment platforms are so difficult to set up in practice. Besides issues such as consumer acceptance and adoption, security and privacy technologies and business models, interorganizational collaboration and platform issues of openness, governance and competition warrant more attention.The following topics were discussed in the interviews. When closed questions were posed, follow-up questions were asked to probe into the reasoning behind the answer.1.Welcome/opening/explanation of research/request for recording of the interview.Business model related questions.a.What is your role in the development of NFC mobile payments?What value and resources does your company bring to an NFC mobile payment ecosystem?Are you developing NFC activities from a growth or a defence strategy?If you are collaborating, which organizations would you choose?Platform-related questions.a.How do you plan to overcome the ‘chicken-and-egg’ problem?Does success come from small, targeted projects where consumers are forced to adopt by their peers or leaders? Or should there be one universal solution?Who should be the platform owner? What type of organization?Do you expect the secure element to be placed on the SIM, to be embedded in a smartphone or to be placed on a micro-SD? Why?Which platform has the largest potential? Travik/OV Chip/other?Will NFC payments only be possible when they are compatible with the payPass/payWave debit and credit card platform?Would you estimate the effect of peer-to-peer payments to be of large influence on market success?Who should pay for the additional costs that come from NFC mobile payments?Did you miss elements in the discussion so far? If so, which one?