@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fuzzy inference and categorization approach for supplier selection using compensatory and non-compensatory decision rules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a supplier selection decision method based on fuzzy inference combined with a fuzzy rule-based classification method.It integrates non-compensatory decision rules in qualification stages and compensatory decision rules in final selection.Decision makers can express supplier performance requirements for qualification in linguistic format.It is especially useful for selecting from a large set of potential suppliers and also for first time purchase.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supplier selection,Supplier categorization,Fuzzy inference,Simple fuzzy grid classification method,Multicriteria decision making,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Fuzzy set theory has been used as an approach to deal with uncertainty in the supplier selection decision process. However, most studies limit applications of fuzzy set theory to outranking potential suppliers, not including a qualification stage in the decision process, in which non-compensatory types of decision rules can be used to reduce the set of potential suppliers. This paper presents a supplier selection decision method based on fuzzy inference that integrates both types of approaches: a non-compensatory rule for sorting in qualification stages and a compensatory rule for ranking in the final selection. Fuzzy inference rules model human reasoning and are embedded in the system, which is an advantage when compared to approaches that combine fuzzy set theory with multicriteria decision making methods. Fuzzy inference combined with a fuzzy rule-based classification method is used to categorize suppliers in qualification stages. Classes of supplier performance can be represented by linguistic terms, which allow decision makers to deal with subjectivity and to express qualification requirements in linguistic formats. Implementation of the proposed method and techniques were analyzed and discussed using an illustrative case. Three defuzzification operators were used in the final selection, yielding the same ranking. Factorial design was applied to test consistency and sensitivity of the inference rules. The findings reinforce the argument that including stages of qualification based on fuzzy inference and categorization makes this method especially useful for selecting from a large set of potential suppliers and also for first time purchase.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Purchasing decisions affect important activities such as inventory management, production planning and control, cash flow requirements and product and service quality [1–5]. The ISO quality management system [6] also includes requirements for supplier selection and assessment. Thus, purchasing and supplier relationship management have become very critical activities for performance management of organizations and supply chains [7].A key step in purchasing and supplier relationship management is that of supplier selection. Basically, supplier selection is a decision process with the purpose of reducing the initial set of potential suppliers to the final choices. De Boer et al. [8] proposed a well-known cited framework that divides the supplier selection decision process into four interrelated phases: problem definition, formulation of criteria, qualification and final choice. In general, decisions in the qualification and final selection phases are based on the performance of suppliers concerning multiple criteria and relative weights of such criteria. Several multicriteria decision making techniques are proposed in the literature to tackle the problem of supplier selection [8–10].Another characteristic of supplier selection is that decision making is affected by uncertainty mainly due to the vagueness intrinsic to evaluation of qualitative criteria, as well as imprecise weighing of different criteria by different decision makers. Fuzzy set theory has been the most important approach used to deal with uncertainty in the supplier selection decision process [11]. It provides proper language by which imprecise criterion can be handled and it is able to integrate the analysis of qualitative and quantitative factors in the selection process. The use of fuzzy inference in supplier selection is proposed by Carrera and Mayorga [12] and Amindoust et al. [13]. One advantage of using fuzzy inference in decision making is the assumption of the concept of approximate reasoning in the inference process that models human reasoning. Another advantage is capturing the specialist's judgements in the knowledge base [14]. Different techniques for supplier selection based on fuzzy theory are proposed by Ordoobadi [15], Shen and Yu [16], Shu and Wu [17], Hsu et al. [18] and Lam et al. [19]. Other integrating techniques combining fuzzy theory with multicriteria methods are reviewed by Ho et al. [9], Wu and Barnes [10] and Chai et al. [11].Apart from these characteristics, De Boer et al. [20] call attention to the point that two types of decision rules can be used in supplier selection: compensatory and non-compensatory ones. In the first case, decisions are based on the assumption that a bad performance of a supplier in a particular criterion can be compensated by high scores in other criteria and therefore its overall evaluation of performance and its rank will reflect this. On the contrary, decisions can be based on a non-compensatory rule. In the qualification phase of supplier selection, the main objective is to sort suppliers that meet minimum requirements for some performance criteria so they can be qualified as a potential supplier. In this phase, there should be no compensation for a supplier not meeting the minimum requirement in a particular criterion. Therefore, in the qualification stage, a non-compensatory decision rule is more appropriate than a compensatory one. On the other hand, when it comes to final selection, all qualified suppliers meet minimum requirements and thus outranking can be based on compensatory decision rules.However, the majority of supplier selection models apply only compensatory types of decision rules for outranking suppliers [9–11], not considering the advantage of combining both types of decision rules. Therefore, this paper presents a supplier selection decision method based on fuzzy inference that integrates both types of approaches: a non-compensatory rule for sorting in qualification stages and a compensatory rule for ranking in the final selection. The qualification process is structured in subsequent stages of performance evaluation based on criteria identified by the literature review. Decisions in each qualification stage are the result of a fuzzy inference system (FIS) combined with the simple fuzzy grid method [21]. The resulting contribution of combining these methods is a procedure for pattern classification so as to sort suppliers into qualified and not qualified. After qualification, the performance of the qualified suppliers in the criteria evaluated in the previous stage are the input variables for another FIS to predict a global supplier performance index used for ranking suppliers in the final step.A descriptive quantitative approach was adopted as a research method [22]. The fuzzy inference systems were implemented in MATLAB®. In an illustrative application case in the white goods manufacturing industry, qualification is carried out in four stages. In each stage, suppliers are evaluated by three performance sub-criteria. A 3K factorial design was used to test the consistency and sensitivity of the inference systems.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly revises the subject of supplier selection, presenting the contributions from the literature in the process, criteria and methods for supplier selection. Section 3 aims to clarify some fundamental concepts regarding fuzzy set theory used in the proposition. Section 4 presents the proposed SS method, as well as details of implementation of the fuzzy inference systems. Section 5 presents and discusses the results of the illustrative case of application. Final considerations and conclusion concerning this research work are made in Section 6.Selecting suppliers involves determining the decision-making process, including the decision criteria as well as determining the multi-criteria decision methods to be used. Although most of the publications on SS focus on decision methods for the final choice phase [23], the supplier selection process comprises several steps previous to the final choice. De Boer et al. [8] propose a framework for supplier selection that consists of four steps: problem definition, formulation of criteria, qualification and choice. For each of these steps, variations from different purchasing situations are also considered such as: new task, modified or straight rebuy and routine or strategic/bottleneck items [24,25]. The first step aims at clearly defining the problem at hand which may mean searching for new suppliers for a completely new product, replacing current suppliers or choosing suppliers for new products from the same set of suppliers. In the next step, the buyer should translate their requirements into either quantitative or qualitative decision criteria so as to guide the choices. The main objective of the qualification step is to sort the potential suppliers from the initial set of suppliers based on qualifying criteria. Implicit in this qualification step is the non-compensatory rule of the decision making process [8]. The last step aims at ranking the potential suppliers so as to make the final choice. Here, unlike qualification, the compensatory decision rule applies so decision makers can select suppliers based on the resulting compensation between performance criteria. Sorting and ranking are especially important in decision making for new purchases, modified or straight rebuy of routine items in which there is usually a large set of potential suppliers. Wu and Barnes [10], based on this framework, proposed an additional step aiming at given feedback to potential suppliers in their performance in the selection process.Formulating selection criteria is an extremely important step in the selection process. There are a number of descriptive studies that have attempted to identify criteria used by buyers to select suppliers. A seminal study conducted by Dickson [26] concluded that quality, delivery and performance history are the three most important criteria. Following this, Weber et al. [27] published a study based on the analysis of 74 papers on supplier selection criteria. They identified price as the most cited criterion, followed by delivery and quality. In a survey conducted with 139 manufacturing companies in the USA, Verma and Pullman [28] concluded that despite quality being perceived as the most important attribute, cost and on-time delivery are assigned more weight when actually choosing a supplier.Kannan and Tan [29] also developed an empirical study on the importance of supplier selection and assessment criteria and their impact on business performance of the manufacturing companies surveyed. Out of 30 selection criteria, on-time delivery and quality were ranked as the most important. However, in another study [30] involving 12 purchasing professionals in the construction industry, the author reports that cost is placed as the most important criterion, followed by key competencies and the ability to collaborate, indicating the importance given to partnership and collaboration in supply networks.Another study, by Katsikeas et al. [1], presents the results of a survey into British distributor firms of IT products. In their research, they confirmed a positive relationship among the four supplier selection criteria considered (reliability, price, service and technological capability) and distributors’ performance. Ku et al. [31], based on a literature review, identified criteria for global supplier selection grouped as: cost or price, quality, service, supplier's profile, risk, buyer–supplier partnership, cultural and communication barriers and trade restrictions. Kahraman et al. [32] propose four groups of supplier performance criteria: supplier's profile, product performance, service performance and cost performance. Awasthi et al. [33] propose criteria for evaluating environmental performance of suppliers. Büyüközkan and Çifçi [34] present a summarized list of criteria for evaluating sustainability of suppliers including: organization; financial performance; service quality; technology; social responsibility and environmental competencies. Table 1presents a compilation of supplier performance criteria frequently found in the literature.Decision making in supplier selection includes multi-attribute decision making techniques (MADM), mathematical programming, stochastic programming and artificial intelligence techniques [9–11]. Even for criteria of a quantitative nature in the selection phase, and especially for completely new suppliers, there is no way of quantifying performance and therefore it should be based on qualitative evaluation. Artificial intelligence techniques can cope better with the uncertainty of such situations than other techniques because they are designed to mimic human judgment. Fuzzy set theory has been extensively used to deal with the vagueness intrinsic to evaluation of qualitative factors of suppliers’ performance as well as imprecise weighing of different factors by different decision makers [9–11]. Table 2presents a summarized review of decision making approaches applied to supplier selection that integrates fuzzy set theory with other techniques.Fuzzy inference is also proposed in the literature to support decision making in supplier selection. Amindoust et al. [13] propose a Mandani inference method for ranking suppliers according to an overall performance predicted by applying fuzzy inference operations, based on four input criteria related to economic, environmental and social dimensions. However, their proposed model only applies multi-criteria decision methods to order suppliers. Carrera and Mayorga [12] propose a fuzzy inference system in supplier selection for new product development, but also applied for ranking suppliers in final selection only. As pointed out by De Boer et al. [8], an important step in the selection process is qualification, for which decision making techniques could also be used so as to reduce the initial set of potential suppliers. Qualification is a categorisation process, in which suppliers are classified as qualified or not qualified, reducing the set of supplier alternatives apt to proceed to the final steps. However very few studies propose the use of categorisation approaches in qualification. Keskin et al. [43] propose the use of fuzzy adaptive resonance theory (fuzzy ART) as a categorization method for qualification in supplier selection. Chen et al. [4] propose the use of fuzzy TOPSIS to order suppliers and then apply a categorisation strategy based on the crisp value of the closeness coefficient. However, these two studies do not use fuzzy numbers to model the range vagueness of the classes used in the categorisation process.Finally, none of the reviewed models based on fuzzy set theory presented in the literature propose an approach that applies non-compensatory decision rules combined with compensatory ones [9–11], as proposed in Section 4. Fundamental fuzzy concepts are briefly reviewed in the following section.Fuzzy Set Theory[53,54] has been used for modeling decision making processes based on imprecise and vague information such as judgment of decision makers. Qualitative aspects are represented by means of linguistic variables, which are expressed qualitatively by linguistic terms and quantitatively by a fuzzy set in the universe of discourse and respective membership function. Operations between linguistic variables involve the concepts presented next.A fuzzy setA˜in X is defined by:(1)A˜={x,μA(x)},x∈Xin which μA(x): X→[0,1] is the membership function ofA˜and μA(x) is the degree of pertinence of x inA˜If μA(x) equals zero, x does not belong to the fuzzy setA˜.If μA(x) equals 1, x completely belongs to the fuzzy setA˜.However, unlike the classical set theory, if μA(x) has a value between zero and 1, x partially belongs to the fuzzy setA˜.That is, the pertinence of x is true with degree of membership given by μA(x) [53,55].A fuzzy number is a fuzzy set in which the membership function satisfies the conditions of normality(2)supA˜[x]x∈X=1and of convexity(3)A˜[λx1+(1−λ)x2]≥min[A(x1),A(x2)]for all x1, x2∈X and all λ∈[0,1]. The triangular fuzzy number is commonly used in decision making due to its intuitive membership function, μA(x), given by:(4)μA(x)=0forx<l,x−1m−1fora≤x≤m,u−xu−mform≤x≤u,0forx>u,in which l, m and u are real numbers with l<m<u. Outside the interval [l, u], the pertinence degree is null, and m represents the point in which the pertinence degree is maximum [53,55]. Trapezoidal fuzzy numbers are also frequently used in decision making processes [34,56].A fuzzy pattern is defined as a set of values of characteristics associated with a class of representation, which are immersed in an environment of uncertainty [58]. Several approaches based on fuzzy logic have been proposed for pattern classification, such as methods based on fuzzy clustering [59,60], fuzzy pattern matching [61] and fuzzy rules [21,62–64]. In problems where the classes of patterns can be characterized by general relationship among entities, it becomes attractive to build classifiers based on rules [65]. In decision making problems, fuzzy rule-based classification methods are especially useful for categorizing sets of alternatives according to their similarity. Ishibuchi et al. [21] proposed a rule-based classification method known as the simple fuzzy grid method. This method has been extensively used to develop new approaches for fuzzy pattern classification [63,64,66]. The simple fuzzy grid method partitions the pattern space into fuzzy subspaces and defines a fuzzy rule for each subspace, as shown in Fig. 1. The fuzzy rules are simultaneously used in fuzzy inference. Thus, the knowledge for classification problems is expressed by each fuzzy rule. The pattern classification method proposed by Ishibuchi et al. [21] consists of two procedures described in the following topics.Suppose that P patterns (x1p, …, xnp), p=1,2, …, P, with xnp∈[0,1] are given as a training pattern from m classes: Class 1 (C1), Class 2 (C2), …, Class m (Cm). In this step, the objective is to generate fuzzy rules that associate m classes with the patterns defined by xp. For this, a fuzzy rule structure of the type presented in Eq. (5) is used.(5)Ruler:IFx1pisA1rAND…ANDxnpisAnrTHENxpbelongstoCrwithCF=CFrIn Eq. (13), r is the label of fuzzy rule, Air(i=1,2, …, n) are fuzzy subsets in the unit interval [0,1], Cris the consequent and CF is the grade of certainty of the fuzzy rule. The value of Cris defined by one of the m classes, according to Eq. (6)[21].(6)βCT=max{βC1,βC2,…,βCm}Assuming that a rule set S is given to form a fuzzy rule-based classification system, an unknown pattern x=(xp1, …, xpn) can be classified by two procedures: (1) Calculate αCTfor T=1, …, m as(7)αCT=max{Σi=1nμAir(xi)CFr|Cr=CT;r∈S}and (2) classify x in the class that maximize αCT. When multiple classes take the maximum value, the pattern x cannot be classified [21].In a fuzzy inference system, output fuzzy variables are inferred from input fuzzy variables according to a set of logic inference rules in linguistic terms, which form the knowledge base of a fuzzy system [15,53,67,68]. A particular inference method, proposed by Mamdani [67], has been applied in a variety of problems. For instance, Liu et al. [69] combine fuzzy inference with life cycle assessment techniques to estimate environmental aspects in environmental management system. Lin et al. [70] apply fuzzy inference to potential hazard analysis and risk assessment of debris flows. Other studies found in the literature apply the Takagi Sugeno fuzzy inference [71]. Lin and Chen [72] present a method based on fuzzy inference for monitoring of ecologically sensitive ecosystems in a dynamic semi-arid landscape from satellite imagery. Chen et al. [73] and Chen [74,75] propose the use of fuzzy inference in applications involving the analysis of structural systems under external excitations.Fig. 2illustrates the main components of a fuzzy inference system [53,76]. The data base contains the input and output variables and corresponding fuzzy numbers. Fuzzification is the process that relates the numerical values of the crisp input variables to the values of the activated linguistic variables. The rule base contains the inference rules relating output variable (consequents) levels to input variable levels. Most usually if…and…then rules are used, as illustrated in Fig. 3[15,53,74,76].In the Mamdani inference method, the consequents in the base of rules are given by specialist opinions [53,74], making this method more suitable for supporting decisions in the supplier selection process [13,77]. The t-norm^(minimum) is usually adopted for the logic connective “and”, as expressed in Eq. (8).(8)μA(x)ANDμB(y)=MIN{μA(x),μB(y)}For the logic connective “or” s-norm V (maximum) is usually adopted, as in Eq. (9).(9)μA(x)ORμB(y)=MAX{μA(x),μB(y)}For each activated rule, the inference machine applies an implication relation R between the fuzzy number resulting from the logic operations, Ã, and the consequent,B˜.A commonly used implication operator is the Minimum (Mamdani), expressed in Eq. (10)[53,78,79].(10)μRA→B(x,y)=MIN{μA(x),μB(y)}Alternative operators are the Max–Min (Zadeh) and the Multiplication (Larsen), respectively in Eqs. (11) and (12)[53,78,79].(11)μRA→B(x,y)=MAX{1−μA(x),MIN{μA(x),μB(y)}}(12)μRA→B(x,y)={μA(x)*μB(y)}The output fuzzy number of each rule is defined by the composition between a fuzzy singleton and the implication relation. Composition operators of fuzzy relations commonly used are Max–Min, Max-prod and Max-Media, respectively in Eqs. (13), (14) and (15)[53,57].(13)SoR(x,y)=MAX{MIN(μS(x,y),μR(y,z))}(14)SR(x,z)=MAX{μS(x,y)*μR(y,z)}(15)S⊕R=MAX12(μS(x,y)+μR(y,z))Aggregation of the resulting composition operations for each rule is the final step in the inference process. Aggregation can be performed by different operators, such as arithmetic, geometric or harmonic means, Min and Max [53,57]. The Max operator is preferred when compensation between input variables is desirable [79]. The Max operator is given by:(16)AG(.)=MAX(μR1(x),μR2(x)…μRn(x))In the defuzzification interface, output fuzzy numbers are converted to a crisp number. A defuzzification technique commonly used is Center of Area (CoA), as in Eq. (17) where n is the number of discrete points of the fuzzy set.(17)CoA=Σk=1nμA(xk)*xkΣk=1nμA(xk)Alternatively, defuzzification can be made using the Mean of Maximum (MoM) and the First of Maximum (FoM) techniques given in Eqs. (18) and (19) respectively.(18)MoM=1mΣk=1mxk,where m is the number maximum points in the membership function A[15,60,64,78].(19)FoM=MinX{Max{μA}}The choice of operators in the inference machine depends on the situation at hand, as well as computational complexity of the inference process.Fig. 4presents the proposed method for supplier selection. The first step comprises definitions of performance criteria (ci; i=1, …, n) and sub-criteria ((scj; j=1, …, m)) A criterion refer to a group of related sub-criteria of supplier performance. For instance quality is a criterion that may group sub-criteria such as quality of conformance and commitment to quality management. The first step also comprises determination of the minimum performance level required for qualification in each performance criterion, Preqc. The performance level Preqcis determined by the decision makers and is defined as a linguistic term related to a fuzzy class. For instance, the performance level required for qualification in quality is the linguistic term “very good”.In the qualification process (step 2, Fig. 4), each stage of qualification relates to a criterion of performance, ci, which in turn is assessed by a set of sub-criteria, scjscj; j=1, …, k, where k≤m. In each stage of qualification, a fuzzy inference process combined with the simple fuzzy grid method takes place, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The antecedent variables are the sub-criteria that characterize the particular criterion of performance. For each antecedent variable, three linguistic terms are proposed, named “poor”, “good” and “excellent”.The consequent variable of the inference system is the performance of a supplier in the criterion related to that qualification stage. For each consequent variable, five classes are defined, called “very low”, “low”, “average”, “high” and “very high”. Triangular fuzzy numbers are defined for antecedent and consequent variables.The base of rules consists of if … and … then rules, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The inference process is defined as in the Mamdani method:•The consequents are given by specialist opinions;The t-norm ^ (minimum) is defined for the logic connective “and”, as expressed in Eq. (8);The Mamdani (Min) implication relation is used, as expressed in Eq. (11);The Max-Min composition operator is defined, as expressed in Eq. (23);Aggregation is performed by a Max operator, as defined in Eq. (16);The Center of Area (CoA) technique, as expressed in Eq. (17) is used for defuzzification in the qualification stages. Within each qualification stage, compensation between sub-criteria is desired. This argument justifies the choices of the Max operator for aggregation as well as the Center of Area (CoA) technique for defuzzification.After defuzzification, the crisp output of each qualification stage is classified into a fuzzy class of performance. For instance, in case the crisp output is 70, as indicated in Fig. 5, it activates class “average” with μA(x′)=0,2 and class “high” with μH(x′)=0,8. The performance class is the one with greater membership, that is “high”. This generates a linguistic output which is compared with the required performance, Preqc, pre-defined by the decision makers (Fig. 4). Only suppliers with a linguistic output at least equal its required fuzzy performance, Preqc, succeed in moving to the next stage. The sequence and number of qualification stages are situation dependent. For instance, quality, cost and supplier profile in this sequence can be defined as stages of qualification.In the third step (final choice, Fig. 4), the crisp output of each qualification stage of qualified suppliers become the input variables for another inference system. Following the Mamdani method as described before, this last inference system generates a global supplier performance index as the output, which is used to order suppliers and make final decisions on supplier selection. Three defuzzification operators were tested in this final inference system: the Center of Area (CoA), the Mean of Maximum (MoM) and the First of Maximum (FoM), so as to test the consistency of the ordering process. The final step aims to give feedback to alternative suppliers in their performance in the selection process so as to guide continuous improvement of performance of the base of suppliers.The computational routines for the proposed approach were implemented in MATLAB®. An illustrative case of application of the proposed method is presented next.A manufacturing company in the white goods sector wants to select new suppliers for a new product. Supplier selection qualification process is based on four stages, related to four criteria of suppliers’ performance: product, supplier, quality and logistics. Three sub-criteria aligned with its manufacturing strategy were used in each qualification stage, totalizing 12 sub-criteria for the four qualification stages. Table 3presents the performance sub-criteria related to each criterion and their sequence in the qualification process. Performance of suppliers in the sub-criteria was scored as grades ranging from zero to 100 (the universe of discourse). Since there is no supply history, evaluation was based on perceptions of decision makers.For the fuzzy inference approach, triangular fuzzy numbers were used to specify the membership function of antecedent and consequent variables as illustrated in Fig. 6a and b respectively with three and five linguistic terms. Table 4presents the parameters of the triangular fuzzy numbers for the linguistic terms of the antecedent variables. The lower, modal and upper values of the triangular membership functions were chosen so as to better represent the linguistic terms of each sub-criterion. For the consequent variables, the triangular fuzzy numbers, representing the classes of performance, are presented in Table 5.Defining the rules of inference was based on the perceptions of three decision makers from distinct functional areas: one from purchasing, the other from quality management and the third one from manufacturing. The rules implement the expected influence of the antecedents on the consequents concerning the perspective of each decision maker. Each decision maker devised a set of if…and…then logic rules relating the classes of suppliers’ performance to the antecedent fuzzy pattern. For instance, if reputation is “excellent”, easy of communication is “good” and relationship is “good”, then, according to a decision maker, the supplier profile is “high”. It is important to emphasize that the weights of the sub-criteria are implicit in the rules.For each stage of qualification, a set of 27 rules were defined totalizing 108 rules. Table 6presents the inference rules for the inference system of the first stage of qualification, related to the product. Fig. 7illustrates the rule viewer of Matlab for the first FIS of qualification step. Each rule is a row of plots and the antecedent and consequent variables are in the columns. For instance, for rule 18, the activated terms for variables sc1, sc2and sc3are respectively “good”, “excellent” and “excellent”. The graph in the last line and last column represents the output resulting from aggregation of the activated rules (15, 18, 24 and 27).Likewise, in step three, final choice, a set of 81 rules were devised by the decision makers relating the output of the four qualification stages (antecedent) to a global index of supplier performance (consequent).A set of supplier alternatives with given scores on the 12 sub-criteria were defined by the decision makers, as presented in Table 7. For each supplier alternative, Table 8presents the crisp output and its corresponding fuzzy class output in each qualification stage; and Table 9presents the status, either qualified or disqualified, of each supplier alternative based on the comparison with the required fuzzy class, Preqcin the four qualification stages. It can be seen from Table 9 that all alternative suppliers were able to pass stages one and two. Suppliers A1 to A3 failed to pass stage 4, logistics, while suppliers A6, A7 and A10 failed to pass stage 3, quality. In the end, four out of ten alternative suppliers were qualified in all stages.The results presented in Table 9 show the non-compensatory nature of the qualification process as a whole. For instance, despite the more than adequate performance of supplier A2 in stages one to three, it was disqualified because its performance in the last stage was below the required level. However, it is interesting to note that within each qualification stage, the compensatory rule is applied. For instance, the score in sub-criterion cs8 of supplier A1 was compensated by the scores in the other sub-criteria considered in stage three, quality, and it led to an output above the required level, as shown in Table 9.After qualification, in step three (final choice), the objective is to order the suppliers which passed qualification; in this case suppliers A4, A5, A8 and A9. The ranking is based on the global performance index, which is the output of a fuzzy inference system that has as inputs the crisp outputs of the four qualification stages. Tables 10 and 11present the parameters of the triangular fuzzy numbers for the linguistic terms of the antecedent and consequent variables. The inferences are based on a set of 81 rules, as presented in Table 12.In step three, the compensation level depends mainly on the choices of linguistic terms of the consequent used for setting the inference rules as well as the type of deffuzification operator. In this case, three different deffuzification operators were used for comparison: the Center of Area (CoA), the Mean of Maximum (MoM) and the First of Maximum (FoM).Table 13presents the scores of qualified suppliers in each qualification stage and the score of the global performance index obtained by them. Despite small differences in the global performance index depending on deffuzification, all three operators led to the same ranking as presented in Table 14. Finally, decision makers can give feedback to alternative suppliers using linguistic terms regarding their classes of performance as evaluated in the selection process.Sensitivity analysis of the outputs of the inference systems was made with the purpose of testing:•The interaction effects of the input variables of the FIS on the output variables;The relative weight of the input variables implicit in the inference rules of each FIS;The compensation effect between the input variables resulting from the chosen fuzzy operators.To test the rules and fuzzy operations of the inference systems of the qualification stages, a full 3k factorial design technique was used [80]. The input variables were set to crisp values in the range of the linguistic terms defined in each rule so that the pertinence degree was maximum. For instance, to test rule 6 in Table 5, the input variables environmental adequacy, cost benefit analysis and technical capability were set to crisp values of 0.0, 60.0 and 100.0 respectively. The output resulting from the fuzzy inference system was 66.7, as presented in Table 15. The Center of Area (CoA) was used for defuzzification. The crisp value settings for the three input variables and three linguistic terms for all the 27 rules tested, as well as the fuzzy inference output are presented in Table 15. Tests were run under Minitab 16®.The graphs in Fig. 8show the interaction effects of the input variables of the FIS of the first qualification stage. The y-axis of the graphs indicates the crisp output of the FIS. The lines in the graphs show the variation of the crisp output depending on the level of interacting sub-criteria. For instance, the graph (a) shows that when the level of the criterion cost benefit analysis increases from level one to three, the output increases approximately the same no matter the level of the criterion environmental adequacy. Analyzing the set of graphs in Fig. 8, it can be seen that the set of decision rules leads to no significant interaction effects between the input variables, which means there is no trade-off between them. It can also be seen that the output variation in all graphs is about the same. However when the criterion cost benefit analysis is set to level one (graph (c)), the range of output variation is well below the range of variation when it is set to levels two or three, meaning that the weight of cost benefit analysis is higher than that of environmental adequacy. Graph (d) also reveals that the weight of technical capability is higher than that of environmental adequacy. The graphs also show a partial compensation effect between input variables. For instance, in graph (d) the output increases when technical capability increases, partially compensating the poor performance in cost benefit analysis.The same analysis was made for all the inference systems, confirming their sensitivity. For the final choice inference system, Table 16presents an extract of the crisp value settings of all the rules tested, for the 4 input variables, as well as the output crisp values according to the three different defuzzification methods used. Fig. 9shows the graphs of the interaction effect between product and logistic criteria for the three defuzzification operators used. For instance, considering the results produced by the CoA operator, when the product is “excellent”, the outputs are in the range 70–80 depending on the level of the logistic variable. For the other operators, the range is wider than that, meaning that the compensation effect of CoA operator is slightly better than the others.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
