@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evolutionary fuzzy SVR modeling of weld residual stress

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modeling is done for weld residual stress prediction using three intelligent tools.Performance is measured in terms of computational speed and accuracy.Results review that fuzzy support vector regression model trained with GA outperforms other models.Developed model enhances industrial automation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Manufacturing,Welding,Residual stress,X-ray diffraction,Support Vector Regression,Genetic Algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Residual stresses are an integral part of the total stress acting on any component in service. It is important to determine and/or predict the magnitude, nature and direction of the residual stress to estimate the life of important engineering parts, particularly welded components. Researchers have developed many direct measuring techniques for welding residual stress. Intelligent techniques have been developed to predict residual stresses to meet the demands of advanced manufacturing planning. This research paper explores the development of Finite Element model and evolutionary fuzzy support vector regression model for the prediction of residual stress in welding. Residual stress model is developed using Finite Element Simulation. Results from Finite Element Method (FEM) model are used to train and test the developed Fuzzy Support Vector Regression model tuned with Genetic Algorithm (FSVRGA) using K-fold cross validation method. The performance of the developed model is compared with Support Vector Regression model and Fuzzy Support Vector Regression model. The proposed and developed model is superior in terms of computational speed and accuracy. Developed models are validated and reported. The developed model finds scope in setting the initial weld process parameters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to intense concentration of heat in heat source of welding, the regions near the weld line undergo severe thermal cycles, thereby generating inhomogeneous plastic deformation and residual stresses in weldment. Welding-induced residual stresses play an important role in the function of welded structures. Different experimental methods for measuring welding residual stresses such as neutron diffraction [1], Barkhausen Noise analysis [2], X-ray diffraction [3], deep hole drilling [4], holographic interferometry [5], Ultrasonic technique [6] and incremental hole-drilling [7] are available. All these methods require special equipment and are expensive. These techniques are limited in obtaining the entire picture of the residual stress distribution in weldment. Later finite element methods were applied to solve welding residual stress problems [8–11].Although the finite element method has emerged as one of the most attractive approach for computing residual stresses in welded joints, its practical application to design problems has been limited due to computational difficulties. Analytical modeling [12] and numerical modeling [13] were applied to determine weld residual stress. Due to the inability of the mathematical models to explain the nonlinear properties existing between the input and output parameters, intelligent techniques such as fuzzy logic, support regression techniques, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) have emerged. Genetic Algorithm [14,15], ANN [16,17], and hybrid algorithms [18–20] are applied to optimize various parameters in manufacturing process. However, the constructed architecture of ANN model using backpropagation algorithm is based on the empirical risk minimization (ERM) principle. ERM pursues minimizing the error on the training data, so it may fall into a local optimal solution due to the overtraining problem. Support vector machine (SVM), by Vapnik [21] is based on statistic learning theory and the structural risk minimization principle that pursues minimizing the upper bound on the expected risk. In conventional Support Vector Regression (SVR), the training process is very sensitive to noise or outliers in the training samples [22]. Fuzzy logic, is a powerful tool to deal with uncertain, vague and ill-posed problems, has been introduced to overcome limitations of SVR [23]. Inspired by Lin and Wang's fuzzy SVM [24], a Fuzzy SVR (FSVR) is proposed and developed for weld residual stress prediction. For accurate residual stress estimation, it is necessary to find a reliable optimization approach to select the optimal FSVR parameters settings. An evolutionary approach Genetic Algorithm (GA) [25] is introduced to choose optimal parameters for the Fuzzy Support Vector Regression (FSVR). This paper addresses the development of evolutionary support vector regression (EFSVR) model for weld residual stress prediction. The results are compared with the developed SVR and FSVR models and validated.The proposed scheme to predict weld residual stress goes through three stages of development: (a) data acquisition, (b) development of Evolutionary Fuzzy Support Vector Regression model (c) validation of the developed model.The generalization performance of the FSVR models seriously depends on a proper setting of several parameters, such as the regularization parameter C, the insensitivity zone ɛ, the kernel function parameter σ, and the fuzzy membership parameters T, a, T1, and T2. A separate optimization of each parameter cannot guarantee the optimization of the FSVR model. Although several optimization approaches have been reported for SVR models, a set of parameters optimized for SVR would not work well in the FSVR model. In addition, there are more parameters that should be chosen for the FSVR model than for the SVR model. For accurate weld residual stress estimation, it is necessary to find a reliable optimization approach to select the optimal FSVR parameters settings. The proposed scheme is depicted in Fig. 1.In FSVR model, residual stress is estimated based arc efficiency, voltage, current and welding speed. The accuracy of the developed model depends on the membership functions chosen.The FSVR is modeled by minimizing following constrained risk function in Eq. (1).(1)R(w)=12wTw+C∑i=1Nμi(ξi+ξ′i)subject to the constraints of Eq. (2).Subject to the constraints(2)yi−wTφ(xi)≤ξ+ξi,i=1,2,…,NwTφ(xi)−yi≤ξ+ξi,i=1,2,…,Nξ′,ξ′i≥0i=1,2,…,Nwhere C is a regularization constant, controlling a compromise between maximizing the margin and minimizing the number of training set errors, and ξiand ξ′irepresents upper and lower constrains on the outputs of model and λ and ɛ are empirical parameters and |yi−f(x,w)|ɛ represents the ɛ-insensitive loss function, xiis the input vector to the SVR model, yiis the corresponding actual output value, and N is the number of input data, ϕ(x) denotes a nonlinear mapping function from the input space x to a high-dimensional feature space, w and b are the support vector weight and the bias. A smaller μicorresponds to attaining data point xiwith less important. This constrained optimization problem is defined as the following Lagrangian function in Eq. (3).(3)J(w,ξξ′,α,α′,γ,γ′)=12wTw+C∑i=1Nμi(ξi+ξ′i)−∑i=1N(γiξi+γiξ′i)−∑i=1Nαi[WTϕ(Xi)−yi+ε+ξi]−∑i=1Nα′i[yi−wTϕ(xi)+ε+ξ′i]where α, α_, γ, and γ_ are the Lagrange multipliers. The optimization of J(w, ξ, ξ_, α, α_, γ, γ_) must satisfy the following conditions:(4)∂J(W,ξ,ξ′,α,α′,γ,γ′)∂w=w−∑i=1N(αi−α′1)ϕ(xi)=0(5)∂J(W,ξ,ξ′,α,α′,γ,γ′)∂ξi=γi−(Cμi−αi)=0(6)∂J(W,ξ,ξ′,α,α′,γ,γ′)∂ξ′i=γi−(Cμi−α′i)=0To formulate the corresponding dual problem of Eq. (3), substitute conditions of Eqs. (4)–(6) in Eq. (3). A convex function is obtained(7)Q(αiα′i)=∑i=1N(αi−α′i)−ε∑i=1N(αi+α′i)−12∑i=1N∑i=1N(αi−α′i)(αj−α′j)K(xi,xj)The solution to the constrained optimization problem can be obtained by maximizing Eq. (7) subject to a new set of the constraints(8)∑i=1N(αi−α′i)=00≤αi≤μiC,i=1,2,….,N0≤α′1≤μiC,i=1,2,….,NWith the Lagrange multipliers αi and α*i, the estimated output can be represented by(9)y=∑i=1N(αi−α′i)K(x,xi)+bwhere K(x, xi) is called the kernel function. According to the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker's (KKT) conditions of solving quadratic programming problem, only some of the coefficients αi−α*I are not zeros, and the corresponding training data vectors are called support vectors. In this study, FSVR equipped with the RBF as the kernel function. Generally, RBF yields better prediction performance and is defined as(10)K(xi,xj)=exp||Xi−Xj||2σ2The chief step before establishing the FSVR model is to address the choice of membership values μithat falls in the unit interval [0,1]. The output of SVR is used as the pre estimation of the residual stress, and then, fuzzy membership is generated. Suppose the pre estimation value for input data xiis denoted byyiˆ, and its corresponding expected goal is di. Compute the Euclidean distance betweenyiˆand di(denoted by ei), and then the membership values is calculated as follows:(11)Linear:μi=−ei−e_e¯−e_+T(12)Exponential:μi=ei−e_powa,ei−e_e¯−e_+T(13)Piecewise:μi=1,ei<T11−ei−T1T2−T1,T1≤ei≤T20,ei>T2where e=mini=1, …,N ei, e=maxi=1, …,N eiand T, a, T1, and T2 are constants, which are used to control the effect of fuzziness to the model training. For instance, in the linear membership function, when T (0<T<+∞) is large enough, the FSVR degenerates to a classical SVR. In the exponential membership function, larger a (a>1) corresponds to faster attenuation of membership values.In the piecewise membership function, T1 and T2 (e<T1, T2<e) determine which parts of data are totally used in the model training, which parts are partially used, and which parts are abandoned [26].SVR model is constructed using four welding parameters such as arc efficiency, voltage, current and welding speed as input variables and residual stress as the output variable. The input variables are transformed into high dimensional space using nonlinear transformation which are defined by inner product functions and get optimal hyper plane in this space. Output layer is the linear combination of the intermediate nodes, each intermediate node corresponds to a support vector. Convex quadratic programming is used in getting the solution to avoid getting struck in local minima. Performance of SVR regression model depends on error ɛ, error penalty factor C and kernel function parameter γ, hence the parameters ɛ, С and γ are optimized. The training parameters are initialized as 0.01, 10 and 64 respectively. Sets of input–output pairs from Table 1are K-fold cross validated using five folds and are used to train the proposed model. To achieve optimal prediction performance of the proposed SVR regression model radial basis function kernel function is employed.Mechanical and thermal response of a weldment is a three dimensional problem that requires a considerable amount of computational time. A two dimensional analysis is carried out with appropriate assumptions to reduce computational time preserving computational accuracy. In this simulation a 2D finite element analysis is used to simulate the 3D welding since quasi-steady state exists under uniform welding speed.Dimensions of 100mm×45mm×10mm two ASTM A36 mild steel plates are modeled and simulated using ANSYS software to form gas metal arc butt weld. Chemical compositions of ASTM A36 steel are given in Table 1. Assumptions followed during the thermal and stress analysis are listed below:(i)Welding is simulated as a single pass.Bottom surface of the weld area is fixed to prevent body movement.No penetration and overfill of the weldments are considered.Initial temperature conditions for both weld and base metal are at uniform temperature of 27°C.Heat loss due to radiation and forced convection due to shielding gas is neglected.Heat loss coefficient is assumed for all surfaces is 0.0001Btu/in2°F.Heat losses or gains from phase transformation are neglected.Heat losses due to radiation and convection influences on microstructures and cooling rates of the weld metal are neglected.Weld model is simulated by bilinear strain hardening properties. The model is meshed with thermal solid element PLANE 55 for the weld bead region and PLANE 35 for the work piece. The convection and radiation surfaces are meshed with LINK34 and LINK31. The mesh density is made very fine in fusion zone, fine in HAZ and course in other zones for accuracy. The real constant for the convection and radiation elements are specified. For the structural analysis, the thermal elements are converted to its corresponding structural elements i.e. Solid Quad 4 node 42 and Triangle 6 node 2. The mesh used in the stress analysis is identical to that in the thermal analysis and the meshed workpiece as depicted in Fig. 2. Due to high stress and temperature gradients near the weld, the finite element model has a fine mesh in both sides of the weld center line. The total number of elements used in the model is 623. Heat flux is applied over the weld bead as the load input to the thermal analysis. Eq. (14) gives the arc heat input(14)q=ηa*V*IABased on the requirement of the weld bead area the amount of heat flux supplied to the weld plate changes and is found by Eq. (15)[19,27].Weld bead area,(15)A=I0.55(103.95*S0.003)where q is the arc heat flux in w/m2, ηais the arc efficiency, V is the arc voltage in volts, I is the arc current in amps, S=welding speed, mm/min and A is the weld bead area in m2. Welding speed is incorporated using load step options in the analysis. Governing differential equation for two dimensional transient heat transfer during welding is given in Eq. (16).(16)−∂qx∂x+∂qy∂y+Q=ρcp∂T∂twhere qxand qyare the components of heat flow rate vector per unit area in the plate (x; y), Q the heat generation, ρ the density, cpthe specific heat and (∂T/∂t) represents the temperature distribution with respect to time which is expected as the output from thermal analysis.Four welding parameters are given as the input for this analysis and they are arc efficiency, voltage, current and welding speed. The working ranges of the parameters were taken from the American Welding Society handbook. Heat input to the model is the product of arc efficiency, voltage, and current [28]. Material properties of mild steel [29] are shown in Fig. 3(a–c). Poisson's ratio is taken as 0.3. Boundary conditions are modeled by nonlinear heat convection and heat emissivity coefficients. Non-linear transient thermal analysis is conducted first to obtain the global temperature history generated during the welding process. In thermal analysis heat flux is given as the load (arc heat) to the workpiece incorporating welding speed in terms of load step time. Stress analysis is carried out with the temperatures obtained from the thermal analysis as the loading to the stress model. The output obtained out of this analysis is longitudinal residual stress distribution over the workpiece after cooling. Residual stress is obtained at the required nodes using the time history postprocessor and recorded in the weld bead and in the workpiece/weld bead interface. Results in Table 2are used to train and test the proposed SVM models.In the development of GA–FSVR modeling the chromosome X is represented by X={p1, p2, p3, p4, p5}, where p1–p5 are binary coded and denote parameters C, ɛ, σ, T1, and T2, respectively. Parameter settings for the GA–FSVR modeling is shown in Table 3. The GA begins with an initial population of coded solutions to the problem. Then, each chromosome is evaluated by several objective functions. Given the FSVR estimated value yi(i=1, …, N), the expected value di(i=1, …, N), and the support vector weight w, three objective functions are defined to evaluate the fitness of current chromosome(17)F1=1Nπ3∑i=1N|yi−di|(18)F2=wTw(19)F3=Count(|αi−αi*|>0),i=1,2,…,Nwhere Count() represents the operation of number counting. The objective function F1 lets the FSVR model accord with the training data, while F2 and F3 guarantee the smoothness of the regression model and avoid the over fitting problem.In the Genetic Algorithm sorting procedure, the individuals in the current population are first identified. In order to maintain diversity in the population, these classified individuals are shared with their dummy fitness values. Then, the individuals of the first front are ignored temporarily, and the rest of the population is processed to identify individuals for the second front. After the selection, operation based on the dummy fitness value, normal crossover, and mutation operators are carried out to create an offspring population. In GA, the term chromosome is referred to as a candidate solution that minimizes a cost function. As the generation proceeds, populations of chromosomes are iteratively altered by biological mechanisms inspired by natural evolution such as selection, crossover, and mutation. GA's require a fitness function that assigns a score to each chromosome (candidate solution) in the current population, and maximize the fitness function value. The fitness function evaluates the extent to which each candidate solution is suitable for specified objectives. GA starts with an initial population of chromosomes, which represent possible solutions of the optimization problem. The fitness function is computed for each chromosome. New generations are produced by the genetic operators, such as selection, crossover, and mutation. The algorithm stops after the maximum allowed time has elapsed.The implementation of FSVR model is as follows:Step 1: Normalize training and testing data.Step 2: Obtain the membership for each training data.1)Estimate the weld residual stress using SVR.Compute the Euclidean distance between every output and its corresponding goal.Compute the membership using Eqs. (11)–(13).Step 3: Optimize parameters of FSVR using GA.Step 4: FSVR.1)Solving the quadratic programming problem.Obtain the weld residual stress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Evolutionary FSVR model is successfully employed to predict weld residual stress. Data sets from finite element analysis are validated by five fold cross validation method and then used to develop the SVR model. Meanwhile fuzzy mechanisms are introduced, to deal with the problem of vague data and FSVR model is developed. The generalization performance of the FSVR model is improved by setting several empirical parameters using Genetic Algorithm. Genetic Algorithm is introduced to choose optimal parameters for the FSVR. GAs are a class of structured random search procedures that mimics the process of the biological mechanisms of reproduction. GA starts with a population of candidate solutions to an optimization problem, with each solution encoded as a string of symbols (called a chromosome).An objective function is used to evaluate the fitness of each chromosome. In each round of optimization, a fitter chromosome receives a higher probability to be selected to bear the subsequent generation. After the selection, chromosomes are subjected to crossover and mutation, which represent the operations of exchanging portions between chromosomes and altering parts of a chromosome string, respectively. When a termination criterion is reached, the iteration of optimization is stopped, and the fittest chromosome is the solution of current optimization problem.The trained and tested SVR models will predict the requisite values of residual stress for given set of parameter combinations in real time without any extensive and expensive computations. The performance characteristics of the developed models are compared in terms of computational speed and accuracy. Results from confirmatory experiment prove that the developed evolutionary FSVR model achieves the best prediction performance prediction than the other models. The developed models are validated. As a result utilization of the developed model in manufacturing brings good quality of products reducing the residual stress developed due to efficient decision making in selection of process parameters. The scope of the paper is to aid the process planners to make intelligent decision making in choosing the appropriate process parameters to reduce the residual stress induced during welding.