@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The privacy–personalization paradox in mHealth services acceptance of different age groups

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the privacy–personalization paradox in mHealth service acceptance.Trust can mediate the effects of perceived personalization and privacy concerns on acceptance intention.For younger potential users, acceptance intention is largely driven by perceived personalization.For elder potential users, privacy concerns have no influences on acceptance intention.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
mHealth services,Privacy–personalization paradox,Trust,Adoption intention,Age differences,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mobile health (mHealth) services have gained increasing attention in recent years; however, few studies have focused on the manner in which customers’ attributes affect acceptance behavior, for instance, personal privacy concerns and personalization concerns; with even fewer studies on the effects on different age groups. To fill this research gap, our research has developed an attribute–perception–intention model, using the privacy–personalization paradox factors as independent variables that affect mHealth acceptance intention, with trust as a mediator. The age differences of participants were then examined. A survey of 650 subjects in China was conducted to test the proposed research model and hypotheses. The results show the following key findings: (1) perceived personalization and privacy concerns are positively and negatively associated with behavior intention; (2) trust mediates the relationships between perceived personalization, privacy concerns and behavior intention; and (3) age differences are examined in the model, which in this respect differ from previous technology acceptance research. Theoretical and practical implications are also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
People in emerging economies worldwide are enjoying gradual improvements in the quality of life and paying more attention to healthcare (Varshney 2014). With the rapid development of the mobile communication industry, there is great interest in the provision of health-related services via mobile telephones or other mobile devices. Such a service is known as ‘mHealth’. Accordingly, the use of mobile technology in healthcare, i.e., mHealth services, has gained rapidly increasing research attention in recent years (Zhang et al. 2014).Whilst the potential benefits of mHealth services are obviously evident, including more efficient health care, availability for remote medical monitoring and consultation, as well as reduced medical costs, literature on mHealth diffusion is rather limited. Moreover, previously constructed models have focused mainly on perceived usefulness; perceived ease of use viewed from the standpoint of the technology acceptance model (TAM); or threat appraisal and coping viewed from a health behavior perspective. However, the constructs of consumer attributes have been generally ignored (Chellappa and Sin 2005, Sun et al. 2013).Among the limited studies on this issue, Chellappa and Sin (2005) have partially narrowed the research gap, in examining how consumer attributes, such as privacy concerns and scope for personalization, affect the likelihood of the adoption of personalized services. This study thus discusses the acceptance of mHealth services from the perspective of consumer attributes. Furthermore, we extend the findings of Chellappa and Sin (2005) by investigating the impact of privacy concerns and personalization on adoption intention, mediated by trust. Indeed, trust has been regarded as a form of mediation in many fields, such as social networks (Levin and Cross 2004), service marketing (Auh 2005) and organizational citizenship behavior (Ertürk 2007). However, the mediating role of trust in the relationship between the privacy–personalization paradox and behavior intention has rarely been explored. This paper thus develops an attributes (privacy and personalization) – perceptions (trust) – acceptance intention model to study consumers acceptance behavior in their use of mHealth services. Furthermore, personality changes across a person’s lifespan have received widespread attention, becoming an important focal point in social science research and theory. The IS literature has used age as a key moderating variable in technology acceptance (Chung et al. 2010, Morris and Venkatesh 2000, Venkatesh 2000, Vijayasarathy 2004); however, almost all the moderating effects of age that were previously discussed have focused only on potential adopters’ perceptions towards new technology, such as perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, perceived quality, and perceived self-efficacy. The effects of age on attributes associated with behavior intention has received minimal attention, even though considerable research points to its significant role in technology acceptance (Chung et al. 2010). Moreover, mHealth is using mobile technology to assist in health practices, and thus health technology acceptance behavior should also be considered as a health behavior (Laugesen and Hassanein 2011, Sun et al. 2013). As the age differences in mHealth may relate to technology and health factors, its complexity warrants multiple approaches and perspectives. Nonetheless, to date, age differences in technology and the health comprehensive context are seen to have been rarely explored.To narrow the aforementioned research gaps, this study aims to address the following research questions:RQ1: What is the privacy–personalization paradox in mHealth service acceptance?RQ2: How can privacy and personalization be balanced with consumer trust?RQ3: Can the privacy–personalization paradox factors provide a different explanation of the intention to adopt mHealth services among the young and the elderly?To address these questions, an integration model based on the privacy–personalization paradox, and trust and age differences was developed. Next, the model was empirically tested with empirical data. This research has both theoretical and practical implications. From the theoretical perspective, this research contributes to the privacy–personalization paradox by using trust to balance the paradox. This research further tested age differences in the privacy–personalization paradox, which provides very useful perspectives, relating to both health and technology, for both technological acceptance research and the paradox. By incorporating age as a moderator in the attribute–perception–intention model, this study highlights age-related differences in consumers’ attributes on mHealth services, and also highlights age-related differences in the technology and health comprehensive perspective. Finally, this research extends mHealth literature by exploring the privacy–personalization paradox and age differences in this emerging service. It can also provide suggestions for practitioners to reduce the paradox and cross the age induced digital divide in mHealth diffusion.This paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we elaborate on the theoretical foundations of the research. In the following section, the research model and hypotheses of this research are proposed. We then provide an overview of the proposed methodology, followed by a discussion of the results and implications. In the Conclusion, we summarize the findings of our research.As a subset of eHealth (electronic healthcare), mHealth has many advantages over general eHealth, including increased flexibility, timeliness and mobility (Akter et al. 2011, Akter and Ray 2010). In fact, mHealth can be defined as the utilization of emerging wireless information and communication technologies to transmit healthcare services, which are applicable for service receivers to acquire health services through mobile devices such as mobile phones, smart phones and PADs (Akter et al. 2011, Istepanian et al. 2006). Characteristically, mHealth can provide three kinds of health services (Phillips et al. 2010): (1) promotion services which are aimed at diagnosis, treatment and management of diseases and delivering treatment or disease management programs to patients; (2) prevention services which are designed for monitoring and intervention of diseases and improving treatment compliance; and (3) procedural services which are aimed at improving health care processes, e.g. appointment attendance, test results and advice notifications. As mobile information and communication technologies are rapidly growing in low income countries, mHealth services are increasingly efficient in dealing with current health problems and have huge potential in these countries (Consulting 2009, Guo et al. 2013, Phillips et al. 2010).Largely due to the emerging nature of mHealth as a healthcare technology, insufficient research attention has, to date, been devoted to its diffusion. An exception is the study of Cocosila and Archer (2010) which investigated the obstacles (risk factors) of potential users’ adoption of mobile information communication technology (ICT) for health promotion from a motivational perspective. By integrating TAM and TPB and examining both their technological and organizational aspects, Wu et al. (2011) studied how healthcare professionals adopt mobile healthcare services. To provide a unified understanding of the acceptance of mHealth services, Sun et al. (2013) introduced health factors from the protection motivation theory to study the consumer acceptance of mHealth services. Guo et al. (2013) explored the enablers and inhibitors of mHealth adoption behavior among the elderly. Akter et al. (2011) studied the establishment of trust in mHealth services and observed its positive impact on consumer trust and the continuance use intention. Based on an expectation confirmation model, Akter et al. (2013)’s in another paper used perceived service quality and perceived trust as key post-adoption beliefs to explore the continued usage of mHealth services for low income populations.After reviewing the literature on mHealth services, we perceive that most previous research on the acceptance of mHealth services are from a general technology or service perspective and thus do not provide fresh perspectives on mHealth characteristics. In order to add insights to mHealth literature, two significant research gaps need to be filled. First, mHealth can provide more personalized health services than general health services and technologies based on users’ personal health information, which may lead to privacy concerns. However, the privacy–personalization paradox has failed to receive adequate attention in mHealth context; and is not concerned with how to balance the paradox. Second, the demographic differences in technology acceptance and health behavior are usually researched as separate areas of focus. As the mHealth service is a combination of technology and health factors, the demographic differences in mHealth related behavior are more complex. However, the demographic differences in mHealth are also under-explored (Zhang et al. 2014).To narrow these research gaps, this research aims at providing an understanding of mHealth acceptance behavior from a privacy–personalization paradox perspective, focusing on how to balance the paradox with consumer trust and the age differences in the decision process.Trust has been explored in many disciplines because it can reduce uncertainty and induce reliance on, another person or entity, as well as enhance desirable behavior (Gefen et al. 2003), especially in Internet contexts (Salo and Karjaluoto 2007). As a popular topic of research, trust has thus been well established (Gefen and Heart 2006). According to Akter et al. (2011), trust in the field of IS can be defined as intentions, beliefs, attitudes or behaviors. Within this broad concept of trust, the two streams of trusting intention and trusting beliefs are widely accepted by most researchers (Gefen and Heart 2006, Salo and Karjaluoto 2007). ‘Trusting intentions’ refers to the truster’s willingness to depend on the object of trust, while ‘trusting beliefs’ are viewed as a set of specific beliefs that the truster attributes to the object of trust (McKnight et al. 2002).It is well established that mHealth services result in great benefits, becoming more personalized once consumers share the required personal information to meet the definition of trusting beliefs. According to Akter et al. (2011), trusting beliefs require more attention in mHealth services. Based on the above arguments, trust in our paper refers to trusting beliefs, which is consistent with trust research (Gefen and Heart 2006, Komiak and Benbasat 2006, McKnight et al. 2002). In the research context, trusting beliefs refer to the consumers’ perceptions that the providers or marketers of mHealth services are trustworthy and would offer personalized services that prove beneficial to users.Trust as a multi-faceted concept that incorporates competence (TBC), integrity (TBI), and benevolence (TBB) is posited by Phillips et al. (2010), McKnight et al. (2002), Akter et al. (2011) and Istepanian et al. (2006) et al. In these studies, benevolence is perceived as providers caring about their consumers’ welfare, and that they are acting in the consumers’ interests. By the same token, competence refers to the providers’ ability to perform effectively (by meeting consumers’ needs) and integrity refers to providers’ honesty in fulfilling their promises (McKnight et al. 2002). In our paper, trust is used as a multidimensional construct with sub-constructs, and we use these dimensions to illustrate how they enhance the perception of trust on providers.Personalization technologies offer users a wider range of different services to choose from, however, by the same token, they require users to disclose more personal information, which can raise privacy concerns (XU et al. 2009). This has been exacerbated by the emergence of smartphones, as the typical mobile phone characteristics are capable of gathering personal information more closely (Sutanto et al. 2013). For example, healthcare, which has been made available on mobile platforms, can reduce the need for face-to-face interaction and even render treatments available through remote operations. Consumers must share their health information (e.g., health status, preferences, living habits, or phone numbers) to service providers to utilize personalized services (e.g., personalized care which circumvents geographical barriers, time-saving services, and consulting services). However, this results in privacy concerns relating to the collection of consumer information: an apparent technological paradox (Awad and Krishnan 2006). Although consumers want to utilize personalized services, they are reluctant to disclose personal information or at least seek to reveal as little information as possible. Having illustrated this privacy–personalization paradox, we shall now move forward to discuss privacy and personalization in greater detail.Personalization exists in many fields and has been well defined in the previous literature (e.g., Consulting 2009, Akter et al. 2013, Cocosila and Archer 2010). Wu et al. (2011) defined personalization as meeting one’s wants and needs by using minimal personal information. Sun et al. (2013) refer to personalization as delivering “the right content to the right person in the right format at the right time.” After a study of prior research, this research adopts the definition of personalization as the extent to which the services provided by providers are based on individuals’ preferences, taste, personal behaviors or geographical location (Salo and Karjaluoto 2007). Similar definitions are adopted by Chellappa and Sin (2005) and Sheng et al. (2008). In the mHealth context, personalization can thus be defined as the provision of appropriate health services for specific health conditions and diseases to consumers via mobile devices.As consumers begin to seek personalized services, privacy concerns arise simultaneously. Varshney (2014) conceptualized privacy as a group or individual’s right to isolate themselves or withhold information about themselves: in other words, keeping personal information out of the reach of others. The notion of privacy is certainly not new, and many scholars have attempted to redefine privacy in order to strengthen broader privacy literature (Angst and Agarwal 2009, Hong and Thong 2013, Sutanto et al. 2013). More recent privacy studies are not concerned with privacy per se, focusing more on exploring concerns of information privacy (Angst and Agarwal 2009, Pavlou 2011). In such a research context, consumers release their personal information to enjoy the diverse and extensive benefits of mHealth services, but concern for privacy renders them hesitant to use these services. It is widely accepted that mHealth services are a recent development, and customers remain uncertain about the providers’ behavior and entertain doubts on whether their information can be accessed and used in ways unknown to them. Therefore, privacy is a key issue in mHealth diffusion.Demographic differences among potential consumers are associated with behavior intention (Gefen and Straub 1997, Morris and Venkatesh 2000, Morris et al. 2005, Wang 2014). A large proportion of research has focused on gender differences in new technology acceptance (Sutanto et al. 2013, Verbrugge 1985, Wang et al. 2008, Zhang et al. 2014). Studies on age differences are still relatively under-researched (Lai and Li 2005), and there are even fewer in the eHealth context, which is also related to health related factors.Some studies have focused on age differences in technology acceptance, indicating that there are differences in the intention behavior among different ages (Chung et al. 2010, Morris and Venkatesh 2000, Venkatesh et al. 2012). The study of age differences in technology acceptance is important in theory development and age related interventions (Reuter et al. 2010). Morris and Venkatesh (2000) were among the first researchers to link age differences and IS research. They explored the antecedents and moderating role of age in the TPB model, showing that age played a significant role in both short-term and long-term technology usage. As the effect of age on TAM has received minimal attention, Chung et al. (2010) linked age differences into the technology acceptance model (TAM) to study user perceptions on online communities; however, the moderating role of age was not presented. Other researchers have used self-developed models (Anusic et al. 2012, Baams et al. 2011, Reuter et al. 2010) or focused on a certain age group to study age differences (Heart and Kalderon 2011, Hughes 1993).According to Featherman and Pavlou (2003), “validity of theoretical constructs that comprise models of health behavior change has not been well documented across all segments of the life span.” With increasing age, physical and psychological activity changes, which, in turn, will affect one’s health condition and decision making (Reuter et al. 2010). Scholars have recently begun to realize that exploring age differences of behavior intention in the health context is both meaningful and important. Ziefle et al. (2010) studied pervasive healthcare system acceptance by adults between the ages of 40 and 92years. They discovered that age differences played an important role in health related technology acceptance. Erickson (2012) tested not only the effect of age differences in relation to motivation for mental health information processing, but also on help-seeking attitude and intention. Sintonen and Immonen (2013) studied the intention to adopt the technology based the services of aging people. Guo et al. (2013) discovered that “dark side” constructs influenced the elderly in adopting mHealth services. Therefore, event though the age factor has been included in health behavior research, the role of age differences in the combined context of technology and health has been rarely explored.The overall research model for this study is illustrated in Fig. 1. The hypotheses are proposed in three stages. The first stage (M1) concerns the direct effects of attribute variables on behavior intention, the second stage (M2) focuses on the mediating role of trust and the third stage (M3) is relevant to age differences in the research model.In the mHealth context, personalization refers to the customization and recommendation of health services according to specific patients and their diseases. Given this new type of medical business model, mHealth beneficiaries can readily include patients of different cultures, and with different physical characteristics and different diseases. Furthermore, mHealth providers should consider the potential variability of different health cases. Thus, personalization is imperative in the provision of mHealth services.Many studies have shown that personalization is a key factor for providers (Schafer et al. 2001, Sutanto et al. 2013). The more personalized the product or service, the stronger is the likelihood of satisfying consumers’ needs, and thus the consumers are more likely to use it (Komiak and Benbasat 2006, Shuk Ying and Bodoff 2014). In the mHealth context, once the potential consumer’s stated preference is to use health services swiftly in an emergency, and if the mHealth providers can enact this functionality using their mobile information and communication technologies to delivery health services more swiftly, accordingly, the consumers will accordingly believe that mHealth is appropriate for them and thus their intention to accept it is enhanced. Therefore, we propose:Hypothesis 1Perceived personalization positively affects the consumer’s mHealth adoption intention.The privacy–personalization paradox suggests that customers need to disclose personal health information to get personalized health services (Awad and Krishnan 2006). Technologies in mHealth services have made remote health information retrieval, remote diagnosis, and remote consultation among others possible, but these functions are mainly based on the storing and analysis of personal health information, which raises users’ concerns of privacy infringements.Many studies have found that privacy concerns have a direct and significant impact on adoption intention in a web-based environment. Their findings suggest that online consumers’ intention to use personalization services is negatively influenced by individual specific concerns for privacy (Chellappa and Sin 2005, Sutanto et al. 2013); and that consumers are reluctant to make online purchases due to privacy concerns (Dinev and Hart 2006). This is a direct negative impact of privacy concerns on behavioral intention in the e-commerce services (Chellappa and Sin 2005). Therefore, we expect a similar negative relationship between privacy concerns and adoption intention in our research context. We thus propose:Hypothesis 2Privacy concerns negatively affect consumers’ adoption intention of mHealth services.Trust, as an acceptance determinant, is used to study its role in reducing uncertainty in technology acceptance (Chellappa and Sin 2005, Komiak and Benbasat 2006, Mou and Cohen 2014, Xiao and Benbasat 2007). Research suggests that consumers often hesitate in transacting with web-based providers because they are unfamiliar with suppliers and unwilling to share personal information for fear of irresponsible usage. Consequently, lack of trust affects consumers’ acceptance of personalized services. Trust thus plays an important role in commercial transactions because trust can eliminate the uncertainty about the undesirable behavior of providers (Wang and Chiang 2009). Numerous studies have confirmed the positive relationship between trust and use intention (Akter et al. 2013, Chellappa and Sin 2005, Gefen 2002, Gefen et al. 2003, McKnight et al. 2002, Pavlou and Gefen 2004).The initial diffusion stage of mHealth services was combined with a high level of personal health information sharing and uncertainties of the health process. As a result, consumers might rely primarily on the trustworthiness of the mHealth service provider based on its past behavior and performance. Therefore, when a new service is developed with a high degree of uncertainty and is not commonly known, consumers are likely to use trust as a critical factor when making decisions relating to adoption of technologies. Our current research posits that this relationship is also applicable to the adoption intention of mHealth services. Thus, we propose:Hypothesis 3Trust positively affects consumer’s mHealth adoption intention.With better representation of consumers’ personal information, mHealth providers can factor consumers’ needs and preferences and are then able to offer them a higher degree of service personalization. It follows, then, that if customers realize that the potential benefits of using mHealth services will outweigh their losses, they may trust the providers and give a better representation of their needs. Previous studies on personalization have also studied the linkage between personalization and trust (Lee 2005). Moreover, Nowak et al. (1999) indicated that perceived personalization induces favorable attitudes towards the providers or marketers, and further increases users’ trust in them. If a company were to provide personalized mHealth services, consumers would have an impression of a capable company, which would then increase their trust in it. Based on the aforementioned arguments, we propose:Hypothesis 4Perceived personalization positively affects consumer’s trust in mHealth services.Privacy in mHealth services refers to the extent to which using the services will infringe on personal privacy. When engaging services, consumers are hesitant to become involved in health services through the mobile platform (Sutanto et al. 2013). Although consumers are likely to use personalization services to some extent, they may not accept the services due to their uncertainty about the providers who may disclose their personal information. From prior research, privacy concerns work as inhibitors that form barriers for trusting technology providers (Angst and Agarwal 2009, Milne and Culnan 2004, Wu et al. 2012). Clearly, it is important for providers to establish trust in order to eliminate privacy fears and enhance their likelihood of acceptance of the services (Smith et al. 2011). Hence, their concerns for privacy may have a negative effect on trust in providers. In the mHealth context, we thus posit:Hypothesis 5Privacy concerns negatively affect consumer’s trust in mHealth services.It is widely believed that younger users are more likely to adopt new technology than the elderly in terms of two aspects (Morris and Venkatesh 2000). The first is related to perceptions. With the development of information technology, many new technological artifacts have come into being sequentially. Thus, most young people are digital natives who see technologies as part of their daily lives. They can thus be regarded as being pre-adopters of new technologies, i.e., young people with an active attitude toward these technologies. On the one hand, the young users are more familiar with the new innovations and accord more importance to the internal service characteristics (Abu-Ghazzeh 1996). The elderly, on the other hand, are often slower at adjusting to technological changes (Harrison and Rainer 1992). Thus, when making the decision of whether or not to adopt mHealth services, they are likely to be more anxious about the pre-adoption risks, such as the ability to use the services (Chung et al. 2010), loss of control (Laguna and Babcock 1997), fear of negative evaluation (Laguna and Babcock 1997) and fear of operational mistakes (Chaffin and Harlow 2005). As pre-adoption uncertainty increases for the elderly in the process of developing trust in mHealth services, they will rely more on the internal service factors when using the service e.g., factors related to their abilities (Abu-Ghazzeh 1996). Moreover, their reliance on the post-adoption perceptions of the service, e.g., whether using the service can meet their personalized demands and can expose their private information, will diminish. Hence, compared to younger potential users, the elderly tend to accord less importance to personalization and privacy concerns to preform trust. Thus we posit:Hypothesis 6The impact of privacy concerns and perceived personalization on trust is stronger for younger potential users.The second aspect is based on cognitive ability. Across their life spans, people accord different emphases on cognition (Advokat 2010). As people grow older and become “senior potential users,” they may face the problem of bodily system functions declining (Lee et al. 2011), resulting in the elderly facing more difficulties in learning new technologies. They often commit more errors and require more assistance when learning new technologies (Lee et al. 2011). In general, the elderly have a higher probability of failure in learning new technology than do younger users, and their previous failure in the learning experiences may subconsciously jeopardize their acceptance behavior (Githens 2007). As such, we propose that there are age differences in mHealth adoption intention. When making adoption decisions, the increased age is associated with more difficulties, and hence the efforts expectancy is more salient for elders, while young people will rely more on the performance expectancy (Venkatesh et al. 2003). As personalization, privacy and trust are all mainly based on the outcome expectancy of the service (Culnan and Bies 2003, McKnight et al. 2002), the young potential users would rely on more these factors, while the elderly would focus on how much effort is required to use the service. Therefore, older potential users will have a reduced attitude towards adoption intention of mHealth services compared to that of young people, even when they perceive the same level of personalization and privacy concerns and perform the same level of trust. Thus, we posit:Hypothesis 7The impact of privacy concerns, perceived personalization and trust on adoption intention is stronger for younger customers.Measures of the constructs were based on previous studies (see Appendix A for items used). All items were measured on a five-point Likert scale with anchors of strongly disagree (one) to strongly agree (five). The measures for dependent variable adoption intention were adapted from Johnston and Warkentin (2010); the measures for trust factors, including trust-benevolence, trust-integrity, and trust-competence were adapted from McKnight et al. (2002); the measures for privacy concerns were adapted from Featherman and Pavlou (2003); while the measures for perceived personalization were adapted from Komiak and Benbasat (2006). Then the measurements were translated in parallel, into Chinese by three groups of Ph.D. students, majoring in IS. Subsequently, they were asked to discuss their translations simultaneously, item by item, to ensure the quality of the Chinese questionnaire.Data for the study was collected through questionnaires administered in a field survey on the customers of a large company providing health services in Harbin, China. The company is planning to provide mHealth services to its current customers. Our targeted respondents are the current customers of the company. Few of the subjects had any previous experience of the mHealth services and it was the first time they would be gaining any knowledge about mHealth services. As the potential users lack prior knowledge about the new innovation, research in technology acceptance always shows that an introduction to the innovation is presented before the measurement of subjects’ responses (Davis et al. 1989, Morris and Venkatesh 2000). Thus, before filling out the printed questionnaires, subjects were introduced to mHealth services (i.e., what is the mHealth service and its functions) so as to ensure that subjects had an understanding of the personalization services. To ensure the robustness of our results, we sampled for diversity across different industries, including organizations, technologies, business units, as well as across different age groups. To ensure a good response rate, incentives (10 eggs) were provided to those who submitted the completed survey.We conducted the survey separately among the younger and older customers in two training sessions for the two groups with the same service introduction and survey process. From 700 respondents, we obtained a total of 650 valid questionnaires after removing incomplete forms. The participants belonged to different age groups and held different positions. The demographic information of the subjects is presented in Table 1.In China, The majority of patients with chronic diseases are those aged over 50 in 2013 (NHFPC 2014), which are expected to be core potential consumers of mHealth services. In the 1980s, computer education gradually became common in China (Wilson et al. 1988), so the population group aged above 50 mainly missed the opportunity of acquiring formal IT education at school. On the other, hand, mobile Internet users above 50years of age, only comprised 3.7% of the total number of users in 2013 (CNNIC 2014). Thus, there was a concern of whether this age group would accept newly introduced technology (Yu et al. 2009). This study therefore used 50 as the cutoff age for distinguishing the elderly from the young users.For data analysis, we analyzed the reliability and two types of validity, i.e., convergent validity and discriminant validity, following which we assessed the structural model and tested the hypotheses. In our research, the analysis of both the measurement model and structural model was conducted using the SPSS and Smart PLS, which estimates the parameters in the outer and inner models and fits when the purpose of the research is exploratory (Chin 1998).Reliability is the consistency of a set of measurements that reveal a strong mutual interrelation between two outcomes measured by similar methods of the same construct (Campbell and Fiske 1959). To assess the reliability of constructs, we checked the composite reliability (CR) and average variance extracted (AVE) (Chin 1998). As shown in Table 2, the CRs exceeded 0.900, a measure high above the suggested cut-off value of 0.70 and AVEs were equal to, or greater than 0.728, exceeding the accepted threshold of 0.50, which indicated a well-constructed reliability (Chin 1998, Fornell and Larcker 1981, Wetzels et al. 2009).The convergent validity relates to the degree to which scale measurements for the same construct provide the same results (O’Leary-Kelly et al. 1998). The item loadings were examined to assess the convergent validity of constructs and any value smaller than 0.7 was considered to be insufficient (Komiak and Benbasat 2006, Lai and Li 2005, McKnight et al. 2002). The measurement items used in the present research generally loaded heavily on their respective constructs and item loadings ranged from 0.809 to 0.917 (see Table 3), higher than 0.70, thus supporting convergent validity.The discriminant validity is the extent to which there is dissimilarity of the measurement of two different constructs (McKnight et al. 2002, O’Leary-Kelly et al. 1998). From prior research, the discriminant validity is tested by comparing the square roots of AVEs with the correlations of this variable with any other model’s constructs (Awad and Krishnan 2006, Chin 1998). Using the item-level correlation matrix (see Table 3), we can observe that all square roots of AVEs were significantly higher than those of the correlations, and the discriminant validity was therefore acceptable. Our measurement model has thus been verified to be reliable.As discussed in the preceding paragraph, trust comprises three dimensions: benevolence, competence and integrity. The degree of explained variance is thus reflected in its components. As shown in Table 4, competence comprises 81.3%, benevolence 83.9% and integrity 86.0%. Furthermore, all the path coefficients were significant at p<0.01.As our data was collected from single respondents of a company, common method bias could influence the validity of the results (Podsakoff et al. 2003). To check for such bias, we used a modified marker variable analysis to test our model. Following Rönkkö and Ylitalo (2011), three items in our data set, which have low correlation with the items in this study, were used to measure the marketer variable. Next, the marketer variable was incorporated into the model with its impacts on the endogenous variables. The results showed that the variable had no impact on trust and behavior intention and the hypothesized relationships had no significant differences regardless of whether the marketer variable was introduced into the model. The results suggest that common method bias had little impact on the results of our study (Rönkkö and Ylitalo 2011).The structural model was tested in three stages according to the hypotheses: the first stage tested the direct impact of perceived personalization and privacy concerns on adoption intention; the second stage tested the mediating role of trust; while the third stage explored the age differences in the model. The results of the first stage showed perceived personalization to be positively associated with adoption intention (β=0.469, t=8.740), and privacy concerns to be negatively associated with adoption intention (β=−0.167, t=2.988). The variance of AI was explained by 28.2% Thus, Hypotheses 1 and 2 are supported.The results of the second stage are presented in Fig. 2. The results show that trust has a significant impact on adoption intention (β=0.544, t=7.980). Moreover, perceived personalization is found to be positively associated with trust (β=0.611, t=11.72), and privacy concerns are negatively associated with trust (β=−0.228, t=4.760). Hence, Hypotheses 3 to 5 are supported.Models involving a mediator are common in behavioral science (Preacher and Hayes 2008). To test the mediating effect in detail, we used the four-step method proposed by Baron and Kenny (1986). The first step was to test the effects of IV on DV; the second step was to test the effects of IV on trust, the third step was to test the effect of trust on DV; whilst the fourth step was to test the integrated effects of IV and trust on DV; following which the Sobel test was used to test the mediating effects (Sobel 1982). As shown in Table 5, trust fully mediates the effect of privacy concerns and personalization on adoption intention.Despite our surveying of younger and older users separately as younger customers were only available at weekends, the loading patterns and factor loadings of different latent constructs were very similar. Consequently, the moderating role can be tested by assessing the differences in path coefficients for each subgroup (Hsieh et al. 2008). To examine age differences, path comparison testing was conducted between the two groups (the younger and the elderly). First, we tested the H1–H5 separately for the two groups (the younger group aged below 50 and the elderly group aged above 50). We then compared the path coefficients based on the method developed by Chin et al. (2003), which is widely used in the IS context to test the moderating effects when the moderating variable is categorical (Chang et al. 2014, Hsieh et al. 2008, Keil et al. 2000, Kuegler et al. 2015, Qureshi and Compeau 2009, Sia et al. 2009, Udo et al. 2012). The results are shown in Table 6.By comparing the path coefficients of H1 and H2, we concluded that age differences actually exist in mHealth acceptance behavior, even though the results partially differ from previous studies. With increasing age, the effects of perceived personalization on adoption intentions decrease, however the effects of privacy concerns become insignificant. In other words, privacy concerns have negative effects on behavior intentions among younger consumers, but do not affect the elderly. Regarding the age differences in Hypotheses 3–5, we found that the attribute–perception–intention model also indicated different results among different groups. For younger customers, the effects of perceived personalization on trust and the effects of trust on behavior intention are stronger than those of the elderly. However, privacy concerns of the elderly have little effect on trust. Thus, H6 and H7 are partly supported.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
