@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective approach to optimal placement and sizing of multiple active power filters using a music-inspired algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new multi-objective method based on THD, HTLL, MLLF, and total APFs currents to eliminate harmonic distortion in the electrical distribution network is taken into account.The flexibility of the proposed approach improves by using multiple active power filters (M-APFs) in the PLAS process. Due to existing harmonic pollution at high levels and low rating current of an APF; therefore, an APF cannot improve power quality as acceptable level.A new modified optimization algorithm is utilized to overcome the difficulties in solving the mixed-integer non-linear nature of the PLAS problem and determine the optimal final solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Active power filters (APFs),Harmonic transmission line loss (HTLL),Min–max technique,Modified harmony search algorithm (MHSA),Motor load loss function (MLLF),Total harmonic distortion (THD),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a new multi-objective framework for optimal placement and sizing of the active power filters (APFs) with satisfactory and acceptable standard levels. total harmonic distortion (THD) of voltage, harmonic transmission line loss (HTLL), motor load loss function (MLLF), and total APFs currents are the four objectives considered in the optimization, while harmonic distortions within standard level, and maximum allowable APF size, are modeled as constraints. The proposed model is one of non-convex optimization problem having a non-linear, mixed-integer nature. Since, a new modified harmony search algorithm (MHSA) is used and followed by a min–max technique in order to obtain the final optimal solution. The harmony search algorithm is a recently developed optimization algorithm, which imitates the music improvisation process. In this process, the Harmonists improvise their instrument pitches searching for the perfect state of harmony. The newly developed method has been applied on the IEEE 18-bus test system and IEEE 30-bus test system by different scenarios and cases to demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed method. The detailed results of the case studies are presented and thoroughly analyzed. The obtained results illustrate the sufficiency and profitableness of the newly developed method in the placement and sizing of the multiple active power filters, when compared with other methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, development of power electronic-based equipments connected to the electrical distribution networks leads to many difficulties such as harmonic current problems. Harmonic current by these non-linear loads can lead to waveform distortion of system voltages, torque pulsation, heating in rotating machines and transformers, higher losses, reducing the life age of devices, etc. [1,2]. Traditionally, one solution for harmonic problems has been passive R–L–C filters. Passive filters include resistance and tuned capacitance and inductance, which can be connected in series or parallel to the bus load. On the one hand, the passive R–L–C filters have large size and parallel resonance and on the other hand, these filters can be eliminated only a specific harmonic; therefore, active power filters (APFs) were developed in the 1970s to overcome passive filters problems [2]. Roughly speaking, the APFs inject equal-but-opposite currents to network as this current is a summation of total harmonic component in order to eliminate the non-sinusoidal components of the non-linear loads [3–6]. The first APF was used for harmonic compensation in 1982. The nominal power of this APF was 800kVA. A hybrid filter by an APF with nominal power of 900kVA and a passive filter with power rating of 6600kVA was utilized in 1986 [7]. Also, more than one hundred APFs have been operating properly in JAPAN by Mitsubishi Company. Given the capabilities and abilities of the APFs, notably in the harmonic elimination, many studies have been concentrated on the APFs in recent decades [8–12]. A recent research issue involving the proper siting and sizing of APFs was named the optimal PLAcement and Sizing (PLAS) problem of the APFs [8–15]. In these studies, the size of APFs is determined by its maximum effective injection current. Also, harmonic standard constraints, APFs locations and sizes, existing harmonic pollution levels and network topology are main factors in the utilization of the APFs. There are many mathematical models available for solving the PLAS problem related to the APFs. The proposed models can be classified as two types of objective functions and two types of constraints [8–15]. The first types of objective functions minimize the voltage distortion to decrease the undesirable effects of harmonic distortions on the electrical distribution networks. The other types use harmonic standards on voltage harmonic distortion and total harmonic distortion (THD) levels to minimize the injected currents of APFs. The PLAS problem of the APFs basically represents an optimization problem in which different objective functions may be utilized: total harmonic distortion (THD), telephone influence factor (TIF), harmonic transmission line loss (HTLL), motor load loss function (MLLF), etc. [12–20]. The PLAS problem of a single APF is investigated in numerous studies [2–4,9,11–15], and multiple APFs in others [11,13]. In Refs. [5–10,15], the APFs size is reported as discrete variables; thus, the PLAS problem of APFs is modeled by a mixed-integer non-linear optimization problem (MINLP). The first types of constraints are harmonic standards applied to the level of voltage harmonics and THD in different locations according to the IEEE-519 standard [11–15]. The second type of constraint is maximum current of an APF (i.e., APF size), which it is due to APF itself. The APF size has a discrete nature because of discrete sizes of inductors and capacitors, which utilized in its structure. Thus, in the PLAS problem, the discrete variables are APFs size [5,10–15]. Consequently, the PLAS problem of APFs is a complicated optimization problem, which formulized as a mixed-integer non-linear problem. In the last decade, plenty of evolutionary optimization techniques have been used to solve the single-objective optimization problems such as genetic algorithms (GAs) [15,21], discrete particle swarm optimization (DPSO) [11,12,14], improved particle swarm optimization (IPSO) [22], Tabu search algorithm (TSA) [10], generalized benders decomposition theory (GBDT) [23] and Lyapunov function [24]. Moreover, lexicographic optimization along with augmented epsilon-constraint method [25,26], incorporating lexicographic optimization and hybrid augmented-weighted epsilon-constraint method [27], corrected normal boundary intersection (CNBI) method [28], fuzzy method and max–min operator [29,30] have also been utilized so as to solve the multi-objective optimization problems. These studies showed that there are some weaknesses both in modeling – such as incomprehensive of objective functions, single-objective optimization model, and in evolutionary optimization techniques – such as insufficient precision, convergence speed, ignorance of flexibility optimization techniques, etc.This paper, then, concentrated on identifying a new multi-objective framework in order to solve PLAS problem of the APFs with satisfactory and acceptable standard levels. Optimization of the total APFs currents, namely, the APFs costs, THD of voltage, HTLL and MLLF are considered in this current study. Besides, the proposed PLAS problem takes into account four types of the APFs to enhance flexibility in control of harmonics. In order to obtain an optimum solution, a new modified harmony search algorithm (MHSA) is used and followed by a min–max technique, which is not trapped in a local minimum. Because of the compromised nature of the solutions and the role of human decision on the final solution of the multi-objective optimization problem, the min–max technique can be applied to solve the multi-objective problem. Also, in this study, by dynamically changing the pitch adjusting rate and the bandwidth parameters in any generation, search performance of the HSA will be modified. The newly developed method has been demonstrated on the IEEE 18-bus test system and IEEE 30 bus test system [11,13, 15 and 31] by three scenarios and cases to demonstrate the feasibility and usefulness of the proposed PLAS method. In order to the best of our knowledge, the main contributions of this paper over previous researches in the context of PLAS problem are threefold:(1)A new multi-objective method based on THD, HTLL, MLLF, and total APFs currents to eliminate harmonic distortion in the electrical distribution network is taken into account.The flexibility of the proposed approach improves by using multiple active power filters (M-APFs) in the PLAS process. Due to existing harmonic pollution at high levels and low rating current of an APF; therefore, an APF cannot improve power quality as acceptable level.A new modified optimization algorithm is utilized to overcome the difficulties in solving the mixed-integer non-linear nature of the PLAS problem and determine the optimal final solution.The rest of this paper is organized into six sections. Section 2 describes formulization of multiple active power filters in electrical distribution networks. The proposed placement and sizing problem of the multiple active power filters is presented in Section 3. In addition, solution algorithm of the proposed placement and sizing problem is presented in Section 4. Simulation results and case studies are demonstrated and discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 is devoted to conclusions and further research.In recent years, utilization and operation of reliable power devices have been increased in the electrical distribution networks for elimination of harmonics, phase balancing and power factor correction. One of the new reliable power devices used to improve quality of power delivered to the utilities is the APFs. Therefore, in this study, the PLAS problem of M-APFs has been considered to compensate harmonics and amend power quality in the electrical distribution networks and also prevent new installation of bulky passive filters [11–20].The proposed model for the APFs in this study is a common model for the APFs and has been utilized in numerous studies [11–15]. This model is a current source, as it injects harmonic currents into the network. The Phasor model of each APF is addressed in Eq. (1).(1)(If)bh=[(If)bh]r+j[(If)bh]i;∀b=1,2,…,B,∀h=1,2,…,HThe root mean square (RMS) current of each APF is also obtained according to Eq. (2).(2)(If)b=∑h=1H(If2)bhr+(If2)bhi;∀b=1,2,…,BIn addition, for a linear frequency domain analysis, the power system network is linearized; and for each frequency, all non-linear loads are regarded as current sources. Accordingly, the network impedance matrix can be obtained independently for each frequency [11,15].In this paper, a new multi-objective framework is addressed for the PLAS problem of the APFs. The proposed model simultaneously minimizes four objectives, namely the Total Cost of installed APFs, THD of voltage, HTLL and MLLF.In this paper, the dependent function of total harmonic distortion is a standard formulation that used by many studies [11–20]. Therefore, the THD of voltage can be obtained as follows:(3)THD=∑b=1BTHDb;∀b=1,2,…,Bwhere(4)THDb=∑h=2H(Vbus)bh2(Vbus)b1;∀h=2,3,…,H,∀b=1,2,…,BThe harmonics have detrimental effects on electrical motors such as proliferation losses, increasing temperature and aging. Hence, in this paper, to investigate these influences, the MLLF index has been defined by Eq. (5)[11,18–20]. The MLLF are almost proportional to the square of voltage directly and the proportional to harmonic order inversely. Given the MLLF formulation, effect of lower harmonics order on electrical motor is more than effect of higher harmonics order.(5)MLL=∑b=1BMLLb;∀b=1,2,…,Bwhere(6)MLLb=∑h=2H(Vbus)bh2h(Vbus)b1;∀h=2,3,…,H,∀b=1,2,…,BIn this paper, the aim is to meet the harmonic standard levels while the sum of APFs sizes is minimized. Therefore, injected currents of the APFs are considered according to Eq. (7). Maximum injected current of an APF is proportionate to its cost [11,14,15]. Accordingly, Eq. (7) will minimize total cost of the APFs [18–20].(7)If=∑b=1B(If)b;∀b=1,2,…,Bwhere(8)(If)b=∑h=2H(If)bh2;∀h=2,3,…,H,∀b=1,2,…,BAs indicated earlier, the harmonics have undesirable effects on power systems such as transmission capacity occupation, increasing loss, etc. Since, in this paper, to study these influences, the THLL index has been defined by Eq. (9)[11,18–20].(9)HTLL=∑h=2HHTLLh;∀h=2,3,…,Hwhere(10)HTLLh=∑b=1B∑b′=1b′>bBRb,b′h(Zb,b′h)2(Vbus)bh−(Vbus)b′h2;∀h=2,3,…,H;∀bandb′=1,2,…,BThe multi-objective proposed model is also subject to the following constraints, namely the harmonic distortions within standard level and maximum allowable APF size. Therefore, the whole mathematical structure of the proposed PLAS optimization is formulized below as follows.Minimize:(11)F1=THD(12)F2=MLL(13)F3=If(14)F4=HTLLSubject to the constraints:(15)(If)b≤(If)b¯;∀b=1,2,…,B(16)(If)b∈M;∀b=1,2,…,B(17)(Vbus)bh≤(Vbus)bh¯;∀h=2,3,…,H,∀b=1,2,…,B(18)THDb≤THD¯b;∀b=1,2,…,BEq. (15) indicates the maximum allowable APFs size. The APFs size can be either continuous or discrete. Due to the DC source in the APFs is implemented by capacitors and inductors which are discrete devices, ignoring this constraint lead to impractical results. Also, the value of the APFs sizes is equal to the smallest value of set M, according to Eq. (16). The M is a set of discrete values with zero and allowable values whenever APFs sizes are regarded discrete. The M is a set of real and non-negative values provided that, APF sizes are considered continuous. Eqs. (17) and (18) represent individual and total harmonic distortions, respectively. In addition, the voltage at bus b for harmonic order h i.e.,(Vbus)bhcan be obtained after APF installation as Eq. (19)[13].(19)(Vbus)bh=[(Vbus)bh]old+Δ(Vbus)bh;∀h=2,3,…,H,∀b=1,2,…,BThe second term of Eq. (19) is determined by Eq. (20) as follows:(20)Δ(Vbus)bh=∑b′∈B(Z)bb′h×(If)b′h;∀h=2,3,…,H,∀b=1,2,…,BThe voltage at bus b for harmonic order h is dependent on (1) impedance matrix, (2) injected current of the APF for harmonic order h and (3) voltage at bus b before APF installation. Based on, the impedance matrix and voltage at bus b before APF installation for harmonic order h are assumed as defined. The injected current of APF for harmonic order h is also supposed as decision variables in the PLAS problem. The real and imaginary sections of the voltage at bus b for harmonic order h can be calculated according to Eqs. (21) and (22)[15] as follows:(21)[(Vbus)bh]r=[(Vbus)bh]rold+∑b′∈B(Z)b,b′hr×(If)b′hr−(Z)b,b′hi×(If)b′hi;∀h=2,3,…,H,∀b=1,2,…,B(22)[(Vbus)bh]i=[(Vbus)bh]iold+∑b′∈B(Z)b,b′hr×(If)b′hi+(Z)b,b′hi×(If)b′hr;∀h∈2,3,…,H,∀b∈1,2,…,BMany algorithms for solving engineering optimization problems have been proposed, most of which are based on the linear and non-linear programming methods. Numerical optimization algorithms for finding a global optimal solution in ideal and simple model are useful. However, real and complex optimization problems have restrictions and are not efficient enough. Given the computational drawbacks in engineering optimization problems, researchers need to make use of meta-heuristic algorithms [11–20]. The harmony search algorithm is a meta-heuristic algorithm developed recently by Geem et al. [32] on the basis of the improvisation of harmony in the music composition. This algorithm has been inspired by music phenomenon. In the process of playing music, a wonderful state of harmony search is estimated to be based on standards of aesthetics such that instrumentalists experimentally, and step-by-step, play their instruments in order to achieve better sound and higher harmonies. This process is similar to the optimization process, where global optimal solution can be searched by evaluating the objective function, namely, fitness function. This is the main similarity between music phenomenon and optimization in harmony search algorithm. In this algorithm, solution vector is called “Harmony”. In other words, every harmony is a vector whose components are values assigned to decision variables of a problem. If problem has “N” variables, harmony or solution vector will also have “N” components [33,34]. In order to implement the harmony search algorithm based on the music phenomenon, it should be established in correspondence with the components in Table 1.The optimization process of the original HSA is represented with a flowchart in Fig. 1[34]. This process is classified in five phases for every considered optimization problem as follows [34–36]:•Phase 1 – Initialize of the problem and its parameters (i.e., input requirement data);Phase 2 – Initialize the harmony memory;Phase 3 – Improvise a new harmony (i.e., improvisation in music phenomenon);Phase 4 – Update the harmony memory;Phase 5 – Requirement of stopping (i.e., repeat of phases 3 and 4 when the stopping criterion is satisfied).In the first phase, the optimization problem is defined initially as minimize{f(x)|x∈X}subject to constraints, which “X” is the set of the possible range of the decision variables and “x” is the set of decision variables. Also, all parameters of the HSA which can change in any optimization problem are categorized according to Table 2.These parameters define and choose as input data for different problem in the first phase. It should be mentioned that the HM is similar to the “Genetic Pool” in the GA [32,36]. Here, the HMCR and the PAR are parameters that are used so as to improve the solution vector.In the initialization step, the HM matrix, demonstrated in Eq. (23), is filled with randomly generated solution vectors with a uniform distributed as HMS and sorted by the values of the objective function. The decision-making variables, namely, harmony vector, in the proposed PLAS problem are real and imaginary parts of APFs current for each harmonic.(23)HM=x11x21⋯xN−11xN1x12x22⋯xN−12xN2⋮⋮⋮⋮⋮x1HMS−1x2HMS−1⋯xN−1HMS−1xNHMS−1x1HMSx2HMS⋯xN−1HMSxNHMSIn defined structure, each set of decision variables was devoted by[(If)bh]rand[(If)bh]ias shown in Fig. 2. In the aforementioned figure, B is set of all candidate buses and h is harmonic order.Improvisation is the process of creating a new harmony from the existing memory. A new harmony vector, such asX′=(x′1,x′2,…,x′N), is generated according to three rules: memory observation, pitch adjustment and random selection. In this step, the value of the first decision variable is selected from one of the harmony betweenx11andx1HMS. The other decision variables in the HM are selected similarly with the probability of the HMCR as it varies between 0 and 1 based on Eq. (24).(24)x′i=x′i∈xi1,xi2,...,xiHMS;withprob(HMCR)x′i∈Xi;withprob([1–HMCR])The HMCR is the rate of selecting a variable from the historical data in the HM, and (1-HMCR) is the rate of randomly selecting one value from the feasible range of values. Each component determined by memory consideration is further examined to determine whether it should be pitch-adjusted. The decision of pitch adjustment is YES with the probability PAR, and NO with the probability (1−PAR), according to Eq. (25). In this equation, “rand” is a uniform random number between 0 and 1.(25)x′i=x′i+rand×BW;withprob(PAR)x′i;withprob([1−PAR])In original HSA, values of the PAR and also the BW are generally fixed, which it makes difficulties in the optimization process. In this paper, then, in order to improve the performance of the algorithm and eliminate the drawbacks associated with fixed values, a new idea using the PAR and the BW in third phase was presented [37]. Based on, the PAR changes dynamically with the number of generations according to Eq. (26).(26)PAR(Gen)=PARmin+[PARnormalized]×Genwhere(27)PARnormalized=(PARmax−PARmin)NIAlso, the BW alters dynamically with the number of generations according to Eq. (28).(28)BW(Gen)=BWmax×exp[(BWnormalized)×Gen]where(29)BWnormalized=Ln[BWmin/BWmax]NIIn this step, if new harmony vector is better than the worst harmony in the HM, the new harmony memory replace in the HM and the existing worst harmony discard from the HM. Moreover, computations of the algorithm are terminated when the number of improvisations (i.e., termination criterion) is satisfied.After determination of solution set, it is appropriate to determine a flexible and realistic solution that shows a trade-off among different objectives [38]. There are many methods for choosing a compromise solution among solutions set, but a fuzzy set is of great interest because of its simplicity and similarity to human logic. The fuzzy sets are clarified by membership functions, which show the degree of membership in a fuzzy set using values from 0 to 1 [13,38]. In the fuzzy sets, a strictly monotonically decreasing and continuous membership function is assigned to each objective. The value of the membership function indicates the extent to which a solution is satisfying the objective fq. There are some types of strictly monotonically decreasing and continuous functions which can be used as membership functions. In this paper, the linear type has been utilized for all objectives as follows:(30)μfq(X¯)=0;fq(X¯)≻fqmaxfqmax−fq(X¯)fqmax−fqmin;fqmin≤fq(X¯)≤fqmax1;fq(X¯)≺fqminFig. 3illustrates the graph of this membership function. To specify the membership functions of the criteria, at first, values of each criterion are calculated in different states during the optimization. So, individual maximum and minimum values of each objective would be calculated.By considering of the individual minimum and maximum values of each objective function, the membership functionμfq(X¯)for each objective function can be determined in a subjective manner. Then, to solve the proposed model as a multi-objective optimization problem with Q objective functions, the final solution is selected based on Eq. (31)[38].(31)minX¯{maxq|μrq−μfq(X¯)|};∀q=1,2,…,QAs stated hitherto, the APFs current at each bus for each harmonic order is considered as decision-making variables of the MHSA. The flowchart of the proposed method has been shown in Fig. 4. In addition, the process of the proposed algorithm can be summarized as the following step-by-step algorithm:(1)Input Data (i.e., network data, place of the non-linear loads and its current, constraints, membership function according to Eq. (30), etc.).Create initial harmony according to the HM matrix.Create initial solution vectors with “HMS” and the iterations for MHSA stop “NI”.Create the maximum harmonic orders with “H”.Set harmony algorithm iteration counter (iteration=1).Set solution vectors counter (NHMS=1).Set bus members counter (B=1).Set harmonic counter (H=1).Add all selected buses candidates and APFs current rating.Determine PLAS criteria, namely, THD, MLLF, HTLL and total APFs current, based on Section 3.a)Run harmonic power flow (HPF) problem.Determine the APFs current at each bus for each harmonic order according to Section 2.1.Save the APFs current value which is determined after running.Determine the bus voltage according to the(Vbus)h=(Ybush)−1⋅(Ibus)h;∀h=Hwhile by regarding the APFs at each(Ibus)h=(If)h−(Inon-load)h.Save bus voltage value which is determined after running.Find and save the fitness value of each criterion from their membership function.Find and save the minimum fitness values for each plan on the basis of min–max technique (Eq. (31)).NHMS=NHMS+1; IfNHMS≤HMSgo to step (9).Rank the best solution which has greater fitness value.Improvise the new harmony according to Sections 4.4 and 4.5.Choose and save best solution as the new harmony.iteration=iteration+1; Ifiteration≤NI.Perform improving operators on proposed algorithm, i.e., PAR and BW according to Section 4.5.Go to step (6).Save final solution corresponding to the best plan.Stop.The PLAS problem was applied to the IEEE 18-bus test system shown in Fig. 5[7,11–15]. It is worth noting that the network has been operated by several previous researchers in the context of the PLAS problem. The proposed problem was implemented in the MATLAB environment using a 2GHz dual core CPU and 2GB memory RAM. Network data for this test system can be found in Refs. [11,39]. The IEEE 18-bus system consisted of several linear loads and three non-linear loads located at buses 7, 24 and 25, which produced the 5th, 7th, 11th, 13th, 17th, 19th, 23rd and 25th harmonic orders. Also, three non-linear loads in buses 7, 24 and 25 are utilized with specification 2.5MW six-pulse converters. The required harmonic data from transmission impedances, voltage magnitude, its angles, etc. are provided in related studies [11,13–15].On the other hand, to apply the fuzzy method, the minimum and the maximum values for each objective function should be determined. The minimum and maximum values of the objective function have been assumed according to the standard guidelines [13,38]. The minimum value of the total APFs current has been obtained in a classic single-objective optimization. These data are applied to the PLAS problem as input data, as shown in Fig. 4. Also, the harmonic contents of the non-linear loads (i.e., harmonic current sources) are presented in Table 3. As further explanation, Fig. 6shows harmonic contents of the non-linear loads in terms of per unit. Also, THD, MLLF and voltage distortions at all buses can be obtained by the admittance matrix according to the step (10) from Section 4.8. TheIfhis considered a zero matrix, as the current authors ignored the APFs. Based on this, THD, MLLF and voltage distortions for all harmonic orders at all buses have been determined according to Table 4.It is notable that all obtained results rounded off to 3 decimal digits. By considering harmonic current sources, the results demonstrate that the network has a rather unallowable harmonic distortion level in the sense of the IEEE standard limit of 5%. Based on Table 4, average values of the THD of voltage, MLLF and HTLL at all buses have been calculated 10.228%, 3.930% and 3.505%, respectively. It is clear that these values are not satisfied standard levels. In this paper, the authors implemented three scenarios according to candidate busses to install APFs in the proposed PLAS problem. These scenarios are tabulated in Table 5. Furthermore, to increase flexibility of the proposed PLAS problem four types of the APFs are considered according to Table 6. On the other hand, in this study, the proposed PLAS problem of APFs is performed under three cases for comparison purposes. The distinctions between first and second cases is in the current constraints. The first, second and third cases are as follows:(1)First case: In this case, the algorithm ignores current constraints (i.e., it ignores APFs size).Second case: In this case, the algorithm considers current constraints (i.e., it applies APFs size) Hence, the algorithm utilizes integer multiple of the APFs size which considers to 0.01 in per unit.Third case: In this case, by regarding APFs size, the performance of the modified harmony search algorithm is compared with original one, non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-II (NSGA-II) and particle swarm optimization algorithm. The robustness of the proposed algorithms is also investigated according to the different trials.Also, the proposed PLAS problem has been performed by using MHSA. In the proposed algorithm, the number of HM matrix rows is equal to the HMS, and number of HM matrix columns is equal to the number of decision variables. In the HM matrix, each row indicates a harmony vector, namely, a solution vector. It fills according to the initialization phase (i.e., phase 2) and sorts by the values of the objective function. Afterward, the objective function is calculated for each harmony vector of HM matrix, subject to all of the constraints. Then, a new harmony vector is improvised from the HM. It should be mentioned that the number of new harmony vectors should be similar to the HMS. In update phase, each new harmony vector is compared with harmony vectors in the HM by its values of the objective function. If weaker vectors exist in the old HM, the stronger vectors will replace it. Accordingly, the new HM will have strongest vectors of improvised vectors and harmony vectors stored in HM. The newly developed algorithm will be stopped based on the maximum number of improvisations. The suitability of this parameter plays an important role in the accuracy and calculation time. The proposed MHSA parameters adjustments have been given in Table 7. These parameters are best after several runs of the proposed algorithm.In this section, ability and capability of the newly proposed PLAS problem are described, while the current constraints on APFs size are ignored, namely, the size of an APF is considered as continuous. The APFs size has a discrete nature because of discrete sizes of inductors and capacitors, which utilized in its structure; therefore, this assumption will be impractical. The optimal results and indices of proposed PLAS problem under the first case have been given in Tables 8 and 9, respectively. As shown in Table 9, after considering APFs, the maximum of the THD under the first scenario is 0.6392%. Hence, the value of THD has been improved in comparison with THD before considering APFs, which calculated as 10.228% (Table 4). The maximum of the MLLF with APFs has also been reduced from 3.930% to 0.1637% without APFs. The maximum value of the HTLL after applying APFs has been obtained as 0.0252%, compared to a value of 0.348% before applying APFs (Table 4). Accordingly, the proposed indices of the PLAS problem have been recovered in the presence of the APFs.In this case, the current constraints have not been implemented in the proposed model; consequently, the proposed PLAS problem has a higher freedom rate in the installation of the APFs. Hence, the total APFs current, namely, its cost, is increased and therefore, this assumption is both impractical and uneconomical.In this section, the algorithm is allowed to use current constraints and or to apply APFs size (i.e., the size of an APF is considered as discrete). The proposed PLAS problem with regards to current constraints, is an applicative and feasible problem. The algorithm is utilized integer multiple of the APFs sizes, which is considered as 0.01 per unit and their sizes are limited according to Table 6. To apply this assumption, the real and imaginary part of harmony vector is amended by Eqs. (32) and (33) at the beginning of the step 10 of Section 4.8[11].(32)[(If)bh]r=[(If)bh]r×ηb(33)[(If)bh]i=[(If)bh]i×ηb(34)ηb=round100×[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2100×[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2In Eqs. (32) and (33), the correction factor, namely,ηb, is used to correct the rating of the APFs located at bus b as integer multiples. Furthermore, in order to take into consideration the maximum APFs current, a change should be employed in harmony vector according to Eqs. (35) and (36)[13,40].(35)[(If)bh]r=[(If)bh]r;[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2≤maxIf[(If)bh]r×maxIf[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2;[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2≻maxIf(36)[(If)bh]i=[(If)bh]i;[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2≤maxIf[(If)bh]i×maxIf[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2;[(If)bh]r2+[(If)bh]i21/2≻maxIfThe THD, MLLF, HTLL and voltage distortions for all harmonic orders at all buses with APFs have been tabulated according to Table 10. In accordance with Table 10, it can be shown that the THD, MLLF, HTLL and voltage distortions at all buses with applying APFs size have been improved over objectives without applying APFs size. The results describe that by regarding APFs in the network, the harmonic distortion is eliminated at the similar buses of the non-linear loads. In order to more illustrate the results, Fig. 7depicts the THD, MLLF and HTLL before and after applying APFs for each bus under the second case. As it can be observed, after applying APFs, harmonic distortions are decreased considerably. Due to 5th, 7th, 13th harmonics have greater values than other harmonics; consequently, distortion level for three harmonics before and after applying APFs for each bus under the second case has been demonstrated in Fig. 8. As it expected, after applying APFs, the distortion level is reduced remarkably. Also, it can be observed that in the second case, the results are in acceptable and permissible levels, relative to IEEE standard limits.The optimal results and indices of proposed PLAS problem have been given in Tables 11 and 12, respectively. As shown in Table 11, the proposed multi-objective approach obtained five buses so that APFs were placed from sixteen candidate busses in the third scenario. Thus, optimal placement has been performed with a selection of a few buses from more accessible options. Moreover, Fig. 9shows total injected current of the APFs with and without consideration APFs size. In accordance with this figure, it can be found out that total injected current of the APFs has been decreased with respect to the APFs size; therefore, the total cost of the installation APFs will be reduced by considering current constraints. The convergence curves for each scenario according to the second case with respect to improvisation (i.e., iteration number) have been shown in Fig. 10. Form this figure, it can be seen that the third scenario has quick convergence than other scenarios; hence, the best objective values are belonging to the third scenario.In this section, the performance of the modified harmony search algorithm is compared with original one, NSGA-II and particle swarm optimization algorithm. The PLAS problem was also applied to the IEEE 30-bus test system shown in Fig. 11[31]. Network data for this test system can be found in Refs. [31,38]. The IEEE 30-bus system consisted of several linear loads and four non-linear loads located at buses 3, 8, 12 and 24, which produced the 5th, 7th, 11th, 13th, 17th, 19th, 23rd and 25th harmonic orders. Also, four non-linear loads in buses 3, 8, 12 and 24 are utilized with specification 2.5MW six-pulse converters. The harmonic contents of these non-linear loads, namely, harmonic current sources, are given in Table 3. All busses are considered as candidate for installing APFs. The robustness of the proposed algorithms is also investigated according to the three trials, as shown in Table 13. These three trials are defined under different settings of two important parameters: PAR, HMCR. Every component obtained by the memory consideration is examined to determine whether it should be pitch adjusted. This process uses the PAR parameter. The HMCR obtains the rate of selecting one value from the historical values stored in the HM. The proposed PLAS problem of the APFs has been performed by original harmony search algorithm and by modified harmony search algorithm and also by NSGA-II for comparison purposes. The NSGA-II is a meta-heuristic algorithm that utilizes non-dominated sorting and a crowded-comparison approach to find a set of evenly distributed solutions to a multi objective optimization problem [41]. The optimization process in the NSGA-II begins with a random population of solutions sorted by non-dominated sorting approach. In this sorting procedure, all non-dominated solutions are ranked 1 and are provisionally removed from the population. The next set of non-dominated solutions in the population is then determined and ranked 2. The procedure is followed until all the solutions are ranked. The population of parents is generated by implementing a binary tournament selection to the current population. The binary tournament selection randomly picks two solutions from the current population and selects the better one with respect to the non-domination rank. Solutions at the same non-domination front are compared by a crowding distance, which is a measure of the density of the solutions at the neighborhood of that solution. Then, a population of off-springs is generated by applying the genetic operators to the population of parents. The next population is formed by taking the best solutions from the combined population of parents and off-springs. The selection criteria are first the non-domination rank and after the crowding distance. The procedure is terminated when maximum number of generations is reached [42]. The proposed NSGA-II has been tested with the following parameters: population size=250, generation=500. The obtained results have been compared with calculated results by particle swarm optimization algorithm [11]. In Ref. [11], THD, MLLF, HTLL and total current of APFs has been implemented as a single-objective optimization model by weight coefficients and a discrete particle swarm optimization algorithm has been proposed as a non-linear optimized integer to obtain optimal results of the PLAS problem. In their case, the size of the APFs has been restricted only to 0.07 per unit. The obtained results with APFs size under the third scenario using original, modified harmony search algorithm and NSGA-II have been tabulated in Tables 14–16, respectively. In these Tables, the obtained results have also been compared with results from that previous study. Looking at Tables 14 and 15, it can be observed that the result obtained by large PAR is better than those calculated by small PAR. Therefore, the large PAR values usually cause the improvement of the solutions. Moreover, it can be seen that small HMCR reduces the efficiency of the algorithm and the algorithm behaves similar a pure random search, with less assistance from the historical memory. Also, the large HMCR achieves the less exploration and the algorithm further relies on stored values in HM and also this potentially leads to the algorithm getting stuck in a local optimum. As a result, the first trial of the parameters is preferable for solving PLAS problem of the multiple APFs. As shown in Table 16, result obtained by NSGA-II are somewhat better than original harmony search algorithm. Looking at Tables 15 and 16, it can be seen that result obtained by modified harmony search algorithm is better than those calculated by NSGA-II. The reason is that NSGA-II requires a large number of generations to approach the Pareto front. Hence, it may not be efficient in generating a Pareto set that covers the entire true Pareto front within a reasonably low number of generations. On the other hand, it can be found out that newly multi-objective method by using modified harmony search algorithm leads to more efficient results than original harmony search algorithm NSGA-II and particle swarm optimization algorithm. This predominance is especially apparent in total cost of the installation of the APFs and THD of voltage. Moreover, it can be seen that the obtained results of the original harmony search algorithm and NSGA-II are more favorable than similar results of the particle swarm optimization algorithm. As a result, it can be concluded that the newly multi-objective method by modified harmony search algorithm is more adequacy and profitableness than other methods for solving PLAS problem of the multiple APFs.Figs. 12–14illustrate the obtained Pareto optimal solutions against the value of the THD of voltage, the HTLL, the MLLF and the APFs current under the first trial. The interaction among the objective functions in Pareto optimal solutions could be different in various networks. As seen in these Figs., THD of voltage and the MLLF current have uncertain relation. Also, THD of voltage and the MLLF current have uncertain relation. These objective functions may attain their optimum values, simultaneously. The THD of voltage and APFs current, behave in a conflicting manner.This paper addressed a new multi-objective method in order to optimize placement and sizing problem with satisfactory and acceptable standard levels. THD of voltage, HTLL, MLLF and total APFs currents, namely, costs of the APFs, were considered in the optimization problem as four objectives. In the newly developed model, the effect of types of the active power filters was investigated in order to enhance flexibility in harmonic control. In order to cope with the non-convexity and non-linearity of the placement and sizing problem of the APFs, a new modified harmony search algorithm was used and followed by a min–max technique to obtain the final optimal solution. The main benefits of the proposed method are: it takes into account a comprehensive placement and sizing problem to eliminate harmonic distortion in the electrical distribution networks, it considers multiple APFs in the proposed model, it regards two cases under three scenarios based on the APFs size to investigate effect current constraints on placement and sizing problem and a case under three trials to study robustness of the proposed algorithms and finally, it improves the optimization technique by dynamically changing PAR and BW with the number of generations.The proposed multi-objective method was successfully applied to IEEE 18-bus test system and IEEE 30-bus test system. The obtained results from case studies revealed that THD of voltage, HTLL and HTLL were determined to be more efficient by considering the APFs in comparison to the proposed model in which they are ignored. Also, these results demonstrated that considering the APFs in the placement and sizing problem caused the total cost of the installation of filters to decrease and THD of voltage, HTLL and MLLF determine in more accurately. In addition, it was observed that the obtained results from the newly proposed approach, in accordance with the modified harmony search algorithm, were more economical and profitable than the results from the original harmony search algorithm, NSGA-II and discrete particle swarm optimization algorithm. Also, the newly proposed approach has higher accuracy in comparison with other employed approaches. Therefore, the newly proposed multi-objective approach may be an appropriate approach for improving power quality problems in the electrical distribution networks. There are several ways to develop the proposed method such as incorporating active and passive power filters to better control of harmonics or stochastic modeling which are under development by the authors.These mathematical symbols, used throughout this paper, are classified below as follows.b,b′index of all busesset of all busesan arbitrary distance bandwidthbandwidth for each generationminimum value of bandwidthmaximum value of bandwidthindividual objective of placement and sizing problemminimum value of the fq.maximum value of the fqgeneration numberindex of all harmonicsset of all harmonicsAPFs current (i.e., the size of the APFs) at bus bAPFs current at bus b for harmonic order hamplitude of the APFs current at bus b for harmonic order hmaximum of the APFs current at bus bnon-linear load current vector for harmonic order hinjected current vector for harmonic order hset of APFs size valuesmotor load losses at bus bpitch adjusting rate for each generationminimum value of pitch adjusting ratemaximum value of pitch adjusting rateindex of all objective functionsset of all objective functionsindices real and imaginary part of each equation, respectivelyrandom number between “0” and “1”rounding the variable to the next integerline resistance between bus b and b′ for harmonic order htotal harmonic distortion at bus bmaximum total harmonic distortion at bus b considered by standard levelamplitude of voltage at bus b for harmonic order hvoltage at bus b for harmonic order hvoltage at bus b for harmonic order h before APFs installationmaximum admissible value of voltage at bus b for harmonic order hbus voltage vector for harmonic order ha solution (APFs to be added to the network)admittance matrix of network at harmonic order himpedance matrixline impedance between bus b and b′ for harmonic order hcorrection factormembership function of solution X with respect to qth objectivereference level of achievement of qth objective (here 1)

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
