@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Customer empowerment: Does it influence electronic government success? A citizen-centric perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigated the impact of customer empowerment on e-government success.We proposed a theoretical model and an evaluation tool for this purpose.The model was validated through a survey and analyzed using partial least squares.This work may provide a new research avenue for customer empowerment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic government success,Customer empowerment,Personalization,Net benefit,Trust,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electronic government (or e-government) initiatives are widespread across the globe. The increasing interest in e-government raises the issue of how governments can increase citizen adoption and usage of their online services. In this study, the fundamental argument is that citizens can be viewed as customers, and that e-government success can be measured by the extent to which customer net benefits are positively influenced. Hence, the key consequents of e-government success are customer-related, and the antecedents of such success have to be considered from the customer viewpoint. We advocate that government agencies must consider their customers’ perceptions of empowerment as a key causal mechanism in deriving value from e-government systems. However, the literature appears to lack this perspective. This study aims to fill the gap by proposing a theoretical model and an associated evaluation tool that measures the e-government performance from a customer empowerment perspective. The model was validated by a survey method and analyzed using partial least squares. The results support our argument and show that all paths in the proposed model are significant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Information and communication technologies (ICT) have revolutionized the processes, operations and structures of public sectors in both developed and developing countries (Alshibly and Al-Dmour 2011; Rana et al. 2015). The application of ICT to government is considered a cost-effective solution that improves communication between government agencies and their constituents by providing access to information and services online (Vragov and Kumar 2013). Most government services are now established electronically, ranging from license registration and renewal, tax filing and payment to online voting. As a result, governments in different countries have implemented beneficial electronic government (e-government in short) initiatives, and others are following suit to enable their citizens to access services and information through the Internet (Karkin and Janssen 2014).Generally speaking, three types of e-government systems and services exist: Government to Government (G2G), Government to Citizen (G2C), and Government to Business (G2B). Government forms and services, public policy information, employment and business opportunities, voting, tax return, license registration or renewal, fine payments and so on fall under the category of G2C services (Wang and Liao 2008). There has been a recent shift of focus on creating a more citizen-centric e-government platform (Karkin and Janssen 2014), which provides services in line with citizens’ needs and offers greater accessibility. However, this endeavor cannot be guaranteed until e-government initiatives are embraced and utilized by citizens (Alshibly and Al-Dmour 2011). Consequently, citizens’ e-governance needs have become one of the primary concerns of government decision makers.Successful implementation of e-government depends on the ability to develop services that match the goals and requirements of citizens and stakeholders. However, limited previous research studies have investigated e-government success from a citizen-based perspective (Scott et al. 2009). Specifically, citizens’ needs or perceived net benefits have not been adequately accounted for, leaving a clearly evident gap between design and reality in e-government service provision (Al-Haddad et al. 2011). To this end, the concept of “customer” (i.e., citizen) empowerment is imperative for understanding how citizens value the services they use and what features of e-government systems and services influence their perceptions (Alshibly et al. 2015). Customer empowerment can be defined as a positive subjective state evoked by the feeling of increased control over the production of desired outcomes and the prevention of undesired outcomes relative to existing or previous systems (Hunter and Garnefeld 2008).In this study, we aim to investigate the impact of customer empowerment on e-government success. The fundamental argument is that e-government success can be measured by the extent to which customer net benefits are positively influenced, and hence the key consequents of e-government success are customer-related. The antecedents of such success thus have to be considered from the customer viewpoint, and we advocate that government agencies must consider their customers’ perceptions of empowerment as a key causal mechanism in deriving value from e-government systems. This research may potentially help to further understand the relationship between e-government and customer empowerment. It may also provide a new research avenue for customer empowerment.An often suggested surrogate indicator of information systems (IS) success is user satisfaction. Many IS researchers have regarded user satisfaction as the most important proxy of IS success, and it is also the most employed measure (Au et al. 2002; Petter et al. 2013; Zviran and Erlich 2003). Cyert and March (1963) were among the first to suggest the concept of user satisfaction as a surrogate of IS success. They suggested that if an IS meets the requirements and needs of its users, then user satisfaction would increase. Since then, IS user satisfaction has been the subject of extensive research, reaching its peak in the late 1980s. According to Ives et al. (1983), user satisfaction is “a perceptual or subjective measure of system success that provides a meaningful surrogate for the criticism, but immeasurable results of an IS, such as, changes in organizational effectiveness and success”. Zviran and Erlich (2003) suggested that measuring user satisfaction provides businesses with information about the system itself, because IS users could be considered as sensors that measure the attributes of their IS. An IS will be considered effective in meeting user needs if the users are satisfied. In an e-commerce environment, user-satisfaction is an essential criterion for gaining customer loyalty (Kim et al. 2012). Thus, it is considered a significant variable in measuring customer judgment, either positive or negative (Au et al. 2002). As a result, satisfaction in e-commerce includes the entire user experience journey, starting from searching for information through to purchasing and payment (DeLone and McLean 2003).E-government is essentially a form of IS, which shares similar characteristics with e-commerce in terms of providing services to or acting as an interactive channel for external users (customers and citizens). In fact, there have been some major overlaps between the core functions of e-government and e-commerce, which aim at exchanging information and/or conducting business transactions in a more cost-effective manner (Lin et al. 2011). These overlaps have motivated the former to learn from experiences of the latter, and adapt some of the e-commerce success stories in the e-government domain (Sørum et al. 2012). Consequently, many citizen-centric studies in the e-government domain have borrowed their models from the IS or e-commerce field (Rana et al. 2015; Wang and Liao 2008).However, it is debatable whether these “borrowed” models are really appropriate, as e-government systems clearly have some distinctive differences compared to general information or e-commerce systems. For e-commerce, the strategic objective of every private organization is profit-oriented. These organizations are mainly interested in providing good services and products so that they can gain a competitive advantage, and subsequently attract more customers (Al-Haddad et al. 2011; Fountain 2001). Otherwise, customers would turn to competitors and choose those who provide better services and products (Srinivasan et al. 2002). Hence, customer satisfaction is an important indicator of the success of an e-commerce application (DeLone and McLean 2004). On the contrary, in the e-government context, government agencies do not compete with each other, as each has its own specialty. They offer a variety of free public services targeting a bigger and more heterogeneous population (i.e., having different characteristics, like literacy, gender, income, etc.) than that of e-commerce (Al-Haddad et al. 2011). Moreover, each government agency provides a variety of services to the public. Hence, the purpose for which citizens use e-government applications varies widely from that of an e-commerce system. Therefore, it is important to separately consider the factors that determine the success of an e-government system.E-government services and facilities aim to provide convenience to citizens as well as to save their time and effort (Johnson 2008). As such, e-government success should be measured based on the value created through positive benefits experienced by a citizen using an e-government system. The concept of “net benefit” success measure (Petter et al. 2013; Scott et al. 2009) for e-government services provides a theoretical framework within which the broad dimensions of success can be conceptualized. This measure is considered preferable because it successfully captures the balance of both positive and negative impacts of the system on the user. When specifying the conceptual context of net benefits, DeLone and McLean (2003) recommended that the following three issues be taken into account: what counts as benefit, the individual or organization that benefits, and the level of analysis where it is considered beneficial. The clear focus of this study is an evaluation of the citizens’ perspective of e-government success and it is thus the user that defines the context or frame of reference as called for by DeLone and McLean (2003). Similarly, the benefits are to be measured from the individual’s perspective, defining the level of analysis for this study. Since the focus here is on measuring e-government system success from the citizens’ perspective, “net benefit” in this study refers to the citizen-perceived net benefit evaluation toward using a specific e-government system. Citizens and taxpayers may feel that they are not getting benefit for their money. They would like this benefit reflected in terms of cost/time savings and better e-government system performance. Thus, “net benefit” appears to be an important success measure of e-government systems. This is confirmed through the study by Wang and Liao (2008), who stated that the “perceived net benefit” is an important success measure of e-government.The concept of public values, as defined by Karkin and Janssen (2014) in the e-government context, involves considering citizens as customers who should be served at the lowest possible cost. One of the main arguments put forward by the public values paradigm is that citizens who are the collective demanders and users of public services should be the ones to decide what is valuable as a public commodity or service, rather than those who actually produce it (Cordella and Bonina 2012). Accordingly, in attempting to understand the antecedents of e-government success, we consider the customer not only as an end user for IS supporting e-government, but also as a traditional customer. Thus, the model concerns variables used to describe the achievement of customer-related objectives of a firm. The latter, we have suggested are encompassed in the concept of customer empowerment.Customer empowerment is a customer’s subjective experience that they have greater ability than before to intentionally produce desired outcomes and prevent undesired ones, and that they are benefiting from the increased ability (Hunter and Garnefeld 2008). It is a positive subjective state, which results from a mental comparison of a customer’s abilities (or beliefs that they have an ability) relative to existing or previous abilities. As such, it is only the perception of increasing control that evokes empowerment, and empowerment may be experienced regardless of whether control actually increases or not. This belief has been shown to be an important factor in shaping individual satisfaction (Fuchs et al. 2010; Hunter and Garnefeld 2008). Accordingly, such a positive belief should influence other judgments, including those of e-government net benefits. This motivates the hypothesis relating customer empowerment to e-government success (net benefits):H1Customer empowerment positively influences e-government success.Theories of power underpin conceptualizations of empowerment: “to empower means to give power” (Thomas and Velthouse 1990). Empowerment is the gaining of power in particular domains of activities by individuals or groups and the processes of giving power to them, or processes that encourage and facilitate their taking of power (Alshibly et al. 2015). The academic literature dealing with power has used diverse approaches adopted from disciplines including psychology, economics and management, and contains a corresponding range of views of the concepts of power and empowerment. Two views relevant to any investigation of customer empowerment are: the psychological view of power and empowerment; and the social relations view. This paper looks at these two theoretical bases for understanding the concept of customer empowerment, and then draws them together to provide a preliminary model of customer empowerment.The psychological view of power concerns an individual’s ability (or belief that they have an ability) to produce desired changes or influences. It is considered as a human need that individuals seek to satisfy (Schiffman and Kanuk 2009). Thus, Greenberger et al., (1989) has defined power as an individual’s beliefs, at a given point in time, in his or her ability to influence a change, in a desired direction, on the environment. Empowerment is the process of supplying the individual with the ability to produce such influences, in order to satisfy the desire for power. Rappaport (1987) described empowerment as the process of becoming able or being allowed to do some unspecified thing.Power and empowerment are also linked with control. Schiffman and Kanuk (2009) defined power as an individual’s desire to control his or her environment. Fatout (1995) defined empowerment as a process for providing individuals with more control by placing boundaries around an area of potentially acceptable behavior and allowing the individual to test and experiment with a variety of choices. Rappaport (1987) said that the concept of empowerment “conveys both a psychological sense of personal control or influence”.The psychological view of empowerment has been adopted and assessed extensively in the management field. Notions of empowerment are derived from theories of participative management, in which managers share decision-making power with employees to enhance performance (Cook and Macaulay 1997). Therefore, staff empowerment concerns organizational behavior that gives employees more power to serve customers; typically, staff empowerment transfers power and responsibility to employees so that, within specified limits, they will be better able to provide the best possible service at their own judgment (Dahle 2000). In services marketing, empowerment has been linked with both attitudinal and behavioral changes in employees, including increased employee perceptions of satisfaction, loyalty, performance, level of service delivery, and concern for others (Fulford and Enz 1995).The customer behavior literature has themes that are part of, or closely related to, the concept of power. These include perceived control, perceived locus of control, self-efficacy and choice (e.g., Broniarczyk and Griffi 2014; Botti and Iyengar 2006). Notions of control or power have been used in several theoretical frameworks, with a common understanding that control/power is a human driving force and the feeling of being in control over one’s environment (Botti and Iyengar 2006).Consumer behavior researchers have associated the concept of power with that of perceived choice. Botti and Iyengar (2006) suggested that a perceived choice is one of the important types of control, and Hui and Bateson (1991) argued that any behavioral or emotional effects caused by the availability of choices can be considered as the outcome of perceived control. In this context, control has been defined as the freedom of choosing an alternative from among a choice set, instead of being assigned to the same alternative by an external agent (i.e., other individuals or chance). However, Wathieu et al.’s study (2002) showed that the experience of empowerment derives not from more choices, but from the system’s flexibility in allowing customers to define the choices available to them. Their study also emphasized the importance of equipping customers with tools to handle the variety of choices and to discover the option that best meets their needs. Organizations offering large choices of products or services should match their offerings to their customers’ distinctive needs and wants. This has led us to suggest that the related concept of personalization as an important factor in customer empowerment.The emphasis placed by the psychological view of empowerment on a user’s ability to shape the environment suggests that the related concept of personalization is also an important factor in the feeling of empowerment. Personalization is known as the process of customizing an IS’s functionalities, interfaces, and contents to a user’s demand based on knowledge obtained through services and user interactions (Park 2014; Pappas et al. 2014). It is also widely known that personalization benefits users with more suitable added value offerings (Kwon and Kim 2012).Coner (2003) believed that personalization allows a firm to better match its products or services to each customer. If customers are better off with less variety, then the firm can increase profits by reducing product lines. In a related study, Huffman and Kahn (1998) provided empirical evidence that customers are more satisfied when they are allowed to specify their attribute preferences in selecting products. Huffman and Kahn found out that when customers were asked to choose items from a wide assortment, too much variation and complexity of choice could decrease customer satisfaction. However, by simplifying the choice process, they were able to increase customer satisfaction. Huffman and Kahn also argued that, in order to increase customer satisfaction with their shopping experience, firms need to focus on information presentation as well as analyze customer inputs (to learn about available alternatives). Another related study by Kwon and Kim (2012) posited that using personalized services may increase customer loyalty. For instance, when the recommendations are based on browsing histories and customers are able to make a purchase with just a few clicks, they are more likely to complete that purchase.In the e-government environment, personalization entails three fundamental aspects: first, adjusting information based on customer preferences and characteristics; second, portraying the information in a real-time environment; and third, estimating and evaluating the behavior of customers (Gillenson et al. 1999). Personalized e-government services divide customers into groups (market segments), and are an important part of a computerized one-to-one marketing system (Al-hassan et al. 2011). A working definition of personalization concerns the extent to which information flow can be adapted to a customer according to his/her characteristics. The customer’s interaction with a firm is documented, interpreted and stored in a database for subsequent analytical use.Personalization in e-government can also be seen as a special form of differentiation that can transform a standard product or service into a specialized solution for customers (Changchien et al. 2004), or as the adaptation of a particular online service to a single user based on user-related information (Al-hassan et al. 2011). Al-hassan et al. (2011) believed that e-government personalization has the potential to improve interactions between governments and citizens. Adopting personalization enables governments to enhance their relationship with citizens and make interactions with them easier. With this, governments are able to meet their citizens’ needs more effectively and efficiently.Personalization helps customers get rid of unnecessary information or product options, thereby reducing the time and effort required for them to achieve what they aim for. When a customer gets more relevant and targeted information, the customer’s experience improves (Kwon and Kim 2012; Lee et al. 2012). Personalization can also create the perception of increased choice by enabling a quick focus on what the customer really wants, according to Srinivasan et al. (2002). In addition, personalization has been claimed to signal better quality of service and help customers complete their transactions more efficiently (Pappas et al. 2014; Srinivasan et al. 2002). The above discussion suggests that personalization, by creating more personal, interesting and relevant services, can work to increase customer empowerment. However, we know of no empirical evidence for the relationship with e-government. Thus, the following hypothesized relationship between personalization and customer empowerment will be investigated:H2Personalization positively influences customer empowerment.In sociology studies, it is generally agreed that power is an important concept to describe and clarify the relationships among social actors. Broadly speaking, the social relations view of power assumes that individuals and groups are dependent upon each other for the satisfaction of their needs. In other words, power stems from a state of interdependence. This view is supported by the work of Bacharach and Lawler (1980), who suggested that power is a function of dependence. More specifically, the power of an actor is a function of the other person’s dependence on the actor.Early sociology researchers, led by Russell (1938), Weber (1947) and Dahl (1957), have examined the concept of power in detail and described its complexity. They were in consensus that the social relations view of power is about the ability of individuals or groups to impose their will on others, or their ability to make others do something they would not have done otherwise (Russell 1938; Weber 1947; Dahl 1957). For example, Russell (1938) stated that “power is the capacity of some persons to produce intended and foreseen effects on others”. Weber (1947) said that in the relationship context, power is often related to an individual’s ability to make others do what he/she wants, regardless of their own wishes or interests. Dahl (1957) concurred with Russell and Weber and suggested that power is the ability to evoke a change in others’ behaviors. He defined power as: “A has power over B to the extent that A can get B to do something that B would not otherwise do” (Dahl 1957). It appears that the power to control, or influence the other, resides in control over things one values.Building on Deutsch (1973), Coleman (2005) suggested that power is the “reciprocal interaction between the characteristics of a person and the characteristics of a situation”, where the individual has the capacity to influence outcomes in their personal, relational and/or environmental domains. Coleman viewed power as an individual’s capacity to influence the outcomes of the individual him/herself, of another person, and of the individual’s environment. According to Coleman, such positive power means that individuals seek out each other’s abilities and appreciate the other’s contributions, negotiate with and influence each other to exchange resources that will help them both be more productive, and encourage each other to develop and enhance their valued abilities.In the commercial context, Ramsay (1995) said that buyers possess power if they are able to produce intended changes in a supplier’s product specification, create a closer match between the supplier’s specification and the buyer’s purchase specification, and incur increased sellers’ costs without increasing buyer costs. Therefore, in order to empower customers in a competitive marketplace, vendors may try to increase the perceived attractiveness of their products by offering product specifications (quality) that exceed the buyer’s purchase specification, or that exceed the specifications offered by their competitors. In fact, anything that increases a vendor’s need or desire to deal with a specific customer, or that increases the customer’s freedom or their conversion capability, tends to increase the customer’s power.Luhmann (1979, 1988) noted that individuals are essentially independent agents whose behavior is not always understandable or rational. Individuals have to consider an enormous number of potential behaviors other individuals and organizations might display in their interactions. One important factor that determines interactions with others is ‘trust’. According to Luhmann, a core aspect of human behavior is the need to control and predict the social environment: individuals have a need to predict how their behavior will influence the behavior of others, and hence affect themselves. Rules and customs are instigated to reduce social complexity and improve predictability, but if these do not exist or are not strongly enforced, people have to rely on trust. Luhmann viewed trust as an essential ingredient for any successful relationship; according to Luhmann’s theory, human beings try to create and support trust because they like to reduce their social uncertainty. They have a need to know in advance how their behavior will influence the behavior of others, and how the behavior of others will consequently affect themselves.The social relations view of power and empowerment emphasizes the need to reduce complexity in social interactions, which can occur through trust. Urban et al. (2000) argued that investigations into customer empowerment need to consider the role of trust strategies, as they stated that trust building can be seen as a method to increase customer satisfaction.Urban (2004) suggested that the increasing power of customers will compel a new paradigm for marketing based on providing open and honest information and advice. The argument is that customers’ increasing power decreases the effectiveness of old-style marketing strategies and, therefore, trust building becomes a critical factor in the success of a business-customer relationship.Luhmann (1979) noted that in the commercial sphere, trust is built on information that reflects a seller’s reputation, policies, practices and performance history. Building trust leads to long-term relationships and higher long-term profits (Corbitt et al. 2003). Trust is an interpersonal determinant of behavior that deals with beliefs about the integrity, benevolence, ability, and predictability of other people, according to McKnight et al. (2002), who claimed that interpersonal interactions, or even cues relating to them, are notably missing from e-commerce websites.Hoffman et al. (1999) discussed the need for control in an online environment – they observed in particular that customers feel they lack control over the access that web merchants have to their personal information and consequently, are hesitant to trust the merchants or firms. The importance of control in online environments increases because customers are dealing with time asymmetry, in the sense that payment is made before the receipt of a product or service. Thus, empowering customers by providing them with more control is likely to be important in building trust. Moreover, because the social relations view of empowerment suggests that regulations and conventions reduce complexity and risk in social interactions, regulations may provide control mechanisms that empower customers (Cook 2002).In the e-commerce literature, trust has been conceptualized in various ways. McKnight et al. (2002), in an attempt to reconcile a vast body of literature regarding the different types of trust, developed a typology of trust consisting of five types: interpersonal trust, trusting beliefs, system trust, dispositional trust, and decision to trust. Interpersonal trust is about an actor’s willingness to depend on another actor with a feeling of security, even when negative consequences are possible. Trusting beliefs are based on an individual’s cognitive beliefs about the other party’s characteristics (e.g., competence, integrity). Dispositional trust is a person’s tendency to trust across a broad spectrum of situations and persons. Decision to trust refers to the intention to trust in particular situations (McKnight et al. 2002). Collectively, these constructs provide a reasonable definition of trust.However, in the context of studying e-government success, a critical issue has hampered empirical investigations of the impact of customer trust on e-government success: the confusion between interpersonal trust and system trust. With interpersonal trust, trust is with a person or business, whereas system trust is about the reliability and security of the system. Pennington et al. (2003) defined system trust as “a belief that the proper impersonal structures have been put into place, enabling one party to anticipate successful transactions with another party”. In the online setting, trust is not only affected by properties attributed to the firm, but also by the electronic system mediating the transaction. Pennington et al. (2003) noted that much of the conceptualization of trust within the e-commerce literature focuses on the risk of a situation, rather than on the question of whether the user can actively manipulate the system and intervene in the process. Similarly, McKnight et al. (2002) noted that much of the discussion in the literature around trust deals with building trust in a physical, interpersonal environment, and that little is known about how to create a trust-conducive environment based on interactive media systems. Building trust is a very important forward step in building successful e-government projects, since users who trust the e-government system are more willing to adopt e-government services.Although the lack of human interface may be considered as a negative aspect of e-government transactions for some citizens, others are motivated by the absence of human presence, as this may enhance the feeling of empowerment, freedom and control. However, it very much depends on the anonymity of transactions and protection of personal information. The past literature has discussed different sources of risks in e-government transactions, especially the risk of privacy and security (Teo et al. 2008; Chau et al. 2007).Pavlou et al. (2006) suggested that the spatial and temporal separation between consumers and firms in the online environment increases fear of vendor opportunism due to product and identity uncertainty, and fear of customers’ personal information being exploited by multiple parties not directly linked to the transaction. This spatial and temporal separation reduces customers’ confidence in e-government activities, creating a barrier to e-government success (Teo et al. 2008).The uncertainty of the online environment emphasizes the importance of building the sense of trust. In this study, trust will be viewed as a two-dimensional construct. The first dimension is security, relating to the security of a consumer’s interaction with the e-government system as well as the security and protection of personal information. The second dimension is privacy, relating to the right of an individual to be left alone and able to control the release of his or her personal information (Li 2014).To sum up, the social relations view of empowerment emphasizes the need to reduce risk in e-government interactions, which can be achieved by increasing trust. Most theorists are in agreement that trust is closely related to empowerment. Luhmann (1979) noted that trust is instrumental in reducing uncertainty; trust is also useful in enhancing the perceived probability of desired behavior. Castelfranchi and Falcone (2000) pointed out that trust and control go hand in hand and claimed that trust is especially needed when a consumer has inadequate power and control over the system. Accordingly, the relationship between e-government trust and customer empowerment is hypothesized as:H3Trust positively influences customer empowerment.Within the e-government context, the lack of physical contact inherent in the online experience causes customers to depend greatly on information technology (IT) behind the e-government system. IS researchers generally regarded personalization to be a highly important characteristic of all web-based ISs (Komiak and Benbasat 2006), independent of the specific application a system was designed to support. In the e-commerce context, Komiak and Benbasat (2006) found that personalization influences trust in a positive way by facilitating the perceived competence of the IT artifact and the user. In turn, this study suggests that the greater the extent to which an e-government website understands and represents the personal needs of the user and the degree to which information is tailored to meet the needs of an individual user, the higher is the customer’s trust (this is in agreement with the literature reviewed above). However, there has been little empirical research about the impact of personalization provided by e-government websites on trust. Therefore, this work contributes to the current knowledge about the impact of personalization on trust by investigating the following hypothesis:H4Personalization positively influences trust.In our research model, which is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1, e-government success is posited to be directly affected by customer empowerment. Since the focus of this study is on the measurement of G2C system success from the perspective of citizens, the net benefit in this study refers to the citizen-perceived net benefit evaluation of a specific G2C system. Citizens and taxpayers may feel that they are not getting benefit for their money. Thus, the “perceived net benefit” appears to be an important success measure of G2C systems.In this study, a self-completion questionnaire was designed. It was decided that the questionnaire should be circulated to citizens who are familiar with e-government services. Accordingly, purposive sampling was used. A field survey carried out by the Department of Statistics in Jordan in 2012 indicated that 43% of Jordanian families did not have computers due to financial constraints, while 47% of Jordanian households were online. The field survey also indicated that only 6.6% of Jordanians were using e-government services. Consequently, a sample size of 400 respondents was taken from the population of Amman – the capital and most populous city of Jordan – between April and May 2014.The questionnaire was accompanied by a cover letter explaining the research objectives. Respondents were first asked whether they had used G2C applications through the Jordan e-government portal (www.jordan.gov.jo), a one-stop portal of the Jordanian e-government system where users can immediately and conveniently access available G2C services online. If the response was affirmative, the respondents were invited to participate in the survey. They were then given a copy of the questionnaire and were asked to complete the questions as instructed at a time convenient to them.Among the 400 questionnaires sent out, we received 221 of them back. However, 45 questionnaires were discarded because they had an unacceptable amount of missing data (Hair et al. 2013). Therefore, 176 usable questionnaires were accepted for data analysis. The usable responses represent a 44% response rate, which is considered to be adequate for this type of study.Table 1lists the respondent demographics. From the table, we see that male participants represent a slightly higher percentage of the effective sample (approximately 52%) compared to female participants (approximately 48%). The majority of the participants are aged 23–45years (approximately 69%). The completed sample is composed of well-educated individuals: about 70% of them have university or post-graduate qualifications. Around 77% of the participants have more than 5years of experience in using computers. The table also reveals that the majority of the participants (92%) have used e-government services for more than 3years, and that 91% of the participants access the Internet daily.A total of four different constructs, as shown in the research model in Fig. 1, have been used in this study. Each of the constructs has multiple items. To increase the validity and reliability of the results, most of the items used for these constructs were adapted from previously validated studies (Hair et al. 2013). Most of the scales that have been used were previously validated in the IS or marketing field. Any changes required to fit the instruments to the e-government context were appropriately performed. Thus, it would be safe to assume that using these scales and items with some contextual changes can help to address the research aim of this study.Specifically, six items for personalization were adapted and refined from the work of Burnham et al. (2003) and Park (2014). Five items for trust were adapted and refined from Egger’s (2003) and Bart et al.’s (2005). To measure customer empowerment, four items were adopted and refined from instruments used by Hunter and Garnefeld (2008). However, the e-government success (net benefits) construct had not been examined empirically in the context of e-government. Consequently, we identified the main indicators used by researchers to measure net benefits and facilitate conditions from the IS literature, and “borrowed” them for use in this study. Accordingly, the e-government success construct was measured by using two items from Etezadi-Amoli and Farhoomand’s (1996) user performance scale and two from Oliver’s (2010) universal product/service consumption satisfaction scale. All of these items were measured using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “strongly disagree” (1) to “strongly agree” (5), to indicate the respondent’s level of agreement and disagreement toward a given statement.After the measurement variables were developed, the face validity of these variables was tested. Three IS scholars and one management scholar reviewed the measurement variables. In addition, ten IS graduate students were asked to review the measurement variables and provide feedback on the length and clarity of each item as well as ease of completion. They also assisted in translating and validating the Arabic version of the survey questionnaire distributed to e-government users. Based on the feedback received, any question items that would cause confusion or were deemed potentially difficult to understand were dropped or replaced by new, easier-to-understand items. Table 2presents the research constructs and related survey items used for the measurement of each of these constructs.Partial Least Squares-Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) was used for data analysis and hypotheses testing through the SmartPLS software version 3.1.7 (Ringle et al. 2014). PLS-SEM can analyze structural equation models involving multi-item constructs, with direct and indirect paths. It works by extracting successive linear combinations of the predictors and is effective in explaining both the response and predictor variations (Davcik 2014).More importantly, PLS-SEM has the ability to simultaneously evaluate the measurement model (the relationships between constructs and their corresponding indicators) and the structural model (the relationships among constructs), with the aim to minimize the error variance (Chin 2010; Hair et al. 2014). It generates loadings between reflective constructs and their indicators, weights between formative constructs and their indicators, standardized regression coefficients between constructs, and coefficients of multiple determination (R2) for dependent variables (Davcik 2014). PLS-SEM is powerful for analyzing models because of its minimal demands on measurement scales, sample sizes, and residual distributions. In addition, it avoids two serious problems: inadmissible solutions and factor indeterminacy (Martínez-López et al. 2013). SEM approaches, such as LISREL and AMOS, are not able to deal with non-normal distributions, and they can yield non-unique or otherwise improper solutions in some cases (Hair et al. 2014). PLS-SEM is useful in screening out factors that have an insignificant effect on the dependent variable. Its emphasis is on predicting the responses as well as in understanding the underlying relationship between variables (Monecke and Leisch 2012).In this study, we have chosen PLS-SEM as the primary data analysis technique because of its minimal requirements regarding the sample size, as it does not assume multivariate normality and takes into account the measurement error when assessing the structural model. A rule of thumb for the required sample size in PLS-SEM is that the sample should be at least ten times the number of independent variables in the most complicated multiple regression of the model (Chin 2010). The sample size in this study met the minimum sample size requirement. According to Hair et al.’s (2014) guidelines, the minimum number of respondents for this PLS-SEM analysis should be 60 observations. Furthermore, for a power of 80% with 60 observations, the R2 for the respective latent variable would have to be 0.50. The minimum acceptable N can be calculated by identifying the reflexive latent variable with the largest number of the indicators, and multiplying that number of indicators by 10. As per Table 2, this would be the personalization latent variable, with 6 indicator variables, and 10×6 is 60. Our survey had an N of 176 observations, which exceeds the general rule requirement.We applied PLS-SEM to validate the constructs of personalization, trust, customer empowerment, and e-government success, as well as to test the hypotheses. Here, PLS-SEM path modeling was applied with a path-weighting scheme for the inside approximation (Chin 2010). Then, the non-parametric bootstrapping approximation was applied with 200 resampling to obtain the standard errors of the estimates (Hair et al. 2013, Martínez-López et al. 2013).The measurement model was assessed by reliability, convergent and discriminant validity. Reliability was tested by Cronbach’s alpha and composite reliability (CR). Both Cronbach’s alpha and CR provide an estimate of the reliability based on the inter-correlations of the observed indicator variables. According to Hair et al. (2013), items have acceptable reliability if the Cronbach’s alpha and CR values are greater than 0.70. As shown in Table 3, the Cronbach’s alpha and CR values for each of the four constructs – personalization, trust, customer empowerment, and e-government success – range from 0.85 to 0.95, which are above the suggested threshold of 0.7. Thus, the scale can be considered reliable.For construct validity, both the convergent and discriminant validity were examined. The convergent validity (i.e., the extent to which a measure correlates positively with alternative measures of the same construct) was confirmed by examining the average variance extracted (AVE). As shown in Table 3, all of the AVE values are higher than the recommended level of 0.5, and thus the cut off value assures that at least 50% or more of the variances in the observed variables are explained by the set of indicators (Chin 2010). This shows that the convergent validity is good (Hair et al. 2014).The discriminant validity was assessed by examining whether the square root of the AVE for each construct is greater than the correlation between that construct and other constructs (Fornell and Larcker 1981). Table 4lists the correlation matrix for the constructs. The diagonal elements in the “correlation construct” (in bold) represent the square root of the AVE. Those off-diagonal elements are the correlations among constructs. As shown in the table, the square root of the AVE for each construct is greater than the correlation between constructs, thus offering evidence of discriminant validity.An alternative approach to assessing discriminant validity involves examining the cross loadings. Discriminant validity can be established when an indicator’s loading on a construct is higher than all of its cross loadings with other constructs. Table 5shows that the study construct indicator’s loadings are higher than all of its cross loadings. For example, the indicator Empo3 has the highest value for the loading with its corresponding construct customer empowerment (0.90). All cross loadings with other constructs have lower values (E-government success=0.66; Personalization=0.40; Trust=0.64). The same finding holds for the other indicators of customer empowerment (Empo1, Empo2 & Empo4) as well as the indicators measuring e-government success, personalization, and trust. Thus, the discriminant validity has been established.Two measures were used to assess the structural model: the statistical significance (t-tests) of the estimated path coefficients, and the ability of the model to explain the variance in the dependent variables (R2). R2 results represent the amount of variance in the construct in question that is explained by the model (Chin 2010). R2 attempts to measure the explained variance of the dependent variable relative to its total variance. Values of approximately 0.35 are considered substantial, values around 0.333 moderate, and values of approximately 0.190 weak (Chin 2010). To test the significance of the hypotheses, the rule proposed by Martinez-Ruiz and Aluja-Banet (2009) was followed. That is, the t-value>1.65 is significant at the 0.05 level, and the t-value>2 is significant at the 0.01 level. As aforementioned, the statistical significance of each path was estimated using a PLS-SEM bootstrapping method utilizing 200 resamples to obtain the t-values.Results of the analysis are shown in Table 6and Fig. 2. The findings provide support for H1, which predicted positive relationships between customer empowerment and e-government success. As can be seen, customer empowerment has significant effects on e-government success (β=0.736, p<0.01), and the t-tests are significant (p<0.01) for customer empowerment (t=18.969). Therefore, consumer empowerment is making significant contributions in explaining the variance in e-government success.The two variables, personalization and trust, are found to have significant positive influences on customer empowerment (β=0.257, p<0.01; β=0.622, p<0.01, respectively). The t-tests are significant (p<0.01) for both personalization (t=5.237) and trust (t=12.997). Therefore, both personalization and trust are making significant contributions in explaining the variance in customer empowerment. The standardized beta (β) values of 0.622 for trust and 0.257 for personalization show that trust has more impact than personalization on customer empowerment. These results provide support for H2 and H3.Finally, the results also provide support for H4. Personalization is found to have significant positive influences on trust (β=0.357, p<0.01). The t-tests are significant (p<0.01) for personalization (t=4.248). Therefore, personalization is making significant contributions in explaining the variance in trust.In terms of the R2 value for each endogenous variable, customer empowerment explained 54.1% of the variance in e-government success. In addition, personalization and trust explained 56.1% of the variance in consumer empowerment. According to the thresholds denoted by Chin (2010), the R2 results of customer empowerment (R2=0.567) and e-government success (R2=0.541) are substantial. Fig. 2 shows the standardized path coefficients as well as variances explained.The goal of this study was to investigate the impact of customer empowerment on e-government success. We argued that e-government success can be considered as the extent to which “net benefits” experienced by a citizen using an e-government system are positively influenced. This means it is important to take the “customer” (i.e., citizen) viewpoint into consideration. Following this perspective, the concept of customer empowerment was introduced as a key factor in determining e-government success. To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies in the IS literature had examined or modeled the linkage between customer empowerment and e-government success.The first conclusion of the study is that there is a positive relationship between customer empowerment and e-government success. Our results have shown that customer empowerment could explain 54.1% of the variance in e-government success (see Table 6). The findings suggest that customer empowerment can increase e-government success by providing customers with the perception that they are in control when navigating through e-government websites, the perception that they have the ability to influence the services of e-government websites, the perception that they have the ability to influence the choice set offered to them by the e-government website, and the perception that they have an increasing influence over e-government websites.The second conclusion relates to the impact of personalization on customer empowerment. The literature has identified personalization as a major antecedent of customer empowerment (Wathieu et al. 2002). Personalization represents the psychological view of empowerment, which emphasizes the ability to control and shape the environment. The psychological view of empowerment highlights the importance of equipping customers with tools to handle the variety of choice; to help them sort through the variety and determine which option best fits their needs (Pappas et al. 2014). To do so, government agencies should provide customers with the ability to customize e-government websites and use these websites the way they intend to. A government website should make suggestions about what kinds of things customers would want, and tailor the way information is presented to them. This study’s overall results have shown that personalized e-government websites can foster customer empowerment by enabling customers to order tailor-made services, gain access to personalized account information, guide customers through service choices, and make good suggestions about what kinds of things a customer might be interested in. These findings support theoretical suggestions from prior studies that personalization has a direct and positive impact on customer empowerment (e.g., see Wathieu et al. 2002). As far as we know, however, none of the previous studies had empirically tested this in the context of e-government success.The third conclusion relates to the impact of trust on customer empowerment. Our results have suggested that trust increases customer empowerment by giving them the perception that they are in control and by making them more confident in their interactions with e-government. Specifically, such trust is found to depend on the extent to which the e-government addresses customer concerns about privacy and implements security measures to protect its online customers. This line of reasoning is consistent with the social relations view of empowerment, which emphasizes the need to reduce complexity in social interactions, as can occur through increased trust. Pavlou et al. (2006) claimed that the spatial and temporal separation between customers and firms in the e-government context increases fear of vendor opportunism due to product and identity uncertainty, as well as fear of personal information being exploited by parties not directly linked to the transaction. This uncertainty then increases the importance of building the sense of trust. Of course, many antecedents may drive these perceptions. In this study, trust has been viewed as a two-dimensional construct. The first dimension is termed security, relating to the extent to which e-government secures interactions with customers and provides reasonable assurance that personal information is kept secure and protected. The second dimension is privacy, relating to the right of an individual to be left alone and able to control the release of his or her personal information. In e-government, privacy and security policies help regulate the interactions a consumer has with e-government services. Our results support the idea that the level of customers’ trust and their behavioral retention increases on integrating security dimensions into the design of e-government websites (Teo et al. 2008).Finally, personalization is found to have significant positive influences on trust. These findings support prior studies’ suggestions that the greater the extent to which an e-government website understands and represents the personal needs of the user, and the greater the degree to which information is tailored to meet the needs of an individual user, the higher the customer trust is (e.g., see Komiak and Benbasat 2006).The main novelty of this work being that it has introduced customer empowerment as a key causal mechanism in deriving value from e-government systems, and established the relation between customer empowerment and the success of e-government. This provides a new research avenue for customer empowerment. The definition and a conceptual model of consumer empowerment presented here are an amalgamation of different but overlapping views of power and empowerment from psychology and social relations, which suggest a complex concept of consumer empowerment that may have wide applicability.Our study has provided the first investigation into a formal conceptualization of consumer empowerment. In particular, we have systematically synthesized a conceptual model of empowerment consisting of factors that are frequently or not so frequently mentioned in the literature, and then empirically tested it in the e-government success context. This identification has several implications for the theory of e-government success and the importance of the concept of empowerment in both IS and marketing fields.While we have already known a great deal about direct e-government users, the same cannot be said of customers as a new type of e-government user. As indicated earlier, limited previous research studies have investigated e-government success from a citizen-based perspective. Specifically, citizens’ needs or perceived net benefits have not been adequately accounted for, leaving a clearly evident gap between design and reality in e-government service provision. This work has established a better understanding of users in contemporary e-government environments.Fountain (2001) argued that adoption of a customer service view might lead to increased political inequality by bucketing resources to the services based on market demand. She suggested that customer service techniques and private sector tools applied to government may lead to increased political inequality, even when some aspects of the services are improved. The argument was proposed more as a projection of the public sector’s inability to adopt and perform in the new media environment. Andersen (2006) believed that the transition to viewing users as digital entities is not only a management challenge, since major challenges will occur in the technical development aspect too. Governments will need to rethink about new applications and consider the out-phasing of existing applications toward the external users (customers). After all, the citizen-centric perspective will imply that governments should formulate visions for online communication as the norm and keystone in governance, and not as an exception.The results of this study have also led to e-government design implications, suggesting that customer empowerment practices are relevant to e-government success. Therefore, e-government developers and designers should consider the impact of customer empowerment practices. An initial focus on empowerment, rather than the traditional emphasis on information and system quality, may motivate development teams to consider additional features that are customer-oriented for their e-government websites.Given the importance of measuring e-government investments and e-government outcomes, it would be sensible to expect governments to employ advanced techniques for assessing metrics for IT investments. Yet, in practice this is not the case (e.g., see Rana et al. 2015; Sørum et al. 2012). The e-government success model developed in this study has suggested that the net benefit is a surrogate indicator of e-government success, and that the critical predictor of e-government success is customer empowerment. Understanding the role of customer empowerment in explaining e-government success gives practitioners the opportunity to understand how customers feel toward specific attributes of e-government websites. Web designers could use this to predict a customer’s reaction and behavior, which in turn would help improving the effectiveness of e-government. We suggest, therefore, that the e-government success model proposed in this study can contribute to practice by helping governments to select metrics of e-government success that can help explain relevant organizational outcomes.To conclude, it is necessary to point out the limitations associated to the research methods used in this study. Firstly, the current study was conducted at one point in time (cross-sectional design). While it provided a useful snapshot and helped to understand the phenomenon we undertook, it could not explain possible changes in consumers’ attitude and behavior over time. It is generally recognized that longitudinal studies (or at least a series of cross-sectional studies) can detect attitude changes over time and allow stronger inferences to be drawn about the dynamic elements of behavior. Secondly, there were limitations arising from the sample used in this study, as the participants were not taken from a probability sample. Although there was no evidence of sample bias compared to the population from which the sample was drawn, this possibility cannot be ruled out. Thirdly, the survey questions asked were more communication and design focused rather than content or outcome focused.Despite these limitations, this work has provided valuable insights into the study of e-government success. The acknowledged limitations have led to suggestions for future research in two broad areas: (1) further exploration of hypothesized relationships, by using new methods of investigation; and (2) expansion of the consumer empowerment model, to include new antecedents or views of power and empowerment. An interesting question is whether consumers’ characteristics have an impact on their perception of empowerment and hence should be incorporated into the model. Another related research avenue would be to look at behavioral characteristics of empowered customers versus under-empowered customers.In summary, this study has explored the impact of customer empowerment on e-government. The detailed framework is the first rigorous research step toward understanding the importance of customer empowerment on e-government success. The framework we built from theory and empirical research provides a foundation for future studies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
