@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Generalized neural network and wavelet transform based approach for fault location estimation of a transmission line

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel approach namely generalized neural network (GNN) is applied for fault location estimation.Fault current signals are analyzed using wavelet transform.Obtained data is used as input parameters in GNN modeling for estimating the fault location.GNN approach is found better as compared to the other soft computing techniques.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Generalized neural network,Wavelet transform,Artificial neural network,Transmission line protection,Transient signals,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To maintain the efficient and reliable operation of power systems, it is extremely important that the transmission line faults need to be detected and located in a reliable and accurate manner. A number of mathematical and intelligent techniques are available in the literature for estimating the fault location. However, the results are not satisfactory due to the wide variation in operating conditions such as system loading level, fault inception instance, fault resistance and dc offset and harmonics contents in the transient signal of the faulted transmission line. Keeping in view of aforesaid, a new approach based on generalized neural network (GNN) with wavelet transform is presented for fault location estimation. Wavelet transform is used to extract the features of faulty current signals in terms of standard deviation. Obtained features are used as an input to the GNN model for estimating the location of fault in a given transmission systems. Results obtained from GNN model are compared with ANN and well established mathematical models and found more accurate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Faults can occur in any component of power systems including generator, transformer, buses and transmission lines. As the transmission line is one of the main components of power systems, therefore the detection of faults on transmission lines is the primary concern of the power systems, necessitating high speed fault clearance and improved transient stability [1].Transmission line fault detection techniques can be classified into two main categories: techniques based on the fundamental power frequency component, and techniques utilizing the higher frequency components of the fault signals. Further these two categories of fault location techniques can be divided into two subgroups: to use single ended information or to use information from both ends using current and voltage data of the faulted line [2–5]. A number of mathematical models are available in the literature for identifying the types and location of the fault of transmission systems [2–8]. In recent study, the sampled current values at the relaying point i.e. single ended data have been used for classification and location of faults [11–13,16]. This technique is more attractive than the technique based on two terminals. Two terminals technique has drawbacks like requirement of communication links and synchronized sampling equipment which not only increase the cost but also affect the accuracy [3]. Therefore techniques using single ended data are preferred.In fact correct fault location of a transmission line depends upon many factors such as on the geometry/configuration and the line parameters of the transmission network (i.e. whether the line is transposed/un-transposed, charging capacitance and shunt reactance being present neglected or taken into consideration for the transmission line model). In addition to that the accuracy of fault location also depends upon the resistance of the faulted path, the fault inception angle, the system loading level and on the amplitude of the dc offset and harmonics content in the transient signal of the faulted transmission line. Besides that transmission line being geographically wide distributed systems and exposed to the environment there is uncertainty about the fault events and the line parameters. Therefore, in such situation, where there is ambiguity and uncertainty about the fault events and the line parameters, it is difficult to deal with the transmission lines protection problems through strict mathematical approaches (deterministic approaches) effectively, and hence these factors introduce the considerable amount of error for the fault location estimation of the transmission system using conventional mathematical (deterministic approach) model of the transmission system.To overcome these problems several intelligent techniques including fuzzy logic, artificial neural networks, neuro-fuzzy and combined wavelet-ANN have been developed and presented in the literature for fault identification and location of transmission system as discussed in [1] and [9–28]. Among aforesaid approaches it is seen that wavelet-ANN has been quite successful in identifying the types and location of fault. However, there are certain drawbacks of ANN like large training time, huge data requirement for training, unknown ANN structure, the relatively larger number of hidden nodes required, problem of local minima, etc. To overcome some of the problems of ANN and to improve it's training and testing performance, a new approach based on GNN in combination with wavelet transform is presented in this paper. The applications of GNN in the field of load forecasting, aircraft landing system, power system stabilizer, estimation of solar energy etc., are available in the literature [29–38]. However, the application of GNN with wavelet for the fault location estimation of transmission line is rarely available.In the present work, single ended fault current signals are analyzed using wavelet transform. Obtained data is used as input parameters in GNN modeling for estimating the fault location of the three phase transmission system. The performance of the GNN model for the fault location estimation is evaluated on the basis of mean value of absolute relative error in percentage, considering the un-transposed transmission line model for the same network and parameters of power system as modeled in [6] and found to produce very accurate fault location result which is around 2.0%. While, the percentage error as reported in [6], which describes iterative method of fault location for the same power system network as considered in the proposed study is varies up to 4.81%. Whereas in [27] the percentage error is reported up to 6.5% using wavelet and fuzzy logic based technique for the fault location estimation of the transmission system.Observations of all test results ascertain that the wavelet-GNN based model of fault location estimation performs excellent even at voltage zero crossing situation of fault inception angle and at different fault locations starting from relay end (sending end) to the end terminal of the transmission line for all kinds of phase to phase and phase to ground faults.This paper is organized as follows: Wavelet transform used for pre-processing of fault current signals to obtain the features of fault current signals in terms of statistical feature i.e. standard deviation is presented in Section 2. Section 3 presents the generalized neural networks and fault location estimation based on GNN model. Section 4 describes the simulation studies. In Section 5 results are discussed. Section 6 presents conclusion followed by references.The wavelet transform is a powerful tool for the analysis of transient phenomena because of its ability to extract time frequency information from the transient signal. Most of the transient signals based relay principle adopts the wavelet transform technology to construct the algorithms. Wavelet transform (WT) expands a signal into several scales belonging to different frequency regions by using translation (shift in time) and dilation (compression in time) of a fixed wavelet function known as mother wavelet. The discrete wavelet transform and multi resolution analysis provides a short window for high frequency components and long window for low frequency components and hence provides an excellent time frequency resolution [17].Continuous wavelet transform (CWT) is defined as the sum over all time of the signal multiplied by scaled and shifted versions of the wavelet function ψ(t). The CWT of a x(t) signal is defined as(1)CWT(x,a,b)=∫−∞∞x(t)ψ∗a,b(t)dtwhere ψa,b(t)=|a|−1/2ψ(t−b/a), the analyzing function ψ(t) is known as the mother wavelet and ψa,b(t) are its dilated and translated versions; the choice of a mother wavelet is flexible provided that it satisfies the following condition:∫−∞∞ψ(t)dt=0This implies that a wavelet is compactly supported in both the time domain and frequency domain. The asterisk in (1) denotes a complex conjugate, a, b∈ℜ, a≠0 (ℜ is a real continuous number system) are the scaling and shifting parameters respectively. |a|−1/2 is the normalized value of ψa,b(t) so that if ψ(t) has a unit length, then its scaled version ψa,b(t) also has a unit length.Wavelet transform of sampled waveforms can be obtained by implementing the discrete wavelet transform which is given by:DWT(x,m,n)=ao−m/2∑x[k]ψ∗k−naomboaomwhere m, n and k are integer variables and it refers to a sample number in an input signal and aoand boare the discrete steps of the scale and translation respectively.Multi-resolution analysis (MRA) is a time frequency analysis technique which has been found to be an effective signal processing tool in monitoring and analyzing power system disturbances including power quality assessment and system protection against faults [9]. It has also other desirable properties such as providing a substantial amount of data reduction and having a simple and fast algorithm. Therefore, DWT is most appropriate for fault detection and location problems in power systems. In this study phase A, phase B and phase C fault current signals, generated on a three phase transmission line considered as x(n) in time domain is passed through high pass h(n) and low pass filter l(n). The outputs from both the filters are decimated by 2 to obtain the detail coefficient (cD1) and the approximation coefficient (cA1) which constitutes the level one decomposition of the original signal at stage first. The approximation coefficient (cA1) is then sent to the second stage to repeat the procedure. Finally, the signal is decomposed up to the ninth levels. The details information and approximations at different levels are seen to provide useful clues regarding the faults locations on the transmission line [27]. A multi-level DWT decomposition scheme shown in Fig. 1shows the essence of the procedure. The approximations and details at level-1, level-2 and level-3 have been represented using suffixes 1, 2 and 3 and so on.In the present study wavelet transform is used to capture the useful fault signature of the faulty current signals of a given three phase transmission line in terms of statistical features like standard deviation to be used as input to the GNN model. Three phase fault current signals recorded at the relaying point sampled at the rate of 100kHz frequency are pre-processed passing through the multi level wavelet filter bank, selecting Db4 as mother wavelet, for different fault operating condition using MATLAB software. Since the selected sampling frequency is 100kHz at the base frequency of 50Hz, therefore ninth level wavelet detail coefficient includes second and third harmonics (97.66–195.31Hz) which are predominant in case of transmission line faults and is useful for the fault classification and fault location estimation of the transmission line. The details coefficient at different frequency range for 100kHz sampling frequency is shown in Table 1. Feature vectors in terms of standard deviation are obtained using Eq. (2), considering the ninth level detail coefficient denoted as: [σAcD9; σBcD9; σCcD9] for three phase fault current signals [25].(2)StandarddeviationσχcDi=1N−1∑j=1N(cDij−μχcDi)21/2MeanμχcDi=1N∑j=1NcDijwhere χ represents phase A, phase B and phase C, i=1, 2, …, l is the wavelet decomposition level from level 1 to level l, N=number of samples of wavelet details coefficient.If the wavelet coefficients are used as inputs to the GNN, it will results in rather large number of inputs (equals to the N number of samples) posing difficulty for training and testing of GNN in connection with accuracy and speed [14]. Therefore, in order to overcome this problem but retaining important features of the wavelet signals, features are obtained in terms of standard deviation using ninth level detail coefficient which are predominant in case of transmission line faults.The general structure of the common neuron is an aggregation function and its transformation through a filter. It is shown in the literature [29–38] that the ANNs can be universal function approximators for given input–output data. The common neuron structure as shown in Fig. 2has summation as the aggregation function with sigmoidal, radial basis, tangent hyperbolic or linear limiters as the thresholding function. The aggregation operators used in the neurons are generally crisp. However, they overlook the fact that most of the processing in the neural networks is done with incomplete information at hand. Thus, a GNN model approach has been adopted that uses the fuzzy compensatory operators [37] that are partly sum and partly product to take into account the vagueness involved.Use of the sigmoidal thresholding function and ordinary summation or product as aggregation functions in the existing model fails to cope with the nonlinearities involved in real life problems. To deal with these, the proposed model has both sigmoidal and Gaussian functions with weight sharing. The GNN model has flexibility at both the aggregation and threshold function level to cope with the nonlinearity involved in the type of applications dealt with, as shown in Fig. 3. The neuron model described above is known as the summation type compensatory neuron model, since the outputs of the sigmoidal and Gaussian functions are summed up. Similarly, the product-type compensatory neuron models may also be developed. The neuron has both Σ and π aggregation functions. The Σ1 aggregation function has been used with the sigmoidal characteristic function (f1) while the π aggregation function has been used with the Gaussian function (f2) as a characteristic function.The output of the Σ1 part with a sigmoidal characteristic function of the GNN is(3)oΣ=f1s_net=11+e−λs*s_netwheres_net=∑WΣiXi+XoΣand λsis the gain scale factor of Σ1The output of the π part with Gaussian characteristics function of GNN is(4)oπ=e−λp*pi_net2wherepi_net=ΠWΠiXi∗XoΠand λpis the gain scale factor of π1.The final output of the neuron is a function of the two outputs and with the weights W and (1−W) respectively, and can be written in mathematical form as(5)opk=oπ∗(1−W)+oΣ∗WThe GNN model gives only one output. If a system requires more than one output, one GNN is used for each output.The neuron model described above is known as the summation type compensatory neuron model, since the outputs of the sigmoidal and Gaussian functions are summed up. Similarly, the product-type compensatory neuron models may also be developed. It is found that in most of the applications, the summation-type compensatory neuron model works well and is the one used for the estimation of fault location of the transmission line.The following steps are involved in the training of a GNN:Step (1) Calculate the output of GNN as given in (3) and (4).Step (2) After calculating the output of the GNN in the forward pass, as in the feed-forward neural network, it is compared with the desired output to find the error. Using a back-propagation algorithm, the GNN is trained to minimize the error. In this step, the output of the single flexible GNN is compared with the desired output to get the error for the ith set of inputs.(6)ErrorEi=(Yi−Oi)Step (3) Then, the sum squared error for the convergence of all the patterns is(7)Ep=0.5∑Ei2A multiplication factor of 0.5 has been taken to simplify the calculations.Step (4) Reverse pass for modifying the connection strength.(a)Weight associated with the Σ1 and part Σ2 of the GNN is(8)W(k)=W(k−1)+ΔWwhere ΔW=ηδk(oΣ−oπ)Xi+αW(k−1)and δk=Σ(Yi−Oi)Weights associated with the inputs of the Σ1 part of the GNN are(9)WΣi(k)=WΣi(k−1)+ΔWΣiwhereΔWΣi=ηδΣiXi+αWΣi(k−1)and δΣj=∑δkW(1−OΣ)∗OΣWeights associated with the input of the π – part of the GNN are(10)WΠi(k)=WΠi(k−1)+ΔWΠiwhere ΔWΠi=ηδΠjXi+αWΠi(k−1)δΠj=∑δk(1−W)∗(−2∗pi_net)∗OΠα is the momentum factor for better convergence, and η is the learning rate. The range of these factors is from 0 to 1 and is determined by experience.The fault current signals of three phase transmission line are filtered through wavelet transform. Obtained data from wavelet is used as input to GNN model. The input data is extracted features of fault current signals whereas the output of the GNN model is location of fault.The neural network toolbox of MATLAB software is used for estimating the fault location of the transmission line. The flow chart of the proposed method is presented in Fig. 4. Firstly, the fault current signal is obtained at the sampling frequency of 100kHz for each case, created for different fault operating conditions. Thereafter the multi-resolution analysis (MRA) based on Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) is used to capture the transient characteristics of the fault current signal. The information captured during the ninth level frequency bands by the details wavelet coefficients in terms of standard deviation is fed as input to the GNN and target as the fault location of the transmission line. Since the input and output data are not of the same order of magnitude, therefore it is necessary to normalize the input and output data in the same order of magnitude. If actual data is directly used, this may cause a convergence problem during the learning process. To avoid such problem, the input and output data are scaled such that they remain within the range of (0.1–0.9). This process is known as normalization. Normalization has a major role in the training and testing of neural networks. The actual data is scaled using the following expression for the fault location estimation problem [37].(11)LS=(Ymax−Ymin)(Lmax−Lmin)(L−Lmin)+Yminwhere L=the actual data; Ls=the scaled data which is used as input to the network; Lmax=maximum value of particular data set; Lmin=minimum value of particular data set; Ymax=upper limit (0.9) of normalization range; Ymin=lower limit (0.1) of normalization range.The GNN model is developed for the fault location estimation of a given three phase transmission line as shown in Fig. 5. The neurons in the input layer receive three input signals representing the features of the three phase fault current signals in terms of standard deviation. The output layer, on the other hand consists of one output neuron representing fault location of the transmission line. The generalized neuron structure summation and product as aggregation functions have been incorporated and the aggregated outputs passed through a non-linear squashing/thresholding function. The Σ-part has the summation of weighted input with sigmoidal activation function f1, while the π-part has the product of weighted input with Gaussian activation function f2. The final output of the neuron is a function of the weighted outputs OΣ and Oπ.The output of summation (Σ) part of the generalized neuron is(12)O∑=f1(∑W∑iXi+Xo∑)The output of product (π) part of the generalized neuron is(13)Oπ=f2(πWπiXi+Xoπ)Finally, the outputs are summed up to get the neuron output. The output of the neuron can be mathematically written as(14)Oi=OΣ*WΣ+Oπ*(1−WΣ)The proposed fault location estimation approach is extensively tested on a 500kV, 50Hz transmission line of 300km length connected between two sources as shown in Fig. 10. The parameters of the system under consideration are as follows:Sending and receiving end source voltageEs=500kV; ER=475 ∠δ kV; where ∠δ is the receiving end phase voltage angle.Sending and receiving end positive and zero sequence source impedanceZs1=17.177+j37.9404Ω;Zs0=2.5904+j12.2773Ω;ZR1=15.31+j38.2704Ω;ZR0=0.7229+j12.6073Ω;Transmission line parametersZ1=0.15483+j0.3050Ω/km;Z0=0.37432+j0.9429Ω/km;C1=1.2097E−8F/km;C0=7.4982E−9F/km.In simulation studies, a large numbers of test cases are generated for different values of fault resistance (Rf) varying from 10Ω to 1000Ω for ground faults and for phase faults from 1Ω to 10Ω, which cover most of the high resistance faults. The variation of distance from the relay point to the end terminal (receiving end) in steps of every 5km is considered, and the receiving end phase voltage angle (δ) of −15°, 15°, 30° and 90°. For simulation, fault is created at different fault inception angles (FIA) of 36°, 54°, 90° and 180°, considering 0.02s simulation time. The fault inception angle specially voltage zero crossing situation has also been widely investigated. The data considered in the analysis is less than one cycle. The fault current signals are obtained at 100kHz sampling frequency at the relaying point in order to be used in feature extraction using multi-resolution analysis based on DWT. For each fault operating condition, simulation of the program generates 59 data files that is a matrix of the order of 59×3=177 data. Out of which 80% data randomly chosen are fed to train the GNN and remaining 20% for testing. To validate the proposed wavelet-GNN model, the fault location results are compared with the other intelligent model like wavelet-ANN (presented in Appendix I), and with the mathematical based method (measuring symmetrical components of voltage and current shown in Appendix II) of fault location estimation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
