@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Vehicle positioning in cell manufacturing systems via robust optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose two new robust ZOP models for vehicle positioning in CMS.Robust optimization approach identifies solutions robust to parametric uncertainty.Numerical results show the applicability of the proposed models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Material handling system (MHS),Robust optimization (RO),Vehicle positioning,Zero-one programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Numerous manufacturing companies are taking advantage of material handling systems due to their flexibility, reliability, safety and contribution to the increase of productivity. However, several uncertain parameters such as types of cost, availability of vehicle etc., influence the performance of the material handling system greatly. In recent years, robust optimization has proven to be an effective methodology permitting overcoming uncertainty in optimization models. Robust optimization models work well even when probabilistic knowledge of the phenomenon is incomplete. This paper thus proposes two new zero-one programming (ZOP) models for vehicle positioning in multi-cell automated manufacturing system. Uncertain parameters in these models include cost parameters, travel time between each pair of centers of cells and location of machines, average time required for performing all transports from location of machines and availability of the vehicle. Then, the robust counterpart of the proposed ZOP models is presented by using the recent extensions in robust optimization theory. Eventually, to verify the robustness of the solutions obtained by the novel robust optimization model, they are compared to those generated by the deterministic ZOP model for different test problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Material handling system plays an indispensable role in increasing the manufacturing systems productivities. In any industrial process, the item being produced visits various stages and it requires to be carried from location to location. This industrial process may embrace activities such as transportation of raw material to the machines and then relocating the machines from one cell to another cell and finally to the store or warehouse. This entails proper utilization of material handling equipment. In cases where material-handling system fails to deliver the right parts at the right time, it often culminates in considerable losses due to machine idling, missing due dates, and elevated work in process. Increased utilization of just in time deliveries on the factory floor has further emphasized the need for a responsive and efficiently raw material handling system. This trend has concentrated on the efficiency of automated material handling systems (AMHS). On account of its flexibility in transport, vehicle-based automated transport systems such as automated guided vehicles (AGVs) are massively being deployed among the various materials handling system used in most automated manufacturing systems.The efficient AMHS assists in minimizing errors and enhancing quality. The enhanced system results in increased workers’ satisfaction as it is possible to change the material arrival rate to suit the workers pace. Moreover, real-time control of material handling is another advantage of discrete material handling system. These factors cause to better identify the parts, the routes they travel and the vehicles they travel in, resulting in a lower work in process inventory, reduced tardiness, lower inventory costs and better response to demands [19]. Moreover, deploying AMHS yields other benefits such as reduction in space requirements. On the other hand, material handling systems such as conveyors and AGVs are small in size and only move along the aisles. They minimize product damage and help in housekeeping. The layout restructuring and relocation is readily accomplished when AGVs are used as material handling system. AGVs are also capable of being combined with other existing material handling systems to increase flexibility.The performance of an automated material handling system depends on the service time and is generally a decreasing function of the service time. The service time is fundamentally composed of two elements: waiting time and the travel time between the pickup point and the delivery point. Along with technology, various tactical design and operational control issues can contribute to the efficiency of the transport system, comprising the design of the network path layout, the location of pickup and delivery points, the number of vehicles in the system, and the scheduling and routing of the vehicles. Other design issues, such as network path design, fleet size design, technology choice etc. have also been investigated in literature. The reader is referred to [23,20,25] for a summary and discussion of these topics. In the following, the literature review is solely focused on papers related to vehicle positioning for material handling in automated manufacturing systems. Very few researches have been done in literature in this respect. Among conducted researches, we can point out the works of Egbelu [16], Kim [18], Gademann and van de Velde [17] and Montoya-Torres and Bello [21].The pioneering work of Egbelu [16] investigated the topic of vehicle positioning for a single loop layout. In Egbelu's paper, the purpose was to identify spots for the positioning of idle vehicles. He differentiated between unidirectional and bidirectional loops, and developed a linear programming formulation for the unidirectional case and also proposed some heuristic algorithms for the bidirectional case. Kim [18] explored the problem of positioning a single idle vehicle where the layout configuration was a single circuit network to minimize the average response time. He demonstrated that the problem of positioning only one vehicle can be solved efficiently. Gademann and van de Velde [17] studies the subject of determining the home positions for a set of m automated guided vehicles in a loop layout where n pickup points are positioned along the circumference (m<n). In their work, a home position was defined as the location where idle automated guided vehicle (AGVs) are kept until they are assigned to the next transportation task. These authors, based on the complexity analysis of the problem established that the problems of minimizing maximum response time and minimizing average response time are solvable in polynomial time for any number of vehicles in a single loop layout. The vehicle location problem for a general configuration of the material handling network was considered by Montoya-Torres and Bello [21]. In their study, the vehicle idleness is not the unique criterion for the positioning of vehicles. Moreover, system is divided into zones and vehicles are assigned to those zones for minimizing the average time needed to service a request.However, as observed in the pertinent literature, in all relevant works the design parameters of the problem are assumed to be of deterministic nature. Nevertheless, the dynamic and complex nature of manufacturing operations mandates a high degree of uncertainty in manufacturing environment decisions. This issue significantly influences the overall performance of the manufacturing system and also the material handling system. Hence, the incorporation of uncertainty in estimating the parameters is deemed indispensable. Generally speaking, three approaches are commonly used in solving problems of non-deterministic nature: (a) stochastic, (b) fuzzy and (c) robust. A more recent approach called robust optimization has emerged as a well-known approach to cope with problems under uncertainty. The main advantages of this approach over other approaches such as stochastic programming and fuzzy programming include:(i)This method remains computationally tractable, independently as uncertain parameters.In this approach, there is no need of the complete knowledge of the probability distributions of uncertain parameters, although in some cases, historical data and experience of the experts can be utilized to obtain the range of uncertainty [1].This approach aims to calculate the feasible solutions for full range of scenarios of the uncertain parameters, while optimizing objective functions in a controlled and balanced condition [12].The RO approach was independently propounded by El-Ghaoui and Lebert [14], El-Ghaoui et al. [15], and Ben-Tal and Nemirovsky [4,5]. A recent textbook compiling the research is Ben-Tal et al. [6]. The approach gives less conservative solutions than earlier worst-case solutions provided by robust mathematical programming approaches (e.g., [24]) by trading off several of the conservatism with improvement in the objective function through bounding the set of values that uncertain parameters could achieve. A key feature of the RO approach is its tractability, which takes root from the structure of the uncertainty set. Ben-Tal and Nemirovsky [4,5] have demonstrated that, the robust formulation of the problem is tractable if the uncertainty set is described as a box or an ellipsoid. The tractability of different types of robust problems is studied by Bertsimas and Sim [10]. Bertsimas et al. [9] consider the robust counterpart of a problem with an uncertainty set that is described by an arbitrary norm. RO has been employed in various areas such as portfolio management, e.g., Ben-Tal et al. [7], dynamic pricing, e.g., Adida and Perakis [2], contracts in the supply chain, e.g., Ben-Tal et al. [8], project management, e.g., Cohen et al. [13], inventory management, e.g., Bertsimas and Thiele [11] and closed-loop supply chain network design, e.g., Pishvaee et al. [22]. As far as reviewed and to the best of our knowledge, there has not been any study applying the RO approach in the context of vehicle positioning problem.Therefore, in order to bridge this gap, two robust zero-one programming (ROZOP) model for vehicle location problem in multi-cell automated manufacturing system are proposed in the present paper in which vehicle location positioning problem for a network path with multiple interconnected loops is explored. Proposed models have separated the network path into cells and vehicles are assigned to each of these cells in order to optimize the performance of the material handling system. This performance can be measured through minimization of the maximum time to cover demand and also minimization of the total cost including transport costs and fixed opening costs. Furthermore, in the first proposed model, we assumed that all transportation in each cell can be performed by a set of vehicles. However, since there are additional constraints such as space limitation and vehicle availability in real world problem, we had to extend the first proposed model for these situations and accordingly the second model was proposed for these cases. Therefore, the second proposed model resembles the first one with the exception that all transportation in each cell can be done by a vehicle due to issues such as space limitation, vehicles availability, etc. The robust counterpart of the developed ZOP model is also developed to overcome the uncertainty in transport costs, fixed cost for opening cell, maximum total cost, travel time between each pair of centers of cells and location of machines, average time required to performing all transports from location of machines and availability of vehicle. Numerical tests have demonstrated the efficacy of the proposed robust model in handling uncertainty in parameters and generating robust optimal solutions.The outline of this paper is as follows. The problem descriptions and formulations of our proposed two models are provided in Section 2. The robust counterpart of the proposed ZOP models is developed in Section 3. Computational experiments are provided in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5, conclusions are given.The problem is approached by dividing the transportation network into cells and assigning vehicles to each of these cells. The network path is defined as a graph, where nodes represent the location of machines and arcs represent the paths in the transportation network. The main assumptions considered in the problem formulation are as follows:•Layout machine manufactures in each cell and material flow paths are absolutely identified.Material flow paths only move horizontally.Transporters between two nodes can be different, hence travel time between each pair of nodes is not the same and is uncertain.Transportation cost between two nodes can be different and is uncertain.For the traffic management problem, controlling intersection points of the unidirectional-guided path is sufficient to avoid collisions.The time that each vehicle is available for performing transport activities can be different and is uncertain.Maximum total cost which manufacturing system could pay for transport activities is limited and uncertain.Average time required for performing all transports from location of machines can be different and is uncertain.Fixed cost for opening cell with location of machine as the center can be different and is uncertain.Each time a transporter visits a machine or the output station of a resource group; there always exist materials to be transferred.Preemption is not permitted, neither for manufacturing operations nor vehicle trips.Number of cells which could be opening as the center is limited.Location of machine which could be opening as the center is changeable and undefined.The number of items to be manufactured throughout a given period is known and constant over the whole production horizon.On the other hand, in the first model, it is assumed that all transportation in each cell can be done through a set of vehicles. The second model is the same as the first one, excepting that all transportation in each cell can be done by a vehicle.The following notation is utilized in the formulation of the ZOP model in vehicle location positioning problems:V: Set of vehicles(v=1,2,…,V)K: Set of location of machines in the network path (k=1, 2, …, K)J Set of possible location of machines in the network path that can be the centers of cells (j=1, 2, …, J)N: Set of cellstjk: Travel time between each pair of centers of cells and location of machines in the network pathcjk: Transport cost between each pair of centers of cells and location of machines in the network pathfj: fixed cost for opening cell with location of machine j as the centerATk: Average time required to perform all transports from location of machine kAVv: Availability of vehiclev, i.e., the time that vehiclevis available to perform transport activitiesTC: Maximum total cost which could be paid for transport activitiesxj=1;if location of machinejis selected as center of cell0;otherwiseyjk=1;if location of machinekis assigned to a opened cell with location of machinejas the center0;otherwisezjv=1;if vehiclevis assigned to a opened cell with location of machinejas the center0;otherwiseCmax: Makespan, i.e., the maximum time required serving the farthest location of machine of a cell(1)minw=Cmax+∑j=1Jfjxj+∑j=1J∑k=1KcjkyjkSubject to:(2)Cmax≥∑j=1Jtjkyjk∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(3)∑j=1Jyjk=1∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(4)yjk≤xj∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(5)∑j=1Jzjv=1∀v∈(1,2,…,V)(6)zjv≤xj∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀v∈(1,2,…,V)(7)∑j=1Jxj≤N(8)∑k=1KATkyjk≤∑v=1VAVvzjv∀j∈(1,2,…,J)(9)∑k=1K∑j=1Jcjkyjk+∑j=1Jfjxj≤TC(10)zjv≤∑k=1Kyjk∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀v∈(1,2,…,V)(11)xj,yjk,zjv∈{0,1}∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀v∈(1,2,…,V),∀k∈(1,2,…,K)The objective function (1) minimizes the maximum time to cover demand and the total cost, which consists of transport costs and fixed opening costs. Constraint (2) is maximum time to cover demand. Constraint (3) ensures that each location of machine in the network path is assigned to one and only one cell. Constraint (4) ensures that a location of machine in the network path is covered by a cell only if the cell is opened. Constraint (5) ensures a vehicle is assigned to one and only one cell. Constraint (6) guarantees a vehicle is assigned to a cell only if the cell is opened. Eq. (7) is capacity constraint on the number of opening cell. Constraint (8) guarantees that total average times required to perform all transports from location of machine k must be less than the times that vehicles are available to perform transport activities in each cell. Eq. (9) is capacity constraint on total cost which could be paid for transport activities. Constraint (10) ensures that a vehicle cannot be assigned to a cell if no location of machine is assigned to this cell. Finally, constraint (11) enforces the binary restrictions on corresponding decision variables. By considering the following constraint (12) and adding them to the first model, a formulation of the second model is obtained and presented below.(12)∑v=1Vzjv=1∀j∈(1,2,…,J)Constraint (12) ensures that a vehicle does all transportation in each of the cell. Therefore, we have:minw=Cmax+∑j=1Jfjxj+∑j=1J∑k=1KcjkyjkSubject to Constraints (2)–(12).To apply the robust optimization model the transport costs, fixed cost for opening cell, maximum total cost, travel time between each pair of centers of cells and location of machines, average time required to perform all transports from location of machines and availability of vehicle are all treated as uncertain parameters. In this section, we provide a quick description of the principles of RO. For further details, readers are referred to Ben-Tal et al. [6] and references therein. Consider the following linear program (LP):(13)mincxs.t.Ax≥bwhere x∈ℜnis the vector of decision variables, b∈ℜmis the right-hand side parameter vector, c∈ℜnis the vector of objective function coefficients, and A∈ℜm×n, with elements aij, is the constraint coefficient matrix.In a typical problem like (LP), c, A and b are assumed to be deterministic based on which the problem is solved and an optimal solution is obtained. Some of the data parameters are considered as uncertain in the RO approach, yet they lie within a set that expresses limits on the uncertainty. Foregoing uncertainty set subsequently defines the limits on uncertainty that a solution will be immunized against. That is, the solution x deals with any possible uncertainty lying within the set. In RO approach, the (LP) is transformed into a robust counterpart by replacing each constraint that has uncertain coefficients with a constraint that reflects the incorporation of the uncertainty set. In the following description, we focus on uncertainty in objective function coefficients and constraint coefficient matrix. Letc˜janda˜ijdenote an uncertain entry in the objective function coefficients and constraint coefficient, respectively. In the proposed model, each of uncertain parameters is assumed to vary in a specified closed bounded box [5,8,22].The general form of this box can be specified as follows:(14)uBox={ξ∈ℜn:|ξt−ξt¯|≤ρGt,t=1,2,…,n},whereξt¯is the normal value of the ξtas t the parameter of vector ξ and the positive number Gtrepresent “uncertainty scale” and ρ>0 is the “uncertainty level”. A particular case of interest isGt=ξt¯, which corresponds to a simple case where box contains ξtwhose relative deviation from the nominal data is up to size of ρ.According to the above mentioned description the robust counterpart of the LP model (15) can be stated as Eqs. (16)–(19).(15)minc˜x+dys.t.a˜x≥bey=fx,y∈{0,1}(16)minz(17)s.t.c˜jxj+dy≤z∀c˜j∈uBoxc(18)a˜ijxj≥bi∀a˜ij∈uBoxa(19)eiy≥f˜i∀f˜i∈uBoxfx,y∈{0,1}Ben-Tal et al. [8] demonstrate that in a closed bounded box, the robust counterpart problem can be converted to a tractable equivalent model where uBox is replaced by a finite set uext consisting of the extreme points of uBox. To represent the tractable form of the robust mathematical model, Eqs. (16)–(19) should be converted to their equivalent tractable ones. For Eq. (16) we have:(20)c˜jx≤z−dy,∀c˜j∈uBoxc|uBoxc={c˜j∈ℜnc:|c˜j−c¯j|≤ρcGjc,j=1,2,…,nc}The left hand side of Eq. (20) contains the vector of uncertain parameters, while all parameters of the right hand side are certain. Thus, the tractable form of the above semi-infinite inequality could be written as follows:(21)∑j(c¯jxj+ηj)≤z−dy,ρcGjcxj≤ηj,∀j∈{1,2,…,nc},ρcGjcxj≥−ηj,∀j∈{1,2,…,nc}.For a constraint i,∑j=1na˜ijxj≥bi, we only need to augment the left-hand side of the equation to reflect the uncertainty set in the formulation. Formally, in the augmented constraint we require, for a given solution x, that [6,3]:(22)mina˜∈uBoxa∑j=1na˜ijxj≥bior(23)mina˜ij:a˜ij−a¯ij≤ρaGija∑j=1na˜ijxj≥biGiven the structure of uBox, the optimal solution of the optimization on the left-hand side is(24)∑j=1na¯ijxj−ρa∑j=1nGija|xj|≥biwhich can be reformulated as(25)∑j=1na¯ijxj−ρa∑j=1nGijalj≥bi(26)−lj≤xj≤lj∀j(1,2,…,n)Similarly, for inequality (19) we have:(27)eiy≥f˜i,∀i∈{1,2,…,nf},∀f˜i∈uBoxf|uBoxf={f˜i∈ℜnf:|f˜i−f¯i|≤ρfGif,i=1,2,…,nf}Thus, it can be rewritten as follows:(28)eiy≥f¯i+ρfGif,∀i∈{1,2,…,nf}According to above description, the robust counterpart of the proposed model with uncertain parameters given by box sets is equivalent to the following:(29)minwSubject to:(30)Cmax+∑j=1J(f¯jxj+ηjf)+∑j=1J∑k=1K(c¯jkyjk+ηjkc)≤w(31)ρfGjfxj≤ηjf∀j∈(1,2,…,J)(32)ρfGjfxj≥−ηjf∀j∈(1,2,…,J)(33)ρcGjkcyjk≤ηjkc∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(34)ρcGjkcyjk≥−ηjkc∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(35)Cmax≥∑j=1Jt¯jk(1+ρt)yjk∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(36)∑j=1Jyjk=1∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(37)yjk≤xj∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(38)∑j=1Jzjv=1∀v∈(1,2,…,V)(39)zjv≤xj∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀v∈(1,2,…,V)(40)∑j=1Jxj≤N(41)∑k=1KAT¯k(1+ρAT)yjk≤∑v=1VAV¯v(1−ρAV)zjv∀j∈(1,2,…,J)(42)∑k=1K∑j=1Jc¯jk(1+ρc)yjk+∑j=1Jf¯j(1+ρf)xj≤TC¯−ρTCGTC(43)zjv≤∑k=1Kyjk∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀v∈(1,2,…,V)(44)∑v=1Vzjv=1∀j∈(1,2,…,J)(45)xj,yjk,zjv∈{0,1}∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀v∈(1,2,…,V),∀k∈(1,2,…,K)(46)ηjf,ηjkc≥0∀j∈(1,2,…,J),∀k∈(1,2,…,K)It is worth mentioning that Constraint (12) does not have any parameter under uncertainty; thus, we can easily produce an equivalent auxiliary crisp of the first model by eliminating Constraint (44).To assess the performance of ROZOP models, several numerical experiments are implemented and the related results are reported in this section. To this aim, three test problems with different sizes are considered and for each size, the experiments are performed under three different uncertainty levels (i.e., ρ=0.1, 0.2, 0.5). First, the robust and deterministic models are solved under nominal data. Nominal data are randomly generated using the random distributions specified in Table 1. Both the deterministic and robust models are solved by GAMS optimization software.The uncertainty levels for all parameters in each test problem are the same (i.e., ρf=ρc=ρt=ρAT=ρAV=ρTC) and for deterministic models (ρ=0). The computational results for deterministic and robust models 1 and 2 are shown in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. It should be mentioned that since the coefficients of the objectives function have different units of measure and ranges, it is essential to normalize these values.Far from the result presented in Tables 2 and 3, we were expected to get worse results from the robust models than the deterministic model, because in robust optimization we consider the worst case until in practice we are faced with the lowest loss and risk. Furthermore, as we expected, with the increase in level of uncertainty the value of objective function is deteriorate. In fact this matter shows that by increasing the amount of existing uncertainty of system, the solution of the model is satisfying these conditions and matching itself to condition. Therefore we can say whatever increases the existing uncertainty of system, because decision will be more sensitive and more difficult. The optimization models adapt themselves with conditions and generate the solutions with lower possibility of unsuccessful implementations compared to deterministic models, however they requires more implementation cost. To more exact investigation of the computational results presented in Tables 1 and 2 and by utilizing the information given in theses tables for three problems, the Figs. 1–3are drawn as below:As seen in all of Figs, the value of objective function for all three problems for model 2 is worse than model 1, because constraint 12 in model 2 that guarantees the transportation in every cell must be done by a single vehicle which leads to open more location as cell and increasing the opening cost of more centers cause to increase the value of objective function, For better understanding see the Figs. 4 and 5.Reason of this matter in those whole machines in every cell must be serviced, on the other hands the time availability of vehicle is restricted, therefore whenever a restriction is added to problem and this adding cause to generate this force that each cell must be serviced only by a single vehicle, we must decrease the number of assigned machines to that single vehicle and which requires opening more new cells. Due to this fact the open cost and consequently the amount of objective function are increased.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
To deal with the issue of uncertain parameters in the vehicle positioning problem in multi-cell automated manufacturing system, two robust optimization models based on the recent extensions in robust optimization theory were proposed. In proposed models, the vehicle location-positioning problem for a network path with multiple loops interconnected was explored. Presented model is separated the network path into cells and vehicles is assigned to each of these cells in order to optimize the performance of the material handling system. Moreover, in the first proposed model we assumed that all transportation in each cell can be performed by a set of vehicles. However, since there are additional constraints such as space limitation and vehicle availability in real world problem, we had to extend the first proposed model for these situations and hence the second model for these cases was proposed. Therefore, the second proposed model resembles the first one, with the exception that all transportation in each cell can be only done by a vehicle due to issues such as space limitation, vehicles availability, etc. To extend the proposed models to be capable of handling uncertain data, the transport costs, fixed cost for opening cell, maximum total cost travel time between each pair of centers of cells and location of machines, average time required to performing all transports from location of machines and availability of vehicle are assumed to be varied in an uncertain closed box set. Afterwards, the related semi-definite models were formulated according to uncertain parameters. Finally, the tractable robust counterpart of the proposed deterministic models was used to find the robust solutions. At the end, numerical tests were conducted to fully demonstrate efficacy and applicability of the proposed robust programming models. The results corroborate that two models performed well within the context and reached what we expected in the manufacturing environment.