@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy clustering with biological knowledge for gene selection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An application of FCLARANS for attribute clustering and dimensionality reduction in gene expression data has been demonstrated.Domain knowledge based on gene ontology and differential gene expressions are employed in the process.Important representative features are extracted from each enriched gene partition to form the reduced gene space.External validation using various well-known classifiers, establishes the effectiveness of the proposed methodology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy CLARANS,Feature selection,Gene ontology,Fold-change,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an application of Fuzzy Clustering of Large Applications based on Randomized Search (FCLARANS) for attribute clustering and dimensionality reduction in gene expression data. Domain knowledge based on gene ontology and differential gene expressions are employed in the process. The use of domain knowledge helps in the automated selection of biologically meaningful partitions. Gene ontology (GO) study helps in detecting biologically enriched and statistically significant clusters. Fold-change is measured to select the differentially expressed genes as the representatives of these clusters. Tools like Eisen plot and cluster profiles of these clusters help establish their coherence. Important representative features (or genes) are extracted from each enriched gene partition to form the reduced gene space. While the reduced gene set forms a biologically meaningful attribute space, it simultaneously leads to a decrease in computational burden. External validation of the reduced subspace, using various well-known classifiers, establishes the effectiveness of the proposed methodology on four sets of publicly available microarray gene expression data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A primary goal of bioinformatics is to increase the understanding of biological processes, possibly by the application and development of data mining techniques [1]. Analyzing biological data sets requires making sense of the data by inferring structure or generalization from it. With the advent of microarray technology, scientists started developing informatics tools for the analysis and information extraction from gene expression data. Due to the inherent characteristic of microarray data, involving high levels of noise, high cardinality of genes, and small samples size, feature selection becomes [2–4] an important and frequently used technique in gene expression analysis. Since the small number of samples narrows down the acquirable knowledge, it reduces the probability of correct decision making. An increase in the number of features may also lead to increased processing time and memory requirements. Therefore a selection of the proper features is an important preprocessing stage for classification; often directly associated with tissue category, disease state or clinical outcome. It reduces computation cost and increases classification accuracy.Selection of features can be supervised [5,6] as well as unsupervised [8,7]. Simultaneous feature selection and clustering has also been reported in literature [9,10]. However, a subset selected by a supervised feature selection method may not always be good for unsupervised learning, and vice versa. It becomes desirable to have a feature selection method which works well in both unsupervised and supervised frameworks.A central limitation of most commonly used algorithms is that they are unable to identify genes whose expression is similar to multiple, distinct gene groups. Moreover, gene expression data are redundant and noisy, leading to ambiguity and vagueness. Computational intelligence, particularly fuzzy sets, provides a natural framework to handle the associated uncertainty and ambiguity [11].Clustering [12,13] is a useful exploratory technique for gene expression data as it groups similar objects together and allows the biologist to identify potentially meaningful relationships between genes. Those genes belonging to the same cluster are typically involved in related functions and are frequently co-regulated. Thus, grouping similar genes can provide a way to understand some of their (as yet) unknown functions. Often some genes are likely to be similarly expressed with different groups in response to different subsets of the experiments. Fuzzy clustering [14,15] facilitates the identification of such overlapping groups of genes by allowing one sample to simultaneously belong to multiple clusters. This becomes appropriate in many cases of uncertainty and noise. It is also suitable in modeling a single gene with multiple functionality.The use of biological domain knowledge often serves to aid the process of data analysis [18], and can make the results more acceptable to biologists. The use of gene ontology [19] and fold-change [20] has been reported in literature. Biological knowledge about co-expressed genes has also been incorporated in clustering [16,17], for determining quality-based partitions. Gene ontology (GO) annotations have been used to extend the k-medoids algorithm, such that genes with known function get clustered together [37]. The incorporation of biological knowledge provides a direction towards the extraction of meaningful groups of genes [38,39]. Computation of pairwise distances between gene annotation similarities has been used [40] to develop a fast software.Gene ontology (GO) provides a common language to describe aspects of a gene product's biology, and is represented in a taxonomic form. The use of a consistent vocabulary allows genes from different species to be compared based on their GO annotations. Fold-change is used to measure the differential expressions of genes in a microarray experiment, thereby providing some indication about their importance. Differentially expressed genes are reported to be important due to their involvement in important biological processes [25]. Microarray technology enables the simultaneous measurement of the expression levels of genes throughout the genome. Its use in discovering genes, which are differentially expressed between two or more groups of patients, has many biomedical applications; including the identification of disease biomarkers that can potentially be used to understand and diagnose diseases in a better way. There exist several methods for the identification of such differentially expressed genes, and the choice of a method can profoundly affect the resultant set. Despite a wealth of available methods, biologists show a fondness for one of the earliest approach, viz. fold change [20,29], presumably because of its computational simplicity and interpretability.In this article we propose a novel way of feature selection through fuzzy gene clustering, while incorporating biological knowledge. Since the number of genes is very large we use Fuzzy Clustering Large Applications based on Randomized search (FCLARANS) [21] for initial fuzzy partitioning based on similarity. Domain knowledge, involving gene ontology, is used for selecting the best clusters. These clusters are qualitatively evaluated in terms of Eisen plot and the constituent gene expression profiles. The differential expression of genes is computed, using fold-change, to select the most-representative feature (or gene) from each cluster to collectively form the reduced subset of genes. The classification accuracy is tested for external validation. We used WEKA [22] for implementing k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), decision tree C4.5, random forest, multilayer perceptron (MLP) and naive Bayes’ (NB) classifiers. It has been observed that incorporation of biological knowledge, along with fuzzy clustering, lead to better performance over a smaller subset of genes.The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the fuzzy clustering algorithm (Fuzzy CLARANS). The proposed feature selection method is described in Section 3. Case studies on Colon, Medulloblastoma, Gastric and Leukemia data are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 provides the conclusion.Here we describe the fuzzy clustering algorithm, Fuzzy CLARANS (FCLARANS) [21], which performs efficiently on large data. The inherent fuzziness in FCLARANS allows the handling of uncertainty, while reducing the computational time for searching neighbours and eliminating user-defined parameters. It incorporates the concept of fuzzy membership onto the framework of CLARANS [23] for manoeuvering uncertainty in the context of data mining. FCLARANS is employed here as a tool for clustering the large gene space. Any other clustering algorithm could be used as well.Let us first briefly introduce CLARANS, before we move onto its fuzzy version FCLARANS. Typically CLARANS searches through a graph GN,c, where nodevqis represented by a set of c medoids (or centroids){m1q,…,mcq}of the clusters. Two nodes are termed as neighbors if they differ by only one medoid, and are connected by an edge. More formally, two nodesv1={m11,…,mc1}andv2={m12,…,mc2}are termed neighbors if and only if the cardinality of the intersection ofv1andv2is given ascard(v1⋂v2)=c−1. Hence each node in the graph has c*(N−c) neighbors. For each nodevqwe assign a cost function(1)Jcq=∑xjɛUi∑i=1cdjiq,wheredjiqdenotes the dissimilarity measure of the jth object xjfrom the ith cluster medoidmiqin the qth node. The aim is to determine that set of c-medoids{m10,…,mc0}at nodev0, for which the corresponding cost is the minimum as compared to all other nodes in the graph.The algorithm considers two parameters numlocal, representing the number of iterations (or runs) for the algorithm, and maxneighbor, the number of adjacent nodes (set of medoids) in the graph G that need to be searched upto convergence. These parameters are provided as input at the beginning. Random search is used to generate neighbors, by starting from an arbitrary node and randomly checking maxneighbor neighbors. If a neighbor represents a better partition, the process continues with this new node. Otherwise a local minimum is found, and the algorithm restarts until numlocal local minima are obtained. The variable maxneighbor is computed as(2)maxneighbor=p%of{c*(N−c)},with p being provided as input by the user. Typically, 1.25≤p≤1.5 [23]. The main steps of the algorithm are outlined as follows:1.Set iteration counter i←1, and set a parameter mincost [measuring the minimum cost attained by Eq. (1)] to an arbitrarily large value. A pointer bestnode refers to the solution set.2.Start randomly from any nodevcurrentin graph GN,c, consisting of c medoids. Compute costJccurrentby Eq. (1).3.Set node counter j←1.4.Select randomly a neighborvjof nodevcurrent. Compute the costJcjby Eq. (1).5.If the criterion function improves asJcj<JccurrentThen set the current node to be this neighbor node by current←j, and go to Step 3 to search among the neighbors of the newvcurrentElse increment j by one.6.Ifj≤maxneighborThen go to Step 4 to search among the remaining allowed neighbors (among its maxneighbor neighbours) ofvcurrentElse calculate the average distance of patterns from medoids for this node; this requires one scan of the database.7.IfJccurrent<mincostThen setmincost←Jccurrentand choose as a solution this set of medoids given by bestnode←current.8.Increment the number of iterations i by 1.Ifi>numlocalThen output bestnode as the solution set of medo-ids and haltElse go to Step 2 for the next iteration.Fuzzification of CLARANS is done by incorporating fuzzy membership to the cost function of Eq. (1). It allows a pattern xito have finite, non-zero membership μij∈[0, 1] to two or more partitions. FCLARANS now minimizes the cost function [21](3)Jfcq=∑j=1N∑i=1c(μijq)m′djiq,where m′ was chosen as 2 after several experiments. Here the distance component is weighted by the corresponding membership value. This is used in Steps 2, 4, 5, 7, of the algorithm CLARANS. Fuzzy partitioning is carried out through an iterative optimization of the cost function defined in Eq. (3), with the membership at nodevqbeing computed asμijq=1∑k=1c(djiq/djkq)(2/m′−1).A choice of m′=2 corresponds to the use of the Euclidean distance.The modeling of uncertainty in the domain of large data is suitably handled. Though the computational complexity is higher in FCLARANS, yet its performance is found to be superior for the optimal clustering as evaluated in terms of accuracy and cluster validity index [21].Since the value of maxneighbor=p%of{c*(N−c)} [as in CLARANS, Eq. (2)] turned up to be very high for large data (having N≥10, 000), FCLARANS employed a new scalable approximation(4)maxneighbor=c2log2(N−c),in order to ease the computational burden.FCLARANS facilitates the identification of overlapping groups of genes by modeling their simultaneous belongingness to more than one such set. Here each gene has a total membership of 1.0, that gets apportioned between the clusters on the basis of its similarity to the cluster representative. A higher similarity implies a higher membership, and vice versa. Such multiple assignment helps in revealing genes whose expression is similar to multiple, distinct functional groups of other (known) genes.The incorporation of biological knowledge in gene selection enables a better biological interpretation of the chosen gene set for a given data. In this section we describe a new feature selection algorithm for microarray data, using fuzzy gene clustering based on biological knowledge. Concepts from gene ontology (GO) study and analysis of differential gene expression are used to select a reduced gene set. While GO helps in finding biologically enriched clusters, the fold-change is calculated during the analysis of differential expression within each such cluster for selecting the representative genes to subsequently formulate the reduced gene set. The concept of selecting a representative gene by computing the fold-change from each biologically meaningful cluster, is unique. It results in improved performance over a smaller gene set.Gene ontology is a controlled vocabulary describing gene products and related functions. It depicts a relational structure of genes present within the gene sets according to their biological descriptions (annotations). It seems to be the most complete database which is well-curated and up-to-date. The gene ontology provides descriptions about gene products in different databases in terms of their associated biological process (BP), cellular components (CC), and molecular function (MF). It provides a grouping of genes into biologically meaningful categories, at various levels of specificity. The categories are gathered in a directed acyclic graph, with the genes being annotated to gene ontology (GO) nodes.We measure the degree of enrichment in terms of p-values,11The p-value of a statistical significance test represents the probability of obtaining values of the test statistic that are equal to or greater in magnitude than the observed test statistic.using a cumulative hypergeometric distribution. This involves the probability of observing the number of genes from a particular functional GO category (i.e., molecular function, biological process, cellular component) within each feature (or gene) subset. The probability p for finding at least k genes, from a particular category within a cluster of size n, is expressed as(5)p=1−∑i=0k−1fig−fn−ign,where f is the total number of genes within a category and g is the total number of genes within the genome [24].The p-values are calculated for each functional category in each cluster. Statistical significance is evaluated for the genes in each of these partitions by computing p-values, that signify how well they match with the different GO categories. Note that a smaller p-value, close to zero, is indicative of a better match. A p-value closer to zero indicates high confidence that the associated category represents the correct annotation for a cluster, whereas a value closer to 1 implies low confidence in the annotation. Our algorithm uses the p-value as a selection criterion to extract “biologically meaningful” clusters of genes from a large collection.Differentially expressed genes are reported to be important due to their involvement in important biological processes [25]. Of the various available methods, biologists tend to prefer fold-change [20] – presumably because of its computational simplicity and interpretability. Fold-change analysis is used to identify genes with expression ratios or differences between a diseased sample (treatment) and a control. It is actually a number describing how much a quantity changes while moving from an initial to a final value. It is often used for measuring the change in expression level of a gene.Let xijand yijdenote the log2 expression levels of gene i in replicate j in the control and treatment, respectively. The standard definition of the fold-change for gene i is(6)FCi=xij¯÷yij¯wherexij¯andyij¯are the mean expression levels of gene i in replicate j in the control and treatment, respectively. The fold-change value is calculated from the mean normalized volumes between groups. Biologists generally consider fold-change greater or equal to 2 as a significant standard for detecting differentially expressed genes [26].The main focus of the algorithm is on fuzzy clustering for gene selection using biological knowledge. FCLARANS is employed for clustering the large gene space, while handling uncertainty and overlap. The total gene space is clustered withc=g[27]. It may be noted that any other medoid-based clustering algorithm, suitable for handling large data [28], could also be used. The GO study is used for the biological validation of the clusters generated in terms of enrichment of functional categories in individual clusters. The p≤e−05 has been used to filter out significant clusters [29], with the most representative genes being chosen based on the maximum fold-change. These gene representatives carry useful biological information, and constitute the reduced set of features. This also leads to reduced computational complexity, improved visualization and faster convergence.1.Initialize g← number of genes, N← number of samplesInitialize number of medoids (number of selected genes) nm←0.2.Cluster set of genes using FCLARANS forc=g.3.Use gene ontology to detect co-regulated genes in terms of process, component and function related p-values ≤ e−05.4.If any biologically meaningful cluster is detectedThen perform Steps 5–7 for each such clusterElse go to Step 9.5.Calculate fold-change FC for each gene present in the biologically meaningful cluster. This is a way of detecting differentially expressed genes.6.Choose that gene with the maximum FC as the representative of the cluster.7.Those representative genes having FC≥2 are considered to be members of the selected (reduced) gene set.(a) Replace each such set of co-regulated genes gcby its cluster representative.(b) Increment nmand decrement g←g−gc.8.Repeat Steps 2–7 until no more good clusters can be found.9.Biologically validate the selected representative genes using publicly available databases, annotations, and relevant tools like Eisen plot, cluster profile.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
