@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Internet banking diffusion: A country-level analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study examines country-level factors that influence Internet banking diffusion.Direct and mediating effects of economic and technological factors are modeled.National culture is used to explain diffusion levels across different country groups.PLS and cluster analysis provide support for mediating and moderating relationships.Findings yield implications on how to promote Internet banking for policy makers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet banking,Diffusion of innovation,Country-level analysis,National culture,Mediating and moderating relationships,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the last decade, Internet banking technology has made remarkable progress. However, there is a huge disparity across different nations all over the world in the diffusion of Internet banking services. This leads to the research question of this study: why different countries exhibit different levels of Internet banking adoption? Previous studies provide limited insight as they were mostly conducted at the individual user level with single-country samples. At the country level, this study proposes an Internet banking diffusion model that examines the impact of economical, technological and cultural factors on Internet banking diffusion. The hypothesized relationships in the research model were statistically tested with the secondary data collected from a sample of 33 European countries. The results indicate that the effects of socio-economic and technology-related factors on Internet banking diffusion are fully mediated by Internet access. Furthermore, the findings suggest that national culture is an important moderator as it make differences in Internet banking diffusion as well as Internet access across different country groups. The country-level analysis contributes to the advancement of Internet banking theory and practice, and provides some useful insights to researchers, practitioners and policy makers on how to enhance Internet banking diffusion.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Researchers have studied Internet banking diffusion for over two decades for its importance to both banks and customers. Banks that offer Internet banking services have an edge over those that only offer traditional offline banking services. Similar to e-commerce, Internet banking is an innovation that provides the following competitive advantages to banks: reducing transaction cost, providing better services to customers, meeting consumer demand, and creating efficient transactions (Kalakota and Winston 1996).Banks provide online services mainly for the purpose of cost reduction resulted from the cheaper expenses than offline services. On average, online banking saves 40 percent operational costs in comparison with offline banking (Tan and Teo 2000, Nath et al. 2001). Banks that reach a high Internet banking diffusion with their customers are even capable of closing some of their physical branches (IB 2009). Furthermore, banks may increase revenue by attracting new customers who prefer Internet banking for its convenience. Internet banking attracts and retains customers by allowing them to conduct financial transactions and access account information anytime and anywhere with computers, tablets and smartphones.For customers, Internet banking provides them a more flexible option that saves them time and effort and enables personal financial management 24hours a day and 7days a week in addition to brick-and-mortar services (Tan and Teo 2000). Internet banking users do not have to make a trip to physical branches, and be constrained by their opening hours (Polasik and Wisniewski 2009). Internet banking users are just clicks away from their latest financial information, which is especially important for corporate customers who need up-to-the-minute information for accurate decision-making in financial management (Tan and Teo 2000).Even though Internet banking is an innovation that benefits banks and customers, its diffusion still remains very low in many countries around the world in comparison with developed countries. It follows that such a significant variation of Internet banking diffusion in the globe is worth investigating by asking the following research question: Why different countries have different levels of Internet banking adoption? The examination of the country-level diffusion of Internet banking services may help researchers, practitioners and policy-makers identify main obstacles and recommend workable solutions.This study addresses the research question by investigating the country-specific factors that make differences in Internet banking diffusion. It develops an Internet banking diffusion model that takes common economical, technological and cultural factors into account. Such a general model is applicable to most countries and regions in the world. The model is tested with secondary data collected from a sample of countries, and the empirical findings may contribute to the advancement of Internet banking theory and practice at the country level. Such a country-level analysis is able to provide insights on the disparity of Internet banking development over the world. This study is organized as follows. First, it reviews the literature on Internet banking diffusion and relevant theories. The subsequent section describes the research model of the hypothesized relationships between country-level factors and Internet banking diffusion. Then, it discusses the methodology including data collection and statistical techniques for model testing. Finally, results are presented, followed by implications and conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
