@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient memetic algorithm for total weighted tardiness minimization in a single machine with setups

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A replacement strategy that improves the diversity of the population is proposed.A decomposition of a computationally expensive neighborhood is defined.Some methods to speed-up the evaluation of the neighbors are proposed and extended.The resulting hybrid algorithm is significantly better than the state-of the-art.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Single machine,Weighted tardiness,Memetic algorithm,Variable neighborhood descent,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The single machine scheduling problem with sequence-dependent setup times with the objective of minimizing the total weighted tardiness is a challenging problem due to its complexity, and has a huge number of applications in real production environments. In this paper, we propose a memetic algorithm that combines and extends several ideas from the literature, including a crossover operator that respects both the absolute and relative position of the tasks, a replacement strategy that improves the diversity of the population, and an effective but computationally expensive neighborhood structure. We propose a new decomposition of this neighborhood that can be used by a variable neighborhood descent framework, and also some speed-up methods for evaluating the neighbors. In this way we can obtain competitive running times. We conduct an experimental study to analyze the proposed algorithm and prove that it is significantly better than the state-of-the-art in standard benchmarks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Effective scheduling is a form of decision making that plays a crucial role in the manufacturing and service industries. For this reason, scheduling problems have been studied for over five decades.The importance of performance criteria involving due dates has been widely recognized in many real industrial contexts. In the current competitive environment, it is important that companies meet the shipping dates submitted to their customers, as certain costs are incurred in case of failure. The costs of late deliveries include penalty clauses in the contract, rush shipping costs, loss of goodwill resulting in an increased probability of losing the customer for some or all future jobs, and a damaged reputation which will turn other customers away [1]. These penalties vary significantly over customers and over orders, and this implied strategic weight should be reflected in job priority. In several surveys [2,3] it has been found that meeting due dates is identified as the most important scheduling objective in competitive markets. The minimization of the total weighted tardiness is the subject of a very large amount of literature in scheduling, because it is probably the most flexible one as it can be used to differentiate between customers.Setup operations are necessary to prepare production resources (e.g., machines) for the job to be executed next, and whenever they depend on the preceding job just completed they are called sequence-dependent setups. In a survey of industrial schedulers, Panwalkar et al. [2] found that 70% of managers stated that they encounter sequence-dependent setup times for at least some of the operations that they schedule, while 13% reported that all operations required sequence-dependent setup times. More recently, Conner in [4] has pointed out, in 250 industrial projects, that 50% of these projects contain sequence-dependent setup times, and when these setup times are well applied, 92% of the order deadlines could be met. In [5] it is stated that sequence-dependent setup times exist in industries that require, for example, cleaning, molding, painting and printing operations.As stated by Xanthopoulos et al. in [6], the single machine case is not restrictive for a number of reasons. First, single machine problems form the building blocks of solutions for systems of higher complexity. Second, in practice, it is common to aggregate several manufacturing functions in a single operation, and third, the performance of complex manufacturing systems often depends heavily on a single bottleneck machine.For all these reasons, minimizing the total weighted tardiness of jobs in a single machine with sequence-dependent setup times is both of academic interest and an important practical consideration. It is a relevant scheduling problem encountered in a number of real-world applications (e.g., turbine component manufacturing [7] or the packaging industry [8]). Additionally, as pointed out by Bozejko and Wodecki in [25], this problem is equivalent to the travelling salesman problem with processing times and due dates, and therefore the array of real-world applications is even bigger, including such problems as vehicle routing.This problem is NP-hard (see Section 3). The most efficient exact algorithm for this problem was recently proposed by Tanaka and Araki in [9], but unfortunately the running time of that method in some difficult instances with 60 or more jobs is prohibitive, taking several weeks in some extreme cases. For larger instances the computation time may increase exponentially. For this reason, metaheuristics are recommended for searching good solutions within reasonable computation times.In this paper we develop a evolutionary algorithm hybridized with a local search method to mimic “memetic evolution” [10]. Our proposal combines several ideas from the literature, which are adapted and extended to design a competitive algorithm. These ideas include a crossover operator that preserves both the relative and absolute order of jobs in the sequences [11], a replacement strategy based on the preselection schemes[12] and the deterministic crowding idea [13,14], and a recent neighborhood structure with a high computational complexity [15]. We propose a new decomposition of this neighborhood into a family of structures that can be used in a variable neighborhood descent schema. To obtain competitive running times, our proposal selects several sets of this family, prevents the generation of duplicated neighbors and includes a speed-up evaluation strategy that extends the method proposed in [16]. We conduct an experimental study to analyze the proposed algorithm in standard benchmarks, obtaining results significantly better than those of the state-of-the-art.Several studies have proposed genetic algorithms or variable neighborhood search separately (see Section 2), but to the best of our knowledge these two metaheuristics have never been hybridized to solve this particular problem, which also motivates this paper. In [17,18] we can find population-based variable neighborhood searches, although their approach is quite different and these papers solve a slightly different problem.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the literature on this problem. In Section 3 we formulate the problem. In Section 4 we detail the genetic algorithm, while in Section 5 we present the local search method. Section 6 reports the results of the experimental study, and finally Section 7 summarizes the main conclusions of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have considered the single machine scheduling problem with sequence-dependent setup times, where the objective is to minimize the total weighted tardiness, and devise a new algorithm, termed GA-VND (genetic algorithm with variable neighborhood descent). The genetic algorithm is designed adapting several ideas from the literature, including a crossover operator that preserves both the absolute and relative position of the tasks [11] and a replacement strategy that improves the diversity of the population, based on the ideas proposed in [12,13,14]. Our variable neighborhood descent is based on decomposing the computationally expensive Block Move structure [15]. In this way we can benefit from considering a high number of neighbors and at the same time limiting the computational cost of considering all of them at once. To further reduce the run time we have proposed a speed-up evaluation method and also extended the speed-up method proposed in [16]. In the experimental study we have analyzed our proposal and shown that the hybrid approach (GA-VND) is better than each metaheuristic alone. We have also compared GA-VND with the best methods in the literature over the most typical benchmarks in both total weighted tardiness minimization and total tardiness minimization, showing clearly that GA-VND compares favorably to state-of-the-art methods.We believe that the main reasons for the good performance of our algorithm are the combination of the diversification provided by the genetic algorithm combined with the intensification provided by the variable neighborhood descent, together with the fact that the neighborhood provides a big range of moves to choose from, allowing the algorithm to search over many diverse and potentially good candidate solutions of the search space. At the same time, the variable neighborhood descent and speed-up methods allow the computational time to stay reasonable.