@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Coral Reefs Optimization algorithm for optimal mobile network deployment with electromagnetic pollution control criterion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Mobile Network Deployment Problem is tackled using the CRO.The Coral Reefs Optimization is based on corals and corals reefs biology.A full description of the new algorithm is carried out.Experimental comparison with alternative soft-computing algorithms is done.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coral Reefs Optimization algorithm,Mobile network deployment,Network optimization algorithms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we apply a novel meta-heuristic approach, the Coral Reefs Optimization (CRO) algorithm, to solve a Mobile Network Deployment Problem (MNDP), in which the control of the electromagnetic pollution plays an important role. The CRO is a new bio-inspired meta-heuristic algorithm based on the growing and evolution of coral reefs. The aim of this paper is therefore twofold: first of all, we study the performance of the CRO approach in a real hard optimization problem, and second, we solve an important problem in the field of telecommunications, including the minimization of electromagnetic pollution as a key concept in the problem. We show that the CRO is able to obtain excellent solutions to the MNDP in a real instance in Alcalá de Henares (Madrid, Spain), improving the results obtained by alternative algorithms such as Evolutionary, Particle Swarm Optimization or Harmony Search algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mobile telecommunication market is one of the most important factors in the current global economy. As an example, the contribution of the mobile market to the UK economy was 2.2% in 2003, and the forecast is that it will increase up to 7.5% in 2015 [1,2]. This is a global trend in developed countries and it is even stronger in developing countries [3]. In parallel with this boom of mobile communications, a social concern on the adverse effects of electromagnetic emissions from base stations, antennas and terminals, has grown in the last few years [4]. There are quite different opinions on this topic, from those that relate the relationship between continuous exposition to electromagnetic fields with different kinds of pathologies [5], to those who deny these effects or claim for more definitive studies before making a complete decision [6]. Attending these studies, and for prevention issues, several governments have warned about possible health risks due to mobile phones and electromagnetic fields exposition [7].In spite of this, electromagnetic emission is still not considered as a key factor in mobile networks deployment problems. Instead, companies and researchers have focussed in the development of efficient algorithms for mobile network deployment mainly based on coverage and cost [8–16]. On the other hand, the majority of recent network deployments problems in the literature have been successfully tackled by using bio-inspired meta-heuristic approaches: problems of WiFi network design [17], optical networks [19,20], UMTS networks [21] and of course mobile cellular networks [22,23] are some examples.The objective of this study is twofold: first, we tackle a novelly defined Mobile Network Deployment Problem (MNDP), in which one of the key objectives is the minimization of the electromagnetic pollution from new base station controllers allocated. This objective is managed together with more classical deployment objectives such as the maximization of the network coverage and the minimization of the deployment cost. Second, we apply a recently proposed meta-heuristic approach to solve the MNDP, the Coral Reefs Optimization (CRO) algorithm [24]. The CRO is an evolutionary bio-inspired approach, based on the simulation of the processes in a coral reefs, such as coral reproduction, growing, fighting for space in the reef or depredation. The CRO can be classified into a family of bio-inspired algorithms which tries to artificially simulate the behavior of a specific natural ecosystem to tackle optimization problems. Other examples of this family of meta-heuristics are the ant colony optimization algorithm [25], the Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm [26], artificial bee colony approach (ABC) [27] or the weed colonization algorithm [28], etc. In this paper we describe in detail the CRO approach, and its adaptations to tackle the MNDP, such as specific reproduction operators and repairing procedures. We show the good performance of the CRO in a real MNDP in a Spanish city, Alcalá de Henares (Madrid), where an electromagnetic measure map is available after several studies carried out in the zone on the impact of mobile telephony over the population. Comparison against different state of the art meta-heuristics is carried out in order to show the excellent performance of the proposed CRO algorithm.The rest of the paper has been structured as follows: next section states the problem definition, and details the different problem's objectives. Section “The Coral Reefs Optimization algorithm” presents the CRO approach proposed to tackle the problem, with full details on its characteristics, including encoding, operators, repairing procedures and adaptations to the MNDP. Section “Experimental part: a case study in Alcalá de Henares (Madrid)” describes the experimental part of the paper, with the results obtained in a real MNDP problem in a Spanish city. A comparison with alternative Evolutionary Algorithm, Particle Swarm Optimization and Harmony Search approach is carried out at this stage. Section “Conclusion” closes the paper by giving some final remarks and conclusions.In this section we present the mathematical definition of the network deployment problem tackled in this paper. Let us consider a metropolitan area A, where the existing electromagnetic field (volts per meter V/m) has been measured defining a set of pointsO=(oi),i∈{1,…,O}, described by coordinates(xio,yio)∈A. The rest of the problem's inputs are the following:•SetP=(pi),i∈{1,…,P}of possible points to locate the new BTSs (Base Transceiver Stations). Each point is defined by its coordinates (xi, yi)∈A.SetT=(ti),i∈{1,…,T}of different types of BTSs.SetP′=(pi′),i∈{1,…,M}of points in A that must be covered by the new mobile stations, i.e., given mobile telephony service, described by coordinates(xi′,yf′i)∈A.Cost functionC(D):P×T→ℝ.The problem's objective is to obtain a deployment of new base stations, D={(pi, ti)}, i∈{1, N} that fulfills the following optimization criteria:1.Minimizes the no-ionizing radiation over the area, i.e., the increment on the electromagnetic radiation over the area under study. We assume that this electromagnetic radiation can be calculated through the electric field E produced by the new deployed base stations, in the following way:(1)PR=ϕAE(2)ϕ=E2120π;AE=λ24πGiwhere PRis the received power in the measurement point, ϕ is the power density in (W/m2) and AEis the effective area of the receiving antenna. In Eq. (2), λ is calculated by the frequency (Hz) and the speed of light in vacuum c (m/s), λ=c/f. Giis the antenna gain, fixed to be 1 in this study. Through these equations, we can obtain Eq. (3), which refers to the electric field E caused by the received power from a BTS in the area under study.(3)E2=PR4π2λ2Gi120If we consider a set of N antennas influencing over M points of the grid area, the increment of the total field can be obtained as the quadratic sum showed in Eq. (4), (sub-indices (n, m) refer to all points (M) on the grid influenced by N antennas):(4)ΔET=∑i=1MΔEi=∑n=1N∑m=1MEn,m2=∑n=1N∑m=1MPRn,m4πλ2Gi120πFinally the new values of the electric field, CE(D) in the deployment D, are calculated as the quadratic sum of the existing original field (oi) in each pointP′=(pi′),i∈{1,…,M}of the area under study plus the increment of electric field given by Eq. (4):(5)CE(D)=∑i=1Moi2+ΔET2Minimizes the number of users without service, or equivalently, minimize the non-coverage percentage of the system, which can be calculated as the number of points without service divided by total points in the coverage target areaP′(M):(6)ming(D)=ncM,where nc stands for the number of points inP′without service, i.e., points with no network coverage by any BTS. The coverage outage in a specific point occurs when the received power PRof all the BTSs deployed in the area is below the receivers sensitivity SR, SR≥PR. The SRdepends on the application service, bandwidth and technology under study and is defined as an input to the problem.Note that for this optimization criterium (and also in optimization criterium 1), it is required to calculate the received powerPRn,m. It can be obtained by Eq. (7), where PTis transmitted power and Lpis path loss:(7)PR(dBW)=PT(dBW)−Lp(dB)To calculate the path loss Lpwe apply the Okumura–Hata[29] and its modification for higher frequencies, Cost231-Hata[30]. Okumura–Hata model is valid for frequencies 150≤f≤1500MHz and Cost231-Hata model is valid for 1500≤f≤2000MHz. Depending the working band of the BTS the corresponding propagation model is applied. This model estimates the path loss (see Eq. (7)) from the transmitter, in our case the BTS, to a specific measurement point m where the receiver is located, which is at distance d (Km) from the BTS; f (MHz) is the frequency of transmission; hBTScorresponds to BTS effective height whereas hMobileis the effective height of the receivers. The equations for the Okumura–Hata for frequencies below 1500MHz are described in Eq. (8):(8)Lp=66.95+26.16·log(f)−13.82·log(hBTS)−a(hMobile)+(44.9−6.55·log(hBTS))·log(d)where(9)a(hMobile)=(1.1·log(f)−0.7)·hMobile−(1.56·log(f)−0.8)Note that a(hMobile) is a BTS height correction factor, which depends on the height of the BTS in meters. The equations for the Cost231-Hata for frequencies above 1500MHz are described in Eq. (10):(10)Lp=46.3+33.9·log(f)−13.82·log(hBTS)−a(hMobile)+(44.9−6.55·log(hBTS))·log(d)+Cmwhere a(hMobile) is defined as in the previous model and Cmis a correction factor depending on the type of the area under study:(11)Cm=0dBfor medium sized cities and suburban centers3dBfor metropolitan centersThe coverage radiusCRiof a BTS i is the maximum distance where the received power PRiis above the receiver sensitivity SR. A binary M×N coverage matrix K is introduced, where M is the total number of points inP′, and N is the set of locations of the BTS of a particular solution. Each element of matrix K, kij=1 if the distance between the BTS i (located on pi) and pointpj′is smaller than the coverage radius of the BTS, i.e.,d(pi,pj′)≤CRi, and 0 otherwise. Note that the value of nc can just be calculated by summing up all the points in K which are not covered by any of the N BTS of a given deployment D, i.e., by summing up the number of rows in K in which all their elements are 0.Minimizes the cost of the deployment C(D) given by the cost of the N BTSs installed in the area under study A. For this, we define a cost functionC:D→ℝ, in which we assume that the cost of installing a given BTS depends on the its type (different frequency and transmission power), and possibly on the point p (payment to neighbors or building owners). Thus, the total deployment cost is:(12)C(D)=∑(pi,ti)∈DCi(pi,ti),where Ci(pi, ti) is the cost of installing an antenna of type t at point pi:(xi, yi).The CRO is a novel meta-heuristic approach based on corals’ reproduction and coral reefs formation. Basically, the CRO is based on the artificial modeling of a coral reef, Λ, consisting of a N×M square grid. We assume that each square (i, j) of Λ is able to allocate a coral (or colony of corals) Ξi,j, representing a solution to a given optimization problem, which is encoded as a string of numbers in a given alphabetI. The CRO algorithm is first initialized at random by assigning some squares in Λ to be occupied by corals (i.e., solutions to the problem) and some other squares in the grid to be empty, i.e., holes in the reef where new corals can freely settle and grow in the future. The rate between free/occupied squares in Λ at the beginning of the algorithm is an important parameter of the CRO algorithm, which is denoted as rho, and note that 0<ρ0<1. Each coral is labeled with an associated health functionf(Ξij):I→ℝ, that represents the problem's objective function. The CRO is based on the fact that reef will progress, as long as healthier (stronger) corals (which represent better solutions to the problem at hand) survive, while less healthy corals perish.After the reef initialization described above, a second phase of reef formation is artificially simulated in the CRO algorithm: a simulation of the corals’ reproduction in the reef is done by sequentially applying different operators. This sequential set of operators is then applied until a given stop criteria is met. Several operators to imitate corals’ reproduction are defined, among them: a modeling of corals’ sexual reproduction (broadcast spawning and brooding), a model of asexual reproduction (budding), and also some catastrophic events in the reef, i.e., polyps depredation. After the sexual and asexual reproduction, the set of larvae formed (new solutions to the problem), try to locate a place to grow in the reef. It could be in a free space, or in an occupied once, by fighting against the coral actually located in that place. If larvae are not successful in locate a place to grow in a given number of attempts, they are depredated in this phase. Fig. 1illustrates the flow diagram of the CRO algorithm referencing the two CRO phases (reef initialization and reef formation), along with all the operators described above.1.Broadcast Spawning (external sexual reproduction): the modeling of coral reproduction by broadcast spawning consists of the following steps:1.a.In a given step k of the reef formation phase, select uniformly at random a fraction of the existing corals ρkin the reef to be broadcast spawners. The fraction of broadcast spawners with respect to the overall amount of existing corals in the reef will be denoted as Fb. Corals that are not selected to be broadcast spawners (i.e., 1−Fb) will reproduce by brooding later on, in the algorithm.Select couples out of the pool of broadcast spawner corals in step k. Each of such couples will form a coral larva by sexual crossover, which is then released out to the water. Note that, once two corals have been selected to be the parents of a larva, they are not chosen anymore in step k (i.e., two corals are parents only once in a given step). These couple selection can be done uniformly at random or by resorting to any fitness proportionate selection approach (e.g. roulette wheel).Brooding (internal sexual reproduction): as previously mentioned, at each step k of the reef formation phase in the CRO algorithm, the fraction of corals that will reproduce by brooding is 1−Fb. The brooding modeling consists of the formation of a coral larva by means of a random mutation of the brooding-reproductive coral (self-fertilization considering hermaphrodite corals). The produced larva is then released out to the water in a similar fashion than that of the larvae generated in step 1.b.Larvae setting: once all the larvae are formed at step k either through broadcast spawning (1.) or by brooding (2.), they will try to set and grow in the reef. First, the health function of each coral larva is computed. Second, each larva will randomly try to set in a square (i, j) of the reef. If the square is empty (free space in the reef), the coral grows therein no matter the value of its health function. By contrast, if a coral is already occupying the square at hand, the new larva will set only if its health function is better than that of the existing coral. We define a number κ of attempts for a larva to set in the reef: after κ unsuccessful tries, it will be depredated by animals in the reef.Asexual reproduction: in the modeling of asexual reproduction (budding or fragmentation), the overall set of existing corals in the reef are sorted as a function of their level of healthiness (given by f(Ξij)), from which a fraction Faduplicates itself and tries to settle in a different part of the reef by following the setting process described in Step 3. Note that a maximum number of identical corals (μ) are allowed in the reef.Depredation in polyp phase: corals may die during the reef formation phase of the CRO algorithm. At the end of each reproduction step k, a small number of corals in the reef can be depredated, thus liberating space in the reef for next coral generation. The depredation operator is applied with a very small probability Pdat each step k, and exclusively to a fraction Fdof the worse health corals in Λ. For the sake of simplicity in the parameter setting of the CRO algorithm, the value of this fraction may be set to Fd=Fa. Any other assignment may also apply provided that Fd+Fa≤1 (i.e., no overlap between the asexually reproduced and the depredated coral sets).The basic CRO algorithm has been adapted in this paper to tackle the MNDP. Specifically, a special encoding, initialization of the corals in the reef, two novel ways of larvae formation using broadcast spawning and a new larvae repairing process are described in the next subsections.We propose a problem encoding in which each individual in the population encodes a possible network deployment D, i.e., it is formed by several pairs ci=pi|ti,i=1, …, N, wherepi∈Pstands for a location of the BTS, andti∈Tfor the type of the antenna. The individual structure is therefore split in two parts, one for the points where the BTSs are located, and a second part for the type of BTS. This structure makes easier to apply the different evolutionary operators, as we will show later. Note that we deal with a variable-length encoding, since the number of BTSs to be installed (N) is different in each individual (deployment). As an example, let us suppose a deployment problem with N=4 BTSs, and T=3 types of stations. An individual[2182432|3121],has the following information: the individual is formed by of 4 pairs, that means the solution has 4 BTSs. One is located at point 2 of the area and its type is 3. The second one is located at point 18 of the area and its type is 1. The third one is located at point 24 of the area and its type is 2 and finally the last one is located at point 32 of the area, and its type is 1. In order to avoid duplicities in the encoding which may affect the EA performance, the BTS locations are always sorted in ascending order.Each coral in the reef has been randomly generated at the beginning of the algorithm, as follows:•Get a random number N of BTSs, as N∈[MinB, MaxB]. The value for the limits MinB and MaxB is obtained by Eqs. (13) and (14). We define the value BMAXas the total number of antennas needed to cover the total area with the minimal coverage possible radius. This minimal coverage radius can be estimated with Eqs. (8) and (10), and the BTS from the set ofTwith the smallest transmission power among all antennas PTand the lowest BTS height hBTS.(13)MinB=⌈0.2BMAX⌉(14)MaxB=⌈0.4BMAX⌉As a small example of the limits [MinB−MaxB] estimation, let us consider the following situation:–Area A=40,281,745m2.Minimal transmission power of BTSs PT=6dBW.Minimal height of possible locations hBTS=15m. These values help us to calculate the smallest coverage radius CRof a BTS and the minimal number of this kind of BTS to completely cover the area BMAX, resulting the interval [MinB−MaxB], in the following way:CR=457.3673mBMAX=⌈Aπr2⌉=86BTSsMinB=⌈0.2BMAX⌉=5BTSsMaxB=⌈0.4BMAX⌉=25BTSsSelect a random location for each BTS, i.e., select a random set of N points inP.Select a random type inTfor each BTS.Note that with this initialization, each coral in the reef at the first generation corresponds to a possible (feasible) solution of the problem.The external reproduction (broadcast spawning) operator proposed in our approach must take into account the special variable-length characteristics of the problem's encoding. To this end, we have defined two different larvae formation procedures by broadcast spawning, which will be randomly applied in larvae formation: template-based reproduction (TBR) and direct merge reproduction (DMR).The TBR larvae formation uses a binary template or mask in order to deal with the possible different length of each individual involved in the operator. Fig. 2shows an example of a TBC procedure: from two coral sexual cells in the broadcast spawning procedure, the TBR will produce a single coral larva. Let us call l1 and l2 to the lengths of the largest and smallest piparts of the sexual cells involved in this procedure, respectively. In a second step, a binary template of length l2 is randomly generated. Then a crossover point must be randomly obtained from {1, …, l1−l2+1}. For example, in Fig. 2, l1=6 and l2=4, so the crossover point can be chosen from the set {1, 2, 3}. Let us suppose that we have chosen as crossover point the point #2. Then, the template and the smallest coral sexual cell are paired starting in the crossover point, and the genes with a 1 in the template are interchanged between both sexual cells (see Fig. 2). A final process to eliminate possible repetitions in the pipart of the coral larva and to sort the BTSs in increasing order is carried out to obtain the final larva from the TBR procedure. We summarize this process in a pseudo-code below.Algorithm 1TBR operator.Input: A couple of coral sexual cells: CAand CBOutput: A single feasible offspring1: lA=number of BTSs CA2: lB=number of BTSs CB3: iflA>lBthen4:   l1=lA5:   l2=lB6:   Coral Larva=CA7: else8:   l1=lB9:   l2=lA10:   Coral Larva=CB11: end if12: random binary mask with l2 bits13: select crossover point p∈{1, …, l1−l2+1}14: fori=pto (p+l2−1)do15:   Larva(i)=mask(i)CA(i)+(1−mask)(i)CB(i)16: end for17: ordering identifiers of BTSs locations for the new coral larva18: repairing larvaWe propose an alternative operator for broadcast spawning, based on a direct merging of both coral sexual cells in the broadcast spawning procedure. Fig. 3shows an example of the DMR operator: the initial sexual cells are directly merged. Then, the new coral larva is sorted in such a way that the BTSs are displayed in increasing order, and finally the larva is repaired, in the case when there are repeated BTSs on it. We show next the pseudo-code for this crossover procedure (Fig. 4).Algorithm 2DMR operator.Input: A feasible coral sexual cellsOutput: A single feasible coral larva1: Larva = concatenate parents sexual cells2: Ordering identifiers of BTSs locations in the new larva3: Repairing larvaNote that we have defined several repairing procedures in the broadcast spawning and brooding reproduction operators, in order to have feasible corals, i.e., solutions without duplicities in BTSs at the same installing point. We consider these as genotype infeasibilities. However, some phenotype infeasibilities can also be defined for a given coral, i.e., the coral is correct in terms of encoding, but the resulting solution that it represents is problematic. Conditions for phenotype feasible solutions are:•Each BTS in the solution (coral) must provide service to a minimum number of points inP′.We allow certain coverage redundancy, i.e., points that are served by two or more BTSs, but no BTS can be completely inside of the coverage area of another BTS. We neither allow cases in which all the points covered by a given BTS are also covered by other BTSs.Fig. 5shows different cases of phenotype repairing. Case 1 shows a situation in which a BTS is completely inside of the coverage area of another BTS. Case 2 shows a situation where all the points served by the smallest BTS are also covered by the three larger BTSs located around. Finally, case 3 shows a situation in which a BTS provides coverage to only one point inP′. Fig. 6shows the feasible coral after repairing.Note that the phenotype repairing process is not unique, and there are cases in which two different repairs are possible. For example consider the case given in Fig. 7(a). In this figure, we show a case where the coral can go feasible by removing any of the central BTS (both cover points completely covered by other BTS). In this case, the final solution depends on the BTS first removed. Due to this, we implement the phenotype repairing in such a way that every BTS in a given coral is checked out for feasibility in a random order (not in increasing order, as the encoding suggests). Fig. 7(b) and (c) shows the final individual after removing a different BTS, respectively.This section presents the experimental part of the paper, where we show the results obtained by the CRO in a real MNDP problem in Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain, and the comparison with existing alternative meta-heuristics performance. Alcalá de Henares is a medium-size city on the north-east of Madrid (Fig. 8(a)). With the increasing of the population, its mobile network needed an update in order to cover the new mobile communication necessities in different parts of the city. The Alcalá city council has been one of the first in Spain with a real concern on the electromagnetic pollution, and ordered a campaign of electromagnetic measurements in the city in 2009. The number of measurement points were M=509 in an area of 9×7km (Fig. 8(b)). Using this electromagnetic map of the city, we can apply the proposed CRO in order to obtain an optimal new deployment (update) of the mobile network of the city, that includes the electromagnetic pollution as a key part of the design process. In order to facilitate a first study, we consider in this case the equivalence of setsP,P′andO, i.e.,O≡P≡P′. The following parameters define the specific deployment problem in Alcalá de Henares.(1)Area of study: 56,051,193m2.Frequency of BTSs: 1800MHzTransmission power of BTSs: [6,10,14](dBW).Number of different BTS types: 3.BTSs costs (depending on transmission power): [100, 200, 300]K€.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have solved a Mobile Network Deployment Problem (MNDP) using a new meta-heuristic technique, the Coral Reefs Optimization (CRO) algorithm. The CRO is a novel optimization algorithm based on a coral reef formation, which simulates the main processes in the reef such as coral reproduction, growing and depredation. In this paper the CRO has been fully described and adapted to the considered MNDP, which, in this case takes into account the minimization of the electromagnetic pollution as a key point of the problem. In addition, the optimal deployment implies the maximization of the network coverage and the minimization of the deployment cost as alternative problem's objective. We have shown that the CRO approach is able to obtain excellent solutions to the MNDP, better than those by an Evolutionary Algorithm, Particle Swarm or Harmony Search approaches.