@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A rapid structural damage detection method using integrated ANFIS and interval modeling technique

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The method can be used to fast assess structural damage after its occurrence for short-term monitoring.The best approximation property of ANFIS facilitates accurate nonparametric system identification.ANFIS is trained with structural input-output data and used to predict response.Interval modeling technique is used to quantify structural system uncertainty.The method is verified using IASC-ASCE SHM Task Group benchmark structure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system,Best approximation property,Interval modeling technique,Rapid damage detection method,Benchmark structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new kind of rapid structural damage detection method is proposed based on structural dynamic vibration data, which can be used to fast assess structural fault for short-term monitoring. In this paper, to identify structural damage rapidly after its occurrence, we have employed adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) for nonparametric system identification and response prediction, which exploits the best approximation property of ANFIS. Interval modeling technique is then used to extract the feature data by processing ANFIS output data. ANFIS is found to provide a high degree of accuracy for the prediction of the structural response, and interval modeling technique to effectively extract damage characteristics. ANFIS and interval modeling technique, relatively new topics when applied to structure, can be integrated to facilitate rapid structural fault detection. The benchmark structure of IASC-ASCE Task Group is modeled in finite element method (FEM), and then utilized for demonstration of the proposed method, within which the structural damage is modeled as element removal. The simulation results indicate that the effect of the integrated method of ANFIS and interval modeling technique presented in rapid damage detection for short-term monitoring is quite plausible.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vibration based structural health monitoring (SHM) systems are commonly used to check the status of structures, to identify the damage and to quantitatively assess its severity when it occurs. Through characterization of the structural dynamic properties, vibration data provide a global picture of the structure, which facilitates significant volume of work in the field of SHM. These methods are based on the fact that any structure can be interpreted as a dynamic system with stiffness, mass and damping. Once a type of defeat occurs in the engineering structure, the time history response will change. Thus, the features extracted from structural vibration response can be viewed as the indications of structural damage [1].The structural damage determination and quality evaluation can be generally divided into four architectural layers: prediction of damage occurring to a structure, determination of damage position, discrimination of damage degree, and the remaining life a structure can maintain. Nowadays, well-developed structural damage identification systems exploit structural vibration response to determine the time and scope when damage occurs, then utilize wave propagation methods to further precisely locate the damage and its severity. If more precise characteristics of damage are needed, then traditional nondestructive inspection methods can be used to accurately describe the structural damage based on the above two steps [2].Currently, acquisition of raw sensor data is not a key problem for SHM technique; rather, crucial algorithmic developments are needed to process the vast wealth of information and provide useful and simple measures of a structure's current health status [3]. The significant characteristics and specific problems which need solving in vibration-based SHM methods may be classified in several aspects: identification of small damage and control of measurement noise, research on quantity of measurement points and position configuration, and research on processing of vibration information and real-time monitoring. An obvious problem is that various studies apply different SHM methods to different structures, rendering side-by-side comparison difficult.A benchmark study, where participants apply a number of monitoring techniques to the same structure with common objectives, can facilitate a comparison of commonly used techniques [4]. One early attempt was conducted at the 15th International Modal Analysis Conference (IMAC XV) [5]. While this “blind test” is a realistic measure of the performance of different SHM methods, it is not easy for researchers to compare the positive and negative effects of various methods, especially the sensitivity to limited sensor information, noise and so on. Later on, the International Association for Structural Control (IASC) formed SHM task group under the auspices of the American Society of Civil Engineering (ASCE) [6], aiming at studying various SHM methods.Formed in 1999 under the sponsorship of the Dynamics Committee of ASCE and the International Association of Structural Control (IASC) [7], the SHM Task Group has developed a series of benchmark SHM problems, ranging from simple ones to more difficult (but more realistic) ones. Studying simulated data allows a control of the problem and an inspection of the sensitivities to incomplete sensor measurements, noise in signals, and difference between the identification model and the true structure. The benchmark SHM problem proposed by IASC-ASCE SHM Task Group provides a platform structure with common objectives for consistent evaluation of a number of monitoring techniques. This problem has been widely studied by the mainstream SHM methods such as time series analysis method and wavelet method. These widely accepted methods provide rich selections for applications to structures.A common proposal for structural damage detection is to extract and monitor changes of vibration signatures such as stiffness and damping coefficients using vibration measurements, which usually needs calculating frequency parameters and modal shapes. Numerous artificial intelligence methods can be applied for the mapping from modal domain parameters to damage location and severity, such as genetic fuzzy system [8], genetic algorithm [9], fuzzy cognitive maps [10]. Regarding to this kind of methods, large amounts of papers and several monographs [11] have been published, and there are also successful engineering applications concerning the online SHM of composite helicopter rotor blades [12].However, there is a sense that rapid damage identification of engineering structures for short-term monitoring is not much involved in the previous studies [13]. In this paper, a rapid structural damage detection approach is proposed using system identification (SI) method and interval modeling technique [14]. To the author's best knowledge, there is little information [13] available in literature about the combination of ANFIS and interval modeling technique utilized in engineering structures, which facilitates rapid detection of structural damage.As a popular artificial intelligence (AI) method, ANFIS has widespread applications [15] in various fields such as forecasting and predictions [16], and brings possibilities to rapid SHM technique. Recently, ANFIS, as a kind of system identification (SI) method, began to be used in modeling complex behavior of the pavement-fluid system under a variety of environment conditions [17]. A wavelet-based ANFIS is used in modeling nonlinear behavior of smart structures equipped with magnetorheological (MR) dampers [18]. A time-delayed ANFIS is proposed for modeling MR dampers under high impact forces [19].ANFIS was first used in the area of SHM by obtaining the input (the location and depth of a crack) – output (the structural eigenfrequencies) relation of the structural system [20]. For some time, ANFIS has been proved to be an effective method in SHM and fault diagnosis system. For instance, discrete wavelet transform (DWT) technique is used for signal feature extraction and ANFIS is used to identify and classify the fault gear positions and gear fault conditions [21]. Principal component analysis (PCA) is applied to extract features from the obtained FRF data of 3D fluid-structure and the features are fed into ANFIS to identify the size and position of the damage in the 3D turbine [22]. In this paper, the structural system identification is accomplished by modeling the input (displacement response of the last time point and the time point now) – output (displacement response of the next time point) relation of the IASC-ASCE benchmark structure using ANFIS.Interval modeling technique was proposed by Sandia [23] for uncertainty quantification of the structural dynamics problem. Then it is used for uncertainty quantification with performance sensitivity [14] applied to a beam structure with an attached subsystem [24] proposed by Sandia National Laboratories. It started to be used in SHM as a kind of performance-based uncertainty quantification method, accompanying with feedback control for damage identification [25]. Then it is used in a real-time structural damage identification method for aircraft with flight condition variations, which begins by identifying the dynamic models under various test conditions from time-domain input/output data [26].Model uncertainty can be transformed into dominant uncertainty due to joint uncertainty and temperature change, and minor uncertainty caused by other factors. Parameter variations, represented by principal components, are stable when no damage occurs to the structure, and this is the basis of rapid structural damage identification. The decomposing process of interval modeling technique needs careful selection of the numbers of parameters and intervals which are the main obstacles in improving computational efficiency. To save the computing resource, the number of parameters and intervals should be reduced, and to improve the decomposition performance, the number of parameters should be approximately equal to that of intervals. To the author's knowledge, interval modeling technique is so far limited to characterizing and quantifying the model uncertainties in frequency domain [26] and modal domain [14,25]. To expand the application to time-domain, this paper tries to apply interval modeling technique to quantifying model uncertainties in time-domain input/output data.ANFIS for structural modeling and dynamic response prediction is introduced in Section 2, which involves universal and best approximation property of ANFIS. Rapid dynamic damage detection method using interval modeling technique is introduced in Section 3. In Section 4, the proposed identification method is verified using IASC-ASCE SHM problem benchmark structure, which is modeled with finite element method (FEM), and furthermore the structural damage is modeled as finite element removal.In general, SI methodologies are divided into parametric and nonparametric approaches. Nonparametric system identification approaches have been widely used in structural health monitoring. To identify the given system model, the nonparametric SI method trains the input–output map of the structural system to approximate a physical structure and predict the structural response, which has been proved useful for the estimation of incomplete and incoherent measurements of large-scale infrastructural systems and has better adaptability than parametric methods.The application of ANFIS to the nonparametric SI of engineering structures is a relatively new topic, and so is the application to the modeling of cracked structure. Although ANFIS system has been applied to structures, and used in SHM processing damage features which are extracted by PCA and DWT, optimization of the output performance is still challenging.This paper uses ANFIS to accomplish nonparametric SI, and then to predict structural dynamic response. This needs to approximate the function representing the input–output map of the structural system, which can be well handled by ANFIS on account of its best approximation property.Considering the structure that can be viewed as a linear viscous damping structure with N degrees of freedom, the equation of motion under excitation can be written as(1)Mx¨+Cx˙+Kx=Ifwhere the matricesM,CandK∈RN×N, are structure mass, damping, and stiffness matrices respectively. N is the number of DOFs.x¨,x˙andx∈RNare acceleration, velocity and displacement vectors relatively.I∈RN×Nis a unitary matrix, andf∈RNis the external excitation vector.Letu=f. If depicted in state space method, the equation can be expressed as(2)X˙=AX+Buwhere the state vectorXand the system matricesAandBare defined as follows:(3)X=xx˙,A=0I−M−1K−M−1C,B=0IThe root of the linear time-invariant system state equation above is(4)X(t)=eA(t−t0)X(t0)+∫t0teA(t−τ)Bu(τ)dτSuppose T as the system sampling period, and take t0=kT, t=(k+1)T andτ=kT+ξ. Suppose that the excitation forceuchanges only in sampling time t=kT (k=1, 2,…), then the above formula can be changed into:X[(k+1)T]=J(T)X(kT)+K(T)u(kT)whereX[(k+1)T] andX(kT) are the state variables at (k+1)T and kT.u(kT) is the external excitation.J(T) andK(T) are as follows:(5)J(T)=eAT,K(T)=∫0TeA(T−ξ)BdξFor discrete control system:(6)x˙(k+1)=g(x((k+1)T),x(kT),T)x(k)=g(x(kT),x((k−1)T),T),According to the above formulae, there come the following relations:(7)x((k+1)T)=G(x(kT),x((k−1)T),f(kT))(k=2,…,K)This paper uses ANFIS to simulate the above formula in order to accomplish the structural modeling, and to finally achieve(8)xˆ(kT)=fANFIS(x((k−1)T),x((k−2)T),f((k−1)T))(k=3,…,K)wherexˆ(k)is the estimated value ofx(k).fANFIS(·) is the mapping or approximation function.The function of the above formula is to predict displacement vectorx(kT) at time kT according to displacement vectorx((k−1)T) at time (k−1)T, displacement vectorx((k−2)T) at time (k−2)T, and excitation vectorf((k−1)T) at time (k−1)T.A very similar [27] prediction of dynamic displacement response on the frame structure under the measured excitation is shown as followed:(9)xkf=fDNNE(xk−2,xk−1,x¨g,k−1)(k=2,…,K)wherexkfis the forecasted displacement response at time kT. xk−2 and xk−1 are the displacement responses at time (k−2)T and (k−1)T.x¨g,k−1is the excitation force.Another similar [19] forecast of structural response using time-delayed ANFIS (TANFIS) is depicted as followed:(10)f(t)=f(xt−d,ft−d,et−d)+e(t)where xt, ftand etrepresent input, output and error for time t respectively. The time delay term is represented by the term d.An earlier attempt [28] of forecasting structural response is expressed as follows:(11)y(t)=f(xt−1,yt−1,et−1)+e(t)where xt, ytand etrepresent the input, output and zero-mean noise vectors at time t (representing the discrete time series values up to time t). e(t) is error between the actual and estimated values of the future output y(t).In this paper, the external excitationf(k) in observation process is zero. So ANFIS used to accomplish the structural modeling needs to finally achieve(12)xˆ(kT)=fANFIS(x((k−1)T),x((k−2)T))(k=3,…,K)The function of the above formula is to predict displacement response x(kT) at time kT according to displacement response x((k−1)T) at time (k−1)T and displacement response x((k−2)T) at time (k−2)T. The above formula is the realization of structural modeling and vibration response prediction.By a universal approximation we mean something that can uniformly approximate continuous functions to any degree of accuracy on compact sets. If A is a compact subset of Rm, then C(A; m, n) denotes all continuous functions mapping A into Rn. A universal approximation is a collection Ψ of functions mapping A into Rnso that given any f in C(A; m,n) and ɛ>0, there is a g in Ψ that can satisfies(13)|f(x)−g(x)|<εfor all x in A.Learning an input–output relation from examples can be considered as the problem of approximating an unknown function f(x) with a set of sparse data points. In a sense, the useful property in this situation is not the above one but the critical concept of best approximation.An approximation scheme has the best approximation property if in the set A of approximating functions (for instance the set F(W,x) spanned by parameters W) one has minimum distance from any given function of a larger set Φ:Given f∈Φ and A⊂Φ we can define the distance of f from A as(14)d(f,A)≡infa∈A||f−a||If the infimum of ||f−a|| is attained through some element a0 of A, that is if there exists an a0∈A satisfying ||f–a0||=d(f, A), this element is said to be the best approximation to f from A.The output of fuzzy inference system is expressed as(15)y=f(x)=∑j=1Mωj∏i=1nμAij(xi)/∑j=1M∏i=1nμAij(xi)where j=1, 2,…,M, M is the number of fuzzy rules; i=1, 2,…, n, n is the number of input variables; ωjis weighting coefficient;μAij(xi)is the membership function of fuzzy setAijof input variable xi, and satisfies the Gaussian function:(16)μAij(xi)=exp−12xi−xij¯σij2LetμBj(y)be the membership of fuzzy set B of output variable y, and satisfies:(17)μBj(y)=0y≠ωj1y=ωjThen the system output is transformed to be:(18)y=f(x)=∑j=1Mωjpj(x)where pj(x) is fuzzy basis function, and satisfies:(19)pj(x)=∏i=1nμAij(xi)/∑j=1M∏i=1nμAij(xi)It has been proved that, fuzzy inference system can uniformly approximate continuous functions to any degree of accuracy on compact sets. For best approximation property, given a function f, there always exists a choice of coefficients that approximates f better than all other possible choices, which is not shared by multilayer feed forward networks for back propagation schemes.Regularization networks are the feed forward network versions of regularization. As a special case of regularization networks, the well-known Radial Basis Function networks have been proved existence and uniqueness of best approximation, which has been used for helicopter rotor operational health monitoring [29].The functional behaviors of radial basis function networks and fuzzy inference systems are equivalent under some minor restrictions. Furthermore, ANFIS, a fuzzy inference system implemented in the framework of adaptive networks, is functionally equivalent to the radial basis function network (RBFN) when the Gaussian membership function is used [30].To cope with the single-output property of wavelet-based ANFIS, several methods have been proposed, including average method and weighted average method. However, these two methods are just adjustments of outputs to reach a comprehensive result, which cannot act as structural damage feature extractors for identification usage. The principal component analysis (PCA) has been applied to extract damage features [22]. Similar to PCA analysis, interval modeling technique is used in this paper as structural damage feature extractor.Fig. 1depicts the sequence diagram of rapid damage detection method. The time history points i−2, i−1, i and i+1 are discrete time points denoting real-time (i−2)T, (i−1)T, iT and (i+1)T, where T is the sampling time interval. Dynamic response is displacement response collected from finite element method (FEM) modeled structure at time (i−2)T, (i−1)T, iT and (i+1)T in this manuscript. Response predictions ofxˆ(k−2),xˆ(k−1),xˆ(k)andxˆ(k+1)are estimated displacements according to x(k−4) and x(k−3), x(k−3) and x(k−2), x(k−2) and x(k−1), x(k−1) and x(k). In order to calculate the dominant uncertainty coordinates using interval modeling technique, P(k) needs to be computed according to x(k) andxˆ(k):p(k−2)=x(k−2)−xˆ(k−2),p(k−1)=x(k−1)−xˆ(k−1),p(k)=x(k)−xˆ(k)andp(k+1)=x(k+1)−xˆ(k+1).In order to apply interval modeling technique for uncertainty quantification, 11 adjacent displacement vectors at 11 adjacent time points are needed to process every SVD decomposition, with each vector representing displacements at 12 sensors on the structure. At time point (i−2)T, interval modeling technique processes displacement vectors P(k−12), P(k−11), P(k−10), P(k−9), P(k−8), P(k−7), P(k−6), P(k−5), P(k−4), P(k−3) and P(k−2). At time point (i−1)T, displacement vectors P(k−11), P(k−10), P(k−9), P(k−8), P(k−7), P(k−6), P(k−5), P(k−4), P(k−3), P(k−2) and P(k−1) are processed. At time point iT, displacement vectors P(k−10), P(k−9), P(k−8), P(k−7), P(k−6), P(k−5), P(k−4), P(k−3), P(k−2), P(k−1) and P(k) are processed. The dominant uncertainty coordinatesα1=α1(t1),α1(t2),…,α1(t11)can be obtained when each SVD decomposition is conducted. The last dominant uncertainty coordinate at each α1 is compared with former 10 coordinates to gain its abnormality, thus defining MiTto measure the abnormality. If MiTis obviously bigger than those at the former time points, then damage occurs at time iT, otherwise the identification process go to another around of computation at time (i+1)T.Interval modeling technique [24] was proposed to solve structural certification problem under various uncertainty conditions, and has been used to quantify uncertainty in multiple models resulting from tests and identification [26]. In this paper, interval modeling technique is used for handling the output of multiple ANFIS systems and extracting damage feature to construct an ensemble ANFIS model.In structural damage detection configuration, multiple displacement sensors are used to collect the information of structural vibration response data. Data after real-time filtering and after ANFIS prediction are the response data reflecting the characteristics of structural health status. Interval modeling technique is used to analyze and synthesize response data. Thus, various uncertainties in response data are transformed to dominant uncertainty coordinates, and consistency interpretation and damage condition description of measured structure are finally achieved.In this paper, feature data are extracted from vector(20)P(k)=x(k)−xˆ(k)x(k) is the measurement response vector andxˆ(k)is the response vector predicted by ANFISs.Decomposition steps of interval modeling technique:1.Computational steps of SVD decomposition [26] involves:(21)ΔPW=W−1ΔP(22)ΔPW=UWSVT,S=diags1…skU=WUW,U=q1…qkIn this paper, the basis matrix U is computed:(23)ΔP=USVT,S=diags1…sk,U=q1…qkThe singular values sjare in descending order, which leads to the descending order of perturbation distribution in qj.Compute the coordinate vector corresponding to the basis vectors qj(24)α(ti)=U−1ΔpiRepresent each parameter vector as(25)p(ti)=p0+∑j=1kαj(ti)qjThe uncertainty in k element displacement vectors is decomposed into uncertainty coordinate vector of k elements. The first uncertainty coordinate is much bigger than other k−1 uncertainty coordinates [14], and it is called the dominant uncertainty coordinate. Thus, various uncertainties of multiple sensors in a measurement of the displacement are represented by dominant uncertainty coordinate, and subsequently accomplished multi-sensor information fusion.Get identification index M through real-time processing of the dominant uncertainty coordinates. The occurrence of abnormal identification index value indicates damage.The uncertainty coordinates of 11 tests gained from uncertainty decomposition are(26)α1=α1(t1),α1(t2),…,α1(t11)The former 10 coordinates of uncertainty vector are fit with constant:(27)R=∑i=110[b−α1(ti)]2where α1(ti) is the uncertainty coordinate at time i. b is the constant used for fitting.Then the 11 uncertainty coordinates can be directly estimated as(28)αˆ1(ti)=b(i=1,2,…,10,11)Since there is no damage in the first 10 tests, their uncertainty coordinates are considered stable and controllable. The structure in the last test is “suspected” to have been damaged, and an exception value may occur in its uncertainty coordinates.Define the disturbance of uncertainty coordinates using(29)β(ti)=α1(ti)−b(i=1,2,…,10,11)Compute the standard deviation σ of the disturbance of the former 10 uncertainty coordinates to measure the abnormalities. The last uncertainty coordinate is compared with σ to gain its abnormality, which is defined as identification index:(30)M=β(t11)σIf the standard deviation σ is too small at some point, it would cause to take β(ti) as a big value. In this paper, a new valueσ˜is taken as(31)σ˜=σσ≥thresholdvaluethresholdσ<thresholdvalueσ˜is used to substitute σ in Eq. (30).The above M is computed at time (i+1)T to identify the damage at time iT. If damage occurs at time iT, the above computed M is defined as M at time iT, symbolized by MiT.During the monitoring process without structural damage, MiTis obtained through the same method. Damage threshold is defined as(32)ρ=α⋅max(MiT)α is the safety coefficient. If(33)|MiT|>ρthen MiTis the identified abnormal value, which indicates damage at time iT is identified at time (i+1)T.This paper uses the benchmark structure proposed by IASC-ASCE Structural Health Monitoring Task Group for simulation. The structure is shown in Fig. 2, which is a four-story and two-bay by two-bay steel-frame quarter-scale model structure with the plan of 2.5m×2.5m and the height of 3.7m. The material's density is 7800kg/m3, Young's modulus (E) 2×1011Pa, and Shear modulus (G) E/2.6. The columns are all oriented to be stronger bending toward the x direction [31]. There is one floor slab per bay per floor: four 800kg slabs at the first level, four 600kg slabs at each of the second and third levels and four 400kg slabs on the fourth level to create some asymmetry.Configuration of sensors, excitations and simulation time:The 12 displacement sensors are numbered according to their positions, which are shown in Fig. 2. The numerical values of 12 displacement responses are obtained from the Finite Element software. This paper uses simulation data generated in the structure after hammer impacts are imposed on 8 nodes for 0.1s, and the excitations are depicted in Fig. 2. The free vibration process is simulated for 12s after the hammer impact is stopped.Configuration of FEM software:In finite element analysis software Abaqus, in order to generate dynamic structural response, implicit dynamic analysis uses Hilbert–Hughes–Taylor time integrator as default of direct integration method. This paper uses Hilbert–Hughes–Taylor operator in 3 conditions (Table 1):Configuration of damage types:Four kinds of damage, simulated to be occurring at time 10th second within the overall 12s, are depicted in Fig. 3. Response change at 0.01s after damage's occurrence is so tiny that it is challenging to identify the damage, while detection of more obvious change is much easier. This paper deals with the challenging problem of identifying structural damage at 0.01s after its occurrence. The rapid identification of damage is what makes this paper special.Configuration of computing platform:Fuzzy logic package of MATLAB 2011b is used for implementation of ANFIS. Computing platform uses Windows XP Pack 3 as the operating system and the computer uses Pentium Dual-Core 2.5GHz CPU with 2G RAM.Fig. 4depicts the details of a typical ANFIS structure, its 49 membership functions and rule base of this ANFIS model used for response prediction. Different responses at corresponding nodes have similar ANFIS structures but different numbers of rules. In Fig. 4, the number of both input nodes and output nodes is 49, and the number of membership function and rules at the rule base is also 49. The structure of rule base depends on the response data clustered by sub-clustering method. The typical parameters when generating ANFIS using function “genfis” in MATLAB software are depicted in Table 2. In fact, sub-clustering method has become a dominant scheme in generating ANFIS, and thus is integrated in the MATLAB software. When utilizing ANFIS, users just need to feed input and output data into the software, and choose appropriate sub-clustering parameters to generate it.In Table 2, “RI”, “SF”, “AR” and “RR” are short for “Range of influence”, “Squash factor”, “Accept ratio” and “Reject ratio”, respectively. The performance of ANFIS is defined as the following equation, and the performance pANFISof a typical ANFIS is depicted in Table 3.pANFIS=fANFIS−yywhere y is the training data or testing data, and fANFISis the estimated values of y using ANFIS.As ANFIS has the best approximation property, the generated ANFIS is unique with the same training data and clustering parameters. The general ranges of parameter value of “RI”, “SF”, “AR” and “RR” are (0, 0.5), (1, 1.1), (0.5, 1) and (0, 0.1). With the same training data, the better performance of ANFIS is determined by smaller RI, smaller SF, bigger AR, and smaller RR. For illustration purposes, ANFIS has better performance when vector [RI, SF, AR, RR] takes value [0.05, 1.05, 0.95, 0.05] than [0.1, 1.1, 0.9, 0.1].On the other hand, better performance means more complex ANFIS network with more membership functions and fuzzy rules, and longer training time when the computing platform is given.In the practical engineering, the pollution of random noise on sensor output time series is inevitable. The performance of response prediction and damage identification without noise is better than that with noise, but is meaningless. In order to examine the sensitivity of the proposed method on noise in this paper, only the results with 10% noise added on displacement response and excitation signal are discussed. Noise added on displacement response and excitation signal denotes measurement error brought by sensors and actuators.When noise is mixed into excitation signal and displacement response, the generating and training of ANFIS are more difficult, and the parameters are more strictly limited. At the same time, the prediction errors are bigger with longer training time, higher computation cost and more fuzzy rules.The number of displacement sensors on the structure model should be carefully selected, because the efficiency of uncertainty quantification in SVD decomposition is determined by the balance between the number of displacement sampling points and the number of intervals.In the course of vibration response based damage identification, uncertainty comes from modeling error, measurement error, data incompleteness, and ANFIS prediction error. Furthermore, structural damage can also be viewed as a kind of uncertainty, and then the damage features can be extracted using the methods processing uncertainty data.Firstly, the displacement response of the structure model is viewed as measurement value computed by FEM software, and the estimated displacement response is regarded as prediction value after calculated by ANFIS. Then interval modeling technique is used to conduct SVD decomposition on the difference of measurement value and prediction value, and the uncertainties are expressed by dominant uncertainty coordinates. Lastly, the dominant uncertainty coordinates are monitored in real-time, and the abnormal value indicates the damage time and location.In the process of damage identification, not all the data are used for ANFIS training and response prediction. As depicted before, in the first 0.1s the structure is under hammer impact, and thus the response cannot be used for training and prediction. In the first second after hammer impact ended, the structural displacement is in the oscillation stage and is not free vibration response. We adopt displacement response from 1.01s, and prediction of response begins at 1.03s. The first dominant uncertainty coordinate occurs at time 1.13s. The whole scale simulation data begins when the hammer impact ends. As damage occurs at time 10s (after hammer impact ends) in the simulation process, it is OK to end the computation at time 10.01s. In this paper, the computation delays for 3 time intervals until 10.04s. The computing sequence corresponding to actual time is shown in Table 4.The sampling period of the displacement sensors is different from the time increment in FEM software. In this paper, the sampling period of the sensors is set to be 0.01s, which is also the length of intervals in interval modeling technique. The time increment also needs careful selection to construct effective training samples for ANFIS. The value of time increment determines the analysis time of finite element model and the capacity of sample set.In order to choose the appropriate time increment, in the process of identification of damage pattern 1, we adopted 3 kinds of time increment in finite element software: 0.0025s, 0.005s and 0.01s for comparison. Parameters of ANFIS using sub-clustering method are shown in Table 5. The ANFIS training time of different time increments are depicted in Table 6. Fuzzy logic package of MATLAB 2011b is used for implementation of training ANFIS. Computing platform uses Windows XP Pack 3 as the operating system and the computer uses Pentium Dual-Core 2.5GHz CPU with 2G RAM.The right side of Fig. 5is an amplification of a small part of the left side. Abnormal values of damage index occur at time series 989, 990 and 991. Time series 989 denotes 10.01s according to Table 4, and 990 denotes 10.02s. If nothing else, setting time increment as 0.0025s is very good for damage identification of damage pattern 1.In Fig. 6, abnormal values of damage index occur at time series 989, 990 and 991. Time series 989 denotes 10.01s according to Table 4. Different from Fig. 5, the first abnormal value appears to be negative, and the following values are positive. This does not influence the identification results, of course. But we can see from the right side of Fig. 6 that the abnormal values are less obvious than that in Fig. 5.We can see from Fig. 7that the abnormal values begin to occur at time series 990, which is 10.02s in the simulation time. The value of damage index at time series 989 is not obvious for identification purposes. As damage occurs at time 10s in the simulation process, this denotes that the structural damage can only be identified at 0.02s after the damage occurs.The damage detection results of damage pattern 1 using different time increments are depicted in Figs. 5–7. According to the monitoring process of damage index, we can put that damage can be detected at 0.01–0.02s after its occurrence. The detection result of damage pattern 1 with 0.01s increment is delayed for 0.01s compared with the result with 0.0025s time increment, which implies that time increment not only influences identification accuracy but also delays identification time. But the ANFIS training time of 8.91s simulation data with 0.0025s time increment is 183s, which significantly wastes more computing resources than that with 0.01s. Therefore, the time increment in this paper is adopted as 0.01s for identification of damage patterns 2, 3 and 4.From the discussion on detection of damage pattern 1, it is found appropriate to set the time increment as 0.01s and to take the damage index calculation method as interval modeling technique. Selecting 0.01s as time increment can achieve better training effects using much simpler ANFIS network and much less training time. When detecting damage patterns 2, 3 and 4, the parameters for generating ANFIS are the same as Table 5. The detection results are shown in Figs. 8–10. For identification of patterns 2 and 4 with 10% noise, the detection time is 0.02s and 0.03s respectively after damage's occurrence. For identification of pattern 3 with 10% noise, the damage cannot be detected.From Fig. 8 we can see that the damage index does not have abnormal value until at time series 990, which is 10.02s in the simulation time. The identification results are satisfactory in that we can identify the damage clearly at 0.02s after its occurrence.Seen from the left side and the right side of Fig. 9, the damage index does not have abnormal value in the whole scale simulation data. And thus we cannot identify the damage occurred at time 10s. The reason may be that damage pattern 3 is so small that the structural response does not change significantly after 0.02s of damage. Using damage identification methods that collect whole scale response data, damage pattern 3 can be identified. In this paper, we focus on a rapid identification method, which cannot identify small damages.Seen from Fig. 10, the abnormal value of damage index occurs at time series 991, which is 10.03s in the simulation time. For damages like pattern 4, which is smaller than pattern 1 and bigger than pattern 3, the damage index has abnormal values which come later. Seen from the left side and the right side of Fig. 10, the identification results are satisfactory.Identification of element removal or stiffness reduction of IASC-ASCE benchmark structure has been widely studied by the mainstream SHM methods such as time series analysis method (A) [32], flexibility based approach (B) [33], wavelet method (C) [34], wavelet packet transform (D) [35], modeling updating using Bayesian system identification (E) [6], statistical model updating approach (F) [36], Bayesian model updating (G) [37], damage index method (H) [38], Hilbert–Huang Transform-based method (I) [39], and adaptive RLS filters (J) [40]. The IASC-ASCE SHM Task Group defines six different damage patterns for comparison of different identification methods. The identification effects of these methods are listed in Table 7. In the table, “√” denotes the damage pattern can be detected using the corresponding method, and “—” denotes the damage pattern is not researched or cannot be identified using the method.Identification time means the time length of measurement data generated after damage's occurrence and required for damage's identification, which is depicted in Table 9. Three kinds of excitation are often used in structural damage identification: Gaussian white noise excitation (i); hammer excitation (ii); sinusoidal excitation (iii). Two models with 12 and 120 degree of freedom respectively are used in the IASC-ASCE SHM Task Group benchmark problem (Table 8). Because of structure symmetry and other restrictions, the models can be simplified to the ones with 4, 8, 36 and 40 degree of freedom. In this paper, the structure is represented as a complex finite element model, which is shown in Fig. 2.Seen from Table 7, it is obvious that the performance of the proposed method in this paper is just at acceptable level, identifying 3 of the 6 prescriptive damage patterns. Significant damages cause appreciable impact on the structural response, and thus are easy to identify using various methods. In order to discover small damages which have little influence on displacement response, long time-span data are needed to find the response changes brought by damages. Statistics based identification methods are very effective in finding small changes within large amounts of response data, and thus are very popular in identifying small structural damages (Table 10).Different from classical vibration based identification methods which focus on finding “smaller” damages, this paper tries to find a “faster” method which can provide new possibilities for engineering applications. For online structural detection, research ideas and methods on discrete control systems are beneficial to the way data are processed. Dividing detection time into intervals and calculating damage index step by step are common practices in computer based engineering.The detection method in this paper can identify 3 prescriptive damages within 0.02s or 0.03s. The reason of rapid identification lies on a special kind of vibration response: free vibration response. It is much easier to extract damage features in free vibration response than in random vibration response. Obviously, the influence of response types is more significant than that of damage types.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a structural damage detection method mustering adaptive neural fuzzy inference system and interval modeling technique. This paper exploits ANFIS as structural modeling tool, and interval modeling technique as damage feature extractor, and applies the rapid damage detection method to the IASC-ASCE benchmark problem of structural health monitoring. Based on the measured noise-polluting displacement response data subject to hammer impact vibration, the proposed combined method is able to quickly identify structural damage at 0.02–0.03s after its occurrence.The main points of this rapid structural fault detection method are ANFIS based structural system identification technique, and interval modeling technique based uncertainty quantification method. After trained by input–output response data, ANFIS acts as a real structure and outputs structural displacement vector. The free vibration response with 10% noise is employed to train the constructed ANFIS. The high degree of accuracy of the predicted response demonstrates the best approximation property of ANFIS. The damage index computed using Interval modeling technique can be effectively used in rapidly indicating structural damage. The benchmark structure of IASC-ASCE Task Group is modeled in finite element method (FEM), and the structural damage is modeled as element removal in the demonstration of the proposed method.There are still some questions to be studied further in the current identification. The free vibration response data in 12s are trained and calculated as a whole, and the training of ANFIS and the computation of damage index are separated into two different process. It is difficult to determine whether the processing of 0.01s simulation data is completed in 0.01s, and thus it is difficult to predict at 10.01s in real-time which kind of computer can identify the damage occurred at 10s. It needs further research to accomplish online structural damage identification.Structural damage is actually a dynamic variation of structural parameter, and thus damage detection can be used as a kind of structural parameter identification method. The structural parameters can be updated after structural damage identification and location. In the area of aircraft structural damage identification and SHM, very few methods and systems are applied to engineering structures, and some general methods have various limitations when applied to engineering practices. Thus on the basis of damage identification theory and algorithm, development of practical SHM systems combined with the sensor technology, information processing and transmission technology, and network technology will be the direction of effort for the future.There is no conflict of interest with any of the suggested reviewers.