@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new color image encryption scheme based on DNA sequences and multiple improved 1D chaotic maps

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A DNA-based color image encryption method is proposed by using three 1D chaotic systems with excellent performance and easy implementation.The key streams used for encryption are related to both the secret keys and the plain-image.To improve the security and sensitivity, a division-shuffling process is introduced.Transforming the plain-image and the key streams into the DNA matrices randomly can further enhance the security of the cryptosystem.The presented scheme has a good robustness for some common image processing operations and geometric attack.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Color image encryption,Improved 1D chaotic system,DNA coding,Security analysis,Robustness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a new encryption scheme for color images based on Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence operations and multiple improved one-dimensional (1D) chaotic systems with excellent performance. Firstly, the key streams are generated from three improved 1D chaotic systems by using the secret keys and the plain-image. Transform randomly the key streams and the plain-image into the DNA matrices by the DNA encoding rules, respectively. Secondly, perform the DNA complementary and XOR operations on the DNA matrices to get the scrambled DNA matrices. Thirdly, decompose equally the scrambled DNA matrices into blocks and shuffle these blocks randomly. Finally, implement the DNA XOR and addition operations on the DNA matrices obtained from the previous step and the key streams, and then convert the encrypted DNA matrices into the cipher-image by the DNA decoding rules. Experimental results and security analysis show that the proposed encryption scheme has a good encryption effect and high security. Moreover, it has a strong robustness for the common image processing operations and geometric attack.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rapid development of Internet and network technologies greatly facilitates the transmission of digital multimedia contents over various communication networks. How to protect the multimedia information against illegal copying and distribution has become an urgent and significant topic [1,2]. Among various protection strategies, image encryption emerged as a common and efficient solution for protecting image information. The conventional schemes such as DES, AES, IDEA etc., for text encryption are not suitable for the digital images due to some intrinsic properties of images such as bulky data capacity, high redundancy and strong correlation among adjacent pixels [3–5]. Considering the excellent characteristics of the chaotic systems, e.g., high sensitivity to initial conditions and system parameters, ergodicity, mixing and so forth, chaos-based image encryption algorithms are suggested more secure and fast encryption methods [3–18]. In recent years, the DNA-based image encryption has received increasing attention due to the excellent features of DNA computing including massive parallelism, huge storage and ultra-low power consumption [19–30].The chaos-based image encryption algorithms can be classified into three major types: permutation (confusion) method, diffusion method and their compounding form. The permutation algorithms only scramble the positions of the plain-image pixels [9,11,12,18]. Because the pixel values remain constant, the histograms of the cipher-image and the plain-image are identical. Hence the permutation-only algorithms are not secure and threatened by the statistical attacks. Many cryptosystems often use Arnold cat map to scramble the positions of the pixels [6,12], but they have some drawbacks. For example, the iteration times of Arnold cat map are very limited, and the height and width of the plain-image must be equal. The diffusion schemes refer that the pixel values of the plain-image are modified by the chaotic sequences so that a slight change for one pixel in the plain-image can cause significant changes in the encrypted image [10,16]. Comparing with the confusion methods, the diffusion ones can get higher security. The image encryption algorithms using either the permutation-only method or the diffusion-only method have some shortcomings in both security and speed [14]. To achieve a satisfactory performance, both confusion and diffusion are usually employed to devise the image encryption algorithms [3,4,6–8,13,15,17].In the early stage, many image encryption algorithms were proposed based on 1D or 2D chaotic maps/systems [4,7,8,15]. The 1D chaotic systems have a simple structure and are easy to implement [11,12], but they also have some defects such as small key space and weak security [31–33]. To improve the security of the encryption schemes, the high-dimensional (equal to or more than 3D) chaotic systems are applied for image encryption in recent years [3,6,9,10,13]. However, the complex structure and multiple parameters increase the cost of hardware/software implementations and the computation complexity [11]. Furthermore, many chaos-based image encryption algorithms are not secure enough, which can be cracked via some attacks such as chosen-ciphertext attack, known-plaintext attack and chosen-plaintext attack [14,34–38]. In [17], three improved 1D chaotic systems were generated from the Logistic, Tent and Sine maps (called seed maps). The new 1D chaotic systems have larger chaotic range and better chaotic behaviors than their seed maps, which makes them more suitable for image encryption. Motivated by this reason, we will develop the image encryption algorithm in this paper based on multiple improved 1D chaotic systems presented in [17]. In contrast to the chaotic encryption schemes in [4,7,8,15], our proposed algorithm based on three improved 1D chaotic systems has the following advantages: (1) the improved 1D chaotic systems have simple structures and better chaotic performance than corresponding 1D chaotic maps. Hence, they are easier to be implemented with hardware/software and have lower computation overhead than the high-dimensional chaotic systems; (2) using multiple improved 1D chaotic systems increases the key space, which can enhance the security of the proposed scheme compared with those encryption methods based on single 1D or 2D chaotic map/system.In recent years, the researchers have proposed another kind of image encryption schemes, namely, DNA-based image encryption methods [20–30]. The DNA-based image encryption methods can be generally divided into two stages. In the first stage, transform the plain-image into the DNA sequence matrices by the DNA encoding rules and generate the key streams. In the second stage, encrypt the plain-image using the key streams and DNA sequence operations, and convert the encrypted DNA sequence matrices into the cipher-image according to the DNA decoding rules. Zhang et al. [21] proposed an image encryption algorithm based on DNA sequence addition operation and two Logistic maps. Because Logistic map has been proved that it does not meet the requirements as a good random source [17], Liu et al. [22] introduced an image encryption method using DNA complementary rule and two chaotic maps with good stochastic property. In [25], a new encryption algorithm was presented based on image fusion, DNA sequence operation and hyperchaotic system. Zhang et al. [39] pointed out that this cryptosystem can be broken by the chosen-plaintext attack. Based on DNA subsequence operation and chaotic system, a couple images encryption algorithm was presented in [26]. To improve the security of the cryptosystem, Zhang et al. [27] used the chaotic system to disturb the image pixel positions and pixel values, and then performed DNA encodings according to quaternary code rules. But the schemes in [26,27] are weak against differential attacks. Enayatifar et al. [28] designed an image encryption algorithm based on a hybrid model of DNA masking, a genetic algorithm (GA) and the Logistic map. Most recently, Wang et al. [29] proposed a new image encryption scheme based on DNA sequence operations and CML. In [30], Enayatifar et al. developed a novel image encryption scheme based on based on a hybrid model of the Tinkerbell chaotic map, DNA and cellular automata. Note that the DNA-based encryption algorithms in [21,22,25–30] mainly focus on gray-scale images. It is known that the color images contain more abundant information than the grayscale ones and are widely used in real applications. It is essential to investigate the DNA-based encryption methods for color images. Wei et al. [23] presented a new color image encryption algorithm based on DNA sequence addition operation and the hyperchaotic system. In [24], a color image encryption algorithm was proposed based on DNA encoding and the Logistic map. However, Liu et al. [40] argued that it is very weak to a chosen-plaintext attack and has other drawbacks such as low sensitivity with respect to changes of plaintext and security keys. Moreover, the researchers rarely considered the robustness of the DNA-based image encryption schemes against the common image processing operations and geometric attacks, which frequently occur in real applications. Although some DNA-based image encryption schemes are available in the literature, the performance of the encryption methods in this domain could be further improved by developing innovative algorithms.Inspired by the above discussions, in this paper, we propose a new robust color image encryption scheme based on DNA sequence operations and multiple improved 1D chaotic systems with excellent performance. The key streams are firstly generated from three improved 1D chaotic systems using the secret keys and the plain-image. Then the original image and the key streams are randomly transformed into the DNA matrices by the DNA encoding rules. In order to decorrelate relations among pixels and scramble the pixel positions and pixel values, we implement the DNA complimentary and XOR operations on the DNA matrices transformed from the plain-image and the key streams, and then decompose the scrambled DNA matrices into equal blocks and shuffle them randomly. Next, to further strengthen the security and sensitivity of the cryptosystem, the DNA XOR and addition operations are carried out for the DNA matrices generated from the previous step and the key streams, and the encrypted DNA matrices are obtained. Finally, the cipher-image is obtained through decoding the encrypted DNA matrices according to the DNA decoding rules. Experimental results and performance analysis demonstrate that the proposed image encryption scheme has a good encryption effect, high security and strong robustness. The main contributions of this paper are listed as follows: (1) three improved 1D chaotic systems are employed to design the color image encryption algorithm. They have excellent chaotic properties and are more suitable for image encryption compared with corresponding 1D chaotic maps. Furthermore, they have simple structure and are easier to be implemented with hardware/software than the high-dimensional chaotic systems; (2) the key streams generated by three improved 1D chaotic systems depend on both the secret keys and the plain-image, which makes the proposed scheme resistant to the chosen-plaintext and known-plaintext attacks; (3) to make the encryption algorithm more secure and robust, the DNA matrix is divided into some equal blocks and then the positions of these blocks are scrambled pseudo-randomly according to the improved 1D chaotic system.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews three improved 1D chaotic systems and the DNA sequence encryption technique. In Section 3, the proposed image encryption algorithm is explained. Section 4 provides the experimental results. Detailed security and robustness analysis are given in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. The conclusions are finally drawn in Section 7.In [17], three improved 1D chaotic systems, i.e., the Logistic-Tent system (LTS), the Logistic-Sine system (LSS) and the Tent-Sine system (TSS), were proposed based on the original Logistic map, Tent map and Sine map. Three new 1D chaotic systems used in this paper are described as follows.•The Logistic-Tent system (LTS):The Logistic-Sine system (LSS):The Tent-Sine system (TSS):The dynamical analysis in [17] has shown that LTS, LSS and TSS have excellent chaotic behaviors. Comparing with the corresponding seed maps, the improved 1D chaotic systems have at least three advantages as follows: (i) the chaotic sequences of the new chaotic systems have a uniform distribution within [0, 1] while all seed maps have the limited data ranges within [0, 1]; (ii) the improved chaotic systems have a wider chaotic range; (iii) the Lyapunov exponents of three new chaotic systems are all larger than their corresponding seed maps, indicating better chaotic performance. So the aforementioned improved 1D chaotic systems are more appropriate for information security.A DNA sequence contains four nucleic acid bases, i.e., adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), thymine (T) [19]. Double-stranded DNA satisfies the principle of Watson-Crick complementary base pairing [41]: A pairs with T, C pairs with G, or A and T are complementary, and C and G are complementary. In the binary system, 0 and 1 are complementary. Similarly, the binary numbers 00 and 11 are complementary, and 01 and 10 are also complementary. If we use the four bases A, C, G and T to denote the binary numbers 00, 01, 10 and 11, there are total 24 kinds of DNA coding schemes. However, only eight kinds of them meet the Watson–Crick complementary rule, which are provided in Table 1.In this paper, the DNA sequences are employed to encrypt the digital images. Each 8-bit pixel value of the grayscale image can be encoded into a DNA sequence with length 4 through using A, C, T and G to represent the binary values 00, 01, 10 and 11. For example, if the grayscale value of the pixel is 121, its binary value is “01111001”. One can get the DNA sequence “CTGC” by the DNA encoding rule 1 in Table 1. Conversely, the original binary sequence can be obtained by the same rule, whereas using different DNA decoding rules will lead to distinct binary sequences, e.g., another binary sequence “00101100” is obtained by using the DNA decoding rule 3 to decode the same DNA sequence “CTGC”.In order to facilitate the application of DNA computing in cryptography, some biological and algebraic operations are introduced for the DNA sequences, such as addition (+), subtraction (-), exclusive or (XOR) operations and so forth [20–30]. In our work, the XOR, complementary and addition operations for DNA sequences are used to encrypt and decrypt the digital images. The XOR, complementary and addition operations for DNA sequences are performed by the traditional XOR, inversion and addition in the binary, respectively. Corresponding to eight kinds of DNA encoding rules, there are also eight kinds of DNA XOR rules, and eight kinds of DNA addition rules. Tables 2 and 3show the DNA XOR and addition rules used in the proposed encryption algorithm, respectively. From the tables, one can see that a base in every row or column is unique, namely, the result of the DNA XOR operation or the DNA addition operation is also unique. The DNA XOR operation is reflexive.In this section, we will describe the proposed image cryptosystem based on DNA sequence operations and multiple improved 1D chaotic systems in detail. The architecture of the proposed encryption algorithm is shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, the key streams for image encryption are generated from LTS, LSS and TSS, where the parameters and initial conditions are obtained from both the secret keys and the plain-image. Convert arbitrarily the original plain-image and the key streams into the DNA matrices according to the DNA encoding rules. Secondly, the DNA complementary and XOR operations are carried out for the DNA matrices and the scrambled DNA matrices are obtained. Thirdly, in order to decrease strong correlation among adjacent pixels and strengthen the sensitivity of the cryptosystem, the scrambled DNA matrices are divided equally into blocks and then the blocks are shuffled randomly. In the last stage, to further enhance the security of the encryption scheme, implement the DNA XOR and addition operations on the DNA matrices obtained from the previous step and the key streams, and then decode the DNA matrices by the DNA decoding rules. Thus the cipher-image is finally obtained. In what follows, without loss of generality, we assume that the size of the color plain-image I0 is W×H.In our encryption scheme, the parameters r1, r2, r3 and initial values X0, Y0, Z0 of LTS, LSS and TSS are regarded as the secret keys. In order to update the parameters and initial conditions, we decompose the original image I0 into three color matrices R, G, B, and compute the sum of color's matrix pixels by the following formula:(4)SumImg=∑i=1W∑j=1HRij+∑i=1W∑j=1HGij+∑i=1W∑j=1HBij.Then the parameters and initial values can be updated as follows:(5)r′1=r1+SumImg/2564,(6)r′2=r2−SumImg/2564,(7)r′3=r3+SumImg−∑i=1WRi,1/2564,(8)X′0=X0+SumImg−∑j=1HG1,j/2564,(9)Y′0=Y0+SumImg−∑i=1WBi,H/2564,(10)Z′0=Z0+∑i=1WRi,1+∑j=1HG1,j+∑i=1WBi,H/2563.Clearly, the new parametersr′1,r′2,r′3and initial conditionsX′0,Y′0,Z′0, for LTS, LSS and TSS are extremely sensitive to any small change in the secret keys and the plain-image.Next, LTS, LSS and TSS are employed to generate the key streams K1, K2 and K3 by the following steps:Step 1. Using the updated parametersr′1,r′2,r′3and initial conditionsX′0,Y′0,Z′0, iterate Eqs. (1)–(3) for l (l≥500) times separately to avoid the harmful effect of transitional procedure. Continue to iterate three 1D chaotic systems for WH times. We can obtain three chaotic sequences with length WH, i.e., X={x1, x2, x3, …, xWH}, Y={y1, y2, y3, …, yWH} and Z={z1, z2, z3, …, zWH}.Step 2. To improve the stochastic properties of the chaotic sequences, we preprocess three chaotic sequences as follows:(11)x¯i=10m×xi−Fix(10m×xi),(12)y¯i=10m×yi−Fix(10m×yi),(13)z¯i=10m×zi−Fix(10m×zi),where i=1,2,…,WH, Fix(·) represents the integer function which rounds the element to the nearest integer toward zero, and m∈[4,10] is a positive integer.Step 3. Sort the above sequencesX¯,Y¯,Z¯, and get three ordered sequencesX˜,Y˜,Z˜. Find the positions of the values ofX˜,Y˜andZ˜inX¯,Y¯,Z¯, respectively, and mark down the transform positions TX, TY and TZ, wherex˜i=x¯TX(i),y˜i=y¯TY(i)andz˜i=z¯TZ(i).Step 4. Process the position sequences according to the following formula:(14)Lτ(i)=mod(Tτ(i),256),where τ=X,Y,Z. Transform the sequences LX, LY and LZ into the matrices M1, M2 and M3 with size W×H, respectively.Step 5. Convert the decimal matrices M1, M2 and M3 into the binary matrices S1, S2 and S3 with size W×8H, respectively. Further, encode the binary matrices S1, S2 and S3 randomly by the DNA encoding rules in Table 1. Thus three DNA matrices K1, K2 and K3 with size W×4H are obtained.Remark 1Our proposed algorithm encrypts the color images based on the final key streams K1, K2 and K3, which are not only related to the original secret keys but also to the plain-image.As shown in Fig. 1, the steps for the encryption algorithm can be outlined as follows:Step 1. Compute the new parameters and initial conditions by the secret keys and the original image I0. Then iterate Eqs. (1)–(3) separately, and generate the key streams K1, K2 and K3 as described in Section 3.1.Step 2. Decompose the plain-image I0 into its red, green and blue components, and transform the decimal matrices R, G and B with size W×H into the binary matrices Rb, Gb and Bb with size W×8H, respectively. Then encode these binary matrices by arbitrarily selecting the DNA encoding rules in Table 1, and obtain three DNA matrices Rd, Gd and Bd with size W×4H. Here the random numbers ρ1, ρ2 and ρ3 used to choose the DNA encoding rules are produced as follows:(15)ρ1=FixmodXWH/64×10α1,8+1,(16)ρ2=FixmodYWH/256×10α2,8+1,(17)ρ3=FixmodZWH/4×10α3,8+1,where α1, α2, α3∈[10,15] are positive integers. In this paper, we arbitrarily choose α1=12, α2=14 and α3=10.Step 3. Calculate the complementary base of each element of the DNA matrices K1, K2 and K3, respectively, and perform the XOR operation on the DNA matrices Rd, Gd and Bd and corresponding complementary DNA matrices by the following equations:(18)Rd2(i,j)=Rd(i,j)XORInv(K1(i,j))Gd2(i,j)=Gd(i,j)XORInv(K2(i,j))Bd2(i,j)=Bd(i,j)XORInvK3(i,j),where the function Inv(x) returns the complementary base of x, i=1,2,…,W and j=1,2,…,4H.Step 4. Combine the DNA matrices Rd2, Gd2 and Bd2 horizontally according to Eq. (19) and obtain a DNA matrix P with size 3W×4H. Then divide P into λ2 (λ≥2) equal blocks and shuffle these blocks randomly. The λ2 pseudo-random numbers used to scramble the blocks are generated by the following formula (20).(19)P(1:W,1:4H)=Rd2(1:W,1:4H)P(W+1:2W,1:4H)=Gd2(1:W,1:4H)P(2W+1:3W,1:4H)=Bd2(1:W,1:4H).(20)Data={x¯55,x¯105,⋯,x¯50*i+5,⋯,x¯50*λ2+5}[SD,ID]=Sort(Data),where Sort(·) is a sorting function, SD is a new sequence after sorting the sequence Data in ascending or descending order, and ID is the index sequence, i.e., SD(t)=Data(ID(t)) (t=1,2,…,λ2). In this paper, we take λ=4. This process can be further illustrated in Fig. 2. After the above procedure, one can get the DNA matrix P′ with size 3W×4H.Step 5. Divide the DNA matrix P’ into three DNA matrices Rd3, Gd3 and Bd3 with size W×4H by Eq. (21). Then carry out the DNA XOR and addition operations for the DNA matrices Rd3, Gd3, Bd3 and the key streams K1, K2, K3 according to the following Eq. (22).(21)Rd3(1:W,1:4H)=P′(1:W,1:4H)Gd3(1:W,1:4H)=P′(W+1:2W,1:4H)Bd3(1:W,1:4H)=P′(2W+1:3W,1:4H).(22)Cr(i,j)=Rd3(i,j)XOR(K1(i,j)+K2(i,j))Cg(i,j)=Gd3(i,j)XOR(K2(i,j)XORK3(i,j))Cb(i,j)=Bd3(i,j)XORK3(i,j)+K2(i,j),where Cr, Cg and Cb are the encrypted DNA matrices, i=1,2,…,W and j=1,2,…,4H.Step 6. By the DNA decoding rules in Table 1 and the random numbers ρ1, ρ2 and ρ3, convert the DNA matrices Cr, Cg and Cb into the binary matrices Rb′, Gb′ and Bb′ with size W×8H, respectively. Then transform the binary matrices Rb′, Gb′ and Bb′ into the decimal matrices R′, G′ and B′ with size W×H, which are separately the red, green and blue components of the final cipher-image C.The decryption procedure is similar to that of the encryption process in the reverse order. Since the decryption process requires the same key streams for decrypting the cipher-image, the same secret keys (r1, r2, r3, X0, Y0, Z0, l, m, λ) should be applied for decryption. Implement the reverse operations to decrypt the cipher-image C.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on multiple improved 1D chaotic systems and DNA sequence operations, a new robust color image encryption scheme is proposed in this paper. First of all, the key streams for image encryption are generated from the secret keys and the plain-image. Then the plain-image and the key streams are randomly transformed into the DNA matrices by the DNA encoding rules. In order to crack the strong correlations between adjacent image pixels and modify the pixel positions and pixel values of the image, we perform the complimentary and XOR operations on the DNA matrices and then carry out the division-shuffling process for the DNA matrices. To further enhance the security and sensitivity of the encryption scheme, the XOR and addition operations are implemented on the DNA matrices generated from the previous step. Simulation results and performance analysis have shown the superior encryption effect and high security of the proposed encryption scheme. Furthermore, our proposed scheme is robust against some common image processing operations (e.g., noise addition, JPEG compression, histogram equalization and contrast adjustment) and geometric attack (e.g., cropping).