@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new feature extraction method based on multi-resolution representations of mammograms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents an approach for breast cancer diagnosis in digital mammograms using shearlet transform.A new approach is represented for feature extraction using shearlet transform, t-test statistic and dynamic thresholding.The system uses two datasets (ROIs) obtained from two different database; MIAS and DDSM database.The datasets include all abnormalites for breast cancer.The classification section was performed to distinguish the ROIs as normal–abnormal and benign–malignant.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast cancer,Digital mammogram,Feature extraction,Shearlet transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, I introduce a new method for feature extraction to classify digital mammograms using fast finite shearlet transform. Initially, fast finite shearlet transform was performed over mammogram images, and feature vectors were built using coefficients of the transform. In subsequent calculations, features were ranked according to t-test statistics, and capabilities were distinguished between different classes. To maximize differences between class representatives, a thresholding process was implemented as a final stage of feature extraction, and classifications were calculated over the optimal feature set using 5-fold cross validation and a support vector machine (SVM) classifier. The present results show that the proposed method provides satisfactory classification accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is a global threat and is the most common cause of cancer mortality. Early detection is the most effective way to avoid the consequences of breast cancer and is achieved by raising awareness of symptoms and by periodical screening programs, including mammography [1]. Although breast cancers are commonly detected using mammograms, subtle appearances and ambiguous margins of abnormalities hamper identification even for experts [2]. Because of these challenges in diagnosis, some cases adversely emerge with false positives that lead to unnecessary biopsies and false negatives that lead to unchecked cancer progression. Previous studies show the presence of cancers in 20–30% of biopsy cases and indicate that 10–30% of visible cancers are overlooked [3–5]. Thus, automated systems are required as aids for radiologists to classify mammograms and to make more accurate diagnoses [6]. Among these, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems are employed in various process steps, and feature extraction is among the most important steps. Accordingly, feature extraction techniques have been represented in the literature to eliminate redundant data by highlighting more effective and distinctive features. Feature extraction can then be performed directly using spatial data from images or using space data from transformed images after implementing transforms such as wavelet transform, curvelet transform, contourlet transform, or wave atom transform [7–11].Multiresolution analysis methods are useful tools that represent images sparsely and efficiently, and several recent schemes have been introduced to classify mammograms via multiresolution representation. Görgel et al. [12] presented a system comprising three steps for the classification of regions of interest (ROIs). In their study, spherical wavelet transform was applied to ROIs as the first step of the proposed system, and features of wavelets were subsequently extracted as details (shape-, boundary-, and gray level-based feature) and approximation coefficients (scaling). Finally, classifications of masses were performed using a support vector machine (SVM) to distinguish between malignant and benign tumors. The proposed system achieved 91.4% maximum classification accuracy using the dataset obtained from the Hospital of Istanbul University in Turkey. Gedik [13] also described a CAD system to classify mammograms as normal–abnormal and benign–malignant using a newer version of the contourlet transform with sharp frequency localization (SFLCT) for feature extraction. After composing the feature matrix using SFLCT coefficients, principal component analysis (PCA) was applied for further dimensional reduction and feature selection. This classification process was performed using SVM and least squares support vector machine (LS-SVM) classifiers, and comparisons were made. The best performance for distinguishing between features of mammograms was obtained using SFLC, PCA, and LS-SVM in combination. Ganesan et al. [14] also performed a comparative study to compare performances of discrete wavelet transform (DWT) and spherical wavelet transform (SWT) to identify features. In their study, several classifiers were used to classify mammograms, including a linear discriminant classifier (LDC), quadratic discriminant classifier (QDC), nearest mean classifier (NMC), SVM, and parzen classifier (ParzenC). The best performance was obtained with the combination of SWT features and SVM. Zhou et al. [15] developed a CAD system to detect breast tumors in ultrasound images using the coefficients of shearlet transform as features. Their system utilized three steps to obtain the shearlet-based texture features as follows: (1) entropy, correlation, contrast, and angular second moment from the coefficients of co-occurrence matrix of the first layer in a horizontal cone; (2) mean, variance, and energy from first- and third-layer coefficients in horizontal and vertical cones; and (3) maximal values in each column of the high-frequency sub-band coefficient matrix. Finally, SVM and AdaBoost classifiers were employed for the classification. Huang et al. [16] also used shearlet-based texture features to characterize breast tumors in ultrasound images and used extracted texture features to feed an AdaBoost algorithm and classify breast tumors. In addition, Ali and Janet [17,18] proposed two separate systems to classify microcalcification and mass in mammograms. To detect microcalcifications, energies of each sub-band of shearlet transform were calculated using a feature and k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier. Accordingly, to detect masses, energies of each sub-band of shearlet transform were calculated as features, and the SVM classifier was used.In this study, a new feature extraction method based on multi-resolution representation and t-test statistics was proposed and tested using the mammographic image analysis society (MIAS) database and digital database for screening mammography (DDSM). Initially, ROIs were decomposed for multiresolution representation using fast finite shearlet transform (FFST), which is a novel shearlet transform. Then, a feature matrix was constructed using coefficients of FFST, and all features in the matrix (columns) were ranked on the basis of t-test statistics. Finally, a threshold operation was performed to select significant features according to ranking values, and the proposed system was tested using an SVM classifier with two classifications to distinguish between normal and abnormal and between benign and malignant.FFST was developed by Häuser and Steidl [19] and provides a fast implementation of the finite (discrete) shearlet transform. The parabolic scaling matrixAaand the shearing matrixSswere considered as follows:(1)Aa=⁡a00a],a∈R2andSs=[1s01],s∈RShearletsψa,s,twere composed using dilation, shearing, and translation of the mother shearletψ∈L2(R2). Hence, definitions of shearlets with translation parameter t are as follows:(2)ψa,s,t(x)=a−3/4ψ(Aa−1Ss−1(x−t))The shearlet transformSTψ(f)of a signalf∈L2(R)is defined bySTψ(f)(a,s,t)=f,ψa,s,t,wheref,ψa,s,tis the scalar product [19].To use image processing applications, shearlet must be defined in a Cartesian coordinate. Thus, dilation, shear, and translation parameters were discretized to obtain a discrete shearlet transform. FFST performs the discrete shearlet construction in the Fourier domain, and discrete provisions of the parameters are defined by(3)aj:=2−2j=14j,j=0,....,j0−1(4)sj,k:=k2−j,−2j≤k≤2j,(5)tm:=(m1M,m2N),m∈G,whereM,Nare the dimensions of the image,j0:=[12log2max{M,N}], and(m1M,m2N),m∈Gis the grid. According to these parameters, finite discrete shearlet transform was defined as follows:(6)ψj,k,m(x):=ψaj,sj,k,tm(x)=ψ(Aaj,1/2−1Ssj,k−1(x−tm)),The FFST is the fast implementation of discrete shearlet transform, which is conducted through the continuous shearlet transform. Detailed information can be found in Ref. [19].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Feature sets that allow thorough discrimination improve the effectiveness and efficiency of classification processes. Furthermore, small feature sets that lack redundant data are desirable. Implementation of the present novel feature extraction method allowed classification of mammogram images with the most effective small-sized features using FFST, t-test statistics, and dynamic thresholding. These analyses produced high-accuracy normal–abnormal and benign–malignant classifications with dramatic reductions in numbers of features in ROIs from the MIAS database and DDSM. Hence, the proposed system provides satisfactory and credible results for the classification of mammograms.