@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intelligent mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking control system design using self-organizing recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network for uncertain two-axis motion control system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An intelligent adaptive tracking control system (IATCS) for X–Y table is proposed.The SORFWNNC is used to adaptively estimate lumped parameter uncertainties online.Structure and parameter learning of SORFWNN are performed concurrently and online.The adaptive laws are derived using Lyapunov stability and H2/H∞ performance.All control algorithms are implemented using DS1104 DSP-based control computer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy wavelet neural network (FWNN),Lyapunov satiability theorem,Mixed H,2,/H,∞ tracking performance,Permanent-magnet linear synchronous motor (PMLSM),Two-axis motion control system,X–Y table,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, an intelligent adaptive tracking control system (IATCS) based on the mixed H2/H∞ approach under uncertain plant parameters and external disturbances for achieving high precision performance of a two-axis motion control system is proposed. The two-axis motion control system is an X–Y table driven by two permanent-magnet linear synchronous motors (PMLSMs) servo drives. The proposed control scheme incorporates a mixed H2/H∞ controller, a self-organizing recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network controller (SORFWNNC) and a robust controller. The combinations of these control methods would insure the stability, robustness, optimality, overcome the uncertainties, and performance properties of the two-axis motion control system. The SORFWNNC is used as the main tracking controller to adaptively estimate an unknown nonlinear dynamic function that includes the lumped parameter uncertainties, external disturbances, cross-coupled interference and frictional force. Moreover, the structure and the parameter learning phases of the SORFWNNC are performed concurrently and online. Furthermore, a robust controller is designed to deal with the uncertainties, including the approximation error, optimal parameter vectors and higher order terms in Taylor series. Besides, the mixed H2/H∞ controller is designed such that the quadratic cost function is minimized and the worst case effect of the unknown nonlinear dynamic function on the tracking error must be attenuated below a desired attenuation level. The mixed H2/H∞ control design has the advantage of both H2optimal control performance and H∞ robust control performance. The sufficient conditions are developed for the adaptive mixed H2/H∞ tracking problem in terms of a pair of coupled algebraic equations instead of coupled nonlinear differential equations. The coupled algebraic equations can be solved analytically. The online adaptive control laws are derived based on Lyapunov theorem and the mixed H2/H∞ tracking performance so that the stability of the proposed IATCS can be guaranteed. Furthermore, the control algorithms are implemented in a DSP-based control computer. From the experimental results, the motions at X-axis and Y-axis are controlled separately, and the dynamic behaviors of the proposed IATCS can achieve favorable tracking performance and are robust to parameter uncertainties.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, high-precision linear motion systems are becoming significantly important to many manufacturing applications such as precision machinery, semiconductor processing, precision metrology, machine tools, microelectronics manufacturing equipment and optical components manufacturing. These systems are often required to operate in high speed to yield high productivity [1,2]. The development of a compact and high performance motion controller for the two-axis X–Y table of a computer numerical control (CNC) machine has been an important field in literatures [3]. In most advanced manufacturing processes, two-dimensional motions are in high demand for industrial applications such as parts assembly, component insertion, machining, etc. In a direct-drive system, the mechanical output is directly generated to the actuator and load and it has the characteristics of high force density, high precision and low production cost [4,5]. The control object, together with the actuator can be implemented as an integral system, which is capable of fast response, high flexibility and can have a simple structure. The two-axis X–Y table system based on direct-drive idea can be constructed according to different motor methodologies. Nevertheless, the X–Y table motion is usually subjected to unmodelled dynamics, external disturbances and the cross-axis coupling interferences, which often deteriorate the system performance during a machining process. With the recent advances of computer technologies, control theories and material technologies, the requirement for the performance of numerical control machine tools is increasing. Representative of the permanent magnet linear synchronous motor (PMLSM) X–Y table system, with its fast response and accurate positioning and high reliability has been widely used in aerospace, semiconductor and high-speed automated processing equipment. Among these applications, PMLSM are frequently used due to their simple structure, ease of manufacture, high power density, large thrust to mass ratio, high efficiency, and low thermal losses. The wide variety of applications and increasing use of PMLSMs drives make it necessary to come up with fast and reliable motor drive control system design approaches [6–8]. The direct drive design based on PMLSM has the following advantages: no backlash and less friction; high speed and high precision in long distance location; simple mechanical construction, resulting in higher reliability and frame stiffness; and high thrust force [7,8]. Therefore, the PMLSM is suitable for high-performance servo applications [6–10]. However, the PMLSM is greatly affected by force ripple, parameter variations and external load disturbances in the drive system. Moreover, the machine can exhibit cogging forces. Therefore, these parameter variation and dominant disturbances should be compensated to achieve high-speed/high-positioning precision control in PMLSM systems. There must adopt an effective control strategy to inhabit these disturbances for the control requirements of PMLSM [6–8].Intelligent control techniques in much research have been developed to improve the performance of nonlinear systems and to deal with the nonlinearities and uncertainties using fuzzy logic, neural network, wavelet and/or the hybrid of them [11]. Much research has been done on application of neural networks (NNs) for identification and control of dynamic systems. According to their structures, the NNs can be classified as feed-forward neural networks and recurrent neural networks (RNNs). It is well known that a feed-forward neural network is capable of approximating any continuous function. However, the feed-forward neural network is a static mapping. On the other hand, RNNs have superior capabilities than the feed-forward neural networks, such as dynamics and the ability to store information for later use. Since a recurrent neuron has an internal feedback loop, it captures the dynamic response of a system without external feedback through delays. The RNNs have the ability to deal with time-varying input or output through their own natural temporal operation. Moreover, the RNNs are dynamic mapping and demonstrate good control performance in the presence of unmodeled dynamics, parameter variations, and external disturbances [11]. In recent years, as parallel distributed computational models, neural networks have been developed for the redundancy resolution of robot manipulators [12–14]. In [12], cooperative payload transportation via redundant manipulators is considered. A dual recurrent neural network, which has separate modules associated with every manipulator in the collection, is designed to solve a quadratic constrained programming problem in a decentralized fashion, by resorting to a first-order kinematic model. The velocity of each arm is assigned and coincides with the payload velocity; hence, communication between vehicles is not necessary. Another interesting work is represented by Shuai Li et al. [13], where the decentralized control of multiple redundant manipulators for the cooperative task execution problem is solved. The use of redundant manipulators left extra design freedom for optimization of the trajectory in certain sense. The cooperative task execution problem is formulated as a separable constrained quadratic programming problem and relaxes the original control law which is obtained by solving this optimization problem iteratively to a new one without requiring full command coverage. The proposed control law is essentially a recurrent neuro-controller. To reduce network complexity and increase computational efficiency, an early dual-neural-network model [14] was then proposed for kinematic control of redundant manipulators. In the aforementioned schemes, it is assumed implicitly that there exist no joint limits or joint velocity limits when solving the redundancy resolution problem. But physical limits do exist in almost any robotic system. The concept of incorporating fuzzy logic into a neural network (NN) has grown into a popular research topic. In contrast to the pure neural network or fuzzy system, the fuzzy-neural-network (FNN) possesses both their advantages; it combines the capability of fuzzy reasoning in handling uncertain information and the capability of NNs in learning from the process [15,16]. On the other hand, the recurrent fuzzy-neural-network (RFNN), which naturally involves dynamic elements in the form of feedback connections used as internal memories, has been studied by some researchers in the past few years [17–28]. Lin et al. [25] proposed a self-constructing RNFN control system for the position control of a PMLSM drive with structure and parameter learning phases concurrently. The structure-learning phase is based on the partition of the input space and the parameter learning phase is based on the supervised-gradient-decent method using the delta-adaptation law. Chen [26] presented a self-organizing adaptive-neural fuzzy control (SANFC) for the trajectory tracking of electrically driven robot manipulators. The structure and parameters in the SANFC can be adjusted online to achieve a suitable-sized network structure, and the adaptive tuning laws of network parameters are derived in the sense of the Lyapunov synthesis approach to ensure network convergence and stability. Lin et al. [27] proposed a recurrent self-evolving fuzzy neural network with local feedback (RSEFNN-LF) by locally feeding the output of temporal firing strength back to itself; thus, temporal firing strength is influenced by current and past states. The idea of a variable- dimensional Kalman filter algorithm is used for consequent part learning. In [28], an efficient reinforcement evolutionary learning algorithm for the self-evolving neural fuzzy inference networks (SENFIN) is proposed. The proposed SENFIN approach can dynamically determine the number of fuzzy rules and adjust parameters of a SENFIN and the consequent of the fuzzy rules of SENFIN model involves a nonlinear combination of input variables.A fuzzy wavelet neural network (FWNN) is combined wavelet theory with fuzzy logic and NN that can bring the low-level learning, good computational capability of the WNNs into fuzzy system and also high-level humanlike IF-THEN rule thinking reasoning of fuzzy system into the WNNs. The synthesis of a fuzzy wavelet neural inference system includes the determination of the optimal definitions of the premise and the consequent part of fuzzy IF–THEN rules. The FWNNs consist of a set of rules and each rule contains a wavelet function in the consequent part of the rule. With the identification and control applications, some researchers [29–37] presented the FWNNs structures that used the gradient descent method to update/tune network parameters including wavelet parameters and weights. In [29], FWNNs are proposed for approximation of an arbitrary nonlinear function. Through tuning the shape of the membership functions, the approximating capability of FWNNs could be improved while not increasing the number of the wavelet bases. In [33], adaptive controller-based FWNNs that have learning laws derived from the Lyapunov theorem is proposed. The training of FWNNs [33] requires a smaller number of iterations while the performance of controller can achieve the higher approximating accuracy than the NNs.From the development and current situation of the PMLSM servo drives driven two-axis X–Y table system and along with increased requirements of the complexity and accuracy of the control objects, it was hard to adopt a single control strategy to meet the high performance control requirements of the controlled object. Therefore, although many research works adopted some constructive strategies for the present high performance control requirements of the controlled objects, but there were still many problems of the control strategies should be solved for two-axis motion control system driven by PMLSMs. Due to the X–Y table system has many disturbance factors, such as the effect of PMLSM servo side, nonlinear and coupling of systems, model perturbation and various disturbance, etc., and from the two-axis motion control system side, the X–Y table motion is usually subjected to unmodelled dynamics, external load disturbance and the cross-axis coupling interferences, which often deteriorate the system performance during a machining process, different control strategies were adopted according to different control objects and made the strategies optimized as far as possible. An overview of two-axis motion control system driven by PMLSM servo drives has been presented to provide a clear perspective on various aspects of these motion control systems to the researchers working in this field. The PMLSM servo drives are suitable for two-axis motion control system which is used in many applications; however, the choice of the control scheme (i.e. sensorless or with sensors) and controller topology depends on the accuracy, cost, complexity and reliability of the system. FPGAs and DSPs are one step in the direction of low cost controllers and many more such as embedded systems with cost effective solutions will be developed in the near future. The ever increasingly stringent performance requirements of two-axis motion control systems driven by PMLSMs [3–5] have forced control researchers to look beyond traditional linear control theory for more advanced controllers. During the past decade, a mathematically rigorous adaptive control [38–41], sliding-mode control [42,43], robust control [44], intelligent control [45–47], intelligent adaptive control [48–50], intelligent sliding-mode control [51,52], intelligent robust control [53] for PMLSM drive systems have been developed achieving significant performance improvement in motion control applications. In addition, the intelligent control strategies [54], intelligent-based advanced control strategies [55–65] for two-axis motion control systems driven by PMLSM servo drives are also presented.In practical control applications, it is always desired to design a controller that achieves multiple objectives. A typical example is the mixed H2/H∞ control scheme, which attempts to capture the benefits of both H2 control performance and the H∞ robustness performance simultaneously. In general, a pure H2 controller is designed for a good measure of transient performance, whereas a pure H∞ controller is developed for robustness with respect to disturbance and system uncertainties. Therefore, the mixed H2/H∞ multiobjective design has become a popular research topic in recent years [76,77]. In engineering practice, the control input is designed not only to eliminate the disturbance but also to minimize a desired control performance when the worst disturbance is imposed. In this situation, the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking control design is appealing for control engineers since it combines the merits of both the optimal control and the robust control. For linear systems, the mixed H2/H∞ control problems have been extensively studied [67–70]. For example, algebraic approaches to mixed H2/H∞ control problems have been proposed in [78] and a time domain Nash game approach has been provided to solve the mixed H2/H∞ in [68,76,77]. Moreover, some efficient numerical methods for mixed H2/H∞ control problems have been developed based on a convex optimization approach in [67,77]. In particular, since the linear matrix inequality (LMI) approach has proven to be a very effective numerical optimization algorithm [79], it has been employed to design both linear state feedback and output feedback controllers subject to H2/H∞ criterion, see, for example [80]. For nonlinear systems, the mixed H2/H∞ control problem has gained some research interests [71–75], where the solutions have been characterized in terms of the cross-coupled Hamilton–Jacobi–Issacs (HJI) partial differential equations. Since it is difficult to solve the cross-coupled HJI partial differential equations either analytically or numerically, Chen et al. [72] have used the Takagi and Sugeno (T–S) fuzzy linear model to approximate the nonlinear system, and solutions to the mixed H2/H∞ fuzzy output feedback control problem have been obtained via an LMI approach. The H2 tracking design is related to minimizing the linear quadratic cost of tracking error and control input [68]. The H∞ tracking design is related to attenuating the effect of the external disturbances. The main purpose of this type of control is to design an H2 optimal control for the worst-case external disturbance whose effect on system output must be attenuated below a desired value [71,83]i.e., to design an H2 optimal control under H∞ disturbance attenuation constraint. This control design has the advantage of both H2 optimal control performance and H∞ robust control performance and is very suitable for optimal tracking control of systems under uncertain external disturbance. However, few studies concern with the mixed H2/H∞ control for the two-axis motion control systems. Although the strategies based on adaptive control [3,5,38–65] have been proposed to address the control design for the two-axis motion control systems under plant uncertainties and external disturbances, to the best of my knowledge, there are still no published research work to deal with the intelligent mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking control problem for the two-axis motion control systems with plant uncertainties. In this paper, the H2 optimal tracking performance under a desired H∞ disturbance attenuation constraint is considered for the two-axis motion control system with plant uncertainties. However, it is difficult to develop a mixed H2/H∞ control for the two-axis motion control systems with plant uncertainties. In this situation, an intelligent adaptive control scheme is incorporated to compensate plant uncertainties in order to improve tracking performance. In this paper, sufficient conditions are developed for the adaptive mixed H2/H∞ tracking problem in terms of a pair of coupled algebraic equations instead of coupled of coupled nonlinear differential equations for the two-axis X–Y table motion control system. The coupled nonlinear differential equations can be transformed into a pair of coupled algebraic equations that can be solved analytically.The major issues considered in the high precision motion control of the two-axis X–Y table driven by PMLSMs include large variations of physical parameters of two-axis motion control system; unknown nonlinearities such as cogging and ripple forces of PMLSMs; dynamic uncertain nonlinearities with non-uniformly detectable unmeasured internal states (e.g., friction described by dynamic models in high precision motion controls); and control input saturation due to limited capacity of physical actuators. The two-axis X–Y table parameter uncertainties, external disturbances, cross-coupled interference and frictional force will be considered simultaneously. Therefore, the two-axis motion control system is a highly nonlinear time-varying system in practical applications. To deal with these uncertainties, the stochastic disturbances and to enhance the control performance of the two-axis X–Y table, advanced control schemes are required.In control system design, it is desirable to have systematic method of ensuring the stability, robustness, and optimality and performance properties of the overall system. Recently, the adaptive control schemes based on Lyapunov stability theorem that incorporate the intelligent techniques of NNs, RNNs, FNNs, RFNNs, WNNs, RWNNs, ENNs, RENNs, RBFNs, FWNNs, RFWNNs have grown rapidly [38–47]. One main advantage of these control schemes is that the adaptive laws were derived based on the Lyapunov synthesis method; therefore, guarantee the stability of the control system. However, some constrained conditions should be assumed in the control process e.g., the approximation error, optimal parameter vectors or higher order terms in Taylor series are bounded. In addition, the prior knowledge of the controlled system may be required, e.g., the external disturbance is bounded or all states of the controlled system are measurable. These requirements are not easy to satisfy in practical control applications. The motivation of this paper and the recent published work by the author is to design a hybrid control scheme (mixed control system), not only to guarantee the stability of the controlled system but also the constrained conditions and prior knowledge of the controlled system, such as the bound of the variation of system parameters and external disturbance, are not necessary in the design process of the hybrid control scheme such that it can easily extend to other nonlinear system. On the other hand, the mixed H2/H∞ control scheme is one of the effective nonlinear robust/optimal control approaches since it provides the system dynamics with an invariance property to uncertainties. Therefore, the proposed intelligent adaptive tracking control system (IATCS) based SORFWNN and the mixed H2/H∞ approach under uncertain plant parameters and external disturbances, is proposed in this paper to accomplish the mentioned motivation.The hybrid control schemes in [48–66] have been developed to achieve the improvement in motion control systems. The comparison of the proposed IATCS and previous works [21,44,85–91] are summarized as follows:In [21], an adaptive hybrid control system (AHCS) based on the computed torque control is proposed. The AHCS incorporating an auxiliary controller based on the sliding-mode, a recurrent radial basis function network (RBFN)-based self-evolving fuzzy-neural-network (RRSEFNN) controller and a robust controller. The RBFN is used to replace the traditional TSK-type fuzzy reasoning. The RBFN increases the dimensionality of the input pattern and thus, creation of nonlinear decision boundaries in the multidimensional space and identification of complex nonlinear functions become simple with this network. An innovative learning algorithm for the structure and parameters of the system is proposed. For structure learning, all of the rules and fuzzy sets are generated on-line in an RRSEFNN, which helps to automate rule generation. Therefore, there is no need to set any initial RRSEFNN structure in advance. The antecedent part and recurrent parameters are learned by gradient descent algorithm. The consequent parameters in an RRSEFNN are tuned using a variable-dimensional Kalman filter algorithm. This algorithm handles inputs with variable dimensions, a phenomenon caused by incremental rules during the structure learning process. The RRSEFNN estimator is used to adaptively estimate the non-linear uncertainties online, yielding a controller that tolerates a wider range of uncertainties. Additionally, a robust controller is proposed to confront the uncertainties including approximation error, optimal parameter vector and higher order term in Taylor series. The online adaptive control laws are derived based on the Lyapunov stability analysis, so that the stability of the AHCS can be guaranteed. In the current paper, the mixed H2/H∞ controller is added and replaces the sliding-mode controller to achieve both H2 optimal control performance and H∞ robust control performance due to the large uncertainties and nonlinearities exist in the two-axis X–Y table system. In addition, the SORFWNNC is combined wavelet theory with fuzzy logic and NN that can bring the low-level learning, good computational capability of the WNNs into fuzzy system.Due to large uncertainties and nonlinearities exist in the operation of the permanent magnet linear synchronous motor (PMLSM) with combined propulsion and levitation; the control performance may be seriously influenced. As in practical application, strong robustness is always an important property that a good controller should achieve. In [44,85,86,91], only H∞ optimal controller is a part of the hybrid control scheme. In [44], a control methodology based on the H∞ optimal control technique to approach the PMLSM Maglev vehicle problem is proposed. The new combined levitation-and-propulsion control technique using H∞ optimal control for PMLSM Maglev vehicle is the most suitable candidate for the vehicle running both on land and under the water where force requirements should be satisfied. The controller is combined with model following controllers. The combinations of both controllers would insure the robustness and overcome the uncertainties of the system. Systematic methodology for controllers design is provided. The H∞ optimal controller can make the closed loop system stable and can handle large parametric uncertainty. The uncertainty treatment employed resulted in a new representation for the PMLSM Maglev vehicle model that were posed as an H∞ optimization problem in a general analysis. The performance of the Maglev vehicle was numerically analyzed and verified. The results confirm that good dynamic performance and high robustness can be achieved by the proposed controller for PMLSM Maglev drive system. This paper lacks the stability analysis. In [85], an adaptive WNN-based H∞ position tracking controller for PMSM servo drive system which guarantees the robustness in the presence of parameter uncertainties and load disturbances proposed. The proposed controller consists of a feedback H∞ position controller in addition to an on-line trained adaptive WNNC. The results due to periodic reference trajectory confirm that the WNN-based H∞ controller grants robust performance and precise dynamic response to the reference model regardless of load disturbances and PMSM parameter uncertainties. The main contributions of this paper are the successful development and implementation of the adaptive WNN-based H∞ position tracking control system, in which a WNNC is utilized to compensate the uncertainty bound in the H∞ position tracking control system on-line. Also, this paper lacks the stability analysis. In [86], This paper proposes a hybrid supervisory H∞ control system using a recurrent cerebellar model articulation controller (RCMAC) for achieving high precision position tracking performance of permanent-magnet synchronous motor (PMSM) servo drive. The hybrid control system is composed of a RCMAC, a supervisory controller and a robust H∞ controller. The RCMAC is used as the main position tracking controller to mimic a perfect computed torque control law and the robust H∞ controller is designed with adaptive bound estimation algorithm to compensate for the approximation error between the RCMAC and the ideal controller. The supervisory controller is designed based on the uncertainty bound of the PMSM to stabilize the system states around a predefined bound region and achieve satisfactory tracking performance. The online adaptive control laws are derived based on the Lyapunov stability analysis, so that the stability of the system can be guaranteed. The proposed hybrid control system grants robust performance and precise response regardless of load disturbances and PMSM parameters uncertainties. In [88], an intelligent optimal control system is proposed to control the rotor position of the PMSM servo drive. The proposed hybrid control scheme comprises an optimal controller, an RWENN controller and a robust controller. The IORWENNCS, in which an optimal controller was designed to minimize a quadratic performance index, a RWENN controller was used to learn a nonlinear function in the optimal control law and a robust controller was designed to compensate for the approximation error. The online adaptive control laws have been derived based on the optimal control theory and Lyapunov stability theorem so that the stability of the PMSM servo drive can be guaranteed. The proposed IORWENNCS grants robust performance and precise dynamic response regardless of load disturbances and PMSM parameter uncertainties. In [91], an intelligent adaptive backstepping H∞ tracking control system (IABHTCS) for the position control of permanent-magnet synchronous motor (PMSM) servo drive is proposed. The IABHTCS incorporates an ideal backstepping controller, a dynamic recurrent-fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network (DRFWNN) uncertainty observer and a robust H∞ controller. To relax the requirement for the value of the lumped uncertainty in the backstepping controller, an adaptive DRFWNN uncertainty observer is designed to adaptively estimate the non-linear uncertainties online. In addition, the robust controller is designed to achieve H∞ tracking performance to recover the residual of the approximation error and external disturbances with desired attenuation level. The online adaptive control laws are derived based on the Lyapunov stability analysis; the Taylor linearization technique and H∞ control theory, so that the stability of the IABHTCS can be guaranteed. The proposed IABHTCS can achieve favorable tracking performance regardless of parameters uncertainties by incorporating DRFWNN identifier, backstepping control and H∞ control technique. In the current paper, the stability analysis has been carried out and the mixed H2/H∞ controller is designed instead of only H∞ controller. The addition of H2 tracking controller design is related to minimizing the linear quadratic cost of tracking error and control input. In this case, the new controller has advantage of both H2 optimal control performance and H∞ robust control performance.In [89], an adaptive dynamic sliding-mode control system (ADSMCS) for IM drive which guarantees the robustness in the presence of parameter uncertainties and load disturbances is proposed. First, a DSMC controller with a RRBFN uncertainty observer and a robust controller has been designed and analyzed. The dynamic sliding-mode controller (DSMC) is proposed to reduce the chattering phenomenon, increase the robustness and improve the control performance. As well, the RRBFN observer is developed to approximate an unknown dynamic function including parameter uncertainty. Moreover, the adaptive learning algorithms for the RRBFN uncertainty observer are derived using the Lyapunov stability theorem to train the parameters of the RRBFN online, so that the stability of the IM drive can be guaranteed. The analysis of ADSMCS is too difficult and the chattering phenomenon is only reduced. In [92], a robust hybrid control system (RHCS) of a two-axis motion control system is proposed. The proposed RHCS incorporates a recurrent wavelet-neural-network controller (RWNNC) and a sliding-mode controller (SMC) to construct a RRWNNSMC. The two-axis motion control system is an X–Y table that is driven by two PMSMs servo drives. The RWNNC is used as the main motion tracking controller to mimic a perfect computed torque control law and the SMC controller is designed with adaptive bound estimation algorithm to compensate for the approximation error between the RWNNC and the ideal controller. The on-line learning algorithms of the connective weights, translations and dilations of the RWNNC are derived using Lyapunov stability analysis. The motion tracking performance is significantly improved using the proposed RHCS and robustness to parameter variations, external disturbances, cross-coupled interference and frictional torque are obtained as well. In the current research work, the mixed H2/H∞ controller is incorporated in the hybrid control scheme to achieve both H2 optimal control and H∞ robust control simultaneously.With the above mention motivations, this paper presents an intelligent adaptive tracking control system (IATCS) based on the mixed H2/H∞ and using a SORFWNN controller for the two-axis motion control system. The major issues considered in the precision motion control of the two-axis X–Y table can be handled systematically and effectively with the proposed intelligent adaptive tracking control system (IATCS). With the above mention motivations, the aim of this paper is to design an IATCS based on the mixed H2/H∞ approach for achieving high precision performance of a two-axis motion control system. The IATCS incorporates a self-organizing recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network controller (SORFWNNC), a mixed H2/H∞ controller and a robust controller. The SORFWNNC is introduced to learn the uncertainties by an adaptive algorithm; that is, the SORFWNNC is used to compensate for the two-axis X–Y table uncertainties. Moreover, the structure and the parameter learning phases of the SORFWNNC are performed concurrently and online. In fact, the SORFWNNC can only approximate the two-axis X–Y table uncertainties. Approximation errors between the SORFWNNC and two-axis X–Y table uncertainties do exist. Therefore, a robust control action is included to eliminate the effect of approximation error. In addition, the mixed H2/H∞ controller is designed such that the quadratic cost function is minimized and the worst case effect of the unknown nonlinear dynamic function, uncertainties, on the tracking error must be attenuated below a desired attenuation level. The H2 tracking performance is related to minimizing the linear quadratic cost function of tracking error and control input, where as the H∞ tracking performance is related to the attenuation property with respect to external disturbances. The online adaptive control laws are derived based on Lyapunov theorem and the mixed H2/H∞ tracking performance so that the stability of the proposed IATCS can be guaranteed. In addition to the stability, tracking performance is also an important issue in two-axis X–Y table control design. The advantages of the proposed IATCS that contains five major contributions are summarized as follows.(a)A novel recurrent structure with the advantages of recurrent property that makes SORFWNN suitable for dealing with temporal problems.The consequent part of the rules is a nonlinear function of input linguistic variables. This paper adopts the wavelet neural network to the consequent part of the rules. The local properties of wavelets in the SORFWNN model enable arbitrary functions to be approximated more effectively.For most recurrent network models, the user must specify the network structure in advance. However, no reassignment of the network structure is required for the SORFWNN model, since the SORFWNN model can construct itself online automatically. In addition, no predetermination, like the number of hidden nodes, must be given, since the SORFWNN can find its optimal structure and parameters automatically and quickly.The SORFWNN model is characterized by small network size and fast learning speed. The model is created on-line via concurrent structure identification (the construction of dynamic fuzzy if–then rules) and parameter identification (the tuning of the free parameters of membership functions). The structure learning together with the parameter learning forms a fast learning algorithm for building a small, yet powerful, dynamic fuzzy neural network.The intelligent adaptive controller (SORFWNNC) is used to compensate the plant uncertainties to achieve the mixed H2/H∞ tracking control design for uncertain constrained robotic systems. The mixed H2/H∞ control design has the advantage of both H2optimal control performance and H∞ robust control performance and is very suitable for optimal tracking control of the two-axis X–Y table control system under uncertainties and external disturbance.As demonstrated in Section 5, the proposed IATCS based on the mixed H2/H∞ using a self-organizing recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network controller (SORFWNNC) for achieving high precision performance of a two-axis motion control system is more adaptive and effective controller than other models.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the dynamic modeling, dynamic analysis and properties of the two-axis X–Y table control system driven by PMLSMs servo drives. In addition, the problem formulation with mixed H2/H∞performance for two-axis motion control system is also included in this section. The structure of the self-organizing recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network (SORFWNN) as well as the structure learning and parameter learning algorithms are introduced in Section 3. The design methodology for the ideal controller, auxiliary controller, robust controller, the SORFWNNC and the mixed H2/H∞ controller are given in Section 4. In addition, the design procedures, adaptive learning algorithms and the stability analysis of the proposed IATCS are described in details in Section 4. The validity of the design procedure and the robustness of the proposed control system are verified by experimental analysis. All of the control algorithms have been developed in a control computer based on a dSPACE DS1104 DSP control board. Experimental results are provided in Section 5 to validate the effectiveness of the proposed IATCS for the two-axis motion control system. Conclusions and future works are introduced in Section 6.The mathematical modeling of the single-axis PMLSM in the synchronously rotating reference frames can be described as follows. The field oriented control (FOC) technique is employed in order to obtain high thrust capability of the PMLSM drive through the decoupling control of d–q axes stator currents in the rotor reference frame [6–8], [21]. The voltage equations of the armature windings in the rotating reference frame can be expressed in (1) and (2).(1)Vqsr=Rsiqsr+ddtλqs+ωrλds(2)Vdsr=Rsidsr+ddtλds−ωrλqswhere(3)λqs=Lqsiqsr(4)λds=Ldsidsr+λPM(5)ωr=(P/2)ωSubstituting (3) and (4) into (1) and (2) will yield(6)Vqsr=Rsiqsr+Lqsddtiqsr+ωrLdsidsr+ωrλPM(7)Vdsr=Rsidsr+Ldsddtidsr−ωrLqsiqsrwhere Vqs, Vds, iqsand idsare the d–q axis armature voltages and currents respectively. Rsis the resistance of armature windings, Ldsand Lqsare the d–q axis inductances, and λPMis the permanent magnet flux linkage. ωr, ω and P are electrical angular velocity, angular velocity of the mover and the number of primary poles, respectively. Moreover(8)ω=(π/τp)v(9)vr=(P/2)v=2τpfrwhere vr, v, frand τpare electrical linear velocity, linear velocity of the mover, electrical frequency and the pole pitch, respectively.The developed electromagnetic thrust can be expressed as:(10)Fe=32⋅P2⋅πτp[λdsiqsr+(Ld−Lq)idsriqsr]Then, using FOC and setting d-axis current as zero, the electromagnetic thrust is obtained as given in (11).(11)Fe=32⋅P2⋅πτp⋅λPMiqsr=Kfiqsr(12)Kf=32⋅P2⋅πτp⋅λPMwhere Kfis the thrust constant andiqsris the command of thrust current and Feis the electromagnetic thrust.The dynamics equation of the mover motion with the friction model included is given by:(13)Fe=Mddtv+Dv+FL+Ff(v)where M is the total mass of the mover, D is the viscous friction and iron-loss coefficient; FLand Ff(v) are the external disturbance load force and the frictional force. Considering Coulomb friction, viscous friction and Stribeck effect, the friction force can be formulated as follows [22].(14)Ff(v)=FCsgn(v)+(FS−FC)e−(v/vs)2sgn(v)+Kvvwhere FCis the Coulomb friction, FSis the static friction, vs is the Stribeck velocity parameter, Kvis the coefficient of viscous friction and sgn(·) is a function. All the parameters in (13) are time varying. From (6) to (13), the block diagram of single-axis PMLSM machine model is depicted as shown in Fig. 1. It is clear that the single-axis PMLSM machine model is highly nonlinear due the coupling between d–q axis, cogging force, friction force and load force disturbances.The dynamic analysis of the two-axis X–Y table driven by PMLSM may be expressed as follows. From (11) and (13), the mechanical dynamics can be simplified as follows [21]:(15)d¨(t)=−DM⋅2Pd˙(t)+2P⋅KfM⋅iqsr*(t)−2P⋅1M(FL+Ff(v))(16)d¨(t)=Amd˙(t)+Bm⋅U(t)+Dm(FL+Ff(v))where Am=−(D/M)·(P/2), Bm=Kf/(M)·(P/2), Dm=−(P/2)·(1/M)U(t)=iqsr*(t)is the control effort,d¨(t)is the acceleration of the mover,d˙(t)is the linear velocity and d(t) is the position of the mover.Now, assume that the parameters of the motion control system are well known and the external force disturbance and the frictional force are absent, rewriting (16) can represent the model of the PMLSM servo drive system.(17)d¨(t)=Amd˙(t)+Bm⋅U(t)By considering the dynamics in (16) with parameter variations, disturbance and unpredictable uncertainties, then the frictional force is added to the system and the motion equation of the system is modified to:(18)d¨(t)=(An+ΔAm)d˙(t)+(Bn+ΔBm)⋅U(t)+(Dn+ΔDm)(FL+Ff(v))(19)d¨(t)=And˙(t)+Bn⋅U(t)+Γ(t)where An, Bnand Dnare the nominal parameters of Am, Bmand Dmrespectively. ΔAm, ΔBm, and ΔDmare the uncertainties due to mechanical parameters M and D, and Γ(t) is the lumped parameter uncertainty and is defined as:(20)Γ(t)=ΔAmd˙(t)+ΔBm⋅U(t)+ΛThe lumped parameter uncertainty is assumed to be bounded, that is,(21)|Γ(t)|≤δwhereΛ=(Dn+ΔDm)(FL+Ff(v))and δ is a given positive constants.In this Section, both the problem formulation and the description of the proposed intelligent adaptive tracking control system (IATCS) for the two-axis X–Y table system are presented. The configuration of the proposed control system is shown in Fig. 2. In practical two-axis motion control systems, uncertainties which may affect the tracking performance are inevitable. Hence, it is significant to consider the effects due to uncertainties. In this paper, two-axis system parameter uncertainties, external disturbances, cross-coupled interference and frictional force will be considered simultaneously. Therefore, the two-axis motion control system is a nonlinear time-varying system in practical applications. The proposed control scheme combines a mixed H2/H∞ controller, a self-organizing recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network controller (SORFWNNC) and a robust controller. The proposed design procedure is divided into three steps. First, a self-organizing adaptive recurrent fuzzy wavelet neural network system is introduced in the next section to learn these unknown or uncertain dynamics,Θˆ, by adaptive algorithms. Second, a robust controller is utilized to deal with the uncertainties, including the approximation error, optimal parameter vectors and higher order terms in Taylor series. Third, the effects on the tracking error,edm(t), due to the unknown nonlinear dynamic function must be attenuated below a desired attenuation level ρ2, which is, the mixed H2/H∞ tracking performance is achieved. The online adaptive control laws are derived based on Lyapunov theorem and the mixed H2/H∞ tracking performance so that the stability of the proposed IATCS can be guaranteed. The hybrid control law is assumed to take the following form:(22)UIATCS*(t)=Bn−1[UA+uH]=Bn−1[(USORFWNNC+URC)+uH]where UA=(USORFWNNC+URC) is the intelligent adaptive controller, USORFWNNCis the self-organizing recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network controller, URCis the robust controller and uHis the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking controller (ATC).Mixed H2/H∞ adaptive control problem, for two-axis system based on the self-organizing adaptive recurrent fuzzy-wavelet-neural-network, under consideration is stated as follows. Consider the nonlinear tracking error dynamic in (82) and (96). Given a desired disturbance attenuation level ρ2 and weighting matrices Q2(t), Q∞(t), R2(t) and R∞(t), the intelligent mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking control problem for the two-axis motion control system is said to be solved if there exist an UHcontrol law and an adaptive controller UAsuch that the following H2optimal tracking performance [71,83](23)minuH∈L2[0,T][ET(t)Q2(t)E(t)Φ˜T(t)Φ˜(t)+∫0T(ET(t)Q2(t)E(t)+uHT(t)R2(t)uH(t))dt]can be achieved under the following H∞ disturbance attenuation constraints [75](24)ET(t)Q∞(t)E(t)+Φ˜T(t)Φ˜(t)+∫0T(ET(t)Q∞(t)E(t)+uHT(t)R∞(t)uH(t))dt≤ET(0)P∞(0)E(0)+1ηΦΦ˜T(0)Φ˜(0)+1ημμ˜T(0)μ˜(0)+1ησσ˜T(0)σ˜(0)+1ηbb˜T(0)b˜(0)+1ηcc˜T(0)c˜(0)+ρ2∫0TΛ˜T(t)Λ˜(t)dtfor all ∀T∈[0, ∞] and for some symmetric positive matrices Q2(t), Q∞(t), R2(t), R∞(t), P2(t) and P∞(t).In this paper, we assume thatΘ˜(t)is uncertain and bounded. However, the effect ofΘ˜(t)will deteriorate the control performance of the ATC and even lead to instability of the nonlinear two-axis motion control system. Therefore, how to eliminate the effect ofΘ˜(t)to guarantee control performance is an important design purpose of the ATC. Since H∞ control is the most important control design to efficiently eliminate the effect ofΘ˜(t)on the two-axis motion control system, it will be employed to deal with the robust performance control in (19). Let us consider the following H∞ control performance [75–83](25)J∞(uH,Λ)=ET(t)Q∞(t)E(t)+1ηΦΦ˜T(t)Φ˜(t)+1ημμ˜T(t)μ˜(t)+1ησσ˜T(t)σ˜(t)+1ηbb˜T(t)b˜(t)+1ηcc˜T(t)c˜(t)+∫0T{ET(t)Q∞(t)E(t)+uHT(t)R∞(t)uH(t)−ρ2Λ˜T(t)Λ˜(t)}dtwhere E(t) is the tracking error dynamics, T is the terminal time of control, ηΦ, ημ, ησηb, ηcand ηγare strictly positive learning rates and ρ is a prescribed attenuation constant.Q∞=Q∞T>0is specified according to the design purpose andP∞=P∞T>0is a weighting positive definite matrix.However, the H∞ robustness performance in (25), which has been considered to eliminate the effect ofΘˆ(t)in the nonlinear two-axis system of (19), is not enough by itself to achieve a desired control performance. In general, the H2 optimal control is more appealing for control engineers to achieve a desired control performance via a proper choice of weighting matrices, i.e., the following control performance [75–83](26)J2(uH,Λ)=ET(t)Q2(t)E(t)+1ηΦΦ˜T(t)Φ˜(t)+1ημμ˜T(t)μ˜(t)+1ησσ˜T(t)σ˜(t)+1ηbb˜T(t)b˜(t)+1ηcc˜T(t)c˜(t)+∫0T[ET(t)Q(t)2E(t)+uHT(t)R2(t)uH(t)]dtmust be minimized without consideringΘ˜(t)and the weighting matricesQ2=Q2T>0andR2=R2T>0are specified before hand according to the design purpose. Then, the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive control problem for the two-axis motion control system is equivalent to finding an optimal control lawuH*, which is related to the mixed H2/H∞ control performance and the intelligent adaptive controller UAthat include the worst case uncertainties Θ(t) such that(27)J∞(uH*,Λ*)≥J∞(uH*,Λ),∀Λ∈L2[0,T]andJ2(uH*,Λ*)≤J2(uH,Λ*),∀uH∈L2[0,T]These mixed control performance with parameter adjustment can be viewed as minimizing H2tracking performance under the H∞ disturbance attenuation constraint on the two-axis motion control system associated with the intelligent adaptive control scheme.In this section, the description of the self-organizing recurrent fuzzy wavelet neural network is introduced. The structure of the proposed SORFWNN is shown in Fig. 3. In addition, this section presents the structure and learning algorithms for the SORFWNN. The recurrent structure in SORFWNN uses interaction feedback that has the ability to capture the critical information from other rules. The consequent part of each recurrent fuzzy rule is a wavelet neural network (WNN). The SORFWNN combines the merits of the self-organizing FNN, WNN and recurrent neural network. The SORFWNN simultaneously uses two types of learning to develop structure and parameter learning. There are no rules in the SORFWNN initially. The rules are created on line as learning proceeds upon receiving the training data. After a rule is generated, its free parameters are tuned by subsequent parameter learning. The following sections introduce detailed structure and parameter learning of the SORFWNN [17–28].The proposed SORFWNN integrates wavelet functions with TSK fuzzy model. The kernel of the fuzzy system is the fuzzy knowledge base that consists of the input–output data points of the system interpreted into linguistic fuzzy rules. The consequent parts of TSK-type fuzzy IF–THEN rules are represented by either a constant or a function. In most fuzzy and neuro-fuzzy models, the function is a linear combination of the input variables plus a constant term. TSK-type systems cannot, in general, model complex processes with desired accuracy using a certain number of rules. These systems do not have localizability, instead model the global features of the process, and their convergence is generally slow. The consequent part of this TSK-type fuzzy networks do not provide full mapping capabilities, and, in the case of modeling of complex nonlinear processes, may require a high number of rules in order to achieve the desired accuracy. Increasing the number of the rules leads to an increase in the number of neurons in the hidden layer of the network. In this paper, the use of wavelet (rather than linear) functions is proposed to improve the computational power of the neuro-fuzzy system [19–21,27–37]. The rules used thus have the following form:(28)IFx1isA1jandx2isA2jand…andxnisAnj(27)THENΨl(xi)(28)Ψl(xi)=∑i=1nωil1−xi−bilcil2exp−12xi−bilcil2where xi={x1, x2, …, xn} are the input variables,Anjis the jth Gaussian type membership function for the jth input and Ψl(xi), which is a function of inputs, is the lth output of the fuzzy rule, biland cilare the translation and the dilation parameters of the wavelet function between the ith (i=1, …, n), ωilare the weights between the hidden and output layers of the WNN and the lth output (l=1, …, n). The Mexican Hat wavelet function ψ(x)=(1−x2)exp(−x2/2) is used as the wavelet transform in this paper. The translated and dilated version of the Mexican Hat wavelet function is used, which is given by the following equation:(29)ψx−bjcj=1−x−bjcj2exp−12x−bjcj2This subsection proposes the structure of the SORFWNN model illustrated in Fig. 3. The goal of integrating this model is to improve the accuracy of function approximation.The jth rule of the proposed SORFWNN is presented as follows:(30)Rj:IFx1isA1jandx2isA2j…andxnisAnjTHENhj(N+1)isγjandyo(6)(N+1)is∑j=1Myj(4)⋅yl⋅ϖjwhere Rjis the jth rule; hjis the internal variable,Aijis a fuzzy set, hj(N+1) is the output of the recurrent layer;yj(4)is the output of layer 4; γj, Wjkand ϖjare the consequent part parameters for the outputs hj,yj(4)and yl, respectively;yo(6)is the output of the SORFWNN.The architecture of the SORFWNN is a six-layer recurrent FWNN embedded with dynamic feedback connections as shown in Fig. 3. To give a clear understanding of the mathematical function of each node, we will describe the basic functions and signal propagation of each layer as follows.Layer 1 (input layer):Each node in this layer is an input node, which corresponds to one input variable. These nodes only pass the input signal to the next layer and the input variables of the SORFWNN are the same. In this layer, the node input and the node output are represented as(31)neti(1)(N)=xi(1)(32)yi(1)(N)=fi(1)(neti(1)(N))=neti(1)(N)i=1,2(33)x1(1)=edm(t)(34)x2(1)=e˙dm(t)wherexi(1)represents the ith input to the node of layer 1, N denotes the number of iterations. The input variables arex1(1)=edm=(dm−d), the tracking position error between the desired position command dm(t), and the rotor position d(t) andx2(1)=e˙dm=(d˙m−d˙), tracking position error change of the rotor.Layer 2 (membership layer):In this layer, each node of the SORFWNN acts as a linguistic label of one of the input variables in layer 1, i.e., the membership value specified the degree to which an input value belongs to a fuzzy set is determined in this layer. The Gaussian function is adopted as the membership function: For the jth node the input and output of the membership node can be described as follows:(35)λAij(xi)=exp−12(xi−μij)2σij2,i=1,…,n,j=1,…,m(36)netj(2)(N)=−12(xi−μij)2σij2(37)yij(2)(N)=Aij(xi(2))=fj(2)(netj(2)(N))=exp(netj(2)(N))=exp−12(xi−μij)2σij2where n is the number of external input signals, m is the number of fuzzy rules (hidden neurons in third layer), μijand σijare the mean and standard deviation of the Gaussian function of the SORFWNN in the jth term of the ith input linguistic variablexi2to the node of layer 2, respectively,λAij(xi)is the membership function of the ith input variable for the jth term.Layer 3 (rule layer):Each node in this layer represents one fuzzy logic rule and performs precondition matching of a rule. Thus, the neuron in this layer is denoted by Π, which multiplies the incoming signals from layer 2 and outputs the product result, i.e., the firing strength of a rule. For the jth rule node:(38)netj(3)(N)=∏inϖjk(3)yij(2)(N)(39)yj(3)(N)=fj(3)(netj(3)(N))=netj(3)(N)=∏i=1nϖjk(3)yij(2)(N)=∏i=1nϖjk(3)exp−12(xi−μij)2σij2wherexj(3)represents the jth input to the node of layer 3;ϖjk(3)are the weights between the membership layer and the rule layer and are set to be equal to unity to simplify the implementation for the real-time control; and n is the number of rules.Layer 4 (recurrent layer):This layer is a recurrent layer. For the internal variable hjin the recurrent layer, the following sigmoid membership function is used:(40)Fj=11+exp(−γjhj),j=1,2,…,m(41)hj(N+1)=yj(3)(N)+Fj=∏i=1nϖjk(3)exp−12(xi−μij)2σij2+11+exp(−γjhj)where hjis the recurrent unit acting as the memory element and γjis the recurrent weight.Layer 5 (wavelet layer):The neuron in this layer multiplies the incoming signals, which are hjfrom the output of layer 4 (recurrent layer) and the output signal from the wavelet functions yl.The output of the lth wavelet is calculated as(42)yl(xi)=Ψl(xi)=∑i=1nωil|cj|−121−xi−bilcil2exp−12xi−bilcil2Furthermore, the process of this layer is described as follows:(43)netj(5)(N)=∏inyl(xi)⋅yj(4)(N)(44)yj(5)(N)=fj(5)(netj(5)(N))=netj(5)(N)=∏i=1nϖjk(3)exp−12(xi−μij)2σij2+11+exp(−γjhj)⋅∑i=1nωil|cj|−121−xi−bilcil2exp−12xi−bilcil2Layer 6 (output layer):In this layer, the final output of the SORFWNN,yo(6), is calculated and the output node together with related links acts as a defuzzifier. The mathematical function is given by:(45)neto(6)(N)=∑j=1Myj(4)⋅yl⋅ϖj(46)yo(6)(N)=fo(6)(neto(6)(N))=neto(6)(N)=∑j=1Myj(4)⋅yl⋅ϖj=UqsSORFWNN=Θˆ(x)where the link weight ϖjis the output strength andyo(6)is the output of the SORFWNN controller and also is the estimated nonlinear functionΘˆ. Moreover,yo(6)=UqsSORFWNN(t)=Θˆfor the uncertainty estimation of the x–y table; M is the number of rules andUqsSORFWNNCis the control effort of the single-axis mechanism of the x–y table motion control system. Define the vectors μ, σ, γ, ϖj=ϖ, ωl=α, bl=β and cl=ζ collecting all parameters of the hidden layer in the SORFWNN as:(47)ϖ=[ϖ1o,ϖ2o,…,ϖMo],α=[α1j,α2j,…,αlj]β=[β1j,β2j,…,βlj],ζ=[ζ1j,ζ2j,…,ζlj]γ=[γ1j,γ2j,…,γij],μ=[μ1j,μ2j,…,μij]σ=[1/σ1j2,1/σ2j2,…,1/σij2]The output of the SORWFNN controller,yo(6)=UqsSORFWNN(t), can be rewritten as(48)UqsSORFWNNC=ΘSORFWNNC(E,Φ,σ,μ,b,c)=ΦTΩ(E,σ,μ,b,c)where the tracking error vector E is the input of the SORFWNN, Φ=[Φ1, Φ2, …, ΦM]Tis the adjustable weights vector (γ, ϖ, ω), Ω is the output vector (σ, μ, β, ζ, Ψl, hj) andE=[edme˙dm]Tis the tracking error input vector to the SORFWNN controller. It was proved in [84] that there exists an SORFWNN as shown in (48) such that it can uniformly approximate a nonlinear, even time-varying function.This section presents the online learning algorithm for constructing the adaptive self-organizing recurrent fuzzy wavelet neural network model. The proposed learning algorithm comprises structure learning and a parameter learning algorithms. Structure learning is based on the entropy measure used to determine whether a new rule should be added to satisfy the fuzzy partitioning of input variables. Parameter learning is based on supervised learning algorithms. The backpropagation algorithm minimizes a given cost function by adjusting the link weights in the consequent part and the parameters of the membership functions. Initially, there are no nodes in the network except the input–output nodes, i.e., there are no nodes in the SORFWNN model. The nodes are created automatically as learning proceeds, upon the reception of online incoming training data in the structure and parameter learning processes [21,27,28].The structure learning algorithm is responsible for on-line rule generation. The first step in structure learning is to determine when to generate a new rule. The way the input space is partitioned determines the number of rules extracted from the training data, as well as the number of fuzzy sets in the universe of discourse for each input variable because one cluster in the input space corresponds to one fuzzy rule, in which μijrepresents the mean and σijrepresents the standard deviation of that cluster, respectively. For each incoming pattern xi, the rule firing strength can be regarded as the degree to which the incoming pattern belongs to the corresponding cluster. For computational efficiency, the degree measure can be calculated using the firing strength from (38) as(49)Dj=yj(3),j=1,…,M(t)where M(t) denotes the number of existing rules at time t and Dj∈[0, 1]. According to the degree measure, the criterion for the generation of a new fuzzy rule for a new incoming data is described as follows. Find the maximum degree Dmax(50)Dmax=max1≤j≤M(t)DjIf Dmax≤D, then a new rule is generated, where D∈[0, 1] is a prescribed threshold that decays during the learning process, thus limiting the size of the SORFWNN. Once a new rule has been generated, the next step is to assign the initial mean and standard deviation to the new membership function and the corresponding link weight for the consequent part. Since the goal is to minimize an objective function, the mean, standard deviation and weights are all adjustable later in the parameter learning phase. Hence, the mean, standard deviation, translation, dilation and weights for the new rule are set as follows:(51)μijM(t+1)=xi(t)(52)σijM(t+1)=σinit(53)αijM(t+1)=r(54)βijM(t+1)=r(55)γijM(t+1)=r(56)ζijM(t+1)=r(57)ϖijM(t+1)=rwhere xiis the new input, r∈[−1, +1] is a random variable and σinitis a prespecified constant.After the network structure has been adjusted according to the current pattern, the network then begins parameter learning to adjust the parameters of the membership functions optimally with the same training pattern. The central part of the parameter learning algorithm for the SORFWNN concerns how to recursively obtain a gradient vector in which each element in the learning algorithm is defined as the derivative of an energy function with respect to a parameter of the network. This is done by means of the chain rule and the method is generally referred to as the backpropagation learning rule, because the gradient vector is calculated in the direction opposite to the flow of the output of each node. The parameter learning is based on supervised learning algorithm to adjust the connected weights in the consequent part, the feedback weights and the parameters of the membership functions using the backpropagation algorithm to minimize a given energy function. To describe the on-line parameter learning algorithm of the self-organizing recurrent fuzzy wavelet neural network, first the energy function Eθis defined as(58)Ed=12(dm−d)2=12(edm)2where dm(t) is the desired motion, d(t) is the actual motion of the mover of the PMLSM andedmis the error signal between the desired motion and the actual motion.Then, the update laws for the parameters in the SORFWNN are described as follows:Layer 6:During the learning process of the SORFWNN, the error term to be propagated is calculated as:(59)δo(6)=−∂Ed∂yo(6)=−∂Ed∂edm⋅∂edm∂yo(6)=−∂Ed∂edm⋅∂edm∂d⋅∂d∂yo(6)The update law of ϖjis(60)Δϖj=−ηϖ∂Ed∂ϖj=−ηϖ∂Ed∂yo(6)∂yo(6)∂ϖj=ηϖδo(6)yj(5)The weights of the output layer (layer 6) are updated according to the following equation.(61)ϖj(N+1)=ϖj(N)+Δϖj(N)Layer 5:In this layer the error term needs to be calculated and propagated:(62)δj(5)=−∂Ed∂yj(5)=−∂Ed∂yo(6)⋅∂yo(6)∂yj(5)=δo(6)⋅ϖjThe update law of ωlis:(63)Δωl=−ηω∂Ed∂ωl=−ηω∂Ed∂yo(6)∂yo(6)∂yj(5)∂yj(5)∂yl∂yl∂ωl=ηωδj(5)yj(4)ΨlThe update law of blis:(64)Δbl=−ηb∂Ed∂bl=−ηb∂Ed∂yo(6)∂yo(6)∂yj(5)∂yj(5)∂yl∂yl∂Ψl∂Ψl∂ϑl∂ϑl∂bl=ηbδl1cilxi−bilcil3−xi−bilcil2exp−12xi−bilcil2=ηbδl1cil(3ϑil−ϑil2)exp(−ϑil2/2)whereϑil=xi−bilcil,δl=∂Ed∂yo(6)∂yo(6)∂yj(5)∂yj(5)∂yl∂yl∂ΨlThe update law of clis:(65)Δcl=−ηc∂Ed∂cl=−ηb∂Ed∂yo(6)∂yo(6)∂yj(5)∂yj(5)∂yl∂yl∂Ψl∂Ψl∂ϑl∂ϑl∂cl=ηcδlxi−bilcil23−xi−bilcil2exp−12xi−bilcil2=ηbδl(3ϑil2−ϑil4)exp(−ϑil2/2)The weights of the wavelet layer (layer 5) are updated according to the following equations.(66)ωl(N+1)=ωl(N)+Δωl(N)(67)bl(N+1)=bl(N)+Δbl(N)(68)cl(N+1)=cl(N)+Δcl(N)Layer 4:The error term is computed as follows(69)δj(4)=−∂Ed∂yj(4)=∂Ed∂yo(6)∂yo(6)∂yj(5)∂yj(5)∂yj(4)=δj(5)⋅ylThe update law of γjis:(70)Δγj=−ηγ∂Ed∂γj=−ηγ∂Ed∂yj(4)∂yj(4)∂Fj∂Fj∂hj∂hj∂γj=ηγδj(4)Fj(1−Fj)yj(4)(N−1)∏i=1nyj(3)(N)The weights of the recurrent layer (layer 4) are updated according to the following equation.(71)γj(N+1)=γj(N)+Δγj(N)Layer 3:The error term is computed as follows(72)δj(3)=−∂Ed∂yj(3)=∂Ed∂yj(4)∂yj(4)∂yj(3)=δj(4)⋅11+exp(−γjhj)⋅1∏inϖjk(3)yij(2)(N)Layer 2:The error term is computed as follows:(73)δij(2)=−∂Ed∂λAij=∂Ed∂yo(6)∂yo(6)∂yj(5)∂yj(5)∂yj(4)∂yj(4)∂yj(3)∂yj(3)∂λAij=δj3⋅ϖjk(3)The update laws of means are:(74)Δμij=−ημ∂Ed∂μij=−ημ∂Ed∂λAij∂λAij∂μij=ημδj2ϖjk32(xi2−μij)(σij)2Moreover, the update law of the standard deviation is:(75)Δσij=−ησ∂Ed∂σij=−ησ∂Ed∂λAij∂λAij∂σij=ησδj2ϖjk32(xi2−σij)2(σij)3The weights of the membership layer (layer 2) are updated according to the following equations.(76)μij(N+1)=μij(N)+Δμij(N)(77)σij(N+1)=σij(N)+Δσij(N)where ηϖ, ηγ, ηω, ηb, ηc, ημand ησare the learning-rate parameters of the connected weights and the link weights of the FWNN, feedback weights, and means and standard deviations of the membership functions of the SORFWNN, respectively and N denotes the iteration number of the jth link.The exact calculation of the Jacobian of the system(∂θr/∂yo(6))which is contained in (59),(∂Ed/∂yo(6)), cannot be determined due to the uncertainties of the two-axis motion control system dynamic, such as parameter variations, external load disturbances, cross-coupled interference and frictional torque. To overcome this problem and to increase the online learning rate of the network parameters, the delta adaptation law is adopted as follows:(78)δo(6)=edm+kdme˙dmwherekdmis a positive constant.In order to control the two-axis motion control system driven by PMLSM servo drives effectively, an intelligent adaptive tracking control system (IATCS) is proposed in this section. The configuration of the proposed IATCS using SORFWNN-based mixed H2/H∞ tracking performance is shown in Fig. 2. The control problem is to find a control law so that the actual motion d(t) can track the desired command motion dm(t). The proposed control scheme incorporates a mixed H2/H∞ controller, a SORFWNN controller and a robust controller. Since the parameter uncertainties of the two-axis motion control system are difficult to measure and the exact values of the external disturbances are also difficult to know in advance for practical applications, the ideal control law (80) cannot be implemented practically. Therefore, the SORFWNN controller is proposed to approximate the nonlinear function Θ, which contains the effects of parameter variations, external disturbances, the cross-coupled interference and the frictional force while the robust controller is used to compensate the approximation error of the SORFWNN controller, optimal parameter vectors and higher order terms in Taylor series. The effects on the tracking error,edm(t), due to the unknown nonlinear dynamic function Θ must be attenuated below a desired attenuation level ρ2, which is, the mixed H2/H∞ tracking performance is achieved. The design of the proposed IATCS as well as the stability analysis is introduced.The control problem is to find a control law so that the state d(t) can track the desired motion command dm(t). To achieve this control objective, a tracking error vector is defined as(79)E=[dm−dd˙m−d˙]T=[edme˙dm]Twhere dm(t) andd˙m(t)are the desired motion and velocity of the two-axis motion control system;edm(t)ande˙dm(t)denote the motion and velocity errors.Now, assuming that the parameters of the two-axis motion control system are well known, the external disturbance, cross-coupled interference and frictional force are measurable and the lumped parameter uncertainty being exactly known, an ideal controller can be designed as follows:(80)uIC(t)=Bn−1[d¨m(t)−And˙(t)−Γ(t)+k2e˙d(t)+k1ed(t)]=Bn−1[d¨m(t)−And˙(t)−Γ(t)+KE]whereK=[k1k2], in which k1 and k2 are positive constants. Substituting (23) into (19) yields(81)e¨dm(t)+k2e˙dm(t)+k1edm(t)=0In (81) if the control gains k2 and k1 are chosen to correspond to the coefficients of Hurwitz polynomial, it implies that tracking error will converge to zero when time tends to infinity, i.e. the two-axis motion control system states can track the desired trajectory asymptotically. However, in practical applications, the lumped uncertainty cannot be precisely known. Therefore, the ideal controller (IC) in (80) is unobtainable and cannot guarantee the performance specified by (81). Moreover, the stability of the two-axis motion control system may be destroyed. Therefore, to ensure the stability of the two-axis motion control system despite the existence of the uncertain dynamics, external load disturbance, cross-coupled interference and frictional force, an IATCS is proposed to mimic the ideal controller and to estimate the value of lumped parameter uncertainty of the two-axis motion control system online in the following section.In this section, the design of the SORFWNN-based H2/H∞ adaptive tracking control system is introduced. The SORFWNNC, which combines the merits of the self-organizing FNN, WNN and recurrent neural network, is proposed to approximate the nonlinear function Θ. The control objective is to ensure that the two-axis X–Y table system tracks desired trajectories despite of uncertainties exist in the dynamic model. To quantify the tracking objective, a filtered-tracking error function denoted by E(t) is defined asE(t)=e˙d(t)+k1ed(t)+k2∫ed(τ)dτ, where k1 and k2 are positive constants. From (19), (20) and the differentiation of filtered-tracking error function E(t), the tracking error dynamics can be expressed as(82)Bn−1E˙(t)=Bn−1AnE(t)−uIC(t)+Θ−Λ=Bn−1AnE(t)+(USORFWNNC(t)+URC(t)−Λ+uH(t))=Bn−1AnE(t)+(Θ+URC(t)−Λ−u(t))(83)Θ=Bn−1([d¨m(t)+k1e˙d(t)+k2ed(t)]−An[d˙m(t)+k1ed(t)+k2∫ed(τ)dτ]−Γ(t)+Λ)(84)uIC(t)=Θ−u(t)(85)u(t)=Bn−1E˙(t)−Bn−1AnE(t)From (83), the nonlinear function contains the effects of mechanical parameter variations, external disturbances, the cross-coupled interference and the frictional torque. Since the parameter variations of the two-axis motion control system are difficult to measure and the exact value of the external disturbances, cross-coupled interference and frictional torque are also difficult to know in advance for practical applications, the control law shown in (84) cannot implemented practically and the performance specified by (81) cannot guarantee. Moreover, to ensure the stability of the X–Y table system despite the existence of the uncertain dynamics, external disturbances, the cross-coupled interference and the frictional torque, an SORFWNN control system is proposed to approximate the nonlinear function Θ. Moreover the hybrid control law is designed as(86)Uqs(t)=Θˆ(x)−u(t)where the intelligent controller using SORFWNN,Θˆ(x), is used to learn the nonlinear function Θ and is defined as(87)Θˆ(x)=ΘˆSORFWNNC+URC(t)The control law is assumed to take the following form:(88)Uqs(t)=iqs*(t)=USORFWNNC(t)+URC(t)+uH(t)whereΘˆSORFWNNCis the SORFWNN controller, URC(t) is a robust controller and uH(t) is the mixed H2/H∞ tracking controller or the auxiliary controller. The intelligent controller is used to learn the nonlinear equation Θ due to the uncertain two-axis motion control system dynamics, the robust control URC(t) is designed to compensate for the difference between Θ andΘˆSORFWNNC, and uH(t) is designed based on the mixed H2/H∞ tracking performance to force the X–Y table system to follow the desired trajectory and to attenuate the external disturbances.The output of the SORWFNN controller can be rewritten as(89)ΘSORFWNNC=ΦTΩAccording to the universal approximation property [21,84], there exists an optimal SORFWNN controllerΘSORFWNNC*to learn the nonlinear function Θ such that(90)ΘSORFWNNC*(E,Φ*,μ*,σ*,b*,c*)+ε=Φ*TΩ*+εwhere ɛ is a minimum reconstructed error; and Φ*, μ* σ*, b* and c* are the optimal parameters of Φ, μ, σ, b and c, respectively, in the SORFWNN. Rewriting (89), we can obtain(91)ΘˆSORFWNNC(E,Φˆ,μˆ,σˆ,bˆ,cˆ)+URC=ΦˆTΩˆ+URCwhereΦˆ,μˆ,σˆ,bˆandcˆare the estimated values of the optimal parameters as provided by the tuning algorithms that will be introduced. Subtracting (91) from (90), the approximation error,Θ˜, is defined as:(92)Θ˜=Θ−Θˆ=Φ*TΩ*+ε−ΦˆTΩˆ−URC=Φ˜TΩ*+ΦˆTΩ˜+ε−URCwhereΦ˜=(Φ*−Φˆ)andΩ˜=(Ω*−Ωˆ). The weights of the SORFWNN are updated online to make its output approximate the unknown nonlinear function Θ accurately. To achieve this goal, the linearization technique is used to transform the nonlinear output of SORFWNN into partially linear form so that the Lyapunov theorem extension can be applied. The expansion ofΩ˜in Taylor series is obtained as follows:(93)Ω˜=Ω˜1Ω˜2⋮Ω˜j=∂Ω1∂μ∂Ω2∂μ⋮∂Ωj∂μTμ=μˆμ˜+∂Ω1∂σ∂Ω2∂σ⋮∂Ωj∂σTσ=σˆσ˜+∂Ω1∂b∂Ω2∂b⋮∂Ωj∂bTb=bˆb˜+∂Ω1∂c∂Ω2∂c⋮∂Ωj∂cTc=cˆc˜+GΘ≡ΩμTμ˜+ΩσTσ˜+ΩbTb˜+ΩcTc˜+GΘwhereΩμ=[(∂Ω1/∂μ)(∂Ω2/∂μ)⋯(∂Ωj/∂μ)]T|μ=μˆ,Ωσ=[(∂Ω1/∂σ)(∂Ω2/∂σ)⋯(∂Ωj/∂σ)]T|σ=σˆ,Ωb=[(∂Ω1/∂b)(∂Ω2/∂b)⋯(∂Ωj/∂b)]T|b=b˜,Ωc=[(∂Ω1/∂c)(∂Ω2/∂c)⋯(∂Ωj/∂c)]T|c=c˜,μ˜=(μ*−μˆ),σ˜=(σ*−σˆ),b˜=(b*−bˆ),c˜=(c*−cˆ)and GΘ is a vector of higher order terms and assumed to be pounded by a positive constant. Rewriting (90), it can be obtained that(94)Ω*=Ωˆ+ΩμTμ˜+ΩσTσ˜+ΩbTb˜+ΩcTc˜+GΘSubstituting (91) into (89) will yield(95)Θ˜=Φ*TΩ*+ε−ΦˆTΩˆ−URC=Φ*T[Ωˆ+ΩμTμ˜+ΩσTσ˜+ΩbTb˜+ΩcTc˜+GΘ]+ε−ΦˆTΩˆ−URC=Φ˜TΩˆ+ΦˆTΩμTμ˜+ΦˆTΩσTσ˜+ΦˆTΩbTb˜+ΦˆTΩcTc˜−URC+Ξwhere the uncertain termΞ=Φ˜TΩμTμ˜+Φ˜TΩσTσ˜+Φ˜TΩbTb˜+Φ˜TΩcTc˜+Φ*TGΘ+ε. According to (82), (85), (86), (92) and (95), the error dynamic equation can be represented as(96)Bn−1E˙(t)=Bn−1AnE(t)−Uqs(t)+Θ−Λ=Bn−1AnE(t)−Θˆ+u(t)+Θ−Λ=Bn−1AnE(t)+u(t)+Θ˜−Λ=Bn−1AnE(t)+u(t)−Λ+[Φ˜TΩˆ+ΦˆTΩμTμ˜+ΦˆTΩσTσ˜+ΦˆTΩbTb˜+ΦˆTΩcTc˜−URC+Ξ]The proposed design procedure is divided into three steps. The first is the SORFWNN controller to learn the uncertain dynamics, Θ, by adaptive algorithms that includes the uncertain dynamics, external load disturbance, the cross-coupled interference and the frictional force for the two-axis motion control system. The second is the robust controller to deal with the uncertainties, including the approximation error, optimal parameter vectors and higher order terms in Taylor series. The last is the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking controller to be specified such that the effects on the tracking error,edm(t), due to the unknown nonlinear dynamic function must be attenuated below a desired attenuation level ρ2. For the convenience of design, we take R2(t)=R(t) and R∞(t)=(3/2)R(t) throughout this paper. Then, we have the following results.Theorem 1Consider the two-axis motion control system represented by (19), the control input is chosen as (88), the intelligent control law is designed as (91), in which the adaptation laws of the SORFWNN controller are designed as (97)–(101), the robust controller is designed as (102) with the adaptive lumped uncertainty estimation algorithm given in (103) and the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking controller is designed as (104) and (105).(97)Φˆ˙=ηΦETP2BnΩˆT(98)μˆ˙=ημETP2BmΦˆTΩˆμT(99)σˆ˙=ησETP2BnΦˆTΩˆσT(100)bˆ˙=ηbETP2BnΦˆTΩˆbT(101)cˆ˙=ηcETP2BnΦˆTΩˆcT(102)UqsRC=Ξˆ(t)(103)Ξˆ˙(t)=ηΞ|ETP2Bn|(104)uH=R−1ETP2Bn(105)Λ=ρ−2ETP∞Bnwhere ηΦ, ημ, ησ, ηb, ηcand ηΞ are strictly positive learning rates, andΞˆ(t)is the on-line estimated value of the uncertainty term Ξ. R−1 is a positive constant, P2 and P∞ are symmetric positive definite solution of the following coupled nonlinear differential equations(106)P˙2(t)+P2(t)An+AnTP2(t)+Q2(t)−[P∞(t)BnP2(t)Bn]×0−1ρ2−1ρ2R−1(t)BnTP∞(t)BnTP2(t)=0(107)P˙∞(t)+P∞(t)An+AnTP∞(t)+Q∞(t)−[P∞(t)BnP2(t)Bn]×−1ρ2R−1(t)R−1(t)−32R−1(t)BnTP∞(t)BnTP2(t)=0with the constraintBnTP2(t)=BnTP∞(t)and the terminal conditions Q2=P2 and Q∞=P∞; then the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive control problem for the two-axis motion control system is solved by (88) and (97)–(105).See Appendix A.In addition to the performance, the stability is the most important issue in the two-axis motion control system design. The stability of the intelligent mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking control for the two-axis motion control system is stated as follows.Theorem 2Consider the two-axis motion control system represented by (19), if the control input is chosen as (88), the intelligent control law is designed as (91), in which the adaptation laws of the SORFWNN controller are designed as (97)–(101), the robust controller is designed as (102) with the adaptive lumped uncertainty estimation algorithm given in (103) and the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking controller is designed as (104) and (105) where P2(t) and P∞(t) are symmetric positive definite solutions of the coupled non-linear differential equations in (106) and (107) with the constraintBnTP2(t)=BnTP∞(t), then the tracking error E(t) and the estimation errorΘ˜in the error dynamic system (96) are all bounded. As a result, the stability of the IATCS can be guaranteed.See Appendix B.The design steps of the IATCS are summarized as follows:Step (1) Initialize the predefined parameters of SORFWNN,Step (2) Determine whether or not to add a new node by Dmax≤Dthcondition,Step (3) The learning algorithm for the SORFWNN model is given in Section 3.3. The details of the structure learning are given in (49)–(57) and (58)–(78) for parameter learning,Step (4) The tracking error and the derivative of the tracking error dynamics are given in (79) and (82), respectively,Step (5) The output of the SORFWNNC is given by,ΘˆSORFWNNC(E,Φˆ,μˆ,σˆ,bˆ,cˆ)+URC=ΦˆTΩˆ+URCwhereΦˆ,μˆ,σˆ,bˆandcˆare the estimated values of the optimal parameters as provided by the tuning algorithms and are given by (97)–(101), respectively,Step (6) The proposed IATCS control law is designed as (22), (88), the ideal controller is designed as (80), the intelligent control law is designed as (91), in which the adaptation laws of the SORFWNN controller are designed as (97)–(101), the robust controller is designed as (102) with the adaptive lumped uncertainty estimation algorithm given in (103) and the mixed H2/H∞ adaptive tracking controller is designed as (104) and (105),Step (7) Return to Step (2).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
