@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Consumer benefit creation in online group buying: The social capital and platform synergy effect and the mediating role of participation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Based on the SCT and systems theory, an explanatory theoretical model is proposed.The results integrate findings of cognitive science and system development research.OGB managers can leverage platform to enhance social capital and consumer benefits.Active participation mediates the effect of social capital on OGB consumer benefits.Synergic functionalities of platform can enhance the efficiency of OGB processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online group buying,Social capital,Active participation,Benefit creation,Platform synergy,Systems theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Drawing upon social capital theory and the platform synergy perspective from systems theory, this study develops an explanatory model to explain how social capital, platform synergy and active participation affect consumer benefits in an online group buying (OGB) context. Data gathered from OGB consumers through a large-scale online survey is used to test the hypotheses. The conceptual model was validated using the partial least squares (PLS) technique. The results show that (1) the consumer benefits created by engaging in OGB are contributed collectively by social capital (i.e., social interaction ties, trust, and value of sharing), active participation and platform synergy; (2) the social capital enhances consumer benefits by increasing consumers’ active participation; (3) the OGB platform synergy has a positive impact on social capital, active participation and consumer benefits. Our findings highlight the important role of active participation in mediating the effect of social capital and platform synergy on OGB consumer benefits. The results provide insights into (1) how OGB platform developers can provide synergic functionalities that are compatible to OGB activities to enhance consumers’ capabilities and the efficiency of OGB processes; (2) how OGB managers and initiators can leverage platform synergy to enhance social capital and the mediating role of OGB consumers’ active participation in exchange resources within the OGB community, thereby leading to effective consumer benefit creation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today, the booming e-commerce and network economy has driven rapid development in emerging business applications and created noteworthy market opportunities that are characterized by the elimination of time and spatial limits (Bharadwaj et al. 2013, Shiau and Luo 2012). Various new styles of e-commerce business models have significantly changed our daily lives. Numerous modern firms have transformed their business operation paradigm from brick-and-mortar to click-and-mortar because of the opportunities created by online business (Wu and Hisa 2008, Zott et al. 2011). Traditional consumption styles have also changed. Specifically, the popular trend in online group buying (OGB) has experienced significant growth in recent years. The OGB websites proffer a social commerce platform in which people with the same interests in buying particular types of products/services can interact to share information and knowledge and engage in social interactions (Jing and Xie 2011, Pentina et al. 2008, Song and Walden 2007). It is the nature of social commerce and the set of information and resources embedded within the specific interpersonal networks that sustain such OGB websites (Huang and Benyoucef 2013, Liang et al. 2012, Zhou et al. 2013a,b). This new type of web-based consumption has become popular with the emergence of OGB websites such as ihergo in Taiwan from 2007, Groupon in the US from 2008 and Juhuasuan in China from 2010.In recent years OGB has gained significant prominence all around the world. For instance, the OGB market leader, Groupon (i.e., http://www.groupon.com/), had more than 500 markets in 44 countries in North America, Europe, Asia and South America with 39.5million active customers in 2012 (Shiau and Chau 2013). According to Taiwan e-commerce YearBook 2013, the total transaction value of the OGB market is projected to reach NTD$ 1340billion (US$44.76million). This OGB market is expected to steadily grow by an annual average of 14–15% over the next three years. In China the transaction scale of its OGB market grew to RMB$ 21.6 (USD$ 3.58billion) billion with a growth rate of ten times from 2009 to 2011 (Qian and Su 2013). In addition, according to the China e-commerce market report 2013, the turnover of China’s OGB market grew to RMB$ 35.88billion (USD$ 5.94billion) and the number of Chinese OGB consumers reached 71.23million in 2013.OGB is becoming more popular and successful in today’s e-commerce environment (Edelman et al. 2011). Incentives for saving money are more likely to characterize the major concern of consumers’ engaging in OGB (Kauffman et al. 2010a,b). In such an OGB community, online consumers with the same interests and value perceptions actively interact and establish trust with each other as well as share the resources embedded within the social networks that facilitated by an IT platform can jointly create their benefits. For instance, the OGB platform can accumulate large volumes of consumers and empower consumers’ information processing capability to facilitate the efficiency of OGB processes. Thus, it is important to understand how the OGB platform facilitates integrated functionalities to help OGB consumers to take advantage of his/her own social networking resources and furthermore to share benefits with friends and aggregate buying power to gain better deals or large discounts through OGB. In addition, through the active engagement in OGB processes, consumers can thus enjoy hedonic shopping experiences and strengthen interpersonal connections (Tsai and Pai 2013, Wang and Chou 2014, Zhang et al. 2014, Zhu et al. 2010). Yet, given the rapid evolutionary e-commerce environments and complicated ties of social networks, the factors affecting consumers to actively engage in online buying groups are becoming a critical and multi-dimensional research topic. OGB is a new business model that has not been fully investigated. For instance, prior research focused mainly on issues regarding OGB shoppers’ behavioural intention (e.g., Cheng and Huang 2013, Shiau and Luo 2012, Tsai et al. 2011) and the functionality and usage of group buying systems (e.g., Tan et al. 2007, Wang and Chou 2014, Zhang et al. 2014) as well as the influences on consumers utilitarian and hedonic benefits (e.g., Chiu et al. 2014, Lim 2014a,b, Shiau and Wu 2013).OGB occurs in an online community where consumers with the same interests share information, resources and/or knowledge with each other via an OGB platform and exhort other consumers to participate to gain an expected price discount. In this context, social capital, active participation and information technology (IT) assets (e.g., OGB platform) are productive resources that play key roles in facilitating social interactions and OGB operations. However, there have been no studies that have systematically explored the impacts of social capital, active participation and platform synergy on consumer benefits including utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits. Although these critical factors are especially salient in the OGB context and crucial for OGB marketers seeking to create their own customers’ benefits, our focus is on elaborating our understanding of how these factors can facilitate consumer benefit creation. Two research objectives are proposed to examine (1) how consumers’ benefits are influenced collectively by OGB consumers’ social capital and active participation and platform synergy; (2) how consumers’ active participation mediates the positive effect of social capital and platform synergy on their benefits.Given our objectives, we draw on the social capital theory and the perspective of platform synergy from systems theory to develop an integrated model explaining OGB consumers’ benefit creation in the OGB platform. Our findings provide strong support for the integrated perspectives of social capital and systems theory in that social capital and platform synergy affect consumer benefits through OGB consumers’ agency through active participation. Greater social capital increases consumer benefits by enhancing active participation and that platform synergy has a partial mediation effect on consumer benefits via active participation. These findings have many implications for (1) how OGB platform developers can provide synergic functionalities that are compatible with OGB activities to enhance consumers’ capabilities and the efficiency of OGB processes. (2) How OGB managers and initiators can leverage platform synergy to enhance social capital and the mediating role of OGB consumers’ active participation in exchanging resources within OGB community, thereby leading to effective consumer benefit creation.Online group buying refers to a kind of social or collective online shopping community where products or service items can be purchased at a significantly reduced price contingent upon a critical mass to buy (Cheng et al. 2012, Klein and Bhagat 2010, Shiau and Luo 2012). The main idea of OGB is to recruit online consumers with the same interests to leverage their collective bargaining power to negotiate with sellers for a better product price. At the same time, sellers can also create leverage to diminish the cost of recruiting customers (Kauffman et al., 2010a,b, Li 2012, Wang et al. 2013). The greater the number of aggregated consumers interested in a product, the stronger the bargaining power of an OGB group with sellers. Consequently, OGB enables sellers to reduce costs to attract consumers and enables consumers to purchase desired products more cheaply. The OGB business model characterizes a novel e-commerce shopping paradigm, where consumers can obtain products or services at a very low price due to demand aggregation and sellers can magnify their customer base and promote total sales performance.The types of OGB processes can be either marketer-initiated or consumer-initiated transactions (Klein and Bhagat 2010, Sharma et al. 2008). In a marketer-initiated OGB context (e.g., Groupon), consumers are collectively engaging in a marketing exchange on the OGB platform which would provide each with a substantial discount on a per capita basis than obtainable individually from the same or other sellers. For example, sellers may provide substantial quantity discount rates for a product on its website exhorting consumers to aggregate a short-term voluntary buying group. If the number of consumers reaches or exceeds a pre-determined critical mass, all members of the buying group get the product at a superior price (Klein and Bhagat 2010). On the other hand, in a consumer-initiated OGB site (e.g., ihergo-Taiwan), the transaction processes are originated by the consumers’ self-organizing to increase value for themselves in the marketing transaction (Bhagat et al. 2009). Consumers actively share information, resources and/or knowledge with each other via the social networking sites or collaborative online shopping tools provided by the platform (e.g., member blog, chat room, OGB bulletin board, discussion forum, etc.) and exhort other consumers to participate to gain an expected price discount (Zhu et al. 2010).Take the ihergo-Taiwan (hereafter ihergo) as an example. It provides a well-established consumer-initiated platform for OGB and has more than eight thousand tribes (i.e., a collective buying group). Each tribe consists of one initiator and members. Among these tribes, 108 tribes had more than 1000 tribe members and the biggest tribe had 7153 tribe members in 2012. A tribe initiator can search for a good product, bargain with sellers to get a good price rate from sellers based on the quantity and call for OGB to recruit like-minded consumers. As for a tribe member, he or she can browse or search the discount information on the ihergo platform or even tribe webpages to find other consumers with the same interests and needs for specific products. More frequently in some cases, while deciding to participate in a specific tribe, a tribe member might also act as an agent to help his/her friends, colleagues, or family to order or buy products in the tribe. The ihergo platform provides overarching interested merchandise information and the targeted amounts on its popular product or tribe webpages, but also facilitates social interaction and information sharing (e.g., buying comments, opinions and experiences) through the synergic functionalities of tribe forums, chat rooms, bulletin boards and rating systems. An OGB consumer can take advantage of his/her own social networking ties to share the benefit with friends and aggregate buying power to gain a good deal or big discounts through joining some tribes. Through the active engagement in such buying group, OGB consumers can thus satisfy their own buying needs, enjoy online shopping and strengthen interpersonal connections.The social capital theory states that social capital, the relationship network possessed by an individual or a social network and the set of resources embedded within it strongly influenced the behaviour of interpersonal resource exchange and combination (Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998). The concept of social capital was originally used to describe the relational resources, embedded in social interaction ties that are helpful for an individual’s development in a social network. Other research has a broader definition of social capital, including social relationships and also the norms and values associated with them (Coleman 1990, Tsai and Ghoshal 1998, Adler and Kwon 2002). For instance, Coleman (1990) indicated that certain values collectively held in a society can be a kind of social capital that benefits the society as a whole. While having a network of individuals is a critical part in developing social capital, equally important are the interpersonal dynamics between individuals in the network. It is the interactions that occur between individuals in the network that lead to the formation of social capital. Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) defined social capital as the sum of the actual and potential resources embedded within, available through and derived from the network of relationships possessed by a social unit. Prior research also conceptualized social capital as a set of social resources embedded in relationships (Chiu et al. 2006). Adler and Kwon (2002) integrated prior theoretical work from various disciplinary domains and proposed a conceptual model of social capital that includes the sources, benefits, risks and contingencies to clarify the concept of social capital and help assess its utility for social science disciplines.Drawing on a comprehensive review of prior literature on social capital, Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) called these different aspects of social context the structural, the relational, and the cognitive dimensions of social capital. Extending Nahapiet and Ghoshal’s work, Tsai and Ghoshal (1998) further elaborated that the structural dimension of social capital includes social interaction ties. The relational dimension refers to the assets that are rooted in interpersonal relationships, such as trust. Trust is a relationship attribute that can act as a governance mechanism for embedded relationships. The cognitive dimension is embodied in the attributes like a shared value or vision that facilitates a common understanding of collective goals and proper ways of acting in a social system (Casaló et al. 2011, Kim and Park 2013). Through close social interactions, trustworthy interpersonal connections and common value perceptions, individuals are able to increase the depth, breadth and efficiency of shared resources exchange and combinations to create mutual benefits (Kuan et al. 2014, Zhou et al. 2013a,b).OGB communities are a kind of online social community in which online consumers, with the same interests and value perceptions, can interact and establish trust with each other as well as share the resources embedded within the social networks that sustain the existence of specific Internet communities. Thus, the social capital concept proposed by Tsai and Ghoshal (1998) and Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) can be well applied in our research context. Adopting the perspective of Tsai and Ghoshal (1998), in our research context (i.e., an OGB environment), social capital is conceptualized and operationally defined as the aggregate of the actual or potential relational resources embedded within, available through and derived from the network of relationships possessed by an OGB community. It can be characterized as three distinct dimensions: structural, relational and cognitive dimensions. Social interaction ties, the structural dimension of social capital, is defined as the strength of the relationships, the amount of time spent interacting and communication frequency among OGB consumers. Trust, the relational dimension of social capital, is defined as an OGB consumer’s expectation that members in the OGB sites will follow a generally accepted set of values, norms and principles. Value of sharing, the cognitive dimension of social capital, is defined as OGB consumers having a common understanding of value perception in buying products at discounted prices, discovering new products, and developing new relationships, within OGB communities. Such a common value perception can help one to form, define and elaborate on common preferences, tastes and values. In the OGB context it may facilitate an OGB consumer to interact with others to obtain access to social resources and facilitate the attainment of one’s future goals. The construct of social capital adopts dimensions represented by Tsai and Ghoshal (1998) as causally or community process related, but employs them for a different purpose (Gable et al. 2008). The three crucial dimensions (i.e., social interaction ties, trust and value of sharing in this study) featuring distinct characteristics of social capital need not be theoretically interchangeable and are not necessarily covariant with each other (Jarvis et al. 2003, Petter et al. 2007). They are used to describe the multidimensional nature of social capital (see Fig. 1). Accordingly, in considering the completeness, mutual exclusivity and necessity of the three dimensions of social capital, we modelled social capital as a formative second-order construct formed by a set of three first-order sub-constructs (i.e., social interaction ties, trust and value of sharing) with reflective measurements. The three sub-constructs formatively contribute to a higher-order social capital construct, which can more parsimoniously explain their joint effects.Extending and elaborating Nahapiet and Ghoshal’s framework, Tsai and Ghoshal (1998) empirically justified how social capital facilitates resource exchange and combination and in turn facilitates product innovation within the organization. The resource exchange and combination, in this study, is considered more specifically for the OGB context as the online consumers’ active participation such as being active in searching for information on products/services, purchasing products/services, and exchanging the information, comments, opinions or experiences. OGB consumers may develop a friendship network with other consumers and help other consumers solve the related problems regarding product services in OGB communities (Tsai and Pai 2013). Drawing upon the prior literature, we defined active participation as positive behaviours (e.g., actively searching for and exchanging information, developing friendships and frequently purchasing products) for resources exchange and relational assets combination performed by OGB consumers while participating in OGB activities.In an OGB context, social interaction ties weave intensive and complicated channels for information and resource flows. Tsai and Pai (2013) indicated that active participating behaviours are most likely triggered when an individual experiences a generalized mood state characterized by positive social interactions. Through social interactions an OGB consumer can gain access to other consumers’ resources via the OGB site. Such access allows OGB consumers to go across various sorts of channels and resources embedded in the OGB sites to find what they truly need. OGB consumers then have more opportunity to actively participate in exchanging information and resources in OGB with others.Trust has been viewed as a critical antecedent of cooperation in the organizational context. Prior literature has pointed out that trust is a type of expectation that alleviates the fear that one’s exchange partner will act opportunistically (Gulati 1995; Tsai and Ghoshal 1998). Thus, when two OGB consumers trust each other, they become more willing to share their resources without worrying that they will be taken advantage of by the other party. This implies that cooperative exchange or combination of resources, among OGB consumers, may emerge when trust exists (Awad and Ragowsky 2008, Chiu et al. 2012, Pentina et al. 2008). As trusting relationships develop inside a network, OGB consumers build up mutual trust that may become important information for other OGB consumers in the network (Kim et al. 2008, Flanagin et al. 2014). Hence, higher levels of trust may result in higher levels of active participation in information and resources exchange in OGB with others.Value of sharing can act as an important social assimilation mechanism expediting consumers’ active participation behaviours, particularly in an OGB environment (Tsai and Pai 2013). Since OGB consumers have the same value perception about how to interact with each other, they can avoid possible misunderstandings in their communications and have more opportunities to easily communicate their ideas or exchange resources (Chan and Li 2010). Value of sharing can then encourage online consumers to become actively involved in supportive activities such as contributing information and interpersonal resources to other tribe members, promoting the OGB community for recruiting potential buyers and entailing active involvement in the OGB tribe or platform self-management. In addition, the common values or interests they share help them to see the potential benefits of their active participation (Tsai and Pai 2013). As a result, OGB consumers who share the same values will be more likely to become active partners participating in sharing their resources with OGB.Standing at the core of social capital theory is that interpersonal relationships in a social network can be the creative resources of social capital. Such a capital facilitates coordination and cooperation for mutual benefits (Coleman 1990, Putnam 2000). The theory has helped to advance our understanding of the structure and usefulness of social capital. However, our knowledge is still lacking regarding how such a capital influences consumer benefits in the OGB context. We argue that social capital, regardless of how strong, will have no effect on the consumer benefits without affecting the behaviour of human agents within the OGB community. Thus, we apply a human agency perspective and posit that online consumers are the primary human agents that translate social capital into actions such as participating in resource exchange and combination. This agency then affects consumer benefits. Our theoretical framework is grounded in the position that social capital affects consumer benefits after being mediated by the active participation of agents in OGB activities such as resource exchange and combination. This leads to the following hypothesis.H1Social capital is positively associated with OGB consumers’ active participation.In an online shopping environment consumer attitude may simultaneously contain both utilitarian and hedonic components (Chiu et al. 2014, Lim 2014a,b, Sarkar 2011, Su et al. 2013). Generally, online consumers with hedonic attitude may pay more attention to pleasure, fun and feeling, and relaxation on enjoying the fun, entertainment and delighted experience in the online shopping process, while the others with utilitarian attitude may emphasize the practical benefits, utilities and functions brought by online consumption (Shiau and Wu 2013, Voss et al. 2003). However, from the OGB consumers’ perspective, OGB deals are likely to be perceived differently from other types of online shopping because of the aspect of social interaction and pre-payment for the deal, increasing consumer’s commitment to explore the business’s offerings and willing to create a new relationship or enhance the relationship with their friends via the OGB (Jing and Xie 2011, Kim et al. 2011, Song and Walden 2007). Consequently, in addition to aforementioned utilitarian and hedonic concerns we add interpersonal factor to the OGB consumers’ benefits derived from OGB.In this study, utilitarian benefit is defined as online consumers’ benefits created by accomplishing some pre-determined instrumental purposes through active participation in an OGB community. Hedonic benefit refers to the exploratory benefits derived from fun and relaxation through playing or otherwise interacting with others. Studies have shown that many participants do so for entertainment through exploring different fictional identities (Hsieh and Lin 2012, Kauffman et al. 2010a,b). Interpersonal benefit is defined as the social benefits generated by establishing and maintaining contact with other people such as social support, friendship and intimacy by gaining acceptance and approval of other members, and the enhancement of one’s social status within the community on account of one’s contributions to it (Liang et al. 2012). Consequently, consumer benefit is operationalized as a second-order factor with three dimensions including utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits. The joint effect of the influential sources represents a coherent depiction of the multidimensional nature of OGB consumers’ benefits. Given the formative causality from synergy among the three different dimensions of consumer benefit, the un-interchangeable features are defining specific characteristics and employing different facets of OGB consumers’ benefits (Petter et al. 2007). Hence, based on the decision rules proposed by Jarvis et al. (2003), we modelled consumer benefit as a formative second-order construct formed by a set of three first-order sub-constructs (i.e., utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits) with reflective indicators.Several researchers have claimed that value creation requires diverse resource inputs and combinative capabilities (e.g., Adler and Kwon 2002, Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2013, Stephen and Toubia 2010, Tsai and Ghoshal 1998, Ulrich 2013). Therefore, the active participation in exchanging and combining resources that facilitates benefit creation within an OGB may serve as a driving force for consumer benefit creation. That is, to create consumer benefits, consumers need to actively participate in OGB activities to exchange resources, combine new resources, or combine existing resources in a new way (Zhang et al. 2014). For instance, if OGB consumers actively participate in gaining access to other members’ resources (e.g., product information, use experience, seller’s reputation, and so forth) via the OGB sites, such access allows OGB consumers to go across various sorts of channels and resources to find what they truly need. Therefore, the higher the level of active participation by OGB consumers, the better opportunity they have to acquire products/services information, resolve uncertainties regarding products/services buying and obtain merchandises at low prices or great discounts through the OGB platform.The more an OGB consumer perceives a deal has high monetary value relative to the price paid, the more pleasure the consumer will associate with that deal (Tuten and Ashley 2011, Wei et al. 2011). Actively participating in OGB gives consumers a hedonic experience, allowing them to enjoy pleasant and relaxed emotions from group buying. When bored, they can pass the time away from group buying with the enthusiasm of “window shopping”. In an OGB platform sellers may offer a good deal (e.g., low price) with a critical mass to buy (Lim 2014a,b, Cheng et al. 2012). Such opportunities attract OGB consumers to communicate with others about the deal through their social networks, thereby facilitating members keeping in touch with or developing friendships while obtaining sufficient social support or help from other members. Consumers may also make use of the collective shopping deal to share their ideas, opinions, suggestions and experiences with members in their social networks (Cheng et al. 2012, Liang et al. 2012). Actively participating in these resources exchanges leads to increasing interpersonal benefits. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that the active participation of resource exchange and combination among OGB consumers is associated with OGB consumer benefits. Hence, we proposed:H2Active participation is positively associated with consumer benefits.OGB takes place in a virtual community via an IT-enabled social commerce platform. Using mass media communication or interpersonal communication during different periods of the OGB process, such platforms are designed to connect businesses with consumers in new ways that enable businesses to develop interactive relationships with and among online consumers (Tsai et al. 2011, Yu 2014, Zhou et al. 2013a,b). The OGB platforms should feature a strong community-orientation based primarily on interpersonal conversation, interaction and collaboration among online consumers. Through open discussion forums, user-generated content creation, product ratings, reviews and recommendations and various forms of user participation and coordination, the platform can also facilitate consumer benefit creation activities (Lang and Li 2013, Pelaez et al. 2013, Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2013, Zhu 2004).As discussed above, this suggests that the goals of a platform should help the consumer resources (e.g., social capital) and positive behaviours (e.g., active participation) achieve OGB members’ tasks or goals. That is when the relationships between humans (e.g., social capital and active participation) and technologies (e.g., platform) are compatible (i.e., are considered positive or beneficial), these will result in positive outcomes (i.e., synergy), and are more likely to achieve members’ tasks or goals (Nevo and Wade 2010). In an OGB context, systems theory is silent on the consumer benefits that may be ascribed to the synergy between consumers and platform functionalities. We term it platform synergy and argue for the establishment of a link between the concept in systems theory of synergy and the social capital, active participation and consumer benefits concepts. Our theoretical framework is grounded in the proposition that platform synergy facilitates social capital, active participation and consumer benefits.Drawing on the synergy perspective from Nevo and Wade’s (2010, 2011) unified model, we define platform synergy as the synergistic relationships between OGB consumers and their OGB platform (i.e., the positive emergent capabilities). These capabilities would make IT-enabled resources more likely to achieve its OGB consumers’ tasks or goals. For instance, if an OGB platform is compatible with online consumers’ levels of past experiences, cultural norms and expected group buying routines, they would perceive the platform as easy to use and interact with other members. The existence of a positive relationship between OGB consumers and the OGB platform facilitates the synergy between the online and physical channels and also empowers OGB consumers’ capability to increase their efficiency in interacting with each other. This induces OGB consumers to maintain frequent and close social relationships with some members, facilitates OGB consumers in knowing one another, allowing them to share important information and create a common point of view (Cheng and Huang 2013, Grange and Benbasat 2013, Preece and Shneiderman 2009, Wang and Chou 2014). Thus, we propose:H3aPlatform synergy is positively associated with social capital among OGB consumers.As mentioned above, platform synergy provides OGB consumers with needed functionalities (e.g., discounted product catalogue, chat room, message board, discussion forum, search and comparison engine, etc.) that empower OGB consumers to participate in OGB, increase their efficiency and enable them to adapt more quickly to changes in OGB (Nevo and Wade 2010, 2011; Yu 2014, Zhang et al. 2014). These capabilities can facilitate OGB consumers easily gaining access to other consumers’ or sellers’ resources, actively participating in exchanging information and resources or developing affective friendships with others, in addition to purchasing products/services on the OGB platform. It is reasonable, therefore, to expect that a more synergistic platform is more likely to facilitate consumer active participation in the OGB context. Accordingly, we propose.H3bPlatform synergy is positively associated with OGB consumers’ active participation.Next we suggest that a synergistic relationship between OGB consumers and the OGB platform can have a positive effect on consumer benefits. The OGB platform is used to connect buyers and sellers through price and discovery, create stakeholder value by increasing efficiency in their value chains, delivering new customer benefits and expanding the market base. Following the same rationale, if the platform synergy provides OGB consumers with needed functionalities to empower OGB consumers to participate in OGB and increase their efficiency, these capabilities could facilitate OGB consumers easily gaining access to other consumers’ or sellers’ resources, searching for products/services information, resolving uncertainties/doubts regarding products/services and easily purchasing products/services on the OGB platform (Grange and Benbasat 2013, Nevo and Wade 2010, 2011; Zhang et al. 2014). Similarly, this facilitates OGB consumers in communicating with others about the deal through their social networks, thereby facilitating members in keeping in touch with or developing friendships with and obtaining sufficient social support or help from other members. These capabilities also provide better opportunities for the OGB consumer to get low price products and satisfy their curiosity about the products in the deal, enjoy a good information flow experience in the OGB activities, thereby, facilitating a hedonistic experience. It is therefore reasonable to expect that a more synergistic platform is more likely to facilitate OGB consumers in gaining consumer benefits. Based upon the above discussion we predicted the following hypothesis.H3cPlatform synergy is positively associated with consumer benefits.The mere combination of the actual or potential relational resources embedded within the network of relationships possessed by an OGB community does not guarantee higher benefit creation. There must be some intervening factors that affect OGB consumers’ benefits, such as active participation, to make the linkage between social capital and consumer benefits more feasible. In our study consumers’ active participation is treated as a mediator affecting consumer benefits. Tsai and Ghoshal’s (1998) model and empirical results also implied that inter-unit resource exchange and combination mediated the influence of social capital on benefit creation. While social capital itself can not directly create value unless it actually facilitates OGB consumers actively participating in the resource exchange and combination process and making deals in OGB activities (Zhang et al. 2014). It is reasonable, therefore, to expect that the influence of social capital on OGB consumers’ benefit creation may be mediated by their active participation in OGB.Similarly, other studies have shown that IT assets have the potential to facilitate benefit creation (Grange and Benbasat 2013, Lang and Li 2013, Nevo and Wade 2010, 2011; Yu 2014). However, in an OGB context, people (i.e., OGB consumers) play a major role in benefit co-creation because they need to participate in OGB processes to interact with other members to exchange resources and consequently to purchase the products (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2013, Wang and Zhang 2012). Although platform synergy can facilitate OGB consumers’ benefit creation, this effect will be amplified by enhancing members’ active participation.We argue that social capital and platform synergy, regardless how strong, may have no substantial effects on consumer benefit creation without affecting the behaviour of OGB consumers. Instead their effects on benefit creation are realized by the OGB consumers’ active participation in resource exchange and combination within the OGB context. Thus, the following hypotheses are proposed.H4aActive participation mediates the positive effect of social capital on consumer benefits.Active participation mediates the positive effect of platform synergy on consumer benefits.Based upon social capital theory and the platform synergy perspective from systems theory, this study develops an explanatory model and a set of hypotheses related to OGB as shown in Fig. 1. Social capital theory and Tsai and Ghoshal’s (1998) suggest a path-dependent process whereby social capital influences resource exchange and combination, in turn to influence consumer benefit creation. We draw on the synergy from systems theory perspective to identify platform synergy in the OGB context to represent the relationships between humans and their technologies that result in positive outcomes such as increased online consumers’ benefits in which information technologies extend the capabilities, efficiency and effectiveness of human interaction and information processing. We theorize that greater social capital increases OGB consumer benefits by enhancing active participation to exchange resources and these processes are facilitated by platform synergy in the OGB context.The first stage in this study is to construct a conceptual framework and develop the measures. We began the scale development process by surveying the extant literature for validated scales that could be used in our study. Although we did not find complete scales that were suitable for this study, we were able to identify several items and scale fragments. We included these in the initial pool of items. Since insufficient coverage of the construct domain was deemed an issue, some new items were self-developed based on the definitions provided by the prior literature. The majority of the scale items were adopted from prior works in information systems (IS) literature but modified slightly for the OGB context. Those social capital items were adapted from Chiu et al. (2006), Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) and Tsai and Ghoshal (1998). The measures for OGB consumers’ active participation were adapted from Gensollen (2007), Tsai and Pai (2013) and Zhang et al. (2010). The measures for platform synergy were taken from Nevo and Wade (2010, 2011). The measures for consumer benefits were modified from Chiu et al. (2014), Lim (2014a,b), Mimouni-Chaabane and Volle (2010), Shiau and Wu (2013) and other prior work. The operationalized definitions of the research constructs/sub-constructs and the referred literature are summarized in Appendix A.Once the initial list of measurement items was generated an iterative interview process involving personal interviews with a small group of experts, including three external academics, the CEO and two executive managers of ihergo and two experienced OGB tribe members was applied to refine the item list. The interviews were taped and reviewed by researchers to further improve the data collection quality. These interviews allowed the researchers to gauge the clarity of the scale items presented, assess whether the items list effectively captured the desired phenomenon and ensure that the salient concepts of the major constructs in our research model were not omitted. This iterative process continued for more than eight rounds until no further modifications to the measurement items were necessary. Feedback from the interview processes served as the basis for correcting, refining and enhancing the experimental scales. Scale items were eliminated if they represented the same aspects with only slightly different wording and modified if the semantics were ambiguous in order to enhance the psychometric properties of the survey instrument.After completing the construct development and related scale items several small-scale pre-tests (including personal interviews) were conducted with a group of twelve panellists to ensure the completeness and appropriateness of the scale items developed. There are two formative second-order constructs (i.e., social capital and OGB consumer benefits) with six reflective first-order factors (i.e., social interaction ties, trust and value of sharing for social capital as well as utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits for consumer benefits) included in our research model. The goal is to have a smaller number of items per construct while maintaining sufficient measurement properties. The basic qualitative criterion concerning construct validity and content validity can then be assured in this stage. Content validity implies that the instrument considers all aspects of the construct being measured. This should be determined by specifying the construct domain, generating items that exhaust the domain and subsequently purifying the resulting scale to produce a measure that is content or face valid and reliable. All measures developed in this study were reviewed by the panel of twelve academic and practical experts to ensure content validity through the content validity ratios calculation on each scale item.The method for calculating the content validity ratios (CVR), developed by Lawshe (1975) is described by the formula: CVR=(ne−N/2)/(N/2); where CVR is the content validity ratio, ne is the number of panellists indicating essential about a specific question and N is the total number of panellists. The CVR of each scale item was calculated as a means of quantifying the degree of consensus in the above-mentioned twelve panellists, who made judgments about the instrument’s content validity. Each expert was asked to judge whether or not the 40 questions in the initial instrument list were indeed essential in measuring the constructs included in our conceptual framework. According to Lawshe’s criteria for CVR (Lawshe 1975), the minimum CVR value of 0.56 needs to be met for statistical significance (p<0.05). The feedback from the pilot respondents resulted in minor modifications to the wording of 31 survey items, and an endorsement of the model, instrument completeness and item association with dimensions.The final questionnaire for the study consisted of two parts, one including participants’ demographic data and the other their responses to the scale items. The participants’ basic information included gender, age, monthly income, experience, frequency and average monthly amount spent on OGB. The second part contained the scale items for the major constructs of the proposed research model. See Table 2 for a final list of questionnaire items. All items were measured using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). We provided a clear definition of online group buying at the beginning of the questionnaire to ensure that the respondents would have the same understanding of the OGB context.The proposed research model was tested with data collected from mysurvey website (http://ae.mysurvey.com/?loc=en_GB) and members of one group-buying site called ihergo. The ihergo website is a well-known group-buying virtual community in Taiwan. A banner with a hyperlink connecting to our Web survey was posted on the ihergo homepage, the most popular OGB site in Taiwan. From January 11 to February 10, 2014 members of the ihergo with group buying experience were cordially invited to support this survey. Fifty randomly selected respondents were offered an incentive in the form of cash amounting to NTD$1000. The first page of the questionnaire explained the purpose of this study and ensured the confidentiality. By the time this survey was concluded, 1200 questionnaires were collected. An attention check question (i.e., SV5. OGB members do not have the same expectation to get a good product at a reasonable price shown in Appendix C) was included in the survey questionnaire to examine if the participants paid attention to the survey questions to ensure the quality of the data. After a strict screening and examining procedure, 537 participants who did not pass the attention check question or gave incomplete answers were excluded. This left us with 663 valid questionnaires (valid-return rate=55.25%) for further data analysis. The profile of the respondents is shown in Table 1.Structural equation modelling (SEM) techniques such as LISREL, AMOS, EQS and partial least squares (PLS) are second generation data analysis techniques that can be used to perform path analytic modelling with latent variables and test the extent to which IS research meets recognized standards for high quality statistical analysis (Chin 1998, Gefen et al. 2000). Because of the greater flexibility that a researcher has for the interplay between theory and empirical data, SEM-based procedures have substantial advantages over first-generation techniques such as principal components analysis, exploratory factor analysis, discriminant analysis, or multiple regression. Such techniques offer social scientists with the flexibility to model nomological relationships among multiple predictor and criterion variables, construct unobservable latent variables, model errors in measurements for observed variables and statistically validate a priori theoretical assumptions against empirical data (Chin 1998). The application of certain constraints or assumptions on an SEM-based analysis would then yield a first-generation analysis with correspondingly less flexibility in modelling theory with data. Partial least squares (PLS) were used to assess the measurement model and then test the hypothesized structural model regarding its ability to handle formative constructs and highly complex predictive models.We chose this approach because PLS’s ability to assess the measurement model within the context of its theoretical mediated model makes it superior to multiple regression, especially when using new scales. PLS employs component-based estimation (Lohmöller 1989), thereby maximizing the variance explained in the dependent variable. It does not require the data to have multivariate normality (Gefen et al. 2011) and it can handle formative constructs. Furthermore, it imposes fewer requirements on the sample size, unlike other structural equation modelling (SEM) methods, which is recommended for confirmatory analysis and requires a more stringent adherence to distributional assumptions (Chin 1998). In general, PLS is better suited for explaining complex relationships as it avoids two serious problems: inadmissible solutions and factor indeterminacy. Because of the aforementioned reasons, SmartPLS 2.0 M3 (Ringle et al. 2005) was applied to the data analysis.The two-stage approach was applied to estimate moderating effects, particularly when the formative second-order constructs (i.e., social capital and consumer benefits) with the reflective first-order factors (i.e., social interaction ties, trust and value of sharing for social capital as well as utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits for consumer benefits) were involved in this study. The model fit was also evaluated using a two-phase approach, i.e., a measurement model and a structural model. In the measurement model the psychometric properties of all scales were first assessed through a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). This step was used to assess the reliability and validity of the measurement model and to test whether the empirical data conformed to the presumed model. Then, a bootstrapping procedure was used to estimate the statistical significance of the parameter estimates for path coefficients of the structural model.As mentioned above the research model (see Fig. 1) to be tested in this study is a second-order factor model with reflective indicators for the first-order factors and three formative dimensions for each of the two second-order factors. Specifically, all of the six first-order sub-constructs (i.e., social interaction ties, trust and value of sharing for social capital as well as utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits for consumer benefits) were modelled as reflective and the second-order constructs (i.e., social capital and consumer benefits) were modelled as formative. The measurement model relating the scale items to their latent constructs was analyzed using SmartPLS 2.0 M3 (Ringle et al. 2005). The assessment of item loadings, reliability, convergent validity and discriminant validity was performed for the latent constructs through CFA. Reflective items should be unidimensional in their representation of the latent variables and therefore correlated with each other. Factor loadings of scale items should be above 0.707, showing that over half of the variance is captured by the constructs (Straub et al. 2004). All constructs in the measurement model should exhibit good internal consistency as evidenced by their composite reliability scores. The composite reliability coefficients of all constructs and the AVE in the proposed conceptual framework were also checked for adequacy. As shown in Table 2, the loadings for all constructs with reflective measures were well above the 0.707 guideline and statistically significant at the 0.001 level, indicating satisfactory item reliability for the reflective measures (Chin 1998). These results collectively suggest good measurement properties for all constructs. The factor loadings and cross-loadings among scale items are listed in Appendix B.Table 3shows the composite reliability, Cronbach’s alpha reliability average variance extracted (AVE) and square root of the AVE, as well as the correlations between the constructs. The composite reliability values for all constructs were above the recommended level of 0.70, indicating adequate internal consistency. All constructs shared more variance with their indicators than with other constructs. Thus, the convergent and discriminant validity of all constructs in the proposed research model can be assured. However, some of the coefficients were relatively high among the first-order dimensions in the tested second-order factor model, so the tolerance values and variance inflation factor (VIF) values were further computed to test for any possible problems with multi-collinearity. Following the guidelines of (Diamantopoulos and Siguaw 2006) and (Diamantopoulos and Winklhofer 2001), we further examine multi-collinearity among the first-order dimensions. Formative higher-order model are essentially based in regression of the formative construct against its lower-level dimensions (or indicators). Namely, the stability of the coefficients of the lower-level dimensions can be affected by the strength of the dimension inter-correlations. Thus, excessive collinearity among dimensions makes it difficult to discriminate the specific impact of the individual dimensions on the formative construct (Bollen 1989). In addition, if a dimension is a linear combination of other dimensions, it would imply that the dimension is redundant (in the context of the formative construct) and should therefore in the interests of parsimony be excluded from the construct.A VIF value greater than 4.0 may indicate problems with multi-collinearity, while a VIF value greater than 10.0 indicates serious problems with multi-collinearity. The resultant VIF values (i.e., between 1.3 and 1.91) were far below the common cut-off threshold of 10 (Diamantopoulos and Winklhofer 2001), and the tolerance values (i.e., between 0.53 and 0.78) were also greater than 0.2 (Hair et al. 2009). The results illustrate that all of the constructs are acceptable and that multi-collinearity is not an issue for the study.The path coefficients and explained variances for the conceptual model in this study are shown in Fig. 2. A bootstrapping procedure with replacement using 500 subsamples was used to estimate the statistical significance of the parameter estimates. The structural model was examined and the effects among those latent constructs were also tested. A test of the structural model was used to assess if the causal relationships specified by the research model were consistent with the available data. The PLS method does not directly provide significance tests and path coefficient confidence interval estimates in the proposed model. Hypotheses and corollaries testing were performed by examining the size, the sign and the significance of the path coefficients and the weights of the construct dimensions, respectively. The statistical significance of weights can be used to determine the relative importance of the indicators in forming a latent construct.Fig. 2 shows the direct and indirect effects from all of the antecedents in the conceptual framework, accounting for 55 percent of the variance in OGB consumers’ benefits. Correspondingly, 53 percent of the variance in active participation and 38 percent of the variance in social capital were explained by the related antecedent constructs. The magnitude and significance of these path coefficients provides further evidence in support of the nomological validity of the research model. As a whole the research model has strong explanatory power for the consumers’ benefit creation construct in OGB. The causal relationship from social capital to active participation in the proposed research model, hypothesis H1, is strongly supported by the significant path coefficient of 0.61. This result implies that consumers who perceived higher levels of social capital will participate more actively in the OGB environment. Hypothesis H2, effectively drawn from active participation to OGB consumer benefits, is also supported with significant path coefficients of 0.26. The direct effect drawn from social capital to OGB consumers’ benefits is also confirmed by the significant path coefficient of 0.27. That is, the social capital construct apparently directly influences consumer benefits resulting from active participation in the OGB environment.Consistent with our hypotheses, with significant path coefficients of 0.62, 0.17 and 0.32, the analysis results also provide support for hypotheses H3a, H3b and H3c, effectively drawn from the platform synergy to social capital, active participation and OGB consumer benefits constructs, respectively. That is, consumers’ perceptions of the OGB site platform synergy will positively affect the three major constructs of the proposed social capital model for consumer benefit creation in the OGB environment.To test whether the social capital (SC) and platform synergy (PS) effects on OGB consumer benefits (CB) are mediated by active participation (AP); we followed the mediation tests suggested by Baron and Kenny (1986) and evaluated the mediation by computing the mean and standard error of the bootstrap samples from the previous PLS analysis. The results of regression analyses signified that both social capital and platform synergy had positive and significant impacts on consumer benefits (β=0.48, t-value=13.90, p<0.01 for SC to CB and β=0.30, t-value=8.64, p<0.01 for PS to CB, respectively) and active participation (β=0.59, t-value=17.00, p<0.01 for SC to AP and β=0.19, t-value=5.11, p<0.01 for PS to AP, respectively). Besides, active participation had positive and significant impacts on consumer benefits (β=0.62, t-value=20.1, p<0.01 for AP to CB). In the presence of the mediator, active participation, both the social capital and platform synergy effects on consumer benefits became less significant (β=0.35, t-value=8.59, p<0.01 for SC to CB and β=0.26, t-value=7.43, p<0.01 for PS to CB, respectively). And for the multi-step mediation from platform synergy via social capital to consumer benefits, the effect (SC to CB) also became less significant (from β=0.68, t-value=25.82, p<0.01 down to β=0.45, t-value=8.29, p<0.01) with the presence of active participation. This suggests that active participation is a critical mediator that would partially mediate the impacts of social capital and platform synergy on consumer benefits. To be more rigorous on this point we also performed the Sobel and Goodman tests to validate the mediation of active participation on the causal effects from social capital and to consumer benefits. We found both of the analytical results to be significant, the mediation of active participation on social capital to consumer benefits (Sobel’s z=11.43, p<0.01; Goodman’s z=11.44, p<0.01) and the mediation of active participation on platform synergy to consumer benefits (Sobel’s z=7.93, p<0.01; Goodman’s z=7.94, p<0.01), also suggesting that both of the influencing relationships from social capital and platform synergy to OGB consumer benefits were partially mediated by active participation and thereby support H4a and H4b.As with all self-administered survey data the potential for common method bias (CMB) exists. Podsakoff et al. (2003) suggested that CMB should be assessed when the independent and dependent variables are not obtained from different sources and are not measured in different contexts when the sources of the method bias cannot be identified. We conducted two statistical analyses to assess the common method bias severity. We conducted a Harmon one-factor test on the four principal constructs in the conceptual framework first, including social capital platform synergy, active participation and consumer benefits. The analysis results from the Harmon one-factor test signified that the principal factors with eigenvalues greater than 1 were generated with no single factor accounting for the majority of the variance in the items. The most covariance explained by the first factor is 35.81%, indicating that CMB is not a likely contaminant of our results. All items retained in the factor analyses accounted for 59.8% of the total variance.According to Podsakoff et al. (2003) and Williams et al. (2003), we next included in the PLS model a common method factor whose indicators included all the principal constructs’ indicators and calculated each indicator’s variances substantively explained by the principal construct and the method. Following Williams et al. (2003), evidence of common method bias can be obtained by examining the statistical significance of factor loads from the method factor and comparing the variances of each observed indicator explained by its substantive construct and the method factor. As shown in Table 4, the squared values of the method factor loadings were interpreted as the percent of indicator variance caused by method, whereas the squared loadings of the substantive constructs were interpreted as the percent of indicator variance caused by substantive constructs. If the method factor loadings are insignificant and the indicators’ substantive variances are substantially greater than their method variances, it can be concluded that common method bias is unlikely to be a serious concern (Williams et al. 2003).The results illustrated in Table 4 demonstrate that the average substantively explained variance of the indicators is 0.65, while the average method based variance is 0.011. The ratio of substantive variance to method variance is about 59:1. In addition, most method factor loadings are not significant. Given the small magnitude and insignificance of method variance, the results indicated the absence of a substantial amount of common method bias in the data. Consequently, common method bias should not be a serious problem in this study.Driven by the need for a theoretical explanation for what factors enhance consumer benefits in an OGB context in which social networking is prevailing and OGB is booming, this study helps to understand the complex process regarding the importance of social capital and the nature of the platform functionalities affecting online consumers’ benefits creation through their active participation in OGB. Building on social capital theory and the perspective of synergy from systems theory, we developed three ideas, all of which were supported in our empirical study. Refining from Tsai and Ghoshal (1998), we first identified three constructs: social capital, active participation and consumer benefits and found that social capital (e.g., social interaction ties, trust and value of sharing) influences active participation, which in turn influences consumer benefits. This finding is congruent with some prior studies (e.g., Chiu et al. 2006, Lang and Li 2013, Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2013, Tsai and Ghoshal 1998), they suggested that individuals who mutually tie, trust and share the same values with each other are more likely to become active partners exchanging and combining their resources for benefit creation in the organizational setting. We next drew on the synergy perspective from systems theory to identify the platform synergy that represents the synergistic relationships between humans and their technologies that result in positive outcomes and found that platform synergy has a direct effect on social capital, active participation and consumer benefits. Finally, consumer active participation plays an important mediating role in an OGB context. The research results indicated that greater social capital increases consumer benefits by enhancing active participation and platform synergy has a partial mediation effect on consumer benefits via active participation.The PLS analysis results from the proposed research model indicate that OGB consumer benefits are predicted mostly by platform synergy, followed by active participation and the related social capital factors, respectively. The social capital factors are the stronger predictors of consumer active participation than platform synergy. As depicted in Fig. 2, in considering the related social capital dimensions, trust is the most critical factor perceived by consumers participating in the online buying groups, while value of sharing and social interaction ties are also significant factors. Noticeably, all of the three sub-constructs: utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits have great contributions to OGB consumers’ benefits.Our first contribution is a theoretical explanation for why social capital drives consumer benefits. Although prior studies (e.g., Tsai and Ghoshal 1998) observed the impacts of social capital on online consumers’ active participation in resources exchange and combination as well as active participation on consumer benefits, few studies have comprehensively explored the impact of social capital on consumer benefits and the mediating role of active participation in resource exchange/combination in the OGB contexts. Our results provide direct empirical support for this viewpoint in the OGB context and demonstrate that active participation is an important intervening variable that mediates the influence of social capital and platform synergy on OGB consumers’ benefit creation. Our study explains why social capital promotes superior consumer benefits, complementing prior work that has recognized social capital as an important precursor to resources exchange/combination and resources exchange/combination on consumer benefits but has not theoretically developed an explanation of the intervening mechanisms (Tsai and Ghoshal 1998).We found evidence that the OGB community’s social capital increases consumer benefits when the consumers are able to actively participate in exchanging resources to facilitate their benefit creation. This finding can act as a counterpart with the prior research that suggested online consumers’ active engagement for utilitarian economic incentives, hedonic experiences and interpersonal enhancement driven by the synergistic effects of IT-enabled social resources embedded in OGB contexts (e.g., Lim 2014a,b, Shiau and Luo 2012). Tsai and Pai (2013) found that in a virtual community, hedonic (e.g., enjoyment), and utilitarian (e.g., information) resources positively influence active participation through community identification and relationship satisfaction. In Adler and Kwon’s conceptual model of social capital, Adler and Kwon (2002) also argued that action facilitated by social capital can, in turn, impact on the social structure, thus directly or indirectly influencing the social capital available to the community members in the next round of action. Therefore, integrating our research findings with the perspectives of Tsai and Pai (2013) and Adler and Kwon (2002), we establish a positive cyclic relationship among these factors. That is, social capital, hedonic and utilitarian resources positively influence active participation and then facilitate consumer benefits (i.e., utilitarian, hedonic and interpersonal benefits) creation in a virtual community. Once consumers gained these benefits in the virtual community, and as a consequence, consumers’ active participation is likely to arise leading to facilitating further consumer benefit creation.Our second contribution is by integrating the view of platform synergy with the path-dependent processes of social capital influences consumer benefits through active participation, we demonstrate that platform synergy has a strong impact on social capital, active participation and consumer benefits and also has a partial mediation effect on consumer benefits via active participation. This helps us gain a more granular understanding of the OGB consumers’ benefit creation phenomena. We discover that while platform synergy influences consumer benefits directly, it also influences active participation and thus consumer benefits indirectly. Thus, this is a preeminent way to integrate social capital theory with other IT-enabled resources from systems theory (Nevo and Wade 2010, 2011) to develop a better understanding of OGB issues. Theorists can continuously refine social capital theory for online contexts where the impact of social capital factors may differ when they are combined with IT assets and organizational resources to create IT-enabled resources for consumer benefit creation (Klein and Bhagat 2010, Shiau and Luo 2012). To the best of our knowledge, we are among the first in the IS discipline to integrate social capital with platform synergy perspectives to explore their effects on active participation and consumer benefits in the OGB context.Our findings offer guidelines to OGB platform developers, managers and initiators. OGB platform developers must first be aware that platform synergy has a positive impact on social capital, active participation and consumer benefits. Thus, platform developers should consider providing synergic functionalities that are compatible to OGB activities (e.g., within the path-dependent process social capital influences consumer benefits through active participation) to enhance consumers’ capabilities and the efficiency of OGB processes. For instance, the OGB website may provide a hedonically featured cyber shopping environment with friendly social interactive and information processing functionalities (e.g., multi-channel interactions, search, comparison, rating, chat room, bulletin boards and forum) and a governance mechanism to empower consumers’ capabilities and facilitate the efficiency of social interaction and OGB activities.OGB managers and initiators must recognize that increasing social capital increases OGB consumers’ benefits because it facilitates OGB members’ active participation. This suggests that OGB managers and initiators should leverage platform synergy to enhance social capital and encourage OGB consumers to actively participate in resources exchange within OGB community. For instance, initiators might actively participate in the OGB processes and champion social interaction and resources exchange in the OGB community. OGB consumers would then have better opportunity to get products or services information, resolve uncertainties regarding products/services buying, get products/services with low price or great discount. Consumers also can acquire a hedonic experience and enjoy the pleasant and relaxed emotions from OGB.Managers and initiators should be aware that social capital factors have a stronger effect on consumer active participation than platform synergy does. Thus, to facilitate active participation among OGB consumers and tribe members, managers and initiators might consider enhancing social interaction ties, trusting relationships and value of sharing by holding various incentive events (e.g., new product trials, sweepstake lotteries or limited extra discounts) to promote social interactions in OGB communities. For example, the tribes of ihergo allow an individual to use tribe forums, chat rooms, bulletin boards and its rating systems and browse other members’ information to get more acquainted with them and participate in some special incentive activities held by the tribes. Such access allows OGB consumers to go across various channels and resources embedded in the OGB sites to find what they truly need. OGB consumers then have more opportunity to actively participate in exchanging information and resources in OGB with others.This study represents a significant advancement in our theoretical and empirical understanding of how consumer benefits are influenced collectively by consumers’ social capital and platform synergy and how active participation mediates the positive effect of social capital and platform synergy on consumer benefits in the OGB context.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
