@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting microblog users’ lifetime activities – A user-based analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Pareto/NBD model and BG/NBD model showed effective ability to fit and predict SNS interaction behavior.We discovered that user base analysis models are more adapted to modeling intrinsic motivated behavior.User segmentation can improve the prediction accuracy by distinguishing currently active and inactive users.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social network,Microblogging,User lifetime vitality,Pareto/NBD model,BG/NBD model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the rapid development of online social media, social networking services have become an important research area in recent years. In particular, microblogging as a new social media platform draws much attention from both researchers and practitioners. Although most current studies focus on the effect of social networks on the diffusion of services or information, most are descriptions or explanations of what has already happened. This study focuses on future activity by employing probability models such as the Pareto/NBD and BG/NBD models to predict user lifetime vitality. Three experiments were implemented to test the two models. Our results showed that both the Pareto/NBD model and the BG/NBD model were effective in predicting SNS user usage behavior on microblogging websites. It was found that tweeting behavior is more suitable for such probability models than retweeting behavior and user segmentation can improve prediction accuracy by distinguishing between currently active and inactive users.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid development of online social media, social networking services (SNSs) have become an important research area in recent years. We are now in the era of social colonization (Cortizo et al., 2011), in which technologies such as Facebook Connect and Google Friend Connect have standardized social functionalities among a vast majority of websites. Social networking services, including microblogs, have entered people’s daily life and become an important social platform for their daily communication. Twitter—as the most famous and the earliest application of microblogging technology—already had 645 million registered users around the world as of January 2014 (Twitter Statistics, 2014). Microblogging is a broadcasting platform based on the follow mechanism in social networks, where users publish (tweet) and distribute (retweet) brief messages (usually of less than 140 characters) through Web or Wap client components. In August 2009, Sina launched its microblog called Sina Weibo, one of the first microblogging services in China. Just two years later, it became one of the most popular websites in China and a significant communication platform. The rapidly expanding trend of microblogging suggests that there could be significant business opportunities to explore. For instance, the microblogging platform helps build online word-of-mouth (WoM) and facilitates social shopping (Liang et al., 2012, Amblee and Bui, 2012, Olbrich and Holsing, 2012). Although microblogging services have attracted a huge number of users, however, nearly half of registered users are inactive “zombie” accounts (Fu and Chau, 2013). How to evaluate the vitality of users on an SNS platform has become one of the primary concerns of platform operators.Although huge numbers of users have registered on various SNSs, only active users are the major contributors to the platforms. The proportion of active users in the user base is an important measure of the healthy development of SNS platforms (Valenzuela et al., 2008). Predicting future vitality of SNS users has great significance for service providers, especially online platform operators. Sina Weibo, for example, treats user vitality analysis as direct guidance for the operation and management practices of microblogging products (such as micro-applications, and micro-topics) (Annual report by Sina.com 2013). Specifically, operators can track the interaction among users who are involved in a certain micro-topic or activity and predict the future popularity trend of the topic or activity by evaluating the current vitality of the user base. Users on the platform are assessed as having different vitality levels according to how often they log in and post messages. The lifetime vitality of registered users relates to the future development of the SNS platform, simultaneously affecting the confidence and enthusiasm of other enterprises in microblogging marketing and advertising.Besides having managerial importance, user lifetime vitality predictions are also of great theoretical importance. Existing studies on social networking services largely consist of static descriptions or explanations of what has already happened. They usually focus on understanding user motivation and intention to use a certain IT artifact (Java et al., 2007, Marios, 2002). Another stream of research focuses on user-generated content (UGC) with social networking behavior and networking features as explanatory variables (e.g. Susarla et al., 2012). Sentiment analysis and opinion mining are applied on UGC for the sake of trend prediction and anomaly detection. However, such static analysis and content-based research on social networking services has several limitations:•Static analysis. The different frameworks and indicators to evaluate user activity and influential power that have been proposed in the literature are mainly based on historical behavior data or the static network formed by behavior history. Static analysis largely neglects the dynamic nature of fast-moving social network interaction.UCG-based analysis. Billions of SNS users generate numerous words and sentences every day. Sentiment analysis and text mining are meaningless if they are not concentrated on specific topics or key words. Microblogging as the new representative social networking service places more emphasis on interaction between users, which is quite different from the content-based network services of Web 2.0, such as YouTube.To complement existing literature on SNSs, rather than explaining users’ past behavior, this research focuses on predicting users’ future behavior. In particular, this research employs stochastic models to predict the lifetime vitality of individual microblogging users’ behavior. Empirical studies are conducted using microblog user interaction data from Sina Weibo. The customer base analysis models (i.e. Pareto/NBD model and BG/NBD model) are rooted in customer lifetime value theory in marketing research (Jain and Singh, 2002), which makes use of stochastic characteristics of interaction behavior to predict future behavior. Applying customer base analysis models to the prediction of SNS user behavior to gain new insights would contribute to current literature in several ways. First, a customer base analysis model goes beyond historical description and aims at predicting the future value and the continuous vitality of the customer base. Second, a customer base analysis perspective focuses on user behavior rather than on generated content. Analysis and prediction of platform vitality is based on an ensemble of individual behavior characteristics. This perspective distinguishes new social media from traditional websites. The unit of analysis in this paper is individual behavior rather than the microblogs created by a user. Finally, by focusing on behavior rather than only on generated content as an analysis unit, it becomes possible to further segment different types of social networking interaction. In general, users may tweet original words or retweet others’ tweets; these two types of behavior may have different characteristics and potential for predicting future vitality.This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 introduces our research. Section 2 outlines related work on microblogging user behavior prediction and customer base analysis models. Section 3 describes the research method composed of parameter estimation process and a derivation of two key expressions for managerial insights. Section 4 illustrates empirical test results of the two models based on user interaction data from Sina Weibo. Section 5 discusses the empirical results. Finally, Section 6 draws conclusions and suggests future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we applied and extended customer base analysis models for user vitality analysis on a microblogging website. Traditional time series analysis needs to collect historical frequency information of successive periods to generate a trend line and forecast the interaction frequency in the following period. In contrast, the Pareto/NBD and BG/NBD models only need frequency and recency value in one observed period, which offers easier approaches to predicting future interaction frequency in any length of time. Our empirical studies, based on microblog user interaction data from Sina Weibo, show strong confidence in the model fitness of Pareto/NBD and BG/NBD to SNS user lifetime activity prediction and provide insights into the prediction of SNS user vitality for managerial practice.