@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of Hyper-Spherical Search algorithm for optimal energy resources dispatch in residential microgrids

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Applying using Hyper-Spherical Search algorithm to the problem of optimal dispatching.Economic modeling of the residential energy system.Determining optimal dispatch strategy of different energy resources.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Combined heat and power,Home energy system,Hyper-Spherical Search algorithm,Electricity tariff,Optimal scheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a residential hybrid thermal/electrical grid-connected home energy system (HES), including a fuel-cell with combined heat and power and a battery-based energy storage system. The minimum operation cost of this integrated energy system is achieved by proper scheduling of different energy resources, found by applying a new powerful optimization algorithm, the Hyper-Spherical Search (HSS) algorithm, to the system's scheduling problem. This is the first time that HSS is used to face the energy resource dispatch problem. The HSS has been only tested in mathematical problems in the previous study. The optimization procedure generates an efficient look-up table in which the powers generated by different energy resources are determined for all time intervals. The effect of different electricity tariffs for purchasing electricity from the main grid on the operation costs of the system is investigated. Moreover, a battery is properly dispatched in the energy system to decrease the operation costs. A real load demand is used in the simulation. The results of HSS are compared with the harmony search algorithm and the colonial competitive algorithm to show the power and effectiveness of HSS to find the optimal dispatch strategy of energy resources for the first time. This is the first time that HSS is compared with CCA. The results of this paper are expected to contribute to home energy systems and real projects.fuel cell startup cost ($)fuel cell shut down cost ($)maximum limit of fuel cell generated power (kW)minimum limit of fuel cell generated power (kW)upper limit of ramp rate of fuel cell (kW)lower limit of ramp rate of fuel cell (kW)length of time interval (h)initial available energy in battery (kWh)available energy in battery (kWh)charging efficiency of batterydischarging efficiency of batterymaximum level of stored energy in battery (kWh)minimum level of stored energy in battery (kWh)maximum electricity purchasing cost ($/kWh)cost of purchasing natural gas per kWh ($/kWh)operation costs of battery per kWh ($/kWh)cost of generated power by fuel cell ($/day)cost of electricity purchased from utility ($/day)cost of operation of battery ($/day)cost of purchasing gas ($/day)cost of electricity purchased from utility in the peak period ($/kWh)cost of electricity purchased from utility in the off-peak period ($/kWh)maximum discharging rate of the battery (kW)maximum charging rate of the battery (kW)heat power produced by fuel cell (kW)electrical power produced by fuel cell (kW)fuel cell efficiencyheat power directly produced from gas (kW)normalized price of electricity tariffelectricity power provided by utility (kW)generated/absorbed power by battery (kW)electrical demand (kW)thermal demand (kW)part load ratioheat to electrical power ratio of fuel cellnumber of the interval that appears as variables subscript and indicates value of that variable in the i-th interval.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is a growing interest in residential distributed generation (DG), such as photovoltaic systems and fuel cells (FC) [1–3]. The most important benefits of using DG technology in residential applications are customers electrification at a competitive price, economical use of thermal and electrical energy, reliability enhancement and emissions reduction [4–6]. The FC can generate electricity and heat at the same time [7]. Electrical and thermal energy can be provided by cogeneration systems such as combined heat and power (CHP) or combined cooling, heating and power (CCHP) systems [8–10]. It has been shown that the operating costs of FCs can be greatly decreased using accurate and optimal settings [11,12].In [13], a model-predictive control strategy was proposed for more intelligent control of micro-CHP systems and the added value of the proposed intelligent control approach over the standard approach in terms of reduced variable energy costs has been evaluated.In [14], the critical role of energy optimization algorithms at the residential level was discussed. The optimization problem was formulated based on the mixed-integer linear programming theory and the implications of energy optimization algorithms on consumers’ behavior and energy policies were discussed.In [15], the effects of battery implementation in the energy system and considering the electricity tariff on the system operation cost were studied, but the optimal operation cost of the integrated energy system was not considered. A CHP system and its economical scheduling were analyzed in [15]. The problem of the economical operation of a CHP system using the chance constrained programming model considering random changes in PV, wind generated powers, and load was discussed in [16].In this paper, the operation of a residential CHP system with an energy storage system (ESS) is studied from the economic point of view. The integrated HES consists of a FC, a battery, thermal and electrical loads. Natural gas and the electrical grid are available as energy sources in this system. The real load demand data of Latvian power and Riga district heating systems is used in this paper to show the effectiveness of the proposed method in energy management in the residential energy system. The results of operating cost minimization are the scheduling of different energy resources; and the optimal dispatch of energy resources are compiled into a look-up table, which can be used to determine the amount of electrical and thermal power generated by different energy resources in each time interval. If different energy resources generate electrical/thermal power at each time interval according to the table, then the load demand is met at minimum cost.A similar integrated energy system was modeled and the application of the harmony search algorithm (HSA) in [17] and the colonial competitive algorithm (CCA) in [18] minimized its operation cost. In this paper, all elements in the energy system are economically modeled and the operating cost of the HES is minimized by application of a new powerful optimization algorithm, the Hyper-Spherical Search (HSS) algorithm. This is the first time that the HSS algorithm is used for the proper energy resources scheduling. In [19], it was shown that the HSS converges faster toward a better solution compared to GA, HSA and particle swarm optimization (PSO) in some mathematical test problems. However, the application of HSS in an engineering problem, especially in the energy resources scheduling as one of the most important issues in the power system, has not been investigated in previous studies. On the other hand, HSS has been compared with HSA, GA and PSO in [19], but has not been compared with CCA in [19]. Thus, in this paper, the HSS algorithm is applied to HES and the results show the power and effectiveness of HSS over CCA and HSA.The main contributions of this paper are as follows:•In this paper, HSS is applied to the real-world engineering problem to validate its application in engineering fields.In this paper, HSS is compared with CCA and HSA to show the advantage of this algorithm in terms of running time and convergence rapidness compared with CCA and HSA.Better optimal operating point of the hybrid home energy system is studied and achieved compared to previous studies (HSA and CCA) [17,18].The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The HES is introduced and the problem is formulated with its constraints in Section 2. In Section 3, the HSS optimization technique is described. Section IV discusses the simulation results and Section 5 concludes the article.The proposed HES consists of a battery, an FC, and thermal and electrical loads, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The thermal load can be supplied by either a natural gas source or the recovered heat from the FC. The electrical load can be supplied by the main grid, FC, or the battery.The main role of the energy management system is to minimize the operating cost of supplying demand for an individual house. Operation scheduling is performed for one day or more in advance to effectively use available energy resources. The goal of this paper is to minimize one day-ahead operating costs. It is assumed that the HES components have been already installed so that installation costs are not considered.The following objective function (OF) should be minimized in order to optimize the system:(1)OF=min∑CFC,i+∑Cgas,i+∑CU,i+∑CB,iwhere each term of this objective function is introduced as follows [17,18]:(2)CU,i=T×MUi×CUb×PU,i(3)CFC,i=T×Cgasb×PeFC,i/ηFC,i(4)Cgas,i=T×Cgasb×Pgas,i(5)CB,i=T×CBb×PB,iIt should be noted that PB,iis negative in charging mode and positive in discharging mode. In order to have a positive battery operating cost in its different operation modes, CB,iis calculated according to (5). Moreover, if the FC starts up (shuts down) in a time interval, the FC start up cost (shut down cost) is added to (3).If no electrical/thermal load is allowed to be curtailed, electrical and heat demands should be completely satisfied. Therefore, the electrical power balance can be expressed as:(6)PeFC,i+PB,i+PU,i−PeL,i=0where PB,iis the electrical power of the battery, which can be negative or positive in charging or discharging operation modes, respectively.Similar to the electrical power balance, in case of no thermal storage device installation, the following equation expresses the thermal power balance:(7)Pgas,i+PhFC,i−PhL,i=0All devices have operation constraints, which should be met through the cost minimization procedure. The constraints of FC and the battery are explained in the next two subsections.Ideally, if a battery is discharged/charged with PB,iin one time interval, its energy is decreased/increased by PB,i×T, while in practice, the energy reduction of a discharging battery at the rate of PB,iis equal to (PB,i×T)/ηdchwhich can be simplified by assuming a time interval of T=1h as follows:(8)Wi=Wi−1−PB,iηdchSimilarly, if the battery absorbs PB,iduring one time interval, its charge level is increased by PB,i×T×ηchwhich can be expressed as follows being assumed T=1h.(9)Wi=Wi−1+PB,i×ηchAvailable energy in a battery is limited by its capacity so that the state of the battery charge cannot violate the specified margins, as expressed by the following inequality:(10)Wmin<Wi<WmaxThe rates of battery charging and discharging are faced with limitations. The available energy in the battery is decreased in one time interval by PB,i×T, which is limited to its maximum value in the discharge mode. The following inequality expressed the limitation of the discharging rate for the battery:(11)Wi−Wi−1T≤PBdchmaxSimilarly, the following inequality expresses the limitation of the charging mode of the battery:(12)Wi−Wi−1T≥PBchmaxThe rate of change for FC output power is limited to its lower and upper boundaries [20,21]; therefore, the following inequalities should be satisfied in FC output power variations:(13)PeFC,i−PeFC,i−1≤ΔPFC,U(14)PeFC,i−1−PeFC,i≤ΔPFC,DIt should be noted that the values for ΔPFC,Uand ΔPFC,Dare not necessarily equal.The maximum output power of FC is limited to its nominal capacity and it cannot generate power greater than this value. On the other hand, if FC output power becomes less than a lower threshold, the FC cannot work properly and should be turned off. The following inequality expresses the constraints for generated electrical power by FC:(15)PFC,min≤PeFC,i≤PFC,maxThe ratio of electrical power generated by the FC to its power rating is the part load ratio (PLR), which affects the FC efficiency and the ratio of electrical to thermal power generated by the FC. The ratio of electrical-to-heat-power and the efficiency of the FC as a function of PLR can be expressed as follows [22]:(a) PLRi<0.05:(16)ηFC,i=0.2716;rFC,i=0.6816(b) PLRi≥0.05:(17)ηFC,i=0.9033PLRi5−2.9996PLRi4+3.6503PLRi3−2.0704PLRi2+0.4623PLRi+0.3747(18)rFC,i=1.0785PLRi4−1.9739PLRi3+1.5005PLRi2−0.2817PLRi+0.6838Fig. 2shows that ηFC,iis slightly higher for higher PLR and rFC,iis lower for lower PLR[17,21,22].Electricity tariffs are applied to reduce the pressure of grid peak regulation and realize greater economic benefits in the electricity market environment. The electricity tariff can vary at different time intervals in order to moderate consumer behavior in electrical power consumption.In this study, three different electricity tariffs are considered: peak, intermediate, and off-peak. These electricity purchase tariffs and their time intervals are shown in Table 1[18]. The effects of the electricity tariff on HES operation costs are considered in this study. All tariffs are normalized according to the maximum electricity tariff of the peak period. These normalized electricity tariffs are shown in the third column of Table 1 and can be found in (2) as MUi.From a general point of view, optimization is the process of improving something, which is modeled as follows [19,23,24]:(19)Min{f(x)|x∈X}subjectto:g(x)=0andh(x)=0.It is expected that f(x) will be minimized through the optimization procedure. All real-world problems are exposed to constraints, categorized as equality and inequality constraints, h(x) and g(x), respectively. The value of f(x) depends on the set of decision variables, x in the possible range of Xi,min≤xi≤Xi,max.The number of variables for each time interval should be known to determine the dimensions of the optimization problem. In (6), (7) and (18), it is clear that there are two independent variables for each time interval: Pe,FC,iand PB,i. By knowing these variables and the electrical load demand, the electrical power purchased from the utility is determined by using (6). If Pe,FC,iis known, Ph,FC,iis determined according to (18) or (16), depending on the value of PLR. Finally Pgas,iis determined using (7), knowing PhL,iand Ph,FC,i. Therefore, by using Pe,FC,iand PB,i, all the powers can be determined for all parts of the integrated energy system. Hence, the costs in (1)–(5) can be calculated for each time interval.In this study, the time interval is T=1h and the integrated energy system is studied in 24 intervals with two independent variables for each time interval. Therefore, the dimension of the optimization problem is N=24×2=48 as shown in Fig. 3.The HSS algorithm procedure is divided into four steps as follows:Step 1: particles initializationThis step initializes the HSS algorithm and includes four sub-steps as follows:a)Initialization of parameters: some parameters of this algorithm should be assigned by the user which are Npop (number of initial population), NSC(number of hyper-sphere centers), rmin, rmax, Prangle and Nnewpar that will be defined in the following sections.Initial population generation: the HSS algorithm starts with Npop randomly generated solutions, xi, which are randomly selected from [Xi,min,Xi,max] with a uniform probability. For each solution, which is called a particle, the objective function is calculated.Hyper-sphere centers nomination: the particles are sorted based on their calculated objective function values in ascending order and the best NSCparticles are selected to be the hyper-sphere centers (SCs). In an N-dimensional optimization problem, a particle is indicated by a 1×N vector, [p1,p2,…,pN] in which pis are the decision variables for i=1,…,N and f(p1,p2,…,pN) is the objective function value of a particle.Particles distribution among hyper-spheres: The NSCof the population are selected as SCs. The remaining particles are distributed among SCs taking into account the SCs dominance, which is inversely proportional to their values of the objective function and expressed by DSC as follows:Then the initial number of particles, which belongs to a SC, would be round{DSC×(Npop−NSC)} chosen randomly by each SC from the remaining particles.Step 2: searchingA particle seeks a better solution by searching the space limited by a sphere with a predefined center and a radius of r, the distance between the particle and the center. Thus, the origin of coordinates is set on the sphere center. The searching procedure will be done by changing the parameters of the particle in spherical coordinates, i.e., r and θ.There are N−1 angles in spherical coordinates for each point in N-dimensional space. Changing each of them leads to movement of the particle in the searching space. In the HSS algorithm, each angle of a particle is changed by α radians with the probability of Prangle. α is randomly selected in each iteration with a uniform distribution between (0,2π).After changing the angle(s) of a particle, the distance between that particle and its corresponding SC is randomly selected between [rmin×r,rmax×r], where r can be calculated as follows, in an N-dimensional hyper-sphere:(22)r2=∑i=1N(pi,center−pi,particle)2The possible position of a particle after the searching procedure is illustrated in Fig. 4, by the dashed space for a 3-D case.In the HSS algorithm, each particle searches its hyper-sphere considering its SC. The operator of the search procedure is indicated by Q[rmin,rmax,Prangle,SC].During searching in its sphere space, a particle may reach a position with a lower objective function value than its SC. In such a case, the labels of this particle and the SC are exchanged. After that, the algorithm will continue in the next iteration to search using the new SC. This condition should be checked in each iteration after the search procedure.During particle movement in the problem of optimal energy resources scheduling, the values of PeFC,iand PB,iare changed. All system constraints at each time interval should be met as follows:1)According to (15), if PeFC,i<PFC,min it is assumed to be PFC,min; if it is PeFC,i>PFC,max is assumed to be PFC,max.According to (14), PeFC,iis equal to PeFC,i−1−ΔPFC,Dif PeFC,i<PeFC,i−1 and PeFC,i−PeFC,i−1>ΔPFC,D.According to (13), PeFC,iis equal to PeFC,i−1+ΔPFC,Uif PeFC,i>PeFC,i−1 and PeFC,i−PeFC,i−1>ΔPFC,U.If the battery is in charging mode (PB,i<0), the difference between the values of PB,ifor two subsequent time intervals should not be greater than PBchmax; otherwise PB,iis assumed to be PB,i−1+PBchmax, according to (12).If the battery is in discharging mode (PB,i>0), the difference between the values of PB,ifor two subsequent time intervals should not be greater than PBdchmax; otherwise PB,iis assumed to be PB,i−1+PBdchmax, according to (11).In charge/discharge mode, the constraints of maximum/minimum battery energy level should be considered. Using (8), if Wiexceeds these limitations, PB,ishould be adjusted to fit the battery energy to the maximum or minimum value.Step 3: dummy particles recoveryAn SC and its particles make a set. Some of the particles in a set have the largest value of the OF. These particles are called dummy particles and it is not expected that they reach the global minimum value of OF. Therefore, their searching hyper-spheres should be changed, i.e., the dummy particle(s) are assigned to other SCs as shown in Fig. 5. At first, the particle sets should be sorted according to the value of set objective function (SOF) to find the worst set, which includes the dummy particles. The SOF of a set is mainly affected by the value of the SC for the OF and the OF value of particles is less important. This fact is modeled by defining the SOF of each particle set by the following equation:(23)SOF=fSC+γmean{fparticlesofSC}A small value of γ causes the SOF to be determined by the OF value of SC and increasing γ will increase the role of particles in the SOF calculation. The value of 0.1 is used for γ in this paper.The dummy particle recovery procedure is modeled by choosing some of the dummy particles (for example one) from the hyper-spheres with the largest SOF and assigning them (it) to the other SCs. For this purpose, the difference of SOF (DSOF) for each set is simply determined as follows:(24)DSOF=SOF−maxgroups{SOFofgroups}Using the calculated DSOF, the particle is assigned to one of the SCs based on the assigning probability (AP).(25)AP=NTOF∑i=1NSCNTOFiThe vector AP=[AP1,AP2,…,APNSC] is formed to divide the dummy particle(s) among SCs based on their APs such that the worst set (with the highest SOF) will lose its dummy particle(s). The dummy particle(s) looks for the new SC among all the SCs based on their APs. If a SC has no particles, this SC will be changed to a particle and looks for a new SC using this procedure.Step 4: Generating some new particlesAs described above, after searching, a particle may reach a position with lower OF value than its corresponding SC.In this step, in order to make the algorithm more flexible and search the space better, the Nnewpar of the worst particles, which are not expected to reach the minimum value of OF, will be removed and they are substituted by new Nnewpar randomly generated particles. The number of Nnewpar is set to 5% of the initial population number. These particles are assigned to SCs as described in subsection D of step1.Step 5: Convergence testingAll the SCs except the best one will be eliminated after a while and all the particles will be assigned to the best SC. There is therefore almost no difference between this SC and the particles, i.e., they have approximately the same objective function value and position. The algorithm is terminated if the difference between the best SCs in two consequential iterations becomes lower than a preset threshold (e.g. in this paper is set to 10−6).Fig. 6shows the flowchart of the HSS algorithm based on the steps expressed above.The variations of normalized thermal and electrical demands in 1 day are shown in Table 2[25]. During a day the thermal load demand is quite stable, changing 80–100%, whereas the electrical demand fluctuates considerably 60–100% [25]. Table 2 is chosen in this paper as the daily demand curve to make the results comparable with [18]. The peaks of thermal and electricity demands are 2 and 1.8kW, respectively similar to [18]. The HSS parameters under study are shown in Table 3. It should be noted that the system parameters are similar to [18] to make the results comparable with it.In this case, battery operating costs and electricity tariff variations are not considered. The electricity tariff is assumed to be fixed to 0.13$/kWh [18]. Cost optimization is carried out by application of HSS algorithm considering (1) as the OF. In this scenario, the total cost of the system is calculated based on (1), being ∑CB,i=0 and MUi=1. The result of this scenario by application of the HSS algorithm is similar to CCA [18] (5.9947$/day) and better than HSA [17] (6.38$/day). The optimized power dispatched by the CHP and the main grid is shown in Table 4. As shown in this table, the FC operates 24h long at almost its maximum limit of power generation because the purchasing tariff of the electrical power remains constant and the main grid electrical cost is higher than the cost of the electrical power generated by the FC. This result is reasonable because according to (17) if the FC generates 1.041kW, its efficiency is about 33%. Therefore, the FC cost (0.05–0.33=0.15$/kW) is approximately equal to the utility electricity cost. If the gas price increases, the cost of the FC generation will increase in comparison to the utility. In order to reduce the FC cost, its efficiency should be decreased. According to Fig. 2, the efficiency of the FC will be decreased at this operating point if the generated power of the FC decreases such that it does not generate near its maximum limit. In this condition, it is more economical to decrease the contribution of the FC and reduce its generated power, since the price of FC generated power increases in relation to the utility cost. Briefly, since the gas price is significantly lower than the electricity price, the FC generates the electricity at almost its maximum limit. As shown in Fig. 2, if FC generates more electric power, its efficiency decreases and its generation cost becomes higher than the utility cost.It should be noted that the battery does not contribute to energy balance if different electricity tariffs are not considered, since the costs of the main grid electrical energy for battery charging and discharging are the same.Different electricity tariffs and the battery are considered in this scenario. It is expected that the proper scheduling of the battery and different sources can lead to a major decrease in costs.The most important variables in this scenario are the charging and discharging efficiencies of the battery. To determine the lowest limit of these variables, assume the battery is charged in the off-peak period with the efficiency of ηchwhile the purchased electricity from the grid is CU,peak. Therefore, it can generate energy in the peak period with the efficiency of ηdchwhile the purchase electricity from the grid is CU,off-peak. If a battery absorbs E (kWh) of energy from the utility in the off-peak period, its state of charge is increased by E×ηchwith the cost of E×CU,off-peak. The charged battery can generate (E×ηch)×ηdchof energy in the peak period. If this amount of energy was purchased from the utility, its cost was (E×ηch)×ηdch×CU,peak. Therefore, if it is expected that a battery participates in the energy routing, the following inequality should be satisfied:(26)E×ηch×ηdch×CU,peak≥E×CU,off-peakSimplifying the inequality (26) leads to the following constraint, showing the criteria for the battery participation in the energy system.(27)ηch×ηdch≥CU,off-peak/CU,peakIf this inequality is not satisfied, the battery does not affect the energy routing in the system and its power is equal to zero for all time intervals as described in scenario 1. The term “battery efficiency” in this section indicates ηch×ηdch.It should be mentioned that regarding the value of electricity price in peak and off-peak periods (Table 1), if the efficiency of the battery is less than 78%, the battery does not cooperate in energy saving or energy generation. Therefore, the lowest efficiency of the battery is determined by the electricity tariff assumption. If a large price differential is assumed in the electricity tariff, the battery efficiency can go lower and the battery will still help to reduce the total cost of meeting the demand of the smart house. Suppose that the battery efficiency is equal to 78%. If the battery absorbs 1kW of active power in the low-cost period with a cost of 0.78pu/kW, it can deliver 1×0.78=0.78kW to the system during the high-cost period with 1pu/kW.It should be noted that, in the mentioned example, the battery is charged in the low-cost period with an efficiency of ηchand discharged in the high-cost time interval with efficiency of ηdch. Therefore, a lower limit of ηch×ηdchis 78%. If the product of the charging and discharging efficiencies is lower than 78%, the battery does not affect the energy routing in the system and its power is equal to zero for all the time intervals as described in scenario 1.The generation of different power sources and the state of charge of the battery, shown in Table 5, are the results of the optimization procedure of (1) as the OF by application of the HSS algorithm. In this table, the negative and positive PB,iindicates the battery charge and discharge modes of operation, respectively.In the first eight intervals, the battery is charged by the electricity purchased from the utility because the utility electrical cost is at its lowest level. The FC does not generate maximum output power in these time intervals, since it should generate the amount of power such that its cost would be less than the cost of the electrical power purchased from the utility. If the FC generates more electrical power, the cost of the generated power increases as FC efficiency decreases according to (17). If the cost of electricity generated by the FC equals the grid tariff, the FC generates no more power. The available energy in the battery is at the maximum level at the end of the first eight intervals. Along the 13th to 16th intervals, the battery is charged again and the maximum available energy is reached at the 16th interval.During the 9th to 12th and 17th to 22nd intervals, the electricity tariff is in its peak period. Therefore, the battery completely delivers its stored energy into the grid and FC generates power at near-maximum limits (less than maximum as described in scenario 1). The resources power generation and load demands are shown in Table 5 and all costs for scenario 2 are shown in Table 6. In this scenario, the total cost of the system is 5.9167$/day by application of the HSS algorithm which is less than CCA with 5.92$/day [18] and HSA with 5.98$/day [17] as listed in Table 7. The results show the power of the HSS algorithm over CCA and HSA in optimizing the dispatch of HES. Moreover, the mean running time, number of generation, the worst result and the results average are compared by application of different optimization algorithms in Table 8.Moreover, the convergence procedure of different optimization methods is shown in Fig. 7. In the case of operating cost optimization of the hybrid energy system, the assumption of scenario 2 is considered.By comparing the operating costs in these two scenarios, i.e. 6.10 ($/day) and 5.89 ($/day), respectively, it is clear that the battery application has the advantage when considering different electricity tariffs.The data in Table 5 can be used to determine the power generation of each source and the state of the battery charge and discharge for each time interval to obtain minimum operating cost.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
