@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A lattice framework for pricing display advertisement options with the stochastic volatility underlying model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new advertisement option that allows an advertiser to pay a fixed CPM/CPC to purchase impressions or clicks. The fixed payment can be different to the underlying ad format.The proposed option can be priced under the lattice framework for both SV and GBM underlying models.The studied model is validated by two advertising datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online advertising,Guaranteed delivery,First look contract,Advertisement option,Option pricing,Lattice framework,Stochastic volatility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Advertisement (abbreviated ad) options are a recent development in online advertising. Simply, an ad option is a first look contract in which a publisher or search engine grants an advertiser a right but not obligation to enter into transactions to purchase impressions or clicks from a specific ad slot at a pre-specified price on a specific delivery date. Such a structure provides advertisers with more flexibility of their guaranteed deliveries. The valuation of ad options is an important topic and previous studies on ad options pricing have been mostly restricted to the situations where the underlying prices follow a geometric Brownian motion (GBM). This assumption is reasonable for sponsored search; however, some studies have also indicated that it is not valid for display advertising. In this paper, we address this issue by employing a stochastic volatility (SV) model and discuss a lattice framework to approximate the proposed SV model in option pricing. Our developments are validated by experiments with real advertising data: (i) we find that the SV model has a better fitness over the GBM model; (ii) we validate the proposed lattice model via two sequential Monte Carlo simulation methods; (iii) we demonstrate that advertisers are able to flexibly manage their guaranteed deliveries by using the proposed options, and publishers can have an increased revenue when some of their inventories are sold via ad options.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Options have been widely used in many fields: financial options are an important derivative when speculating profits as well as hedging risk (Wilmott 2006); real options are an effective decision-making tool for business projects valuation and corporate risk management (Boer 2002). Recently, options have been introduced into the field of online advertising to solve the so called non-guaranteed delivery problem as well as to provide advertisers with greater flexibility in purchasing premium ad inventories. Moon and Kwon (2010) proposed an ad option for advertisers to make a flexible choice of payment at either cost-per-mille (CPM) or cost-per-click (CPC). They are two popular online advertising payment schemes: the former allows an advertiser to pay when his ad is displayed 1000 times to online users while with the latter an advertiser pays only when his ad is clicked by an online user. The proposal of Moon and Kwon (2010) was similar to an option paying the worst and cash (Zhang 1998) because the option payoff depends on the minimum difference between CPM and CPC. Wang and Chen (2012) proposed a simple European ad option between buying and non-buying the impressions that will be created in the future, and discussed the option pricing based on the one-step binomial lattice method (Sharpe 1978). Their ad option was priced from the perspective of a risk-averse publisher who wants to hedge the expected revenue in the next step. Chen et al. (2015) investigated a special option for sponsored search whereby an advertiser can target a set of keywords for a certain number of total clicks in the future. Each candidate keyword can be specified with a fixed payment price and the option buyer can exercise the option multiple times at any time prior to or on the contract expiration date. Their design was a generalization of the dual-strike call option (Zhang 1998) and the multi-exercise option (Marshall 2012).In this paper, we discuss an ad option that gives an advertiser a right but not obligation to purchase the future impressions or clicks from a specific ad slot (or user tag or keyword) at a pre-specified price. The pre-specified price is also called the strike price, which can be same or different to the payment scheme of its underlying ad format. For example, the underlying price (i.e., the winning payment price) of a display impression from real-time bidding (RTB) is usually measured by CPM while the proposed ad option can be specified with a strike price in terms of CPC for this impression. The publisher or search engine who grants this right in exchange for a certain amount of upfront fee, is called the option price. Obviously, ad options are more flexible than guaranteed contracts (Bharadwaj et al. 2010) as on the delivery date. If the advertiser thinks that the spot market is more beneficial, he can join RTB as a bidder and his cost of not using an ad option is only the option price. A contract with a such structure is also called a first look at inventory (shortly first look) contract or tactic (Interactive Advertising Bureau of Canada 2015). It means that an advertiser is given the opportunity to buy inventories which a publisher offers to him, and if he has no use for it, it can be sold onto another ad network. The ad options proposed by our this study and Wang and Chen (2012), and Chen et al. (2015) are first look contracts while the ad option studied by Moon and Kwon (2010) is not a first look contract.When pricing an ad option, the previous research is mostly restricted in their usage to those situations where the underlying price follows a geometric Brownian motion (GBM)Samuelson 1965. According to Yuan et al. (2013, 2014) and Chen et al. (2014), there is only a very small number of ad inventories whose CPM or CPC satisfies this assumption. Therefore, the previous studies fail to provide an effective unified framework that covers general situations. In this paper, we address the issue and provide a more general pricing framework. We use a stochastic volatility (SV) model to describe the underlying price movement for cases where the GBM assumption is not valid. Based on the SV model, a censored binomial lattice is then constructed for option pricing. We also examine several previous binomial and trinomial lattice methods to price an ad option whose underlying inventory prices follow a GBM model, and deduce the close-form solutions to examine their convergence performance. Our developments are validated by experiments using real advertising data. We examine the fitness of the underlying model, valid the proposed option pricing method, and illustrate that the options provide a more flexible way of selling and buying ads. In particular, we show that an advertiser can have better deliveries in a bull market (where the underlying price increases). On the other hand, a publisher or search engine is able to reduce the revenue volatility over time. In a bear market (where the underlying price decreases), there is a growth in total revenue. To our best knowledge, this is the first work that discusses lattice methods for the ad option evaluation.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work. Section 3 introduces the preliminaries of lattice methods for pricing an ad options with the GBM underlying model. Section 4 discusses our lattice method to price an ad option with the SV underlying model. Section 5 presents our experimental results. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
