@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Brand competition in fashion e-commerce

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Application of regression analysis to examine substitution effects in fashion e-commerce.Unexpectedly small extent of brand competition present in fashion e-commerce.Patterns and magnitude of cross-price effects are very distinct.Asymmetric competition between private and national brands is present.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
e-Commerce,Cross-price effects,Fashion,Price elasticity,CCHM-model,Substitution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When developing pricing strategies, it is highly important for managers to understand brand competition resulting from price promotions within a store. To the knowledge of the authors the present study is the first to examine this topic in the fashion e-commerce space. Using a unique data-set with more than 3.3 million observations which was provided by a leading European e-commerce company, we empirically estimate cross-price elasticities in two independent product categories. Regression results show unexpectedly low levels of cross-brand competition due to the distinctiveness of fashion merchandise prohibiting customers to take advantage of increased market transparency in e-commerce. In addition, patterns of brand competition are very distinct as there is only a small share of significant but highly pronounced effects. Moreover, the results show that asymmetric competition exists between private and national brands. Lastly, we also discuss implications for markdown pricing strategies in the context of fashion e-commerce.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is essential for retailers to take into account substitution and complementary effects within their assortment when making pricing decisions to improve overall firm profitability (Song and Chintagunta 2006). Successful pricing strategies should thus recognize interdependencies on brand level within and across related categories (Wedel and Zhang 2004). Knowledge of these in-store competitive effects can be very valuable for online fashion retailing companies as they oftentimes apply markdown pricing strategies offering potential for substantial profit gains (Levy et al. 2004). Due to industry-specific supply characteristics, these companies receive the majority of stock prior to season start and before actual demand is evident (Soysal and Krishnamurthi 2012). Moreover, products in this setting are highly perishable as fashion becomes obsolete when new styles are introduced to the market (Varadarajan and Yadav 2002). To clear excess stock of poorly selling products and to boost sales, retailers apply discounts by season end (Levy et al. 2004). These price reductions influence the sales of competing products in the same shop thereby possibly shifting demand between high- and low-margin items (Kopalle et al. 2009). In a category management setting the target is to optimize the overall outcome of a category. This requires a multiproduct pricing strategy accounting for price-induced substitution and complementary purchase across items (Hall et al. 2010, Kopalle et al. 2009).The e-commerce space offers a promising setting for this type of pricing strategy as retailers can leverage inexpensive tools to track supply and demand on a detailed level; at the same time low menu costs allow for reactive action in terms of frequent price changes (Biswas and Biswas 2004, Varadarajan and Yadav 2002). Highly frequent price changes, in turn, amplify the potential profit gain generated by applying a sophisticated markdown strategy (Varadarajan and Yadav 2002).So far, retailers have often neglected cross-price effects in their pricing decisions (Hall et al. 2010, Levy et al. 2004). Some companies also lack the data, the ability, or the time to conduct cross-price elasticity analyses which are essential to be able to cope with the above challenge (Kopalle et al. 2009). Additionally, consistent with the resource-based view (RBV), scholars have identified the strategic importance of the pricing process as a capability to improve competitiveness in the marketplace (Dutta et al. 2003, Kemper et al. 2013). Although it is highly important for academics and practitioners, there has been only scarce research examining cross-price effects in e-commerce settings (Kopalle et al. 2009). Extant literature largely focuses on brick-and-mortar situations involving fast-moving consumer goods (Leeflang and Parreño-Selva 2012). As increased information availability exists online altered patterns of customer behavior with respect to product substitution are likely to occur which renders an examination of this topic in the e-commerce context an interesting extension to existing literature (Kopalle et al. 2009, Varadarajan and Yadav 2002).With this study we seek to make the following contributions. First, we analyze demand interdependencies among brands in two independent pairs of related product subcategories in online fashion retailing. Hence, we examine the impact of price cuts on the market share of other brands in the same product cluster. In our analyses we use a unique data-set consisting of more than 3 million sales observations which was provided by a European fashion e-commerce company. Second, this research helps obtain a fuller picture of price elasticities prevailing in e-commerce. In this context the online fashion retailing setting has not received sufficient attention so far (Kopalle et al. 2009) leaving a gap we seek to close with the present study. Third, we derive insights for category management considerations as we analyze detailed patterns of cross-competitive effects found in this distinct setting.In the following we develop our conceptual framework and derive hypotheses to examine cross-price elasticities in fashion e-commerce. Price elasticity “measures the percentage sales loss (gain) from a certain percentage price increase (decrease)” (Nagle 1984, p. 9). Moreover, cross-price elasticities refer to the percentage shift in the demand for a product when the price of a related product is changed (Levy et al. 2004). This change in demand is positive for substitutes and negative for complementary goods (Mulhern and Leone 1991). Moreover, competition among brands is called asymmetric when the effect of a price change of brand A on the demand for brand B is different from the effect of brand B on brand A (Carpenter et al. 1988). In this context extant literature refers to a brand’s price changes influencing another brand’s sales (gaining market share) as clout and, similarly, to a brand’s sales being affected by another brand’s price movements (losing market share) as vulnerability (Kamakura and Russell 1989).Four factors constitute the underlying effects responsible for price-induced sales shifts. First and second, there is current and future brand switching within the same as well as in other stores in the same category (Ailawadi et al. 2007, 2007). Third, a possible result are sales shifts in other categories in the same store (Ailawadi et al. 2007, 2007). Fourth, increased category or brand consumption is likely to occur following a price promotion (Ailawadi et al. 2007, 2007). In a similar vein, customers get detracted from purchasing in the focal product category when prices increase (Ailawadi et al. 2006).Previous research on cross-price effects focuses on brick-and-mortar settings where fast-moving consumer goods–mostly groceries–constitute the center of attention. In these studies, evidence of substitution and complementary effects among different brands and categories becomes apparent (Mulhern and Leone 1991, Walters and MacKenzie 1988). In addition, cross-price effects are found to be less pronounced compared to own-price effects (Leeflang and Parreño-Selva 2012). Furthermore, significant cross-brand effects exist among a substantial share of brands within a category. In this context different studies consistently find a two-digit percentage ratio of significant effects over all possible brand-to-brand effects within a category (e.g. Bezawada et al. 2009, Kamakura and Kang 2007, Leeflang et al. 2008, Song and Chintagunta 2006). In contrast, cross-competitive effects across categories are found to exist only among a fraction of the examined product categories. (Duvvuri et al. 2007, Leeflang and Parreño-Selva 2012). Moreover, research has revealed that there is asymmetric competition among price tiers and national as well as private brands (Blattberg and Wisniewski 1989, Wedel and Zhang 2004).One major difference between offline and online retailing can be seen in increased supply side transparency in e-commerce since most online retailers offer a multitude of different searching, filtering, and comparison possibilities for their products to create a more convenient shopping experience (Biswas and Biswas 2004, Rubin and Mantin 2012). Early predictions theorize the emergence of frictionless commerce characterized by highly competitive markets, enabling customers to easily obtain an overview of the products offered by a retailer within seconds (Bakos 1997, Varadarajan and Yadav 2002). Although information availability is high in fashion e-commerce brand competition is still not likely to exist between all brands within a category for these kind of products because of fashion products’ distinct characteristics.The classification of goods devised by the American Marketing Association groups products into either convenience, shopping, or specialty goods2Later on, a fourth dimension, preference goods, was added to the framework (Murphy and Enis 1986). In addition, the product classification was based on two dimensions—risk of making a faulty purchase and effort invested in the purchasing process (Murphy and Enis 1986).2, with the respective category depicting an item’s importance to the customer as well as the effort invested to purchase it. Given this classification, fashion products are considered specialty goods (American Marketing Association 1948, Copeland 1923, Murphy and Enis 1986). Customers have to invest little effort into buying convenience products, whereas the opposite is true for specialty products. They are generally very important to customers, and they thus invest substantial physical effort to be able to purchase these items (Murphy and Enis 1986). Nevertheless, customers avoid canvassing information about substitutes when it comes to shopping this type of product (Kaish 1967). There are two reasons for this customer behavior. First, customers ascribe the potential to satisfy their distinct needs only to a small set of brands, which leads to less substitution among alternatives as customers decline all but the preferred items and are willing to make an extra effort to obtain them (Bucklin 1963).The blocking of dissonance reduction serves as a second explanation for the lack of shopping activity. In a shopping context, cognitive dissonance occurs post-purchase if an item is important to the customer and turns out to have one or more inappropriate attributes (Kaish 1967). People generally seek to reduce dissonance in order to achieve consonance regarding their attitudes and mental accounts as well as their actions (Festinger 1970). Collecting product information helps reduce the anxiety that a product’s inappropriateness is only detected post-purchase, thereby reducing dissonance in the first place (Kaish 1967). Nevertheless, certain conditions exist when the possible anticipated dissonance is high but engaging in any activity does not promise to solve this dissonance (Festinger 1970). In this case, people refuse dissonance reduction and live with its discomfort (Festinger 1970). When shopping for fashion merchandise, product comparisons often do not yield sufficient information to reduce dissonance as for these goods, “the physical characteristics of the product do not reflect directly its functional characteristics” (Kaish 1967, p. 31). As a result, customers avoid comparing products as items are “purchased on the basis of brand preference stemming from habit or recommendation” (Kaish 1967, p. 30). Given this lack of extensive shopping activity, it is likely that customers do not extensively search for substitutes either.De Figueiredo (2000) developed a more current product classification scheme in which products are categorized based on the difficulty to judge an item’s quality on the web (Nikolaeva 2005, Walter et al. 2006). The continuum of product classes includes commodity products, quasi-commodity products, “look-and-feel” items, and “look-and-feel” items with variable quality (De Figueiredo 2000). The difficulty to judge a product’s quality online increases in the same order (Walter et al. 2006). Fashion items are considered to belong to the “look-and-feel” category containing differentiated goods as the evaluation of their appropriateness requires personal examination (Jung et al. 2014, Lal and Sarvary 1999). Moreover, customers are subject to higher degrees of perceived risk in online shopping situations (Biswas and Biswas 2004, Kirmani and Rao 2000). One possible reason is the inability to inspect products personally, leading to the risk of buying functionally inappropriate products. Another likely reason is the risk of dealing with a fraudulent seller not delivering purchased items after the customer has paid for them (Biswas and Biswas 2004, Laroche et al. 2005). The former reason specifically applies to “look-and-feel” goods (De Figueiredo 2000). Hence, customers strongly rely on signals on the web which help reduce perceived risk (Kirmani and Rao 2000). Extant research identifies branding as one of the strongest signals customers use in e-commerce (Baye and Morgan 2009, Kwon and Lennon 2009, Smith and Brynjolfsson 2001). Consequently, buyers regularly adhere to their individual choice sets of brands as they feel they are able to deduce a product’s adequacy based on brand reputation and thus do not have to attempt to judge item quality based on information available on the internet (De Figueiredo 2000).Summarizing, although information availability is high online customers have a rather small choice set for fashion products for which intense substitution occurs. This behavior stems particularly from increased perceived risk towards functional inappropriateness of fashion items as evaluating product quality is more difficult for differentiated “Look-and-Feel” products as a result of spatial distance between buyer and seller in e-commerce. The latter aspect is particularly different from brick-and-mortar settings. We therefore predict:Hypothesis 1Cross-brand competition is less pronounced in fashion e-commerce compared to the order of magnitude found in offline settings.Previous studies have shown that asymmetric competition is present in brick-and-mortar settings; particularly among different price tiers as well as between private brands and national brands (Blattberg and Wisniewski 1989, Song and Chintagunta 2006, Wedel and Zhang 2004). The preference distributions which cause the trade-off between quality and price prevailing in most markets lead to asymmetric competition among price tiers. In this context, promotions of high-price high-quality brands attract the majority of the customer base whereas price promotions by low-price, low-quality brands result in only a small share of customers who substitute these for upper-price-tier brands as customers do not receive an adequate alternative in terms of quality when purchasing discounted low-price brands (Blattberg and Wisniewski 1989). The same relationship holds for private brands and national brands as private brands are oftentimes characterized by lower price levels compared to national brands (Wedel and Zhang 2004). Hence, private brands are associated with lower clout and higher vulnerability when being subject to cross-competitive effects as has been shown empirically in different offline applications (Blattberg and Wisniewski 1989, Pauwels and Srinivasan 2004).In line with the big middle theory, there is evidence that large online retailers move towards a strategy of offering an assortment comparable to their offline counterparts (Ganesh et al. 2010). In addition, the majority of Western-world customers engage in online shopping and customer profiles are mostly similar online and offline (Ganesh et al., 2010; Kukar-Kinney et al., 2009). With similar assortments and customer profiles in place we predict similar quality distributions of brands and corresponding preferences among customers also to be present online. These aspects should thus result in asymmetric competition in the online context as well. Moreover, private brands usually pertain to lower price tiers in fashion e-commerce as well making asymmetries between private brands and national brands a likely outcome in this environment. Replicating results in existing literature we predict:Hypothesis 2aIn fashion e-commerce, national brands induce higher levels of competitive clout compared to private brands.In fashion e-commerce, private brands are subject to higher vulnerability compared to national brands.A leading European online fashion retailer provided us with a novel data-set consisting of more than 3.3 million observations of numerous apparel and shoes categories. Going forward, we choose two categories for further analyses of competitive patterns-women’s cardigans and men’s sneakers. We select this subset of two categories since we need to assume their independence in terms of competition. This is most likely the case as the above categories pertain to different genders as well as product groups (apparel and shoes respectively) and thus do not represent substitutes. The data cover the period between August 2013 and January 2014, spanning almost 150days with about 290,000 observations for the two categories under study. On SKU level they contain information on actual demand, undiscounted price, and offer price of both private and national brands in the German web shop. Due to the high number of SKUs belonging to the categories under study (about 3000 SKUs each), the retailer split each further into two subcategories. Since this split is also visible for customers on the website, we use it in our analysis as well.Going forward we select the 10 top selling brands per subcategory and aggregate data to brand level. Subsequently, we delete one brand per subcategory in the cardigans cluster since for these two brands we do not have sales observations for every day in the examined period which could pose difficulties in the estimation strategy. The number of SKUs per brand can vary in the course of a season since some styles become available in a later part of a season. This aspect may change the composition of a brand’s assortment on the website and may also change the average brand price. We therefore compute a price index per brand and day to control for this aspect. The price index is calculated as the average offer price divided by the average undiscounted price of all SKUs within a brand’s assortment. Price indexes generally follow a decreasing pattern over the season as a result of markdown practices.In addition, price levels are heterogeneously distributed between private and national brands in both examined product categories, which facilitates the detection of asymmetric patterns in the competitive structure. The vast majority of discounts in our data-set are not accompanied by a specific promotion prominently communicating the price reduction as they mostly stem from markdown practices. Price reductions, however, can easily be identified since a red price and a sales sign are attached to the product. In addition, we compute the revenue share per brand and day which is positive for every observation. Table 1depicts descriptive statistics.Additionally, we determine a composite of all remaining brands per subcategory to control for price and revenue share movements outside the subset under study (Song and Chintagunta 2006). The revenue share of the composite is computed as the sum of the revenue shares of all underlying brands. The price index, again, is defined by the average offer price divided by the average undiscounted price. This leaves us with a total of 18 brands and 2 composites (cardigans) as well as 20 brands and 2 composites (sneakers) per category for further analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
