@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic Fuzzy Rating Tracker (DYFRAT): a novel methodology for modeling real-time dynamic cognitive processes in rating scales

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The article presents an original methodology for measuring fuzziness in human rating data.It avoids traditional problems of standard rating scales and other types of fuzzy scales.It models fuzziness by measuring some real-time biometric information during the cognitive process of rating.Some real applications support the usefulness of the proposed novel methodology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rating-scales,Fuzzy rating scales,Real-time dynamic cognitive processes,Fuzzy measurement,Fuzzy modeling,Mouse tracking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rating scales (such as, Likert scales, Guttman scales, Feelings thermometers, etc.) represent simple tools for measuring attitudes, judgements and subjective preferences in human rating contexts. Because rating scales show some useful properties (e.g., measurement uniformity, considerable flexibility, statistically appealing), they represent popular and reliable instruments in socio-behavioral sciences. However, standard rating scales suffer also from some relevant limitations. For example, they fail in measuring vague and imprecise information and, above all, they are only able to capture the final outcome of the cognitive process of rating (i.e., the rater's response). To overcome these limitations, some fuzzy versions of these scales (e.g., fuzzy conversion scales, fuzzy rating scales) have been proposed over the years. However, also these more sophisticated scales show some important shortcomings (e.g., difficulty in fuzzy variables construction and potential lack of ecological validity). In this paper, we propose a novel methodology (DYFRAT) for modeling human rating evaluations from a fuzzy-set perspective. In particular, DYFRAT captures the fuzziness of human ratings by modeling some real-time biometric events that occur during the cognitive process of rating in an ecological measurement setting. Moreover, in order to show some important characteristics of the proposed methodology, we apply DYFRAT to some empirical rating situations concerning decision making and risk assessment scenarios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many empirical research areas such as, for instance, psychology, sociology, organizational and management sciences, marketing, and epidemiology, rating scales represent a widely used, simple and flexible tool for measuring attitudes, opinions, and subjective preferences [1–4]. Let us assume that we are interested in measuring a person's degree of happiness. We could do this in a number of different ways, but one direct and efficient approach would be simply to ask the person, ‘How happy are you?’ and require them evaluate themselves on a Likert-type rating scale, ranging from ‘very unhappy’ to ‘very happy’. Rating scales typically consists of a variable to be measured (e.g., ‘happiness’) and a set of anchor points from which the rater selects the most appropriate description (e.g., very unhappy, moderately unhappy, neither, moderately happy, very happy). One widely used type of rating scale is the so-called numerical scale, where the anchor points either explicitly or implicitly are defined numerically (e.g., 1: low, 2: average, 3: high). Like checklists, rating scales are used for a wide variety of assessment purposes. For example, rating scales can be used to have one individual evaluate another, for example, when a physician might asses a patient as to degree of obesity, but the rating scales can also be applied as self-report measures. Unlike other types of ratings, self-report scales require the person provide a direct and explicit rating of their own behavior/opinion/preference, etc. Of course, the main assumption behind self-report measures is that individuals are in the best position to report their own opinion in a direct and transparent way. The great diffusion and success of rating scales are mainly due to the following major reasons that are all well documented in the literature: (1) rating scales can be administered to large groups of respondents at one single setting; (2) they can be administered under conditions that guarantee anonymity; (3) they allow the rater to proceed at their own pace; (4) they present uniformity of procedure; (5) they allow for great flexibility – for example, take-home questionnaires; and (6) the results are more amenable to statistical analyses (in particular for numerical scales) [5].However, over the years several criticisms have been arisen against the empirical validity of rating scales. For example, because of the discrete and crisp nature of rating scales, some raters tend to avoid extreme categories in the anchor points (central tendency or restriction of range problem) [6]. In general, we may think of human opinions and subjective preferences as being characterized by more vague and imprecise information than the ones actually described by standard rating scales. Moreover, in some circumstances, the honesty assumption implicitly assumed in self-report rating administrations appears to be simply unrealistic. So, for example, in personnel selection surveys some candidates might not be so candid in admitting their imperfections and, therefore, the associated self-report evaluations could be definitively biased (e.g., [7]). Finally, another important limitation pertains the idea that what is being reported using rating evaluations is something that allows us to objectively explain and describe a person's behavior. However, several psychologists argue that such assumption is, in principle, ill-posed and that what we really need, instead, is to directly focus on the observable behavior involved in the process of rating (e.g., [8]).In order to overcome the limitations of standard rating scales, some researchers have applied fuzzy set theory (FST) to directly modeling imprecise features of human rating evaluations [9,10]. In particular, in the rating scale problem, FST has been mainly used in two different contexts: (i) for modeling data obtained by means of standard rating scales (fuzzy conversion scales) or (ii) for directly quantifying empirical evaluations using fuzzy rating scales. In the first case, FST is applied a-posteriori as a procedure for converting standard rating data into fuzzy data (i.e., raters express their judgements using a traditional rating scale which is subsequently converted into a fuzzy structure). By contrast, in the second case, FST is applied a-priori as a general interface for directly capturing fuzzy rating data (i.e. raters give their evaluations by means of computerized tools that allow to directly use fuzzy sets in place of crisp numbers).In line with these approaches, in the present contribution we propose a novel methodology, called DYFRAT (Dynamic Fuzzy Rating Tracker), to measure some relevant behavioral dynamics involved in the rating process. Likewise fuzzy rating scales and fuzzy conversion scales, also DYFRAT represents human rating evaluations in terms of fuzzy sets. However, unlike fuzzy conversion scales and fuzzy rating scale, DYFRAT captures (in addition) some physical and biometric characteristics underlying observable behaviors involved in the process of rating and considers fuzziness as a natural property that spontaneously arises from the observed data. In this respect, DYFRAT is a formal procedure that explicitly focuses on the behavioral dynamics of rating and provides a continuous on-line measure of the cognitive aspects involved in this process.The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In the second section we describe a comprehensive survey of the state-of-the-art of FST applications in human rating problems. In the third and fourth sections we present our new methodology. In the fifth section we describe a first computerized implementation of DYFRAT system. In the sixth section we show some empirical applications of DYFRAT to real data, whereas in the seventh section we conclude this article by providing some final comments.Fuzzy conversion scales (FCS) are computational procedures based on a fuzzy system which convert standard crisp rating data into a set of fuzzy data. Fig. 1a shows a graphical representation of the rationale underlying the FCS approach. In general, two perspectives can be adopted to derive the conversion scale procedure from crisp rating data: (i) an expert-based approach and (ii) an empirical-based approach. In the first perspective, a researcher (a-priori) sets the main features of the fuzzy variables (the number and shape of fuzzy sets, their overlapping degrees, etc.) as well as some properties of the fuzzy system used in the conversion process (input and output space definition, implication rules, implication surface, etc). In the second approach, the fuzzy variables, are obtained using suitable statistical or data-mining procedures applied on the original crisp data (e.g., fuzzy clustering, histogram based methods, probability-possibility transformations).FCS has found wide application in different empirical contexts. For instance, Chang and Chung used FCS to study service quality of domestic airline companies [11], Chan and Kao analyzed customers’ satisfaction [12], Benítez et al. proposed a FST based method to measure hotels quality [13], Lalla et al. developed a system for teaching activity evaluations [14], Costa et al. proposed an application for perception of disability evaluation [15], Li developed a novel type of fuzzy Likert scale [10], Moon et al. described a system for ranking candidates in military organizations [16], and Chen et al. proposed a fuzzy approach for selecting environment-watershed plans [17].However, fuzzy conversion scales are also characterized by some limitations which are related to their general definition of fuzzy variables. For example, aspects such as the number or type of fuzzy sets and the amount of overlap between consecutive fuzzy sets in the scale, represent all sensitive steps in the scale construction process. Moreover, the realization of the conversion procedure, usually implemented by means of specific fuzzy systems, is generally not a trivial task as it requires several delicate phases (e.g., evaluation of the uniqueness of the final fuzzy representation, measurement of the overall goodness-of-fit). In general, although the adoption of the empirical-based methodology may overcome some of the drawbacks of the expert-based approach [18,19], FSC still inherits some of the limitations of standard rating scales, such as for example, the problem of selecting extreme categories in the scale and, more importantly, the fact that this methodology cannot provide any information about the underlying dynamics of rating.A Fuzzy rating scale (FRS) is a graphical tool which allows to collect human rating data by means of a computerized procedure entirely based on the FST rationale. Generally, the FRS procedure permits to directly draw, on a continuous scale with a movable cursor (or mouse pointer), a fuzzy set which would then represent the subjective judgment or evaluation of the rater. A two-step paradigm is usually assumed in FRS applications. First, the respondent chooses a point on a continuous scale as h(er/is) preferred position (Fig. 1b(i)). Next, to express how fuzzy the rater feels about the original preference, s(he) draws a line to the right (Fig. 1b(ii)) and another one to the left (Fig. 1b(iii)). In an alternative version of the FRS procedure, a triangular or trapezoidal fuzzy set lying on a continuous line can be directly used, as a movable cursor, by the rater who subsequently can modify it by expanding or contracting its sides in order to express the response uncertainty. Also FRS has been successfully applied in many real contexts. For instance, Hesketh and Hesketh proposed, for the first time, a measurement tool for subjective attitudes called computerized fuzzy rating scale [20–22]. Costas et al. applied fuzzy rating scales for the evaluation of psychological constructs [23], finally, Gil et al. described a free fuzzy-numbered response format questionnaire and compared it with standard rating scales [24].However, the application of fuzzy scaling methods can also be problematic. In particular, FRS can lack some ecological validity as subjects must follow specific training periods for learning how the instrument exactly works, what the concept of fuzziness is and, above all, how it can be used to directly express their judgements or evaluations. Moreover, FRS can also be criticized because this technique asks respondents to provide information that may seem difficult or even tricky to them. For this reason, the basic assumption underpinning FRS, namely that human raters are able to explicitly express the fuzziness of their judgements or evaluations by means of fuzzy sets, could be questionable. Therefore, due to the high complexity of the rating procedure, we cannot exclude that in some situations data collected using the FRS framework could be distorted or even meaningless [25–27].The traditional rating scale paradigm often regards human rating as a discrete-stage process in which the final response represents its final stage. Unfortunately, the observed final response captures only the outcome of the rating process while the real-time cognitive dynamics that occur during this process are lost. To overcome this relevant limitation, we propose a new methodology (DYFRAT) which is designed to track real-time mental processes by using the so-called Mouse Tracking Methodology (MTM). This methodology allows to record peculiar cognitive information derived from the motor control of the computer-mouse (or other pointer devices such as, for example, trackball, joystick, light pen, wii system, laser pen, etc.). Just as saccadic eye movements, brain waves, pupil diameters, reaction-times, also computer-mouse movements can provide a continuous on-line measure of the cognitive processes involved in human ratings [28,29]. Moreover, several studies have shown as the computer-mouse can be considered as a reliable, cheap, non intrusive and accurate data acquisition device that can successfully be used in cognitive as well as behavioral research [30–35]. In the DYFRAT approach, the process of human rating is described as a temporal and dynamic changing course of data information [36,37]. More precisely, because subjective judgements or evaluations can be conceived as the output of peculiar underlying cognitive processes[36,38,39], DYFRAT uses some biometric physical measures (which are associated with the rating) for modeling human judgements or opinions. In particular, such physical measures are assumed to be observable indicators of the dynamic process of rating which constitute the antecedents of the final rating outcome. In the DYFRAT approach these physical components are represented by: (a) the motor activation involved in the process of rating and (b) the overall time spent by the rater to provide h(er/is) final rating outcome. The first component is measured by means of tracking computer-mouse movements whereas the second component is measured in terms of response time – RT (recorded in ms). Finally, in our approach both the components are integrated into a common and comprehensive fuzzy model which allows to express the overall fuzziness of the combined temporal and motor dimensions of rating.DYFRAT consists of a data-capturing procedure which implements a MTM based computerized interface for collecting the motor and temporal components in the process of rating and a data-modeling procedure which provides a fuzzy model for the recorded information.Consider a questionnaire with J items. Each item is composed by its description (usually a question about a topic) and a rating scale with K distinct levels (e.g., K=5 for a five-point Likert scale). In the DYFRAT approach, a questionnaire is represented according to a customized graphical interface. In particular, for each item j in the questionnaire, the DYFRAT data-capturing interface is based on two consecutive frames (see Fig. 2a and b). After a participant clicks a start button, a window with the item description appears on the screen (first frame). A calibrated pause separates this first frame from the second frame. At the end of the pause, a pseudo-circular scale with K levels appears while the mouse cursor is allocated to the center of the screen (second frame). A participant can give h(er/is) response by mouse-clicking the chosen level of the scale (the selected anchor point). Meanwhile, the DYFRAT system records the streaming of the x–y coordinates of the computer mouse (at a given sampling rate) as well as the total response time as the difference between the time at the mouse-clicking on the selected anchor point and the onset time of the presentation of the pseudo-circular scale on the screen. Note that the two frame-phases allow to separate information about the reading process (involved during the presentation of the item description) and the response process (involved during the presentation of the rating scale). This distinction ensures that mouse movements and response times can be related to distinct cognitive components. The idea behind the usage of a pseudo-circular scale in place of a traditional linear-type scale or arc-type scale [34] is justified by the fact that a pseudo-circular configuration yields the largest degrees of freedom for mouse-movement recordings [37]. However, unlike genuine circular scales, a pseudo-circular representation still preserves the ordinal property between consecutive anchor points in the scale as it shows a visible breakpoint between the first level and the last level of the rating scale. The proposed configuration can be considered as a standard linear scale which has been bent in order to take into account the properties of both standard linear scales as well as circular ones.The collected data are represented by an I×J array D, that is to say, I observations (raters) containing J structured measures (rater's measures). The entry dijof D denotes a generalized rating measure defined as:dij=〈zij,tij,pij〉,i=1,…,I;j=1,…,Jwithzij∈ℕ,tij∈ℝ+, andpij=(xij,yij)∈ℝNij×2withNij∈ℕ. In particular, zijrepresents the final ordinal response provided by rater i to item j, tijindicates the corresponding response time, whereas xijand yijare Nij×1 vectors of Cartesian coordinates associated to the streaming of the x–y coordinates of the computer mouse movements (movements path of length Nij).The main idea is to construct a new I×J arrayD˜, called the fuzzy data array of D, by transforming each generalized rating measure dijinto a corresponding fuzzy setd˜ijthat expresses the overall fuzziness of the rating score associated with the (i, j) response. Therefore, according to our rationale, we consider mouse-movements and response times as two particular sources of uncertainty, namely spatial uncertainty and temporal uncertainty. By contrast, the ordinal crisp response is understood as the final output of the dynamic decision process. A two-step procedure is used to derive the final fuzzy representationd˜ijfrom dij. In the first step, we model (in an independent fashion) the spatial uncertainty and the temporal uncertainty. In the second step, we provide the final fuzzy model representation,d˜ij, by integrating these two sources of uncertainty. In particular, the rater's final response is captured by the corecore(d˜ij)of the fuzzy setd˜ij, the spatial uncertainty is described by the supportsupp(d˜ij), whereas the temporal uncertainty is modeled by the membership functionμd˜ij.11We recall that, given a collection X of elements, the support of the fuzzy setd˜on X is the collectionsupp(d˜)={x∈X∣μd˜(x)>0}, whereas the core is the subsetcore(d˜)={x∈X∣μd˜(x)=maxz∈Xμd˜(z)}.In what follows we describe the two-step procedure to derive the final fuzzy setd˜ijaccording to the DYFRAT framework.First step: In the first stage of the fuzzy modeling procedure, a fuzzy setp˜ijrepresenting the spatial uncertainty is constructed from the generalized rating measure dij. In particular, to derivep˜ijwe first remove eventual imprecision due to hand motor controls and/or computer mouse adjustments. To this end, the x–y coordinates in pijthat are located near to the starting point (the center of the scale), the points that are recorded in the breakpoint area, and those ones that are beyond the border of the pseudo-circular scale, are all removed by applying a predefined filter which defines the area for acceptable x–y coordinates. The refined pijis next transformed into a vectormijcof angles (expressed in radians) by using the well-known atan2 function, namelymijc=atan2(pij).22The atan2(y, x) function is the arc tangent of the two variables x and y and uses the signs of both arguments in order to compute the quadrant of the result which lies in (−π, π).The fuzzy setp˜ijis constructed from the histogram of the radian measures collected inmijc. We callp˜ijthe spatial fuzzy set of dij. There are several procedures that can be adopted to derive fuzzy sets from data histograms [19]. In the DYFRAT approach we adopted a heuristic procedure based on the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm [40]. The PSO algorithm looks for the best fuzzy set that maximizes the total entropy with respect to the data histogram [41–43]. In particular, for the maximization algorithm we used the well known total fuzzy entropy measure proposed by De Luca and Termini [44]. Several convex as well as non-convex fuzzy sets can be used for representing a histogram (e.g., triangular, trapezoidal, Gaussian) [45,46]. However, for the sake of simplicity, in this contribution we opted for the simplest triangular format which is associated to the well-known LR-representation [47]. In this respect, the triangular membership function may also be useful when one wants to analyze these variables on the basis of some widely used fuzzy statistical techniques (e.g., [48,49]). Some examples of fuzzy sets derived from the radian histograms are shown in Fig. 3. In particular, Fig. 3a shows a pattern of movements characterized by a modest spatial uncertainty which corresponds to a fuzzy set with a narrow support. By contrast, Fig. 3b shows a pattern of movements in which the spatial uncertainty is related to the rater's choice between two possible alternatives. Note that in this second configuration the associated fuzzy set has now a wider support and its core has shifted toward the right side. Finally, Fig. 3c presents an interesting pattern in which the spatial uncertainty is related to the choice among three distinct options. This last configuration shows the largest support for the derived fuzzy set.Second step: In the second modeling step, the final fuzzy representation, is obtained by transforming the spatial fuzzy setp˜ijinto a new fuzzy setd˜ijwhich integrates the spatial component with the temporal information of the rating process. In particular, the membership function ofd˜ijis defined according to the following conditional equations:(1)μd˜ij(x)=0.5−(22γij−1)·[0.5−μp˜ij(x)]2γij,Fˆ(tij)>Fˆ(t¯j)and0≤μp˜ij(x)≤0.51−(20.5ωij)·[1−μp˜ij(x)]0.5ωij,Fˆ(tij)>Fˆ(t¯j)and0.5<μp˜ij(x)≤1μp˜ij(x)νij,Fˆ(tij)<Fˆ(t¯j)and0≤μp˜ij(x)≤1μp˜ij(x),Fˆ(tij)=Fˆ(t¯j)and0≤μp˜ij(x)≤1withγij=λijFˆ(tij),ωij=1γij,andνij=12Fˆ(tij)and whereFˆdenotes the empirical cumulative distribution function of the response times sample tj=(t1j, t2j, …, tIj) associated to item j whereast¯jindicates the sample mean of tj. The first and the second lines of formula 1 act as an expansion modifier which increases the overall uncertainty represented in the original spatial fuzzy setp˜ij. In particular, if the recorded time tijfor rater i to item j is larger than the corresponding average timet¯j, thenp˜ijis nonlinearly expanded according to a model parameter γijwhich, in turn, depends on the cumulative density value of tijand the shape parameter λij33λijis a coefficient which maximizes the overall fuzziness of the set. Given the fuzzy set of movementsp˜ij, the best value for λijis obtained by adopting an iterative optimization algorithm which maximizes the Kaufmann index [50]. Because the objective function is bounded above, the algorithm is always able to yield the maximum of the function. However, for basic triangular representations λijcan be simply chosen to be ≥4.. By contrast, the third line of formula 1 acts as a concentration modifier which decreases the overall uncertainty represented inp˜ij. In particular, if the recorded time tijfor rater i to item j is smaller than the corresponding average sample timet¯j, thenp˜ijis nonlinearly concentrated according to a shape parameter νijwhich is inversely related to the cumulative density value of tij. Finally, the fourth line of formula 1 represents the fuzzy set when the observed response time tijis perfectly equivalent to the average response time for item j. In this last case the new fuzzy setd˜ijsimply boils down to the original spatial fuzzy setp˜ij. Note that, that the third line of formula 1 corresponds to the well-known linguistic hedge called concentration which allows to reduce the fuzziness of the set. Similarly, the first and second lines of formula 1 is inspired by the Zadeh's linguist hedge called intensification[51] which allows to intensify (to expand) the fuzziness of the set. In our approach the expansion was created ad-hoc in order to obtain an increasing level of fuzziness for the set. More precisely, ifμp˜ij(x)≤0.5we expanded the base of the set, otherwise we reduced the peak of the set. Fig. 4shows a graphical summary of this expansion/concentration transformation.However, in the DYFRAT context we stress that the equations used for the integration between movement patterns and response times are only used according to a descriptive fashion and, therefore, they cannot be conceived as linguistic hedges in a strict fuzzy logic sense. Moreover, we preferred to develop a novel fuzzy modifier according to a statistically oriented perspective (e.g., using the cumulative distribution function for the response times and the observed average response time for the item) because we were interested in providing a rational procedure to transform a fuzzy set according to observed distributional data (empirical distribution of times and empirical distribution of movements).In sum, the overall idea underlying the definition of the novel modifier was based on current theories about decision making (e.g., [52]). In particular, according to these theories intuitive judgements or evaluations occur quickly, effortlessly, and almost automatically, such that the final responses (but not necessarily the underlying processes) are accessible to consciousness. By contrast, more elaborated or conflicting reasonings occur more slowly, require some additional efforts, and presumably involve some more steps that are directly accessible to consciousness. The latter type of responses are usually characterized by a much larger level of uncertainty. With our model we tried to capture this psychological intuition according to a purely descriptive representation.Fuzzy summary measures can play a relevant role in highlighting important properties of the final fuzzy setd˜ij. In the DYFRAT framework we implemented the following basic and well known fuzzy set measures:•Kaufmann index[50]:(2)K(d˜ij)=2card(d˜ij)·∑x|μd˜ij(x)−δ(x)|,whereδ(x)=1,ifμd˜ij(x)≥0.50,ifμd˜ij(x)<0.5where card(.) is the cardinality of the final fuzzy setd˜ij.Fuzzy entropy[44]:(3)H(d˜ij)=−∑x[μd˜ij(x)log(μd˜ij(x))]−[(1−μd˜ij(x))log(1−μd˜ij(x))]COG based Fuzzy centroid[45]:(4)CR(d˜ij)=∑xx·μd˜ij(x)·∑xμd˜ij(x)−1Total spread (or length of the fuzzy set support):(5)TS(d˜ij)=max(supp(d˜ij))−min(supp(d˜ij))In addition, we also considered a new simple fuzzy measure, called the intensification index, derived from the fuzzy entropy measure. In particular, the intensification index is defined as follows:(6)HR(d˜ij,p˜ij)=H(d˜ij)−H(p˜ij)H(p˜ij)whereH(p˜ij)andH(d˜ij)indicate the entropies associated to the spatial and final fuzzy sets, respectively. Values ofHR(d˜ij,p˜ij)<0indicate the quantity of information which is subtracted by concentration from the spatial fuzzy setp˜ij, whereas values ofHR(d˜ij,p˜ij)>0indicate the quantity of information which is added by expansion onp˜ij.One important comment is in order concerning the defuzzification measures adopted for the final fuzzy set. In general, several measures can be selected to perform the defuzzification of a fuzzy set [53]. In this first implementation of the DYFRAT system we opted for a COG based index because of its simplicity and high flexibility. In particular, the COG centroid is a measure which fully takes into account the integration between movements and times. More specifically, unlike other defuzzification measures (e.g., first of maximum FoM, last of maximum LoM, mean of maxima MEoM, etc.), the COG index also considers the weighted information provided by the membership function of the final fuzzy set.In sum, these measures can be used, among other things, for quantifying some peculiar information stored in the final fuzzy sets (e.g., the amount of ambiguity, fuzziness, uncertainty, average information), for detecting eventual outliers in the data (i.e., subjects that show anomalous spatial/temporal information), as well as for running further statistical analysis. In particular, the total spread can be used for detecting those individuals who use the computer-mouse in an improper way (outliers for mouse-movements). Similarly, the intensification index can be used for detecting anomalous subjects with lower or greater response times (outliers for response times). We will provide some examples of indices applications in the sixth section of the manuscript.Data-capturing procedure: The first application consists in an executable stand-alone package available for Windows, OSX and Unix systems developed in Processing 2.0 (http://processing.org). All the main features of the DYFRAT graphical interface can be modified by the user (e.g., temporal delay between-items or within-items, labels positions, font type and text size, scale diameter, scale stroke, breakpoint width, mouse-movements sample-rate). In particular, label positions can be set to either a fixed or random configuration. In the latter case, the position of the first label is located at random on the circular scale and all the other labels are reconfigured accordingly to reconstruct the linear order. Moreover, the user can also modify the questionnaire by choosing the number of items and the levels of the scale as well as the textual information describing the scale levels. The user can manage the application by modifying specific textual files (placed in the application main folder) that contain all the application parameters. When the application is launched, the files are automatically loaded. Fig. 5a shows an example of the final DYFRAT graphical interface. For each combination of rater i and item j, the application provides two output files (textual format). The first output contains information related to the rater's responses (mouse movements in Cartesian coordinates, degrees, ordinal crisp values for the final response, response time, on-set and off-set values). The second output is instead a pre-formatted textual file containing information that is used as input for the data-modeling application.Data-modeling procedure: The second application consists of a GUI-based system developed in Matlab for Windows, OSX and Unix systems that implements the modeling steps of the DYFRAT methodology (see Fig. 5b). All the features involved in the analysis (e.g., type of filters, histogram of movements, PSO parameters) can be set by the user. Moreover, different types of analysis (e.g., subject-by-subject, item-by-item, global) with different characteristics (temporized or static analysis) can be selected. Finally, the application provides a single output containing the main results of the analysis. These are organized by means of two-way (two-dimensional matrices) as well as three-way array structures (three-dimensional matrices). A detailed information about the functioning of the DYFRAT system is available in the DYFRAT User's guide that can be downloaded from the dedicated web-site.44The entire DYFRAT package (data-capturing procedure + data-modeling procedure) can be freely downloaded from http://polorovereto.unitn.it/∼luigi.lombardi/DYFRAT.htmlBy way of illustration we consider three simple applications using the DYFRAT methodology. The first example is about the evaluation of a well known cognitive problem in decision making. The second application considers data about rash driving behaviors among young people aged 18–26. Finally, the third application illustrates how one can perform an outlier detection analysis using the DYFRAT framework.General context and motivation: In cognitive decision making [52,54], moral judgements and dilemmas are relevant phenomena characterized by high levels of uncertainty in individuals responses. In this application, we used a moral dilemma based on the well-known trolley scenario[52,54–56]:A trolley is running out of control down a track. In its path are five people who have been tied to the track by a madman. Fortunately, you can flip a switch that will lead the trolley down a different track to safety. Unfortunately, there is a single person tied to that track. Do you agree to flip the switch?In general, individuals react to the dilemma by using their personal moral beliefs. The trolley scenario is an example of a setting engaging some levels of emotional processing which, in turn, might affect people's judgments to such an extent that some individuals may hesitate in providing the final response. Researchers working in decision making (e.g., [54,57]) stress the fact that moral evaluations can be distinguished in two components: moral intuition and moral reasoning. Moral intuition occurs quickly, effortlessly, and automatically, such that the final judgment (but not the underlying process) is accessible to consciousness, whereas moral reasoning occurs more slowly, requires some effort, and involves at least some steps that are accessible to consciousness. In this first example, we studied the relationship between response uncertainty, as measured by the Kaufmann index of the final fuzzy set, and moral judgment as represented by the centroid of the same fuzzy set. We expect that the individuals who show a very strong disagreement with the action described in the trolley scenario (moral intuition raters) will be characterized by very fast responses with low levels of uncertainty. By contrast, those who are characterized by a more moral thinking attitude (moral reasoning raters) will show less extreme responses with larger values of uncertainty. Because the trolley scenario may activate not necessarily conscious underlying processes in the rater, we believe that DYFRAT can represent an ideal methodology for testing this hypothesis.Data-analysis and results: The trolley dilemma was administered to a group of students (I=103, 47 males, age 18–23: 70.87 %, age 24–27: 19.42%, age 28–36: 2.91 %, age≥37: 3.88%) from the University of Trento (Italy) and the responses were collected using the DYFRAT graphical interface. In particular, participants used a pseudo-circular scale with five response levels (strongly disagree=1, disagree=2, neither=3, agree=4, strongly agree=5). Fig. 6shows two empirical patterns of mouse movements with the final fuzzy sets. In particular, Fig. 6a represents an empirical pattern with a low uncertainty/fuzziness, by contrast Fig. 6b shows a pattern with a higher level of uncertainty. Table 1reports some results for the two selected subjects.The scatterplot between response uncertainty and moral judgment evaluation is presented in Fig. 7. The result of the graphical analysis shows that the raters with fuzzy centroid values closer to the extreme anchor point “strongly disagree” are characterized by very low levels of response uncertainty (for these individuals the Kaufmann index is very low). By contrast, raters with fuzzy centroid values closer to less extreme or intermediate anchor points (disagree or neither) showed much larger levels of uncertainty in the rating process. In particular, it is interesting to note a positive linear trend between these two variables (the higher the value of the rating judgment, the larger the level of the observed response uncertainty). The linear model fitted on data showed a good fit (R2=0.6) and a statistically significant relation between the two variables (βCR=0.39, p<0.01). This result is in line with the theoretical expectation that moral intuition raters are characterized by more extreme, quick, effortless, and automatic final responses. In sum, this application shows how DYFRAT can be considered as an efficient and elegant procedure to represent the underlying mechanisms involved in the cognitive process of rating in moral dilemmas.General context and motivation: In this second application we studied the effects of gender and driving experience on self-report measures about reckless driving in a group of young adults. High rates of traffic fatalities among young people continue to be a very serious, worldwide problem (e.g., [58]). Nowadays, there are several evidences that show how young drivers are generally more likely to perform risky behaviors or neglect precautions while driving than more experienced drivers [58,59]. In particular, several studies have shown that inexperienced young drivers’ ability to perceive risk accurately is generally low [60,61]. Moreover, young men seem to consider reckless driving less serious than do young women [62] and, to some extent, this tendency seems not to be necessarily rationally (or consciously) based [63]. Because in this sensitive context, self-report ratings can be influenced by implicit aspects, we used the DYFRAT interface to track and collect real-time behavioral data occurring during the rating process.Data analysis and results: A six-item questionnaire was adapted from a previous reckless driving scale [64] and administered to a group of young drivers (I=60, 38 males, age 18–23: 43.33%, age 24–28: 28.33%, age≥29: 28.33%) from the Trentino region (North-East Italy). The only criteria for inclusion in the study were possession of a driving license and at least six months of driving experience. Table 2reports the item descriptions. Participants were asked to read each item carefully and report how often they used to drive according to the described way. Data were collected using the DYFRAT graphical interface and ratings were made on a 5-point scale, ranging from 1 (never) to 5 (very often). In Figs. 8and 9we illustrate four empirical patterns (two females and two males) on the second item only. Table 3shows the DYFRAT results for these selected cases.The dependent variables of the study were the fuzzy summary measures (fuzzy centroid, total spread, fuzzy entropy, Kaufmann index, intensification index) and the crisp rating response, whereas the independent variables were the factors gender and driving experience (at two levels: <3; ≥3 years). A t-test for independent samples was separately performed for each item in the questionnaire. The results of the analysis are reported in Table 4.As expected, the observed differences were in line with what documented in the reckless driving literature with male drivers reporting more frequently risky behaviors than female drivers. However, more interesting differences between the two groups emerged when the analysis was repeated using the fuzzy summary statistics as dependent variables. In particular, sensation seeking and more aggressive driving styles (items 3 and 6) were found to be more characteristic of young male drivers and less of young female drivers. In addition, the male group reported on a higher appraisal of driving as a challenge than the female group (item 5). In general, it seemed that young male drivers tended to disregard more potential negative outcomes in comparison to women. By contrast, young female drivers tended to perceive driving as more threatening in comparison to male. Finally, an illuminating difference was observed between not expert drivers (with less than 3 years of driving experience) and more expert drivers (with at least 3 years of driving experience). In particular, not expert drivers considered alcohol consumption (item 6) less serious and less likely to result in a dangerous source for potential harm than the more expert-drivers reported.General context and motivation: In this last example we illustrate how the DYFRAT methodology can be used to perform outlier detection analysis in a dynamic rating setting. In general, in a data sample an outlier can be defined as a data point or data observation that appears to deviate markedly from other observations in the sample [65,66]. Of course, this definition implicitly entails a sort of distance metric to measure single data-point deviation from the data sample. An alternative and more general definition for outliers is a subset of observations which appears to be inconsistent with the remainder of observations in the sample [66]. In our context, outliers refer to anomalous measure values describing the temporal and spatial dynamics underlying the mechanism involved in the cognitive process of rating. In this respect, two particular fuzzy summary measures, the total spread and the intensification index, seem to be appropriate statistics to detect eventual anomalies in the spatial and temporal components of the rating process as measured by computer-mouse movements and relative response time, respectively.Data analysis and results: For the sake of simplicity, here we illustrate the outlier detection procedure using only the data associated to the fifth item of the reckless questionnaire described in the former application. We recall that this item described a situation where an individual drives under the influence of alcohol (see Table 2).Fig. 10a shows the total spread measure as a function of the subject identification number (ID) in the questionnaire. Note that there are three data points (outliers) which are clearly isolated and inconsistent with the main cluster of points. These outliers correspond to raters that have shown patterns of mouse movements that markedly deviate from the other spatial patterns in the sample. Fig. 11shows the corresponding empirical patterns of mouse movements. Fig. 10b shows the intensification index HRas a function of subject ID. In this graphical representation there is only one rater (i=47) who is characterized by a very fast response time relative to the response times variance for the group of raters. Finally, we remark that in some situations it can be useful to produce a scatter plot between the total spread statistic and the intensification index. This combined representation would be used to jointly detect eventual anomalies in the spatial and temporal components of the rating process.In this paper we proposed a novel methodology (DYFRAT) for measuring the fuzziness of human rating situations from an original perspective. By considering human rating as a temporal and dynamic changing course of information in which the final rater's response is only the outcome of peculiar latent cognitive processes, we modeled fuzziness as the result of the integration between two important physical/biometric measures. We adopted the mouse tracking methodology for capturing the motor and temporal components of the rating process. Such components were computed by the streaming of x–y computer-mouse coordinates and the overall response times, respectively. In order to provide a final model representation for the rating data, we integrated such information using a fuzzy modeling paradigm. In particular, the motor component was represented by an appropriate fuzzy set whereas the temporal component was included by modifying the shape of the spatial fuzzy set. The final fuzzy representation included all the information available from the response process (i.e., the final response, the temporal and spatial information, the fuzziness of the response, etc). To better illustrate the DYFRAT features, we also described two real applications from decision making and risk assessment contexts. The results suggested how DYFRAT can measure important features of dynamic decision process. We further showed as DYFRAT could be used to perform an outlier detection analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In sum, unlike other fuzzy scales, DYFRAT allows to express the fuzziness of the human rating process by integrating two important physical measures. In this respect, DYFRAT always guarantees an ecological setting for cognitive measurements (e.g., it does not ask respondents to learn what fuzziness is and it works to express judgements/evaluations fuzziness). Moreover, DYFRAT allows to model fuzziness as a natural property which spontaneously arises from some biometric measures (mouse-movements and response times) while respondents use a simple and user-friendly computer device to express their evaluations.The proposed methodology can be applied in several research fields. For instance, decision making contexts as well as risk assessment situations may require reliable instruments for measuring human uncertainty. Clinical psychologists as well as organizational psychologists may use this instrument for personnel selection problems. However, several other general contexts, such as for instance formative and teaching evaluation, vocational training assessment, decision support systems, quality control and assessment, medical decision making, prevention and treatment assessment, political and social interviews, performance appraisal, military promotion screening, ranking systems, etc., may all require sophisticated tools for adequately measuring the natural uncertainty which arises from these complex situations. We think that DYFRAT can be a reliable, simple and cheap methodology for appropriately addressing such measurement problems.