@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Color image segmentation using PDTDFB domain hidden Markov tree model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The joint statistics and mutual information of the PDTDFB transform coefficients are studied.The PDTDFB transform coefficients are modeled using a HMT statistical model with Gaussian mixtures.The intra-scale, inter-scale, and inter-direction dependencies are captured comprehensively.A PDTDFB domain HMT statistical model based color image segmentation scheme is developed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Color image segmentation,Pyramidal dual-tree directional filter bank,Hidden Markov tree,Parameter estimation,Information fusion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The pyramidal dual-tree directional filter bank (PDTDFB) transform is a new image decomposition, which has many advantages, such as multiscale and multidirectional transform, efficient implementation, high angular resolution, low redundant ratio, and shiftable subbands. In this paper, we present a new color image segmentation algorithm based on PDTDFB domain hidden Markov tree (HMT) model. Firstly, the joint statistics and mutual information of the PDTDFB coefficients are studied. Then, the PDTDFB coefficients are modeled using a HMT model with Gaussian mixtures, which can effectively capture the intra-scale, inter-scale, and inter-direction dependencies. Finally, a color image segmentation using PDTDFB domain HMT model is developed, in which expectation–maximization (EM) parameter estimation, Bayesian multiscale raw segmentation, context based multiscale fusion, and majority-vote based color component fusion are used. Experimental evidence shows that the proposed color image segmentation algorithm has very effective segmentation results in comparison with the state-of-the-art segmentation methods recently proposed in the literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
IMAGE segmentation is a key task in image processing aiming at partitioning a digital image into multiple objects which share some common properties [1]. Image segmentation is a critical issue as the quality of its outcomes has a strong influence on the posterior image understanding task. Among its practical applications are medical imaging, traffic control systems, object location in satellite images, machine vision, etc. In recent years, a number of very inspiring and pioneering image segmentation algorithms have been developed [2]. These algorithms have proven to be successful in many applications, but none of them are generally applicable to all images, and different algorithms are usually not equally suitable for a particular application [3].The pyramidal dual-tree directional filter bank (PDTDFB) transform is a new image decomposition, which is recently proposed by Nguyen et al. The PDTDFB transform has the following advantages: multiscale and multidirectional transform, efficient implementation, high angular resolution, low redundant ratio, shiftable subbands, and provide local phase information. Based on PDTDFB transform, we proposed a new color image segmentation algorithm using PDTDFB domain HMT model, in which the intra-scale, inter-scale, and inter-direction dependencies are utilized effectively.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A review of previous related work is presented in Section 2. Section 3 presents the basic theory of PDTDFB transform. In Section 4, we study the marginal and joint statistics of PDTDFB transform coefficients. Section 5 examines the dependencies between PDTDFB transform coefficients using mutual information. Section 6 presents the HMT statistical model in PDTDFB domain. Section 7 introduces the new color image segmentation using PDTDFB domain HMT model. Simulation results in Section 8 will be dedicated to the description of a variety of simulation experiments, which will illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed scheme. Finally, conclusions will be briefed in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new approach for color image segmentation based on PDTDFB domain HMT statistical model is introduced in this paper. By concisely modeling and fusing the PDTDFB transform coefficients statistical behavior of color image at multiple scales, the proposed approach can produce a robust and accurate segmentation of color images. The proposed approach yields not one final segmentation but a range of segmentations at different scales. Results obtained on the Microsoft Research Cambridge database, and Segmentation Evaluation Database indicates that the proposed color image algorithm achieves better quantitative results than four known color image segmentation algorithms. However, in this paper, the over-segmentation problem is not described. Future work will focus on eliminating these drawbacks.