@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of e-commerce websites using fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS based on E-S-QUAL

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing a fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS based on E-S-QUAL for evaluating e-commerce.Utilizing fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS to reflect the hierarchical structure.Applying E-S-QUAL for assessing e-commerce website service quality effectively.Conducting the case study to understand in a better way the evaluation process.Conducting a validation test with other MCDM to verify the robustness of method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evaluation of e-commerce websites,B2C e-commerce websites,Fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS based on E-S-QUAL,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the wake of the rapid emergence of e-commerce, its evaluation is of great theoretical and practical importance. Among the various types of e-commerce, business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce has become a key, and especially influential, retailing channel. Its ascendancy raises core issues with respect to how the customer is to be satisfied by, and therefore inclined to trust, e-commerce websites. B2C e-commerce website evaluation, therefore, is an important related issue. First, while a number of studies have studied B2C e-commerce website evaluation using various multiple-criteria-decision-making (MCDM) methods, they have focused only on the perceived service quality of B2C e-commerce websites. In fact, it is generally recognized that service quality is determined by the difference between the expected service level (which expectation is derived from information obtained before the service experience) and the actual, perceived service level; this concept, then, should be also be afforded due consideration in B2C e-commerce website evaluation. Second, among the various MCDM approaches, TOPSIS, which involves the consideration of both the positive-ideal solution (PIS) and the negative-ideal solution (NIS), is especially pertinent to the complex decision-making entailed in the evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites. Third, the human element of subjectivity in the evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites needs to be considered in order to enable modeling of real-life website-evaluation situations. Finally, the hierarchical structure of the evaluation criteria between the main dimensions and their sub-criteria should be considered. To reflect these issues, in this paper, we present a fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS based on E-SERVQUAL (E-S-QUAL). This approach effectively considers the raised issues and preserves the core concept of E-S-QUAL (the extended version of SERVQUAL) for measurement of electronic service quality in the e-commerce environment. The empirical case study of B2C e-commerce provides the researchers and practitioners to understand in a better way the evaluation process from a practical point of view. In addition, core finding of this study is that the comparison results with other MCDM methods further verify the robustness of the proposed approach. It implies that this method potentially can be applied to performance evaluation of similar service sectors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The advent and especially the more recent development and increasing sophistication of the Internet has facilitated the rapid growth of e-commerce [1]. It has become increasingly common for consumers as well as companies to buy products and services this way, owing to the easy accessibility of high-quality products and services in an overall context of convenience in which time- and money savings are maximized [2]. According to the nature of its business transactions, e-commerce can generally be classified into five types: business-to business (B2B), business-to-consumer (B2C), consumer-to-consumer (C2C), consumer-to-business (C2B), and business to government (B2G) [3–6].First, B2B e-commerce involves companies doing business with each other. Representative example is Alibaba. It is an inter-enterprise e-commerce. Second, B2C e-commerce consists of businesses selling to the general public. An example of this is Amazon. It is a business to users of e-commerce. Third, C2C e-commerce is similar to the retail market, and the aim of this is the end-user shopping. Example of this includes eBay. It is a person to person e-commerce. Fourth, in C2B e-commerce, consumers post a project with their budget in online, and companies bid on the project. Then, the consumer reviews the bids and selects the company. Elance can be an example of this. It is a person-to-business e-commerce. Lastly, B2G e-commerce is a business model that refers to businesses selling products, services or information to governments or government agencies with online transactions. B2G e-commerce provides a way for businesses to bid on government projects or products that government might purchase or need for their organizations.Among these types of e-commerce, B2C e-commerce has become an important retailing channel rivaling even traditional brick-and-mortar outlets; indeed, many of the very considerable number of B2C e-commerce websites already established are enjoying continuously increasing sales volumes. The startlingly rapid emergence and success of this new information-technology-based commercial paradigm raises core issues with respect to the customer's continued satisfaction with, and trust for, B2C e-commerce websites [7,8]. Thus, in this study, we specifically focused on the evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites to better meet customer needs.Many researchers have considered the evaluation of B2C e-commerce as a multiple-criteria decision-making (MCDM) problem and they applied various methods. For instance, Wen et al. [9] applied data envelopment analysis (DEA) approach to measure relative of efficiency B2C e-commerce firms. Unlike other MCDM methods, DEA does not require assigned numeric weights or modeling preference for analysis. Thus, this study utilized DEA to provide ranked alternative evaluations by requiring less information from decision makers. Chiu et al. [10] applied AHP to evaluate the B2C e-commerce strategy. In practice of the evaluation of B2C e-commerce, managers often face a variety of information that has vagueness. Thus, this study applied fuzzy theory with AHP to fulfill the B2C e-commerce manager's needs. Kong and Liu [11] also applied fuzzy AHP to evaluate success factors of B2C e-commerce. Generally, if the comparison matrices which are used in AHP process are not consistent, elements in the matrices should be adjusted and a consistency test should be conducted until they are consistent. Thus, this study introduced a fuzzy AHP in which substitute membership scales proposed by Saaty [12] to reduce adjusting times needed. In recent, Zhang et al. [13] evaluated B2C e-commerce security using AHP and evidential reasoning. Regarding B2C e-commerce security, it is difficult to find a complete secure e-commerce security, because security technology has a limitation and security issues contains the complexity. Thus, this study focused on such problems. They proposed a model to solve such problems by using AHP with Dempster–Shafer (DS) theory of evidence.Sun and Lin [7] applied fuzzy TOPSIS method for evaluating the competitive advantages of B2C e-commerce websites. They used the TOPSIS as the analytical tool that determines the weights of each criterion. In addition, they also adopted fuzzy sets to cover inability of deterministic evaluation information in modeling the real problem. Yu et al. [1] evaluated B2C e-commerce websites in e-alliance based on AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS. They used AHP to analyze the structure of ranking problem and to determine importance weights of the criteria, TOPSIS method to obtain final ranking of B2C e-commerce websites.Some of quiet recent studies applied DEMATEL and ANP for evaluating B2C e-commerce websites. Chiu et al. [2] proposed a new hybrid MCDM model combining the Decision Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL), DEMATEL-based Analytic Network Process (DANP), and VIšekriterijumsko KOmpromisno Rangiranje (VIKOR) methods. They focused on evaluating and improving strategies of B2C e-commerce to reduce the gaps in customer satisfaction caused by problems such as interdependence and feedback among dimensions and criteria. Chiu et al. [14] developed B2C e-commerce marketing strategies combining DANP and a gray relational assessment model. They proposed a new hybrid gray relational model to improve strategies by adopting innovation and creativity to achieve the aspiration level in each dimension and criterion.Although, all the aforementioned studies enlighten evaluation of B2C e-commerce, some limitations in practice need to be paid attention to. First, B2C e-commerce website evaluation can be approached from the perspective of service quality [8,15,16]. Many researchers have noted that service quality is not determined specifically by the perceived service level but rather by the difference between the expected service level (derived from information obtained prior to the service experience) and the perceived service level [17]. This reality is reflected by the SERVQUAL method, which measures both customer expectations of service quality (in terms of five dimensions: tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance, empathy) and their perceptions of the service they receive, and evaluates service quality, accordingly, as the gap been the expected service level and perceived service level. One previous study evaluated service quality by integrating SERVQUAL and MCDM [18]; however, it utilized only the evaluation criteria of SERVQUAL in assessing just the perceived service level, not also the gap between the expected service level and the perceived service level. Rather, when combining SERVQUAL and MCDM for service quality evaluation purposes, it is not sufficient to utilize only the evaluation criteria of SERVQUAL; the core concept of SERVQUAL needs to be reflected in the evaluation as well. E-SERVQUAL (E-S-QUAL), developed by Parasuraman et al. [19] in recent years as a modified version of SERVQUAL for evaluation of electronic service quality in the e-commerce environment, can be more appropriately applied to the evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites with MCDM methods. Moreover, because E-S-QUAL reflects important criteria from the customer's point of view, E-S-QUAL can be a competitive and effective tool for assessing B2C e-commerce website service quality that is largely a function of reputation perceived and felt by customers.Second, among the various MCDM methods, fuzzy TOPSIS was utilized for evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites in previous studies, for example, in [1,7], because such evaluation is a complex decision-making problem that requires consideration of both the positive-ideal solution (PIS) and the negative-ideal solution (NIS) [20] and makes linguistic judgments than crisp value judgments. However, since criteria affecting evaluation of B2C e-commerce are multidimensional, they should be evaluated using with regards to more than one criterion as hierarchical to get more accurate, coherent, and reliable results. Kahraman [21] extended the fuzzy TOPSIS to a hierarchical one named fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS that has ability to cover a multidimensional problem having a hierarchical structure. In addition, this fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS does not have disadvantages of the pairwise comparisons among main criteria, sub-criteria, and evaluation alternatives. Thus, this study applies fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS for evaluation of B2C e-commerce.Motivated by first and second limitations in previous studies, this paper presents a new method integrating E-S-QUAL and fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS for evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites. Fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS can effectively handle the hierarchy among main criteria and sub-criteria in E-S-QUAL. Moreover, such a method adequately accounts for the issues of concern while preserving the core concept of E-S-QUAL. The value added to this area of this paper is to suggest a new MCDM model which reflects important criteria from the customer's point of view. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that integrates fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS and E-S-QUAL for evaluating B2C e-commerce websites. This model assesses service quality of B2C e-commerce website effectively utilizing information about reputation perceived and felt by customers. In addition, the particular strength of the method is its practical applicability to the uniquely complex decision-making situation faced when evaluating B2C e-commerce websites.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the prior research relevant to E-S-QUAL, fuzzy set theory, and fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS. Section 3 presents the proposed approach, which combines fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS and E-S-QUAL. Section 4 provides the results of empirical case study to facilitate understanding of the proposed approach. In this section, sensitivity analysis for the proposed approach and validation test with other MCDM methods are conducted. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and anticipates future research.Understanding exactly what customers expect is the most crucial factor determining the successful delivery of the high quality service [22,23]. Evaluation of service quality by considering the “voice of the customer” is vital to the improvement of service quality and the enhancement of customer satisfaction [18]. In other words, after delivering a service, service providers should evaluate how well the customers’ expectations had been fulfilled [24]. For this purpose, a wide-range of research has been conducted, both extensively and in depth. Among many studies, SERVQUAL has been well-utilized as a service-quality assessment method that focuses on the gap between customer expectations and perceptions. When the SERVQUAL model was first proposed in 1985, its designers identified 10 main dimensions of service quality: (1) reliability; (2) responsiveness; (3) competence; (4) access; (5) courtesy; (6) communication; (7) credibility; (8) security; (9) understanding/knowing the customer; (10) tangibles [25]. In later work, this list was reduced to three, namely tangibles, reliability, and responsiveness, and two new dimensions, assurance and empathy, were added, for a total of five [26].This traditional SERVQUAL method was suitable for measuring the quality of all non-Internet-based customer interactions and experiences with companies. However, as electronic service quality (e-SQ) became increasingly important in determining the success of electronic commerce applications [27], a new method of service-quality conceptualization was necessary. Developing new version of SERVQUAL for the electronic context required the development of e-SQ dimensions that extend beyond mere adaptation of offline dimensions. Based on a literature review of the previous studies dealing with evaluation of e-SQ, such as WebQual [28], SITEQUAL [29], and eTailQ [30], Parasuraman et al. [19] identified dozens of website features at the perceptual attribute level. As a result, they developed E-S-QUAL by categorizing website features into the four dimensions and 22 sub-criteria listed in Table 1: efficiency, fulfillment, system availability, and privacy.Based on these four dimensions and 22 sub-criteria, customers evaluate service quality by deciding whether there is any gap between their expectations and perceptions. If their perceptions level about service quality is equal to their expectations level, the given service is acceptable. If their perceptions level is higher than their expectations level, the service is ideal. However, if customers’ perceptions level with respect to service quality is lower than their expectations level, the service is unsatisfactory; and this has a negative effect on repurchase intentionality.According to Zadeh [31], traditional quantification methods are inadequate for expression of complex or difficult-to-define situations; this task, they contend, requires linguistic variables [32–34]. In the present study, linguistic variables “very good (VG),” “good (G),” “Fair (F),” “poor (P),” and “very poor (VP)” were used as ratings in the measurement of the performance values of alternative websites (see Fig. 1). The fuzzy numbers defined by Quang et al. [32], listed in Table 2, were incorporated into the computational technique.Linguistic variables also were used to measure the importance weights of the respective criteria, as “very low,” “low,” “medium,” “high,” and “very high” (see Fig. 2). The triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs) defined by Chou et al. [33] are listed in Table 3.Before linguistic variables can be transformed into crisp values, a derived fuzzy number has to be defuzzified. By defuzzification process, a fuzzy number becomes a specific crisp value which is called as a Best Non-fuzzy Performance (BNP) measure. The various defuzzification methods were introduced in previous studies. Among various defuzzification methods, this study uses the graded mean integration representation method proposed by Chen and Wang [35] for presenting the representation of one fuzzy number, based on the integral value of graded mean h-level of fuzzy number, owing both to the simple calculation process and the exclusion of analysts’ opinions. The BNP is calculated based on the graded mean integration representation method as follows:LA(x)=(x−a)(b−a),a≤x≤b,LA−1(h)=a+(b−a)h,0≤h≤1RA(x)=(x−c)(b−c),b≤x≤c,RA−1(h)=a+(b−c)h,0≤h≤1LA(x) and RA(x) are the function L and the function R of the triangular fuzzy number S, respectively.LA−1(h)andRA−1(h)are the inverse functions of the function LA(x) and the function RA(x) at h-level, respectively. Let the graded mean h-level value of fuzzy number A ish(LA−1(h)+RA−1(h))/2. Then, BNP based on the graded mean integration representation method of A is as follows:(3)BNP=∫01h(LA−1(h)+RA−1(h))2dh/∫01hdh=∫01h(a+(b−a)h+a+(b−c)h)2dh/∫01hdh={(c−a)+(b−a)}3+awhereA˜=(a,b,c)Hwang and Yoon [36] developed TOPSIS. It reflects the simple concept that a chosen alternative should be at the shortest distance from the positive-ideal solution (PIS) and the farthest distance from the negative-ideal solution (NIS), where the PIS is a composite of the best performance values exhibited by any alternative for each criterion, and the NIS is the composite of the worst performance values [37–40]. Because the problem-solving process of TOPSIS is rational and transparent, it has been well utilized in public sectors. Indeed, over the course of thirty years, a great number of studies have been conducted using the TOPSIS method.Due to the potentially serious practical problems encountered in applying TOPSIS, which relate to the uncertainty of human cognition and vague judgment, a fuzzy TOPSIS method employing the fuzzy set theory as a modeling tool for complex systems was suggested [41]. In more recent years, in consideration of the ever increasing complexity of performance evaluation and decision-making activities, fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS was suggested as an extended version of the fuzzy TOPSIS method (a natural generalization of the one-layer fuzzy TOPSIS) to more effectively reflect the hierarchical structure of the decision process [21,42]. The core attribute of fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS is the computation of the final weight score for each sub-criterion. This is calculated based on the product of the main criterion weight score and the sub-criterion weight score with respect to the corresponding main criterion. Then, the weighted values within each main criterion are aggregated.However, subsequent research has identified an embedded problem of extant fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS. Bao et al. [37] found that after computing the final weight score for each sub-criterion, all the sub-criteria were actually treated as if they were in the same layer, and so the meaningfulness of the hierarchy was actually destroyed. To solve this problem, they designed a new hierarchical fuzzy TOPSIS model that can effectively reflect the layered hierarchy of all criteria. This is the scheme that was utilized in this study.The framework of the proposed approach for evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites is illustrated in Fig. 3. As indicated, the process consists of three main phases: defining the problem situation; calculating assessment scores from the decision maker, and evaluating B2C e-commerce websites, which include a total of 7 sub-steps.Step 1Select B2C e-commerce websites as evaluation alternatives and define the evaluation criteria of E-S-QUALAs the first step in the evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites, several B2C e-commerce websites are selected as evaluation alternatives. In this step, selecting B2C e-commerce websites that generally belong to the same category is key, because the important attributes that customers consider do no greatly differ among B2C e-commerce websites. Thus, from the same B2C e-commerce website category, several B2C e-commerce websites can be selected as evaluation alternatives. Then, for the selected B2C e-commerce websites, the evaluation criteria including the four dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUAL, proposed by Parasuraman et al. [19] and Akinci [43], are utilized in this study.Step 2Identify a decision matrixTo obtain assessment scores for mobile services on the basis of a given set of criteria, a decision matrix is established. Consider a two-layer situation of n alternatives A={A1, A2, …, An} that include m main criteria MC={MC1, MC2, …, MCm}, and r sub-criteria (Sc). Here, assume each main criterion has rjsub-criteria; thus, the total number of sub-criteria r is the sum of rj(j=1, 2, …, m), as follows:(4)r=∑j=1mrjMeanwhile,e˜jkfdenotes the expected fuzzy value of the kth sub-criterion within the jth main criterion, which is evaluated by the fth expert in the decision group consisting of d experts with triangular fuzzy numbers. The value can be expressed by fuzzy numbers, e.g.,e˜jkf=(a1jkf,b1jkf,c1jkf). In addition,p˜ijkfdenotes the perceived fuzzy value of the kth sub-criterion within the jth main criterion of the ith alternatives which is evaluated by the fth expert in the decision group consisting of f experts with triangular fuzzy numbers. This value also can be expressed by fuzzy numbers, e.g.,p˜ijkf=(a2ijkf,b2ijkf,c2ijkf).Here, the expected fuzzy valuee˜jkfis assessed only in terms of the criteria, whereas the perceived fuzzy valuep˜ijkfis assessed in terms of both the criteria and the alternatives. In other words, the number of assessments of the expected fuzzy valuee˜jkfis m, and the number of assessments of the perceived fuzzy valuep˜ijkfis m×n. This is because we assume that the expected service levels differ only among the criteria, not also the alternatives, but that the perceived service levels differ among both the criteria and the alternatives.If d decision makers evaluate the expected fuzzy score and perceived fuzzy score for the criteria and the alternatives, alle˜jkf=(a1jkf,b1jkf,c1jkf)andp˜ijkf=(a2ijkf,b2ijkf,c2ijkf)(f=1, 2, …, d) are aggregated as(5)e˜jk=(a1jk,b1jk,c1jk)wherea1jk=minf{a1jkf},b1jk=1d∑f=1db1jkf,c1jk=maxf{c1jkf},(6)p˜ijk=(a2ijk,b2ijk,c2ijk)wherea2ijk=minf{a2ijkf},b2ijk=1d∑f=1db2ijkf,c2ijk=maxf{c2ijkf}After calculating the aggregated value of expected fuzzy score (e˜jk) and perceived fuzzy score (p˜ijk), thex˜ijkvalue, which represents the gap between the expected fuzzy value (e˜jk) and the perceived fuzzy value (p˜ijk), is derived as(7)x˜ijk=e˜jk−p˜ijk,wherex˜ijk=(a1jk,b1jk,c1jk)−(a2ijk,b2ijk,c2ijk)=(a1jk−c2ijk,b1jk−b2ijk,c1jk−a2ijk)=(a3ijk,b3ijk,c3ijk)wherex˜ijk=(a3ijk,b3ijk,c3ijk)denotes the fuzzy value of the kth sub-criterion within the jth main criterion of the ith alternatives.Note that because thex˜ijkvalue does represent the gap between the expected fuzzy valuee˜jkand the perceived fuzzy valuep˜ijk, the smaller thex˜ijkvalue, the better. In other words, a smallx˜ijkvalue implies that customers’ expected level of service quality is not significantly different from their perceived level of service quality, which situation is ideal.Accordingly, a fuzzy hierarchical MCDM problem can be represented in an aggregated decision matrix as follows:(8)D˜=A1A2…AnMC1MC2MCmSc11Sc12⋮Sc1r1Sc21Sc22⋮Sc2r2⋮Scm1Scm2⋮Scmrmx˜111x˜112⋯x˜n11x˜112x˜212⋯x˜n12⋮⋮⋱⋮x˜11r1x˜21r1⋯x˜n1r1x˜121x˜221⋯x˜n21x˜122x˜222⋯x˜n22⋮⋮⋱⋮x˜12r2x˜22r2⋯x˜n2r2⋮⋮⋱⋮x˜1m1x˜2m1⋯x˜nm1x˜1m2x˜1m2⋯x˜nm2⋮⋮⋱⋮x˜1mrmx˜2mrm⋯x˜nmrmStep 3Derive the normalized decision matrixIn this step, initially, the defuzzified matrixD˜BNPbased on the calculation of the BNP value should be derived from an aggregated decision matrix as(9)D˜BNP=A1A2…AnMC1MC2MCmSc11Sc12⋮Sc1r1Sc21Sc22⋮Sc2r2⋮Scm1Scm2⋮Scmrmy˜111y˜112⋯y˜n11y˜112y˜212⋯y˜n12⋮⋮⋱⋮y˜11r1y˜21r1⋯y˜n1r1y˜121y˜221⋯y˜n21y˜122y˜222⋯y˜n22⋮⋮⋱⋮y˜12r2y˜22r2⋯y˜n2r2⋮⋮⋱⋮y˜1m1y˜2m1⋯y˜nm1y˜1m2y˜1m2⋯y˜nm2⋮⋮⋱⋮y˜1mrmy˜2mrm⋯y˜nmrmwherey˜ijk={(cijk−aijk)+(bijk−aijk)}/3+aijkwherex˜ijk=(aijk,bijk,cijk)After calculating the defuzzified matrix based on the BNP value, the raw data should be normalized using linear scale transformation in order to bring the various criteria scales into one comparable scale. Among the various linear scale transformation methods available, we adopted the linear scale transformation of cost criteria proposed by Awasthi et al. [18], because thex˜ijkvalue can be interpreted as the cost criterion, which means that the lower the response, the better. Thus, the decision-making matrix (D˜) is converted by linear scale transformation to a dimensionless normalized fuzzy matrix (R˜) as follows:(10)r˜ijk=y˜jk−⊙y˜ijk=y˜jk−y˜ijkandy˜jk−=miniy˜ijk(costcriteria)wherer˜ijkare normalized values, ⊙ denotes a fuzzy division operation, andy˜jk−=miniy˜ijkrepresents the lowest value of each sub-criterion.Step 4Determine the importance weights of dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUALIn this step, the relative importance in terms of the dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUAL is determined. First, the importance weights of the dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUAL are calculated respectively as(11)w˜MC=MC1MC2⋮MCj⋮MCmw˜1w˜2⋮w˜j⋮w˜mwherew˜j(j=1,2,…,m)are the importance weights of the dimensions of E-S-QUAL, which are expressed in fuzzy numbers and assessed by the d decision makers as follows:(12)w˜j={wj1,wj2,wj3}wherewj1=minf{wj1f},wj2=1d∑f=1dwj2f,wj3=maxf{wj3f}Second, the sub-criteria weight matrixw˜Scis constructed with regard to the corresponding main criteria as(13)w˜SC=w˜1w˜2⋯w˜j⋯w˜mMC1MC2⋯MCj⋯MCmSc11Sc12⋮Sc1r1Sc21Sc22⋮Sc2r2⋮Scj1Scj2⋮Scjrj⋮Scm1Scm2⋮Scmrmw˜110⋯0⋯0w˜120⋯0⋯0⋮⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮w˜1r10⋯0⋯00w˜21⋯0⋯00w˜22⋯0⋯0⋮⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮0w˜2r2⋯0⋯0⋮⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮00⋯w˜j1⋯000⋯w˜j2⋯0⋮⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮00⋯w˜jrj⋯0⋮⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮00⋯0⋯w˜m100⋯0⋯w˜m2⋮⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮00⋯0⋯w˜mrmwherew˜jrj(j=1,2,…,m)are the importance weights of the sub-criteria of E-S-QUAL, which are expressed in fuzzy numbers and assessed by the d decision makers as follows:(14)w˜jrj={wjr1,wjr2,wjr3}wherewjr1=minf{wjr1f},wjr2=1d∑f=1dwjr2f,wjr3=maxf{wjr3f}Based on the derived relative importance in terms of the dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUAL, the final importance weights for each sub-criterion are calculated, specifically by multiplying the BNP value of the importance weight of the main dimension and that of the importance weight of the sub-criterion with respect to the corresponding main dimension, as follows:(15)W˜Scj=w˜MCj⊗w˜Scj=w˜j⊗w˜j1w˜j2⋮w˜jrj=w˜Scj1w˜Scj2⋮w˜Scjrj,(j=1,2,…,m),(16)whereW˜Scj=w˜MCj⊗w˜Scj=[{(wj3−wj1)+(wj2−wj1)}/3+wj1]×[{(wjr3−wjr1)+(wjr2−wjr1)}/3+wjr1]andw˜j={wj1,wj2,wj3}andw˜jrj={wjr1,wjr2,wjr3}Note thatW˜Scjdenotes the final importance weight matrix for each sub-criterion corresponding to the jth main dimension, and thatw˜MCjandw˜Scjrepresent the importance weights of the jth main dimension and the sub-criterion with respect to the corresponding jth main dimension, respectively.Step 5Calculate the weighted normalized decision matrixThe weighted normalized decision matrix (V˜) is computed by multiplying the normalized sub-criterion value by its corresponding final importance weight as follows:(17)v˜ijk=r˜ijk⊗w˜Scjk,i=1,2,…,n,j=1,2,…,m,k=1,2,…,rj,This matrix (V˜) can be expressed as(18)V˜=A1A2…AnMC1MC2MCmSc11Sc12⋮Sc1r1Sc21Sc22⋮Sc2r2⋮Scm1Scm2⋮Scmrmv˜111v˜112⋯v˜n11v˜112v˜212⋯v˜n12⋮⋮⋱⋮v˜11r1v˜21r1⋯v˜n1r1v˜121v˜221⋯v˜n21v˜122v˜222⋯v˜n22⋮⋮⋱⋮v˜12r2v˜22r2⋯v˜n2r2⋮⋮⋱⋮v˜1m1v˜2m1⋯v˜nm1v˜1m2v˜1m2⋯v˜nm2⋮⋮⋱⋮v˜1mrmv˜2mrm⋯v˜nmrmBased on this weighted normalized decision matrix (V˜), the final weighted normalized decision matrix (V˜′) can be derived by using the addition principle to aggregate sub-criteria with respect to the corresponding main dimensions as follows:(19)v˜′ij=∑k=1rjv˜ijk,i=1,2,…,n,j=1,2,…,m,(20)V˜′=A1A2⋯AnMC1MC2⋮MCmv˜′11v˜′12⋯v˜′n1v˜′21v˜′22⋯v˜′n2⋮⋮⋱⋮v˜′1mv˜′2m⋯v˜′nm,This addition principle has great importance, because if we consider theV˜as the final weighted normalized decision matrix as in previous research utilizing the fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS [21,42], all of the sub-criteria are then treated in the same layer, which means that hierarchy is not reflected. Thus, we utilize the improved fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS proposed by Bao et al. [37], which reflects the hierarchical structure by aggregating the weighted values within each main dimension.Step 6Compute the distance of each alternative from the PIS and NISThe PIS and NIS are computed as follows:(21)PISA˜*=[v˜1*,…,v˜m*]wherev˜j*=maxi{v˜ij},i=1,2,…,n,j=1,2,…,m,(22)NISA˜−=[v˜1−,…,v˜m−]wherev˜j−=mini{v˜ij},i=1,2,…,n,j=1,2,…,m,Based on the PIS and NIS, the distance of each weighted alternative i=1, 2, …, n from PIS and NIS is calculated as(23)di*=∑j=1mdv(v˜ij,v˜j*),i=1,2,…,n(24)di−=∑j=1mdv(v˜ij,v˜j−),i=1,2,…,nwheredv(a˜,b˜)is the distance measurement between two the BNP valuesa˜andb˜, or(25)dv(a˜,b˜)=a˜−b˜Step 7Rank the preferences for the B2C e-commerce websitesThe different alternatives are ranked according to the closeness coefficient (CCi) in decreasing order. This closeness coefficient simultaneously denotes the distances to the PIS and NIS. The closeness coefficient of each alternative is computed as(26)CCi=di−di−+di*,i=1,2,…,nThe best alternative B2C e-commerce website is closest to the PIS and farthest from the NIS, and thus has the largest CCivalue among the alternatives.To illustrate the efficacy of the proposed approach, an empirical case study was conducted. According to eMarketer's latest forecasts, worldwide B2C e-commerce sales will increase by 20.1% in 2014 to reach $1.500 trillion. Since B2C e-commerce websites are increasingly widespread and significant in the new era, they face many competitors [31]. Additionally, because of this proliferation, customers encounter difficulty in selecting the B2C e-commerce website that they exactly want among a great variety of services having similar functions. Thus, the present empirical case study dealt with the evaluation of B2C e-commerce website in order to facilitate and support customers’ choices of best B2C e-commerce website.Step 1Select B2C e-commerce websites as evaluation alternatives and define the evaluation criteria of E-S-QUALSix widely used Korean B2C e-commerce websites that provide similar services were selected as the alternatives: B2C e-commerce 1 (A1), B2C e-commerce 2 (A2), B2C e-commerce 3 (A3), B2C e-commerce 4 (A4), B2C e-commerce 5 (A5), and B2C e-commerce 6 (A6). For these websites, evaluation criteria of the four dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUAL were identified by adopting and re-constructing the scheme of evaluation criteria of E-S-QUAL based on studies of Parasuraman et al. [19] and Akinci et al. [43], as shown in the following Table 4.Step 2Identify a decision matrixA group composed of 3 decision makers (DM1, DM2, DM3) was asked to indicate linguistic expressions for the sub-criteria and alternatives. We selected 3 experts regarding B2C e-commerce. They specialized in service engineering of technology management field. Moreover, these experts are heavy users of B2C e-commerce, so they have immense volume of information for evaluating B2C e-commerce.The expected values and perceived values for the sub-criteria and alternatives were evaluated on the following linguistic scale: very poor (VP), poor (P), fair (F), great (G), and very great (VG) (see Table 5).The results of the evaluations of the 3 experts in terms of the expected fuzzy valuee˜jkfand perceived fuzzy valuep˜ijkfwere aggregated as shown in Table 6. According to Eqs. (5) and (6), we could easily obtain the aggregated expected fuzzy valuee˜jkand perceived fuzzy valuep˜ijk. For example, the aggregated expected fuzzy valuee˜jkwith respect to Sc11 could be derived as follows:In case of (G=(0.6, 0.7, 0.9), G=(0.6, 0.7, 0.9), VG=(0.8, 0.9, 1.0))e˜11=(min{0.6,0.6,0.8},13(0.7,0.7,0.9),max{0.9,0.9,1.0})=(0.600,0.767,1.000)Based on the results of Table 6,x˜ijk, which is the gap between the expected value (e˜jk) and perceived value (p˜ijk), can be derived using Eq. (7). For instance, the fuzzy value of the 1st sub-criterion within the 1st main criterion of the 1st alternatives can be calculated as follows:x˜111=(0.600,0.767,1.000)−(0.300,0.633,0.900)=(0.600−0.900,0.767−0.633,1.000−0.300)=(−0.300,0.133,0.700)Then, according to Eq. (9), the defuzzified value ofy˜111can be calculated as follows:y˜111={(c111−a111)+(b111−a111)}/3+a111={(0.700−(−0.300)+(0.133−(−.300)}/3+(−0.300)=0.178Then, the defuzzified matrixD˜BNPcan be established as shown in Table 7.Step 3Derive the normalized decision matrixIn this step, as shown in Table 8, the defuzzified matrixD˜BNPcan be normalized using linear scale transformation to bring the various criteria scales into a comparable scale according to Eq. (10). For example,r˜111can be derived based on the results of Table 7 asr˜111=y˜11−⊙y˜111=y˜11−y˜111=0.1780.178=1.000wherey˜11−=min{0.178,0.200,0.289,0.311,0.200,0.311}=0.178Step 4Determine importance weights of dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUALFirst, the relative importance in terms of the main dimensions of E-S-QUAL is determined according to the following linguistic variables functioning as importance weight criteria:very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and very high (VH) (see Table 9).Based on the linguistic variables assessed by the 3 decision makers, the aggregated fuzzy value can be calculated using Eq. (12). For instance, the aggregated fuzzy value in terms of the first main criteria (MC1) can be derived as follows:In case of (M=(0.00, 0.25, 0.50), VH=(0.50, 0.75, 1.00), H=(0.25, 0.50, 0.75))w˜1=(min{0.00,0.50,0.25},13(0.25,0.75,0.50),max{0.50,1.00,0.75})=(0.250,0.500,1.000)Second, likewise, the importance weights of the sub-criteria assessed by the 3 decision makers with linguistic variables can be determined (see Table 10). The aggregated fuzzy value of the importance weights of sub-criteria (Sc) can be calculated by Eq. (14).Based on the defuzzified value of relative importance in terms of the dimensions and sub-criteria of E-S-QUAL shown in Tables 9 and 10, we can calculate final importance weights for each sub-criterion according Eqs. (15) and (16), as shown in Table 11. Table 11 shows that sub-criteria of fulfillment (MC3) is generally higher than those of the other main dimensions.Step 5Calculate the weighted normalized decision matrixIn this step, the weighted normalized decision matrix (V˜) is computed by Eq. (17) based on the results of Tables 8 and 11 (see Table 12). For instance,v˜111in the weighted normalized decision matrix (V˜) can be derived by multiplying the normalized sub-criterion value by its corresponding final importance weight, as follows:v˜111=r˜111×w˜Sc11=1.000×0.356=0.356Then, we can establish the final weighted normalized decision matrix (V˜′) by the addition principle, using Eq. (19) (see Table 13). For example, for the alternative A1 and the first main criterion MC1, thev˜′11value can be calculated asv˜′11=∑k=18v˜11k=0.356+0.146+0.259+0.081+0.192+0.227+0.103+0.247=1.611Step 6Compute the distance of each alternative from the PIS and NISFirst, the PIS and the NIS for each alternative are computed by Eqs. (21) and (22) (see Table 14).Second, the distance of each weighted alternative i=1, 2, …, n from the PIS and NIS is calculated by Eq. (25) (see Table 15).Step 7Rank the preferences for the B2C e-commerce websitesAs the final step, we compute thedi*anddi−using Eqs. (23) and (24). For instance, for the alternative A1, the distancesdi*anddi−are given byd1*=∑j=1mdv(v˜1j,v˜j*)=0.000+0.112+0.381+0.101=0.594d1−=∑j=1mdv(v˜1j,v˜j−)=0.417+0.062+0.315+0.195=0.989Likewise, using Eq. (26), we compute the closeness coefficient (CCi) for the six alternatives. For example, for alternative A1, the closeness coefficient is given byCC1=d1−d1−+d1*=0.9890.989+0.594=0.624In the same way, the closeness coefficients (CCi) for the other five alternatives are calculated. The final results are shown in Table 16. By sorting the CCivalues for the six alternatives in decreasing order, the ranking is established. In this case, the ranking of the six B2C e-commerce websites is B2C e-commerce 3 (A3)>B2C e-commerce 6 (A6)>B2C e-commerce 1 (A1)>B2C e-commerce 5 (A5)>B2C e-commerce 4 (A4)>B2C e-commerce 2 (A2). In the case of B2C e-commerce 3 (A3), the distancedi*is the lowest among all of the alternatives, and the distancedi−is the highest; therefore, B2C e-commerce 3 (A3) is the best choice. Accordingly, B2C e-commerce 3 (A3), scoring high in service quality on the basis of the various criteria, can be considered to be the benchmarking B2C e-commerce website for the improvement of the service quality of the other B2C e-commerce websites.Five B2C e-commerce alternatives were evaluated applying the proposed approach. To obtain the full potential of this study, two issues related with the proposed approach should be considered. First, because an important thing in the evaluation of B2C e-commerce is to reflect the hierarchy among main criteria and sub-criteria, sensitivity analysis should be conducted to investigate the influence levels of main criterion in the proposed approach. By conducting the sensitivity analysis, analysts can know the hierarchy among main criteria and sub-criteria and the most influential main criteria affecting the evaluation results. Second, comparison with other methods is necessary to verify the robustness of the proposed approach. Validation by comparing with other representative MCDM methods can show advantages of the proposed approach. Thus, sensitivity analysis and validation of results are conducted.A sensitivity analysis is conducted to rank the influence levels of main criterion. The aim of sensitivity analysis is to calculate the ranking when only one main criterion has the maximum weight whereas the others have the minimum possible weight. In other words, we set the weight of one main criterion as 1 whereas the weights of other criteria have 0. The results of the sensitivity analysis are given in Table 17and Fig. 4.It can be seen from Fig. 4 that an alternative B2C e-commerce 3 (A3) is the best for all criteria except efficiency (MC1) and fulfillment (MC3). In other words, they scored high customer satisfaction levels when system availability (MC2) and privacy (MC4) were mainly considered to be important. However, even though B2C e-commerce 3 (A3) does a good job, they need to improve efficiency (MC1) and fulfillment (MC3) to have a sustainable competitiveness. On the other hand, the ranking of B2C e-commerce 2 (A2), which has the worst ranking among alternatives, were improved when the importance of system availability (MC2) was increased. However, when the importance of fulfillment (MC3) was only considered, their ranking shows the worst. Thus, they need to maintain the quality of system availability (MC2) at their current level and improve the quality of fulfillment (MC3) in priority to have a better reputation.We also conducted validation of results by comparing with other representative MCDM methods. Table 18reveals that the results obtained using the proposed approach are similar to those obtained using other methods to some degree. B2C e-commerce 3 (A3) is the highest ranked alternatives in all MCDM methods. In addition, the results of upper ranking group (A1, A3, A6) and lower ranking group (A2, A4, A5) were also same in all MCDM methods. However, the detailed rankings of alternatives were different in each MCDM method. This is because other MCDM methods such as TOPSIS, VIKOR, and GRA did not reflect hierarchy between the main dimensions and their sub-criteria. However, the proposed approach can capture hierarchical structure arising from the evaluation process of B2C e-commerce. Thus, more precise results can be provided with the proposed approach compared with other MCDM methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we present a new method that integrates E-S-QUAL and fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS for evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites. The proposed approach consists of three main steps. In step 1, the problem situation is defined. In detail, B2C c-commerce websites are selected as evaluation alternatives, and the E-S-QUAL evaluation criteria are identified. In step 2, the assessment scores are calculated. In this step, a decision matrix is established, and the importance weights of the main dimensions and their sub-criteria are computed. Based on this information, the final weighted normalized decision matrix is derived. In the final step, the B2C e-commerce website alternatives are evaluated. First, we compute the distance of each alternative from the PIS and NIS. Based on this distance value of each alternative, the preference order for the B2C e-commerce websites is calculated. Lastly, we conducted a sensitivity analysis to validate the results.In order to utilize suggested framework effectively, it is important to evaluate alternatives in terms of both the expected service level and perceived service level. Because this study assumes that service quality is determined by difference between the expected service level and the perceived service level, analysts should carry out surveys considering evaluators who can evaluate alternatives in this respect. In addition, information related with importance weights of the main dimensions and their sub-criteria should be considered importantly. Analysts can conduct a sensitivity analysis is to evaluate the preference order when only one main criterion has the maximum weight whereas the others have the minimum possible weight.The contribution and potential utility of this approach is threefold. First, as a remedy for limitations of previous studies focusing on evaluation of B2C e-commerce with MCDM methods, we proposed E-S-QUAL-based fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS. The most important strength of this new method is that it can capture hierarchy between the main dimensions and their sub-criteria by preserving the core concept of E-S-QUAL, and enables more accurate and meaningful explanations. Second, as a result of the empirical study, we found that the fuzzy hierarchical TOPSIS was a practical and efficient tool for ranking B2C e-commerce websites in terms of their overall performance with respect to multiple criteria. The results of comparison with other methods demonstrated that the proposed approach was consistent with other methods. Moreover, the proposed approach was more reasonable than other methods. It implies that this method potentially can be applied to performance evaluation of service sectors which have similar characteristics compared with those of B2C e-commerce service. Third, the proposed approach is not limited to the evaluation of B2C e-commerce websites; rather, it also offered a potential application to other service areas for improvement of specific aspects of their operations.Despite all the advantages and possibilities of the proposed approach, it has several limitations that suggest paths for future research. First, there exists causal relationship among criteria in B2C e-commerce. However, this study did not consider this issue. For the extension of this study, fuzzy DEMATEL method, which is able to capture interrelationships among criteria graphically by means of causal relationship matrices or digraphs, can be applied. Second, future studies could apply the proposed approach to other areas of decision making.