@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exchange market algorithm based optimum reactive power dispatch

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents a maiden application of EMA to solve power system ORPD problems.Steps of implementation of EMA to solve ORPD are elaborately discussed.The performance of EMA is tested on standard IEEE test systems.The selection of control parameters of EMA is done through exhaustive parametric study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimum reactive power dispatch,Exchange market algorithm,Stability-index,Optimal power flow,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, an exchange market algorithm (EMA) approach is applied to solve highly non-linear power system optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problems. ORPD is most vital optimization problems in power system study and are usually devised as optimal power flow (OPF) problem. The problem is formulated as nonlinear, non-convex constrained optimization problem with the presence of both continuous and discrete control variables. The EMA searches for optimal solution via two main phases; namely, balanced market and oscillation market. Each of the phases comprises of both exploration and exploitation, which makes the algorithm unique. This uniqueness of EMA is exploited in this paper to solve various vital objectives associated with ORPD problems. Programs are developed in MATLAB and tested on standard IEEE 30 and IEEE 118 bus systems. The results obtained using EMA are compared with other contemporary methods in the literature. Simulation results demonstrate the superiority of EMA in terms of its computational efficiency and robustness. Consumed function evaluation for each case study is mentioned in the convergence plot itself for better clarity. Parametric study is also performed on different case studies to obtain the suitable values of tuneable parameters.susceptance of the lines connecting between busiand busjobjective functionconductance of transmission line between busiand busjstability index ofjth load busnumber of generator busses orPVbussesnumber of load busses orPQbussesnumber of tap changing transformersnumber of transmission linesnumber of shunt capacitorsactive power loss in MWminimum limit of active power output (MW) of slack generator (G1)maximum limit of active power output (MW) of slack generator (G1)limiting value of active power output (MW) of slack generator (G1)active power output (MW) of slack generator G1active power generation (MW) ofith generatoractive power load demand (MW) atith busminimum limit of reactive power output (MVAr) ofith generatormaximum limit of reactive power output (MVAr) of ith generatorreactive power generation (MVAr) forith generatorreactive power load demand (MVAr) atith buslimiting value of reactive power generation (MVAr) ofith generatorreactive power output of slack generator G1 (MVAr)reactive power output of Shunt capacitor (MVAr)minimum value of reactive power output ofith shunt capacitormaximum value of reactive power output ofith shunt capacitorreactive power output of1st shunt capacitor (MVAr)reactive power output ofith shunt capacitor (MVAr)apparent power flow throughLth transmission line (MVA)apparent power flow limit ofLth transmission line (MVA)max. limit of apparent power flow throughLth transmission line (MVA)shares of shareholderslower limit ofjthshare ofith shareholderupper limit ofjth share ofith shareholdervariation in the share ofKth shareholder of the third grouptap positions of tap changing transformersminimum position ofkth tap changing transformermaximum position ofkth tap changing transformertap position of the first tap changing transformertap position of thekth tap changing transformervoltage of first generator G1(p.u).magnitude of the load voltage (p.u)voltage magnitude of the first load bus (p.u)voltage magnitude of theith bus (p.u)voltage magnitude of thejth bus (p.u)minimum voltage ofith generator (p.u)maximum voltage ofith generator (p.u)voltage ofith generator (p.u)minimum voltage ofith load bus or PQ bus (p.u)maximum voltage ofith load bus or PQ bus (p.u)reference voltage magnitude atith load bus (p.u)voltage phase angle difference between busiandjpenalty factor associated with slack bus power outputpenalty factor associated load voltagepenalty factor associated with generators reactive power generationpenalty factor associated with line loadings

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In modern restructured power systems, optimum reactive power dispatch (ORPD) problem is gaining much more attention than before by the power system practitioners and researchers. This is due to the fact that reactive power has significant effect on systems voltage security. Since, reactive power is very closely related with bus voltages, insufficient reactive power supply may lead to voltage instability or in extreme cases, voltage collapses. Hence, proper distribution and management of reactive power has become a major concern for utilities. ORPD is a tool for managing reactive power requirements in power systems. It aims for proper allocation of reactive power from various VAr sources present in power systems. Conventionally, the ORPD is executed to satisfy certain objectives; such as, energy dispatch with minimum power loss, minimum voltage deviations, improvement in voltage stability etc. However, every ORPD solution must obey few operational limitations; such as, the generators and voltage control devices must be operated within their capacities simultaneously maintaining bus voltages within permissible range. The ORPD solution provides optimal control settings of reactive power sources and other voltage control devices present in the power system for efficient and economic distribution of reactive power [1]. When viewed as an optimization problem, the ORPD is a non-convex, non-linear complex optimization problem and usually it is formulated as an optimal power flow (OPF) problem. OPF aspires to locate the steady operating state of electrical power system that optimizes a given objective function and satisfies a set of constraints. The OPF problem was first introduced by Carpentier [2] and thereafter, it is probably the most studied and researched subject in power system operation and planning. A wide verity of classical optimization techniques [1,3,4] has been applied to solve OPF problems. Although, these techniques have excellent convergence characteristics; but, the presence of non-convexity in objective functions and discontinuous constraints in ORPD problems made the solution computationally complex and challenging. Off late, general purpose optimization algorithms, most of which deal with principle of natural selection, had successfully been applied to solve many power system problems and found to be suitable to overcome the drawbacks associated with classical optimization techniques [5]. In [5], Lba has applied Genetic by Algorithm (GA) [5] to solve ORPD problem. In [6] an adaptive GA with variations in the population size is utilized by Attia et al. to solve OPF problems. In ref. [7], the ORPD problem is solved using Evolutionary Programming (EP). M.A Abido implemented Tabu Search (TS) in [8] to solve OPF problem. Further, Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [9,10], Differential Evolution (DE) [11],[12], Biogeography Based Optimization (BBO) [13,14], Harmony Search Algorithm (HSA) [15], Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA) [16,17], Black-Hole Based Algorithm (BBA) [18] etc. are some of the similar natured inspired algorithms which have been successfully applied to solve power system problems. Water Wave Optimization (WWO) [19], Water Cycle Algorithm (WCA) [20] are some recent meta-heuristic algorithms reported in the literature. Most of these approaches are population based search technique and have the capacity to find global optimal solution. These algorithms do not involve the property of differential calculus and thus have no restrictions on the nature of objective functions. Therefore, they prove themselves to be a better option for solving any non linear non-convex optimization problems. Besides their extraordinary advantages, sometimes they also suffer from slower convergence and trapping into local optima [11–18,21,22]. Moreover, since randomization is their inherent property, they require large number of trial runs to declare/suggest the optimal solution. To overcome this, researchers have combined these algorithms with suitable classical optimization techniques [23–25] or with other methods [21,22,26] etc. and make them hybrid to improve its convergence characteristics. Such hybrid approaches aims for a right balance between exploitation and exploration. In ref. [26] authors’ have introduced the concept of aging leaders and challengers in PSO to improve the convergence of original PSO and solve ORPD problem. Modified Brain Storm Optimization (MBSO) [27] and Across Neighborhood Search for Numerical optimization (ANS) [28] are some recent hybrid algorithms reported by the researchers in the state-of-the-art literature.Very recently, Naser Ghorbani and Ebrahim Babaei have proposed a very promising evolutionary algorithm called ‘exchange market algorithm (EMA)’ based on the behavior of shareholders in the stock market. The EMA is inspired by intelligent dealings of shareholders. The authors in [29] demonstrated the search capability of EMA in solving diverse classical yardstick constrained optimization problems and weighed the performance of EMA against other reported results. The results obtained using EMA are encouraging and the algorithm looks very promising. In practice, the behavior of exchange market changes frequently and often oscillates between balanced/non-oscillatory and unbalanced/oscillatory market conditions [29]. In order to implement this, both balanced and unbalanced market conditions are introduced in EMA. Therefore, in one complete cycle, algorithm explores through both the phases. In each phase, the algorithm undergoes both exploitation and exploration. This double exploitation and exploration property of the algorithm makes it more efficient than other contemporary algorithms. The present authors feel that it would be interesting to implement this unique property of EMA in solving ORPD problems and as far as the knowledge of the authors, EMA has not been applied to solve ORPD problems till date.In this paper, the ORPD problem variables are updated by the following way: initially, the random shares/problem variables are evaluated and passed to both non-oscillatory and oscillatory market phases; wherein, the shares of average shareholders undergo some changes according to the rules of EMA. In the present work, various vital objectives like active power loss minimization, total voltage deviation and improvement of voltage stability index are considered. Since, the ORPD is a constrained optimization problem, the penalty based approach [30–32] is implemented to handle inequality constraints and power flow based solution approach is utilized to deal with equality constraints. In this paper, the constraints handling portion for solving ORPD problem is presented in a separate section explaining the hardship to tackle constraints in optimization algorithms [32]. The section also discusses some of the approaches [30,33,34] to handle equality constraints; particularly the recent one [33], which explain about the variable reduction strategy for the treatment of equality constraints. The treatment of continuous and discrete variables associated with ORPD problem is also highlighted in the present work. The consumed function evaluations for each case study are mentioned in the convergence plot itself for better clarity. Parametric sensitivity study is also presented in this paper to give a better idea about the choice of optimization parameters. The algorithm is coded on MATLAB-13.2 platform and tested on standard IEEE 30 bus [35] and IEEE 118 bus [36] systems. In the result section, the optimum values of ORPD problem variables are presented for each case study performed and compared with other contemporary methods. The comparison demonstrates the high computational efficiency and robustness of the algorithm in solving the ORPD problems.The mathematical formulation of ORPD problem is expressed as:(1)Minimizef(x,u)(2)Subjectedtog(x,u)=0hmin≤h(x,u)≤hmaxwhere f is the objective function to be minimized, u is the set of independent or control variables, x is the set of dependent variables. g(x, u) and h(x, u) represents the sets of equality and inequality constraints which are to be satisfied while solving the ORPD problems. The vector of independent variables or the control parameters (u) can be represented mathematically as:(3)uT=VG1,……VGNPV︷continuousTap1,……TapNT,QC1,……QCNC︷discreteHere, the generators voltages(VG1,……VGNPV)are continuous variables, the tap changers positions (Tap1, ……TapNT) and the switchable capacitors output(QC1,……QCNC)are discrete variables. Conventionally, generator busses are known as PV buses in power systems due to the fact that both real power (P) and voltage (V) are specified for such bus. It is worth mentioning that in ORPD problems, the active related controls (generators power output) are kept fixed and only reactive related controls (mentioned in Eq. (3)) are adjusted to satisfy a given objective. Since, the outputs of all the voltage control sources discussed above are generated randomly within their ranges; they are called as independent variables. The vector of dependent variables ‘x’ may be expressed as:(4)xT=PG1,VL1,………VLNPQ,QG1,……..QGNPV,SL1,………….SLNTLAmong the dependent variables in Eq. (4), PG1 and(QG1,……..QGNPV)represent the real generation of slack generator and reactive power generation of PV generators respectively. The line flows(SL1,………….SLNTL)in transmission lines and voltage magnitudes(VL1,………VLNPQ)of load buses are other dependent variables. It is worth mentioning that in power systems, the load buses are also called PQ buses in order to account fixed values of real power (P) and reactive power (Q) at those buses. The reason behind naming these variables as dependent variables is due to the fact that their values changes with change in independent/control variables mentioned in Eq. (3). The process of calculation of dependent variables from independent variables is explained in Section 2.3.2. An ORPD solution is feasible if and only if the values of dependent variables for that solution are within their limits.In this paper, three different challenging objective functions are considered and as described below:Mathematically, the real power loss in the transmission line for whole network or certain section of line [32] can be is expressed as:(5)minPloss=∑k=1NTLGk[(TapkVi)2−Vj2−2TapkViVjcosθij]where Tapkis tap ratio of the transformer connected in branch k (Tap=1 for transmission line).A very important security index, related to voltage stability of power system network is called L-index/stability index. The L-index value may vary between 0 and 1. A value of L-index close to 0 indicates the system is almost stable and a value close to 1 indicates system condition approaching toward voltage collapse. Therefore, for enhancement of voltage stability, it is important to force the voltage stability indicator L-index to a minimum value by adjusting various voltage controllers present in power system. Each load bus of power system network has a scalar value of L-index and it is important to minimize the maximum value of it. The objective is to minimize global stability index ‘Lmax’. Mathematically, it is expressed as:(6)Lj=1−∑i=1NPVFijViVjwherej=1,2,3…,NPQ(7)Lmax=max(Lj)(8)Fij=−[Y1]−1[Y2]where i and j are the elements of PV (Generator) and PQ (Load) busses. [Y1] and [Y2] are the sub matrix of the system Y bus after separating PV and PQ buses, which can be obtained as follows:(9)IPQIPV=Y1Y2Y3Y4VPQVPVMinimization of load bus voltage deviation improves the voltage profile of electric power network and helps the system to operate more securely. The voltage deviations at load buses can be mathematically expressed as:(10)TVD=∑i=1NPQ|Vi−Viref|where TVD is the total voltage deviation and ‘i’ is the element ofNPQ,Virefis the reference voltage magnitude at ith load bus which is taken as 1 p.u.The overall objective function is formulated by considering power system operational limitations into account and mathematically it is expressed in generalized form as:(11)MinimizeF=Fobj+λGPG1−PG1limit2+λUiVLi−VLilimit2+λQGiQGi−QGilimit2+λTLSL−SLlimit2where Fobjare the objective functions under consideration (Active power loss minimization or voltage deviation minimization or stability index minimization, one at a time). Here,PG1−PG1limit,VLi−VLilimit,QGi−QGilimit,andSL−SLlimitare the violations associated with slack bus power output, load voltage and generators reactive power generations and line loadings respectively. The associated penalty factors can be chosen based on the nature of objective functions [30].PG1limit,VLilimit,QGilimitandSLlimitand are their limiting values and these are obtained by the following methods:(12)PG1limit=PG1minifPG1<PG1minPG1maxifPG1>PG1maxPG1ifPG1min≤PG1≤PG1max(13)VLilimit=VLiminifVLi<VLminVLimaxifVLi>VLmaxVLiifVLimin≤VLi≤VLimax(14)QGilimit=QGiminifQGi<QGiminQGimaxifQGi>VGimaxQGiifQGimin≤QGi≤QGimax(15)SLlimit=SLifSL≤SLmaxSLmaxifSL>SLmaxwhere max and min are the maximum and minimum limiting value of respective parameters.The ORPD problem deals with various power systems operational constraints and these are described as below:The real and reactive power balance equations represent as equality constraints involved in ORPD and are usually denoted by g (Eq. (2)).(16)PGi−PDi−|Vi|∑j=1NB|Vj|{Gijcos(θi−θj)+Bijsin(θi−θj)}=0(17)QGi−QDi−|Vi|∑j=1NB|Vj|{Gijcos(θi−θj)−Bijsin(θi−θj)}=0where NB represents total number of buses present in the power system. Real power generation of all PV generators are fixed except for slack generator. The output of slack generator (PG1) is a dependent variable as its output depends on the losses occurred in the transmission lines. QGiis dependent quantity as it changes with the change in the control settings.The inequality constraints mainly appear to account for different power systems components operational limitations.The inequality constraints on independent variables are:1.Generator voltage constraints: The generated voltages of the generators must lie within their limits. This fact is represented in Eq. (18).(18)VGimin≤VGi≤VGimaxi∈NPVTap changers constraints: In power systems, tap changing transformers are frequently used to adjust voltage levels. Taps are brought to HV winding of the transformer and there are some fixed numbers of tap positions present in a transformer. For this reason, the tap settings in a tap changer are considered as discrete and they are to be adjusted within their specified limit as mentioned in Eq. (19).(19)Tapkmin≤Tapk≤Tapkmaxk∈NTShunt VAr compensator constraints: The VAr output of all the switchable capacitors should within their range as expressed in (20).(20)QCimin≤QCi≤QCimaxi∈NCThe inequality constraints on dependent variables are:1.Generator power constraints: The reactive power generations of the generator are dependent quantities and they must lie within their limits and this fact is represented mathematically in Eq. (21). Although, the real power generations of PV generators are kept fixed in ORPD problems; but, the slack generator's power output is considered as dependent quantity as it changes with change in power loss in the system. It is determined by executing load flow analysis. The real power output of the slack generator should be within its operational limits and this is shown in Eq. (22)(21)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimaxi∈NPV(22)PG1min≤PG1≤PG1maxSecurity constraints: Load voltage limitations and transmission line loading constraints falls under security constraints in power system operation. Hence, they should comply upon their operational limits. These are mathematically represented in Eqs. (23) and (24).(23)VLimin≤|VLi|≤VLimaxi∈NPQ(24)SL≤SLmaxL∈NTLConstraints handling is an important issue in optimization problems. The solution of an optimization problem is feasible if all the constraints are within their limiting values and reports zero or tolerable violations. Constraints handling techniques generally provide treatment to the infeasible solutions and restrict them within the boundary of feasible region by maintaining the diversity of overall population [33]. ORPD being a highly non linear optimization problem, it requires efficient treatment for its constraints as well. Constraints of the ORPD can be divided into two parts; namely equality constraints and inequality constraints [31]. In the present work, the methods adopted to handle both equality and inequality constraints are explained in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 respectively.ECs are considered as the most rigid constraints of the optimization problem and are more difficult to satisfy as compared to inequality constraints [33]. Moreover, the rate of feasible solutions becomes low when any optimization problem contains large number of ECs to satisfy. Converting ECs into inequalities by using a small threshold value is a common method practised by the researchers to handle equality constraints [30,33,34]. Very recently, Guohua et al. have proposed an efficient constraint handling technique called ‘ECVRS’ to handle ECs for Constrained Optimization Problems (COPs) [33]. The proposed model improves the efficiency of evolutionary algorithms by reducing the numbers of ECs and variables while solving a COP. In the present ORPD problem, two ECs are associated with each bus of the electric network and these are the basic real and reactive power balance equations as mentioned in Eqs. (16) and (17). In power system practice, these power flow equality constraints are solved using the power flow solution method [31] to obtain various power system parameters. In the present work, the Newton Raphson Load Flow (NRLF) solution method is utilized to solve the power flow problem i.e. Eqs. (16) and (17). It is worth noting that the NRLF solution converges successfully, only when both the ECs are fully satisfied.Inequality constraints appear in ORPD problems in order to account for the operating limitations of various power apparatuses. In ORPD problem, the ICs may consist of both dependent and independent variables. The independent variables are considered as control or adjustable variables and these are represented in Eqs. (18)–(20). In ORPD, these independent variables are randomly generated within their specified limits. Practically, the natures of the variables are both continuous as well as discrete. The generator voltages being continuous can be generated randomly within their range asVGi=randVGimin,VGimax.However, the independent variables associated with tap changers and shunt capacitors are made discrete before they are taken as input in the optimization process. The random tap settings of tap changers are rounded off to their nearest decimal value of step size 0.01 and the reactive injections of switchable capacitors are rounded off with the step size of 0.1. Rounding off is done by utilizing rounding operator asround(random[Tapimin,Tapimax],0.01)andround(random[QCimin,QCimax],0.1)for tap changers and switchable capacitors respectively. These rounding action guarantees that the independent variables are treated with their correct nature in practical ORPD problems. These independent variables are passed on to execute NRLF program to determine various unknown quantities; such as: reactive power outputs of generators, slack bus power output, load bus voltages, power flow in transmission lines etc. Since these unknown quantities are outputs of NRLF, they are considered as dependent variables in ORPD problem. Due to their dependency on adjustable/independent variables, they may violate their limits. To take this fact into account, dependent variables are represented as ICs as mentioned in Eqs. (21)–(24). Therefore, it is another key challenge for the researchers to handle these constraints. Techniques like static penalty method, superiority of feasible solution, self-adaptive penalty, epsilon constraints, stochastic ranking etc. have been implemented by the authors in [31] to handle ICs involved in ORPD problems of power system. In the present work, the penalty based approach [31,32] is implemented to handle the ICs. The overall fitness function incorporating penalties on dependent variables are mentioned in Eq. (11).The motivation toward the development of exchange market algorithm is from the behavior of stock market, wherein the shareholders trade variety of shares in the virtual stock market, under diverse market conditions. The algorithm is proposed by Ghorbani and Babaei in the year 2014 and reported their work in [29]. In a stock market, the market intermittently undergoes oscillations and non-oscillations resulting from the political and economic resolutions of different organizations or nations. Under balanced or non-oscillated conditions, it is easier to gauge the market and thereby increase shares’ profit to certain extent without undertaking any unconventional risks. However, under unbalanced or oscillated conditions, selecting shares for trading involves certain risks; as it is challenging to forecast the market status; as such, the actions of the shareholders can be lucrative or pernicious [29].In this algorithm, it is estimated that active people in the stock market behave like the elite stock dealers. Based on the properties’ values, fitness of each individual is surveyed, rated and classified in each market mode. Once the sorting of the population is done after each fitness test in EMA, the individuals at the beginning, middle and end of shareholders are known as first, second and third groups respectively. The individuals in the first group remain unaffected in all stages. In a non-oscillated market, the second and third group select stocks same as or close to that of the first group. To put it differently, the algorithm has the task to mobilize members toward the elite members. In an oscillated market condition, the individuals in the second and third groups trade with separate relationship at higher risks. EMA has greater flexibility to adjust its search area and thus enjoys the ability to optimize the objective function in the best possible way.The steps involved in optimizing the functions related to ORPD problem of power system using EMA are enumerated as follows:Step 1: Input data for market operation:In this step, the total number of shareholders in the market (m), number of shares owned by each shareholder (n), maximum and minimum limits of each shares and risk factors (g1andg2) are provided to meet the requirement of the algorithm. Maximum number of cycles is also specified to set the stopping criterion. Power system data such as bus data, line data and generator data are also specified. Here, the shareholders are the solution vectors and the shares of shareholder represent the output of each control variables in ORPD problem.Step 2: Initialization of initial shareholders and their shares.Each shareholder is a possible solution of ORPD problem. In this work, the population of shares of shareholders (Si,j) are randomly initialized within their specified range using following formula:(25)Si,j=si,jL+rand(si,jU−si,jL)wheresi,jLandsi,jUare lower and upper limits of jth share of ith shareholder respectively. Here, “rand” is the uniform random number between [0,1]. Complete set of m shareholders with n shares can be represented in the following way.Si,j=s1,1s1,2…s1,ns2,1s2,2…s2,n..….st,1st,2…st,n..….sm,1sm,2…sm,nwhere i= 1, 2, 3,….m and j= 1, 2, 3 ……n. In ORPD problem, the generation voltages of generating units (VG), transformer tap settings (Tapi) and shunt capacitors settings (QCi) are the control variables/decision variables which are considered as the shares of shareholders (as discussed in Eq. (3), Section 2). In power system terminology,s1,1s1,2…s1,n,s2,1s2,2…s2,nandsm,1sm,2…sm,nare ORPD decision variables for 1st, 2nd and mth solution vectors (shareholders) respectively. Mathematically, they are represented as:(26)Si,j=[VGi,1,VGi,2,…VGi,NPV,Tapi,1,Tapi,2…Tapi,NT,QCi,1,QCi,2…..QCi,NC]whereVGi,1,VGi,2,…VGi,NPVare generator voltages of ith shareholder. Similarly,Tapi,1,Tapi,2…Tapi,NTandQCi,1,QCi,2…..QCi,NCare the values of tap positions and reactive power outputs of tap changers and shunt capacitors respectively for the same shareholder. Sum of NPV, NT and NC is the dimension (j) of the given ORPD problem.Step 3: Computation of shareholders cost (fitness) and ranking.The shareholders cost or cost of the total share in the present ORPD problem is calculated by using Eq. (11) and is considered as fitness function. The first component of Eq. (11) represents the objective function (Fobj) those shown in Eqs. (5), (7) and (10). The NRLF program is executed to determine the values of Fobj. Here, the fitness equation is implemented in such a fashion that ORPD solutions with higher fitness's (lower Fobjvalue) represent the optimum values of objective functions. The solutions without violations are considered as feasible solutions; whereas, those with violations are penalized according to Eq. (11). In this step, the ORPD solutions (shareholder's) are sorted in descending order in terms of their fitness functions and are classified into three groups (first, second and third groups). The effectiveness of the total shares will be high for the 1st group, medium and low for 2nd and 3rd group respectively. In the present work, altogether 20% solutions with higher fitness's (with lower Fobjvalue) are kept under 1st group; remaining 60% and 20% are kept under 2nd and 3rd group respectively.Step 4: Adjustment on the shares of the second group in non-oscillatory (balanced) market condition.According to EMA, in this step, the high ranked elite members (members of the first group) are kept same as they were; whereas, the 2nd group members (shareholders with medium fitness's/objective function value) undergo some changes of their shares (ORPD variables) according to the following equation.(27)popigroup2=r×pop1,igroup1+(1−r)×pop2,igroup(1)wherepopigroup(2)is ith shareholder in the 2nd group.pop1,igroup(1)andpop2,igroup(1)are any two randomly selected individual of group 1. ‘r’ the random number in the interval [0,1]. Here the members of 2nd group learn from the elite members (1st group) and will experience some changes and update accordingly. In power system terminology, the ORPD variables update themselves randomly by accounting the variables of elite group using Eq. (27).Step 5: Adjustment on the shares of the third group in non-oscillatory (balanced) market condition.From the perspective of fitness function, the members of the third group are low ranked members (having lesser Fobjvalue) and changes in their shares (ORPD variables) values are determined using equation (28). The new population for this group are generated according to the Eq. (29).(28)Sk=2×r1×popi,1group(1)−popkgroup(3)+2×r2×popi,2group(1)−popkgroup(3)(29)popkgroup(3),new=popkgroup(3)+0.8×Skwhere Skis the variation in the share of the kth shareholder of the third group. In power system terminology, Skis the change that ORPD problem variables will experience for its third group members.popkgroup(3)is the kth member of the third group,popkgroup(3),newis the new population of kth member of third group andpopi,1group(1)is any randomly selected member of first group. r1 and r2 are the random number in the interval [0,1]. Control variables of ORPD problem in this group update their values according to Eq. (29).Step 6: Limit checking phase:The change occurred in 2nd and 3rd group members of ORPD variables may drive them out of limits. Hence, in this step the updated values of the variables are compared to their limiting values and are restricted to their respective limiting values in case of any violations.Step 7: Computation of shareholders cost (fitness) and rankingHere, the fitness's for both 2nd and 3rd group members are calculated and subsequently, the members are repositioned and separated into three different groups (1st, 2nd and 3rd group) in consonance with their fitness value similar to Step 3.Step 8: Exchange in shares of second group members under market oscillation (unbalanced) condition.In this step, market enters into its unbalanced phase; where, it is comparatively difficult to predict the market condition unlike balanced market phase. High ranked elite members are considered as most experienced and have the probability to earn more profit under diverse market condition. Hence, in this step also, members of the 1st group are kept fixed. However, the shares of 2nd group members changes as per following equations.(30)Δnt1=nt1−δ+(2×r×μ×η1)(31)μ=tpopmpop(32)nt1=∑y=1nsyy=1,2,3,……..n(33)η1=nt1×g1(34)g1cycle=g1,max−g1,max−g1,minMaxcycle×cyclewhere Δnt1 is the amount of shares is should be added randomly to some share, nt1 is the total share prior to the share variation. When viewed as a power system ORPD problem, nt1 is the summation of all ORPD variables present in one solution vector. syis the yth share of tth shareholder (t∈m). Here the addition of shares resembles with the purchase of shares. r is the random number between [0,1]. μ is the constant coefficient of each shareholder and δ is market information. Since penalty factor is used in this work, δ is equal to nt1. η1 is the risk level related to each member of the second group. tpopand mpopis tth member (tth solution vector of ORPD) and the last member of the market respectively. cycle represents present iteration number. g1,max and g1,min are the maximum and minimum value of risk in the unbalanced market respectively. Control variables in ORPD problem are both continuous and discrete, so the calculation of share variations is carefully done. In the present work, separate Δnt1 is calculated for discrete variable and is distributed among discrete control variables only.In the above part shareholders have purchase some share, therefore now it is necessary that each shareholder of group 2 should sell some of their shares so that sum of each shareholder's share remains constant. Hence to maintain the sum, shareholders randomly reduce some of its shares. Δnt2 for all shareholders can be calculated as:(35)Δnt2=nt2−δwhere Δnt2 is the amount of share that should be decreased randomly from some of the shares. nt2 is sum of the total shares of shareholder after the variation applied during the purchase of the shares.Step 9: Exchange in shares of third group members under market oscillation (unbalanced) conditionIn this step, shareholders of 3rd group exchange some shares (variations in ORPD variables) according to Eq. (36), irrespective of their total share amount.(36)Δnt3=(4×rs×μ×η2)where Δnt3 is the share amount which is randomly added to the share of each of shareholder, rs=(0.5- rand), is the random number between [−0.5, 0.5]. All other parameters are calculated in the same manner as in Step 8 and their proper explanations are also given in [29].Step 10: Limit checking phase:After the variations applied in the shares (control variables of both 2nd and 3rd group), their values are compared with corresponding limiting values and corrected if violations are reported.Step 11: Repeat if program's stopping criteria is not metThe algorithm repeats from Step 3 if the termination criterion is not satisfied. However, the algorithm's ends if the stopping criterion is met. A maximum number of iteration is taken as the stopping criterion for the present work.The EMA based ORPD problem is also shown with the help flow chart and pseudo-code in Figs. 1 and 2respectively.In this section, simulation results obtained by the EMA, applied to solve ORPD problems for standard IEEE 30 bus and IEEE 118 bus systems are presented. The ORPD problem is formulated and solved for various objective functions. In all cases the objective functions are minimized simultaneously satisfying all the constraints discussed in Section 2. Programs are developed in MATLAB, version 13.2 and executed on a Core i5 processor PC, with 2 GB RAM.The algorithm is tuned to handle the constraints associated with the present ORPD problem as discussed in Section 2. The penalty based approach used for constraint handling (11) ensures filtering out of all infeasible solutions. Trial and error method is adopted to select the values of penalty factors. For all cases (except for Case-1, 118 bus) the values of λG, λUi, λQGiand λTLare taken as 500, 500, 100 and 700 respectively. However, for Case-1, 118 bus, the same penalty factors are taken as 1000, 1500, 1000 and 700 respectively. In this paper, three case studies are presented for IEEE 30 bus system and two case studies are shown for IEEE 118 bus system. The choice of optimization parameters is an important aspect and the changes in these parameters determine how fast the algorithm switches from exploration to more intensive exploitation. In this paper, a detail discussion on this is presented in Section 6. In the present section, the simulation results are presented by varying population size or number of shareholders for Case 1, 30 bus system. The ORPD problem is executed for 20, 25, 50 and 100 population size and best results are reported after carrying out 50 independent trial runs. From the analysis it can be observed that 50 population sizes appear to give better results for Case-1, 30 bus system. Therefore, in the present work, simulations are carried out with 50 population size for all case studies. In EMA,g1 andg2 (risk factors) are the two essential control parameters [29] and choices of these control parameters for all the test cases are presented in Section 6.For IEEE 30 bus system network, load and generators data are taken from [1,10,35]. The complete description of IEEE-30 Bus system is given in Table 1and the line diagram is shown in Fig. 3.The objective in this case is to find the optimal settings for the power system control variables used to minimize the net real power loss (5). In this case, after executing 50 independent trial runs, the best results obtained with EMA are compared in detail with other recent reported methods in Table 2. The convergence characteristics obtained by EMA at various population sizes (number of shareholders) are compared in Fig. 4and it is observed that best result is obtained for 50 population size. The corresponding convergence plot is redrawn in Fig. 5for better clarity. It is observed from Table 2 that the EMA is able to reduce the power loss to 4.4978MW i.e. 22.61% from its initial value of 5.812MW in comparison to 20.86% with ALC-PSO [26], 22.38% with OGSA [17], 22.32% with GSA [16], 22.07% with HFA [23], 20.36% with PSO [10], 21.62% with DE [12] etc. It is observed that a significant reduction in power loss is reported by EMA in comparison to other reported results. The CPU time is also shown in the table and it is observed that the time taken by proposed algorithm is 80.109s. Direct comparisons cannot be performed with other methods based on CPU time due to the fact that different number of iterations and function evaluations are taken by the authors. The convergence plot shows good convergence characteristics of EMA in optimizing the power loss. The Number of Function Evaluation (NFEs) consumed by the algorithm (=11,200) in achieving the convergence is also highlighted in the convergence plot. The procedure for calculating NFEs is clearly explained in Appendix.The objective in this case is to find the optimal settings for the control variables to minimize the global voltage stability index ‘Lmax’ discussed in Eq. (7). The results corresponds to 50 pop size are taken. The best results obtained using EMA are mentioned in Table 3and compared with other methods. It can be observed from the table that all control variables are within their respective limits. The convergence characteristic for the present case is also shown in Fig. 6. It is observed that the convergence is obtained even before 20th iterations; hence, number of iterations is restricted to 100. It is observed that an L-index value of 0.09797 is reported by EMA in comparison to 0.11607 and 0.1089 by GSA [16] and PSO [10] respectively. A reduction of 18.4% and 10.03% on L-index value took place by EMA than that reported by GSA and PSO. The NFEs for the present case is evaluated and reported on the convergence plot itself.In this case, the EMA is applied to determine optimum control settings for minimizing the Total Voltage Deviations (TVD) discussed in Eq. (10). The population size is kept 50 as before. The best results obtained with EMA are compared with different reported literatures like DE [12], GSA [16], BFOA [23], ABC [23], FA [23] etc. in Table 4. It is observed that the TVD value reported with EMA is 0.061311 which is 63.50% less than then the initial TVD. The initial TVD value can be seen from Table 2. It is evident that EMA intelligently outperforms several of its contemporary algorithms in this case also. For example, it reduces 32.95%, 9.34%, 58.85%, 54.58%, 4.20%, 47.00% and 83.3% of TVD values than that obtained with DE, GSA, BFO, ABC, OGSA, FA and CLPSO respectively. The convergence plot of EMA with TVD as objective is plotted in Fig. 7and the NFEs is also evaluated and highlighted in the plot.Conventionally, in ORPD problems, the reactive related control settings (as is shown in Table 2–4) are given more attention than the active related controls. The active controls are basically generators’ real power outputs. It is worth mentioning that in case of ORPD problems, the real power outputs are kept fixed for all PV generators; but, slack generator's power output varies while aiming for an optimum operating point. The slack generator power output would be different while optimizing different objective functions.In view of this, it is important to declare the generators’ power output settings for various cases considered in the present work before the readers. Table 5represents the real power outputs of the generators for three different cases. Shaded portion of Table 5 represents the fix real power outputs of all other generators except Slack generator. As optimum operating points are different for different case studies, the associated transmission losses are also different (See Tables 2–4) which leads to the variations in slack generator's power output. In Table 5, the values under the column PG1 represent the power output of slack generator. It is obvious to note that when power loss minimization was taken as objective (Case-1), the output of PG1 is least in comparison to two other cases.In order to show the consistency and robustness of EMA in solving power system ORPD problems, the statistical analysis is performed for all three case studies in Table 6and comparison is drawn with other methods. It is observed that EMA based solution reports minimum standard deviations in all three cases; which reflect the consistency of the algorithm for providing optimum solutions.In order to verify the effectiveness of EMA in solving similar problems of larger dimensions, the ORPD problem is tested on standard IEEE 118 bus test system. The network, load, bus and generation data are taken from [36]. The initial active power loss for the system is 133.357MW. The ORPD problem is formulated considering 77 reactive related control variables and solved for two different cases as discussed below.For the present case, the active power loss is considered as objective (5). The EMA based ORPD problem is executed and comparison results with different methods are shown in Table 7. The best result obtained from EMA is found to be 126.2243MW and the corresponding control settings are shown in Table 8. It is revealed that EMA can reduce the power loss by 5.65% from its initial value in comparison to 5.013% by recently reported OGSA [17]. The convergence plot in Fig. 8shows good convergence characteristics of EMA even for a system of larger dimension. NEFs is also calculated and found to be 15,700. The statistical analysis of the results obtained by EMA is accommodated in Table 7. For the analysis, 50 trial runs were performed and it is observed that the standard deviation obtained with EMA is less in comparison to that of OGSA [17]. However, it is slightly higher in comparison with CLPSO [10]. Moreover, the comparisons are also drawn with respect to the computing time among the reported results in Table 7. The comparisons show that the computation time taken by EMA is 1098.98s, which is less than that obtained by PSO, CLPSO, GSA and OGSA methods.In this case, minimization of Lmax is considered as the objective function (7) and EMA based ORPD is applied to solve the problem. For the present case, the maximum number of iterations is selected as 100 and the value is obtained through experiments. The optimized result of Lmax is found to be 0.048411073 by EMA as shown in Table 9in comparison to 0.060 with OGSA [17]. Thus, EMA provides an Lmax value of 23.9% less in comparison to OGSA. Fig. 9shows the convergence curve for Lmax minimization. It is seen that that EMA converges at 25th iterations which is quite fast showing the better efficiency of the algorithm is optimizing Lmax for higher dimension problems also. Total function evaluation value is calculated and found to be 2500. In Table 9, the minimum, maximum and average values out of 50 trials are reported. It is interesting to note that the standard deviation (Std. dev) is found to be 85.4×10−7which is quite less, indicating the consistency of the algorithm in hitting the optimum. EMA takes around 1085.87s in completing the optimization process.Selection of different parameters of meta-heuristics plays crucial role in the performance of the algorithm. Since randomization is the inherent property of these algorithms, several trial runs are required at different population size to declare the optimum solutions. Furthermore, the tuneable parameters (other than the population size) of these algorithms can also be adjusted properly for its better performance. For different optimization problems, these parameters can take different values to provide optimal solution. Hence, proper adjustment of these control parameters is an important aspect as far the efficiency of the algorithm is concerned. In view of this, in the present work, rigors analysis has been carried out with different population size and control parameter of algorithm while solving the case studies mentioned in Section 5. Based on the analysis presented in this section, optimum control parameters of the algorithm are defined for different case studies.For this analysis four different population size (20, 25, 50 and 100) are considered. For each population size, 50 independent trial runs are executed for all case studies presented in the previous section. Variations in the values of objective function along with trial runs at different population size are represented in Figs. 10–14. It is observed that best results are obtained at 50 population size for all the cases. Furthermore, higher consistency of the algorithm in hitting the optimal points is also achieved for 50 population size. In Fig. 14, it is observed that the results from 20 population size and 25 population size sometimes hits the optimal value but the consistency is less in comparison to that of 50 population size.When the market undergoes oscillation, shareholders have to take the risk while selecting the shares for trading, because it is difficult to predict the market under such scenarios. Hence, in order to model it mathematically, the authors of EMA have introduced two risk factors calledg1 andg2; which can be varied according to the nature of the problem to obtain better results. In this section, parametric studies are performed for all cases which helps in selecting the appropriate values of risk factors. For the investigation purpose, ten different combination of g1 and g2 are taken and best results are reported in Table 10. For each study, 50 independent trial runs are executed for every combination of g1 and g2. From Table 10 it can be observed that with the combination ofg1maxminandg2maxminas0.10.01and0.50.01respectively, all objective functions give their best optimized results except for TVD. The shaded portion in the table highlight the selected extreme values forg1 andg2. Results obtained for other combinations are also shown in Table 10. When similar investigation for TVD is performed, the optimum values ofg1maxminandg2maxminare found as0.10.05and0.60.01.For better view, the impact of variations on market risks on the objective function is plotted in Fig. 15for Case-1, 30 bus system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a recently developed evolutionary algorithm, called exchange market algorithm is efficiently applied to solve nonlinear, non-convex ORPD problems of power system. The search capability of EMA is verified by implementing the ORPD problems on standard IEEE test systems. In this work, various objective functions are considered to test the performance of EMA. It is observed that EMA searches for optimum solution by hitting a right balance between exploration and exploitation. The results obtained with EMA are compared with previously reported methods in the literature. Statistical analysis and parametric study confirms the high level of consistency and robustness of the algorithm in solving reactive power dispatch problem of power system. Parametric study shows that selection of tunable parameters is very important to obtain global optimum solution. The results confirm that EMA has greater ability and superiority to solve higher dimensional problems with no restrictions on objective functions.Formula used for the calculation of NFEsNFEs=(Iterationatwhichalgorithmconverges×numberoftimestheobjectivefunctionisevaluatedinonecycle×totalnumberofshareholdersinthemarket)Example: Case-2 IEEE-30 bus (Lmax Minimization)Here, from Fig. 8 it can be seen that the algorithm converges at 15th iteration so,Numberofiterationatwhichalgorithmconverges=15Since EMA evaluate the objective function twice in one iteration, therefore,Numberoftimestheobjectivefunctionisevaluatedforoneshareholder=2The numbers of shareholder are taken as 50. Hence,Totalnumberofshareholdersinthemarket=50ThereforeNFEs=15∗2∗50=1500.