@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective optimization on multi-layer configuration of cathode electrode for polymer electrolyte fuel cells via computational-intelligence-aided design and engineering framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multi-layer cathode electrode modelling for optimal design.CIAD and CIAE framework.Swarm dolphin algorithm.Pareto reliability index.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuel cell,Cathode electrode,CIAD,CIAE,Swarm dolphin algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs) have attracted considerable interest within the research community due to the increasing demands for renewable energy. Within the PEFCs’ many components, a cathode electrode plays a primary function in the operation of the cell. Here, a computational-intelligence-aided design and engineering (CIAD/CIAE) framework with potential cross-disciplinary applications is proposed to minimize the over-potential difference η and improve the overall efficiency of PEFCs. A newly developed swarm dolphin algorithm is embedded in a computational-intelligence-integrated solver to optimize a triple-layer cathode electrode model. The simulation results demonstrate the potential application of the proposed CIAD/CIAE framework in the design automation and optimization of PEFCs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEFCs) convert chemical energy stored in hydrogen fuels into electrical energy in a direct and efficient manner. Because of their zero-emission nature and increased efficiency, PEFCs have the potential to be used as a primary renewable energy source toward reducing the use of fossil fuels and decreasing pollutant emissions in a sustainable economy. Among the many components of PEFCs, the cathode electrode plays a vital function in the operation of the cell. PEFCs with a multi-layer cathode electrode configuration can increase conductivity by increasing the extent of sulfonation of the polymer. Over the last few decades, a significant amount of research has been conducted to advance PEFC technology.A number of studies on PEFCs with a multi-layer cathode electrode configuration have been reported in recent years. Wei et al. [1] investigated direct methanol fuel cells consisting of multi-layer electrodes that include a hydrophilic thin film and traditional catalyst layer. Haile [2] reviewed the current status of solid oxides and PEFCs with a focus on the improvements in power densities obtained by reducing the electrolyte thickness and architectural control of composite electrodes. Song et al. [3] performed the optimization analyses on the PEFC cathode catalyst layers using the parameters of the Nafion content, Pt loading, catalyst layer thickness and porosity. In 2004, Grujicic and Chittajallu [4] proposed a model considering the parameters: the air-inlet pressure, cathode thickness and length and the width of the shoulders. Litster and McLean [5] provided an overview of effective fabrication methods and characteristic performances of electrodes; their study also surveyed common components, designs and assembly methods for PEFC electrodes. Tao et al. [6,7] introduced a non-isothermal 3D model for the parameter sensitivity analysis. Wang and Feng [8–10] developed explicit solutions for a triple-layer electrode and found that the layer adjacent to the electrolyte membrane contributes substantially to the production of the electrode Faradic current. Park et al. [11] developed a multi-layer anode electrode to reduce the methanol and water crossover from the anode to the cathode. Ko et al. [12] studied the effects of multi-layer electrode design on direct methanol fuel cells. Fofana et al. [13] proposed a 2D numerical steady state model using a sputtering technique for the design of PEFCs with low platinum loading. Abdollahzadeh et al. [14] investigated the PEFCs’ performance by a multi-component mixture model simulating two phase flow. Wang et al. [17,18] proposed a 3D two-phase model to investigate an inverse geometry design optimization of PEFC. Gao et al. [16] investigated the performance of a multi-physical dynamic PEFC stack. Khajeh-Hosseini-Dalasm et al. [15] presented a computational study of f a PEFC with the structural parameters analysis. Jung et al. [19] introduced a model to simulate the PEFC stack system. Moein-Jahromi and Kermani [25] carried out a sensitivity study using an agglomerate model to rank the parameters’ influence. Considering reaction kinetics and ohmic resistance effects, Pathak and Basu [20] introduced a model to predict the PEFC's performance. Molaeimanesh and Akbari [24] introduced a 3D lattice Boltzmann model to perform the simulations on the catalyst layer's electrochemical reaction. Noorkami et al. [21] investigated the performance and durability of a PEFC with temperature uncertainty. Chen et al. [22] discussed a dual-layer cathode model using a bat swarm algorithm.Two concerns in the analytical modeling of cathode electrodes have not been addressed in previous studies. (1) The effects of coupling on the performance of PEFCs have not been determined because of the interactions among design variables. (2) Only few effective computational approaches that can be used for quantitative modeling, model analyses, verification, and parameter optimization have been developed.Thus, a multi-layer cathode electrode modeling technique is proposed for the optimal design of PEFCs via a computational-intelligence-aided design and engineering (CIAD/CIAE) framework, in which a newly developed swarm dolphin algorithm (SDA) is embedded to construct and optimize the quantitative model of a multi-layer cathode electrode configuration. The CIAD/CIAE framework is applied to improve the overall fuel cell performance by varying the design parameters (in the CIAE phase) via selection of proper structural/material parameters (in the CIAD phase).By changing the population and maxing the computational speed, this proposed SDA allocates computational resources, which is inspired by the dynamic behaviors of dolphins. Dolphins can respond to changes in the direction and speed of their neighbors quickly during certain activities (e.g. locating roosting crevices, avoiding obstacles, detecting prey) through foraging and searching. The social intelligence, as useful behavioral information, has been passed among dolphin individuals to guide them from one configuration to another as one unit. By employing this type of social intelligence, the SDA is able to achieve a global optimum by deploying parallel and independent dolphin individuals.The contributions of our work can be highlighted in four aspects. First, a multi-layer model is developed to assess the performance of PEFCs. Second, a new CIAD/CIAE framework with potential cross-disciplinary applications is proposed. Third, the swarm intelligence method of SDA, embedded into the CIAD/CIAE framework, is designed as the optimization engines to determine the optimal parameters for the multi-layer configuration. Fourth, the Pareto reliability index (PRI1) is defined to assess the Pareto-optimal solutions of the multi-objective (MO) optimization procedure.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the analytical model of the multi-layer configuration of a cathode electrode; Section 3 introduces the conceptual framework of the CIAD/CIAE and the overall application schematic with a computational-intelligence-integrated solver (CIS); Section 4 describes the SDA algorithm for the multi-layer configuration model optimization; Section 5 defines the fitness function for the optimization of multi-layer configuration model as proposed in Section 2; Section 6 provides the empirical results and validations of the optimal design; and Section 7 concludes the paper and recommends future applications.The membrane electrode assembly (MEA) is the core component of a fuel cell and is composed of a polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM), catalyst layers (CLs) and gas diffusion layers (GDLs) attached to the bipolar plate (BP) layers (Fig. 1).A PEM has the thin layers (≤10μm) of electrodes coated on its surface, which contains a catalyst (typically Pt), carbon, an ionomer electrolyte and a void space. Fig. 1 shows the analytical modeling of the triple-layer cathode electrode configuration, three sections are labeled I, II and III.•Section I: A schematic diagram of a PEFC with a triple-layer cathode electrode configuration, which includes three basic components: the anode (aBP, aGDL and aCL), the PEM and the cathode(cBP, cGDL and cCL).Section II: Assuming that all the CLs have the same oxygen concentrations, temperatures, electronic phase potentials, and equilibrium potentials, which are uniform within each layer [8,9], a triple-layer cathode configuration is depicted in this section, where the triple-layer electrodes have a total thickness of δ. As shown in the circle on the left side, three general phases can be observed when one zooms in on the cCL layer: (1) the void space (for gaseous reactant transport); (2) ionomer content (for proton transfer); and (3) carbon support (for electronic current conduction). Eq. (1) shows the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), which is essential for all functions.(1)O2+4e−+4H+→2H2O+HeatSection III: Specifically, the cCL layer is composed of three sub-layers, denoted as Layers 1, 2 and 3. The parameters of this model include: σ, the ionic conductivity; a, the catalyst specific area; i, the exchange current density; Rδ, the ionic resistance; Iδ, the current density; δ, the sub-layer thickness; l, the interface location of the three sub-layers; ΔU, a lumped variable, is defined in Eq. (2), where Rδ=δ/σ is the overall ionic resistance across the cathode electrode. Iδ=−jδδ is the current density based on the transfer current density jδat the interface of the diffusion media and the electrode.(2)ΔU=RδIδThe relative interface location of the three sub-layers is defined in Eq. (3), where the thickness ratios rδof Layers 1, 2 and 3 are given in Eqs. (4)–(6), and δ1, δ2 and δ3 are the thicknesses of the corresponding layers.(3)l=xδ(4)rδ12=δ1δ2(5)rδ13=δ1δ3(6)rδ23=δ2δ3As shown in Eq. (7)[10], the factors of the ionic conductivity σ of Layers 1, 2 and 3 are σ1, σ2 and σ3,respectively, which are determined by the electrolyte water content λ[26], as given in Eq. (8); the ionomer tortuosity τ; Nafion content ϵ; temperature T; and local relative humidity μ. The ratios of the ionic conductivity factors of the three layers are given in Eqs. (9)–(11).(7)σ=ϵτ(0.5139λ−0.326)exp12681303−1T(8)λ=0.3+10.8μ−16μ2+14.1μ3(9)rσ12=σ1σ2(10)rσ13=σ1σ3(11)rσ23=σ2σ3As given in Eq. (12)[10], the structural factor ai is determined by the structural features of the electrode, such as: Pt loading, the reaction interface roughness, and the mean radius of the catalyst particles, etc., where ai is defined as the product of a and i, a is the catalyst specific area, i is the exchange current density; s is the liquid water saturation; Eais the ORR activation energy; Rgis the universal gas constant (8.314J/molK).(12)ρ=ai0(1−s)exp−EaRg1T−1353.15The catalyst specific area a defines the active catalyst surface area per unit volume, as given in Eq. (13), where mpis the mass loading of platinum per unit area of the cathode, mcis the mass loading of carbon per unit area of the cathode, and lcis the CL thickness.(13)a=mplcAsAs shown in Eq. (14), a curve-fitting procedure [27] is employed to approximate Asin terms of the platinum mass fraction f, which is defined in Eq. (15).(14)As=(227.79f3−158.57f2−201.53f+159.5)×103(15)f=mpmp+mcAs given in Eq. (16)[27–29], i0 is the exchange current density, which is determined by the temperature and catalyst electrochemical characteristics, where i0refis the reference exchange current density,CO2refis the reference oxygen concentration,γO2is the reaction order for the oxygen, andCO2is the concentration of oxygen in the catalytic interface of the cathode (mol/m3).(16)i0=i0refCO2CO2refγO2The ratios of ρ of Layers 1, 2 and 3 are given in Eqs. (17)–(19).(17)rρ12=ρ1ρ2(18)rρ13=ρ1ρ3(19)rρ23=ρ2ρ3In this research, one dimension – the x direction is applied for the cathode electrode modeling, three indices η1, η2 and η3 are defined for the overpotential differences of Layers 1, 2 and 3 and are given in Eqs. (20)–(22)[10], respectively, where Π, ΨII, ΩII, ΨIII, and ΩIIIare the functions given by Eqs. (25) to(24). r0 and r1 are two relative factors of the triple-layer configuration thickness ratios rδand are described by Eqs. (28) and (29).(20)η1=RgTαcFln[Π+1](21)η2=RgTαcFln[ΨII·(ΩII+1)](22)η3=RgTαcFln[ΨIII·(ΩIII+1)](23)ΩIIΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12,l=tan2αcFΔU2RgT·rσ12rρ12·ΨII(ΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12)·(l−r0)−tan−1Π(ΔU,r0)ΨII(ΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12)rσ12rρ12(24)ΩIII(ΔU,r0,r1,rσ12,rρ12,rσ13,rρ13,rσ23,rρ23,l)=tan2αcFΔU2RgT·rσ13rρ13·ΨIII(ΔU,r0,r1,rσ12,rρ12,rσ13,rρ13,rσ23,rρ23,l)·(l−r1)−tan−1ΨII(ΔU,r1,rσ12,rρ12)−Π(ΔU,r0)ΨIII(ΔU,r0,r1,rσ12,rρ12,rσ13,rρ13,rσ23,rρ23,l)rσ23rρ23+Π(ΔU,r0)ΨIII(ΔU,r0,r1,rσ12,rρ12,rσ13,rρ13,rσ23,rρ23,l)rσ13rρ13(25)Π(ΔU,l)=tan2±ΔUαcF2RgT12·1−l(26)ΨII(ΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12)=Π(ΔU,r0)·(1−rσ12rρ12)+1(27)ΨIII(ΔU,r0,r1,rσ12,rρ12,rσ13,rρ13,rσ23,rρ23,l)=ΨII(ΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12)ΩII(ΔU,r1,rσ12,rρ12,l)(1−rσ23rρ23)+ΨII(ΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12)−rσ13rρ13Π(ΔU,r0)+rσ23rρ23ΨII(ΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12)ΩII(ΔU,r0,rσ12,rρ12,l)(28)r0=rδ13+rδ231+rδ13+rδ23(29)r1=rδ131+rδ13+rδ23Due to the real-world applications with increasing complexity, computational intelligence (CI) offers a ‘state-of-art’ capability to handle these problems, which is a family of nature-inspired approaches with ever-increasing new members. It is not necessary to reformulate the complex industrial problems for searching for optimal solutions in nonlinear or nondifferentiable spaces, compared with traditional optimization approaches, CI can manage its objectives using fitness functions which can express the complex problems with flexibility. This feature is particularly appealing if an explicit objective function of complex industrial application is difficult to obtain, which will directly benefit both academic and industrial users in a multidisciplinary range, especially the design and manufacture R&D and industries.Innovative and creative activities enhance our economic competitiveness. Design and manufacture are driven by technological innovation and intellectual ingenuity. For this, the CIAD/CIAE framework promises many benefits, including higher flexibility, improved efficiency (in design, manufacture and energy use), and improved design quality. The CIAD/CIAE enabled smart design system will provide expanded capability to accommodate a variety of CI algorithms. Three advantages: (1) mobilization of computational resources; (2) taking advantage of multiple CI algorithms; and (3) reduction of the computational costs. Being a set of nature-inspired approaches which offers a wealth of capability for complex problem solving, CI does not need to reformulate the problem in order to search for a non-linear or non-differentiable space.The CIS is proposed and applied to utilize the diverse range of CI approaches. As shown in Fig. 2, the architecture of the CIS comprises three modules [22,23]: (1) data inputs, (2) CI integrated solver and (3) result outputs.•module 1: @A, data inputs. Generally, this module is to prepare user inputs, initial parameters and handle raw data from various sources, such as experimental data, real-time traffic data, research reports, etc.module 2: CI integrated Solver. This module integrates a set of CI algorithms into one CIS, which is able to perform the optimsation for the complex practical problems automatically choosing one or more CI algorithms, such as genetic algorithm, swarm fish algorithm and fuzzy logic approach, to determine optimal solutions for given design objectives. In this paper, an new CI algorithm – SDA is integrated in this CIS @C, which is discussed in Section 4.module 3: @B, Result Outputs. This module handles the analysis results from module 2 and performs all post-integrated solver activities, such as result visualization, technical documentation and result data storage.Fig. 3shows the general CIAD/CIAE framework, where the overall process can be summarized in seven phases. In the current version, the deployment processes in the following four phases involve CIS: CIAD, CIAE, computational-intelligence-aided virtual prototype (CIVP) and computational-intelligence-aided manufacturing (CIAM). In this research, the CIAD and CIAE phases are processed to determine the optimal multi-layer configuration of the cathode electrode of the PEFC.The CIAD/CIAE is a newly developed working framework with extendable capability to accommodate various CI approaches. Due to its performance: (1) it can mobilize computational resources effectively, (2) it can accommodate and apply multiple CI algorithms, and (3) it reduces computational costs of all kinds. The CIAD/CIAE can be applied to a wide range of multi-disciplinary applications.•Phase 1: CIAD is divided into five steps (Fig. 4) [22,23].–Step 1 is the parametric modeling for engineering applications under specific conditions using computer-aided design (CAD) technologies.Step 2 is the parameter optimization of the CAD models that is performed via the design objectives using the pre-defined fitness functions.Step 3 as shown in Fig. 2, the CIS performs the parameter optimization via the fitness functions.Step 4 (labeled ‘validation 1’) is the validation step for the CIAD phase. In this stage, performance criteria are used to assess the optimal results, and then, a decision is made concerning whether the optimization process should continue (NO) or terminated and thus should proceed to step 5 (YES).Step 5 is to produces the final results and completes the post-processing tasks. This step handles the analysis results, visualizes the generated data and recommend optimal solutions for the next phase.Phase 2: CIAE, as shown in Fig. 5, is divided into five steps.–Step 1 is the transfer of data from CIAD and the construction of models to satisfy the requirements for engineering applications using computer-aided engineering (CAE) technologies, for example, the finite element method.Step 2 is the parameter optimization for CAE models using the pre-defined fitness functions of engineering objectives.Step 3 involves the CIS.Step 4 (labeled ‘validation 2’) is the validation step for the CIAE phase. Similarly, the decision of NO or YES in this step should be based on performance criteria.Step 5 is the transfer of the results to the next phase.Phase 3: CIVP, Fig. 6shows the five steps in this phase. A virtual prototype is built, for example, the dynamic model with intelligent controller in the given virtual environments, in which the co-simulations for the dynamic models and their controllers are performed with optimal parameters using the CIS.–Step 1 is the design of the control using the optimal parameters determined by the CIS.Step 2 is the parameter optimization for the virtual prototype (VP) models of the multi-body dynamics (MD) by the CIS, which can include rigid-body systems, flexible-body systems and multi-discipline mechanical/mechatronic systems.Step 3 is the parameter optimization of the CIS for the controllers and dynamic models.Step 4 (labeled ‘validation 3’) is the validation for the CIVP phase, which is similar to the validation steps of the previous phases.Step 5 produces the results of the CIVP phase and analyzes, visualizes, and transfers the data to the next phase.Phase 4: Based on the results and data imported from the CIVP, this step transforms the VPs into physical prototypes (PPs), which enables engineers to build a full-size or scaled replica of the experimental system through rapid prototyping services. For example, 3D printing technology can be used to facilitate the rapid design, testing, and manufacture of mechanical, electro-mechanical, and electronic products.Phase 5: CIAM is also shown in Fig. 7. Data validated by PPs and digital models are imported into the CIAM phase, which is divided into five steps. CIAM follows the CIAD, CIAE and CIVP phases. The models that are built, validated, optimized and refined in previous phases can be imported into the CIAM phase, which employs the computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) process to control the machine tools and related machinery in the manufacturing process. In addition, CIAM uses the CIS system to assist in all operations of a manufacturing plant, including planning, management, transportation, storage, and other product life-cycle management (PLM) phases.–Step 1 is the construction of the CIS-optimized controller, which is used to drive computer numerical controlled (CNC) machines through a few numerical control (NC) programs using data imported from previous phases.Step 2 is the optimization of parameters for the automated manufacturing process using the controller commands. This step may include the use of computer applications to define a manufacturing plan for tooling design, CAD model preparation, direct NC (DNC), NC programming, tool management, coordinate-measuring machine (CMM) and execution, CNC machining, inspection programming, machine tool simulation, or post-processing.Step 3 is the CNS manufacturing process optimization of the CIS.Step 4 (labeled ‘validation 6’) is the validation step for the CIAM phase.Step 5 is the summary of the results of the CIAM phase, and the data are transferred to the next phase.Phase 6: System integration, testing and installation. In this phase, all components are integrated, tested and installed to produce a fully functional system or product.Phase 7: This phase includes multi-disciplinary applications supported by the previous phases, which have been demonstrated by previous works in numerous areas, such as terahertz spectroscopic analysis for public security [30], applied energy [31], sustainable development [32–34], engineering modeling and design [35], aerospace engineering [36], automotive engineering [37], economics and finance [38], and drug development for public healthcare [39,40].Dolphins are intelligent animals that exhibit a wide range of complex social behaviors. Compared with many other species, the behavior of dolphins has been extensively studied both in captivity and in the wild. Fig. 8illustrates the anatomy of a Bottlenose dolphin, including its eyes, tail, and body shape. Dolphins always travel in groups and communicate with each other via a complex system of squeaks and whistles. Their excellent hearing compensates for their poor sense of smell and uncertain vision underwater.In the fission-fusion societies of dolphins, a primary group (PG) breaks up into a few smaller subgroups (SGs) to explore, forage and later rejoin other SGs within the PG to communicate, share resources and provide benefits to ensure the survival of the society. Governed by a general social hierarchy, SGs may or may not have leaders. The leader is typically the dolphin that has the largest body size or is the most dominant. During their daily activities, dolphins always exhibit cooperative behavior, which can be briefly classified into two categories: foraging (search, detect and capture) and searching for partners [41–44].The SDA is an artificial intelligence algorithm inspired by the swarm intelligence of the social behavior of dolphin herds. The SDA initially simulates the behavior of an individual artificial dolphin (adi) and then constructs an artificial dolphin (AD). Each adisearches its own local optimal solution and passes specific information to its peers until it finally arrives at globally optimal solutions. The SDA is based on the following assumptions:•The prey and obstacle can be identified by each adi;Only one species of dolphin, for example, bottlenose dolphins, is in a dolphin herd AD.The SDA workflow is illustrated in Fig. 9and involves four steps: search, detect, capture and bulletin. Upon running the SDA program, all of the parameters, such as the population P and behavior status, are initialized and then processed in four steps as follows:1Search. Based on food density and the number of peers and visual conditions, one of the three reactions of the AD (herd, scout and group) is then selected by a k-NN classifier, in which scout is the default or initial behavior of each adi.Detect. The adifinds a prey and relays the position of the prey to the remainder of the herd and then determine the appropriate method for the capture action in the next step.Capture. Given the location of a prey, the AD converges to the location, traps and captures the prey through either a C- or W-method, and feeds on it.Bulletin. This step compares the current solution xiof each adiwith the historical state data, and the bulletin data are replaced and updated only when the current solution is better than that of the last generation.After the four steps, the program checks whether it is an MO application. If YES, then a nondominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) is utilized to address the MO optimizations; if NO, then the SDA converges to meet the given termination condition, which is the max-generation of AD searching for food under a given initial condition.The contributions of the SDA can be summarized in two components. (1) The SDA algorithm, using the swarm intelligence of dolphins’ social behavioral information, is developed as a design tool to optimize the practical problems; (2) to describe the dynamic behavior of the SDA algorithm's evolutionary searching process, two new metrics are proposed in this paper, including the index of the moving mean of the average precision (mmAP) and the index of the moving mean of the standard deviation (mmSTD).As noted in Section 3, the first two phases of the CIAD/CIAE framework (phase1-CIAD and phase2-CIAE) are used to determine the optimal design of a multi-layer configuration. Table 1summarizes the CIAD and CIAE phases. As shown in Table 1, the optimal design parameters are considered the objectives, whereas the structural/material parameters are the variables under Phase 1-CIAD. In Phase 2-CIAE the fuel cell performances are controlled by the optimal design parameters in Phase 1-CIAD, which helps manufacturers to maximize the fuel cell performance by choosing the proper structural/material parameters in a practical manner.In the CIAD phase, eight variables and three fitness functions are considered in the MO optimizations, in which variable nos. 1-4 are for fitness function No. 1 Ϝσ, as described in Eq. (34); variable nos. 5–7 are for fitness function No. 2 Ϝa, as described in Eq. (35); and variable nos. 4 and 8 are for fitness function No. 3Ϝi0, as described in Eq. (36).Ten variables and one fitness function for the optimization are considered in the CIAE phase, in which variable nos. 1–4 are constructed using Ϝσand variable nos. 5–7 are constructed using ϜaandϜi0, which shows the relationship between the two phases. Variable nos. 8–10 are new variables in this phase, and the fitness function is given by Eq. (37).In this section, two new indices are proposed for the MO optimization in the CIAD phase, namely, the Pareto reliability index in Section 5.1 and fitness functions for each phase in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.As defined by Eq. (30), β1 is the Pareto reliability index (PRI1), in which, μfis the mean of the normalized fitness values, as given in equations (31); σfis the standard deviation of the normalized fitness values, as given in Eq. (32); Wiis the weighted normalized fitness values, as given in Eq. (33); andwiis the weight factor,wi∈[0,1], it balances the weight of all normalized fitness values.(30)β1=μfσf(31)μf=∑iJWiJ(32)σf2=∑iJWi−μf2J−1(33)Wi=wi·fih,∑iJwi=1Without loss of generality, a two objectives f1 and f2 are utilized to define the PRI1 β1. As shown in Fig. 10, a geometrical illustration of the PRI1 β1 in a dual-objective case is given to show the distance of the mean margin in a multi-criteria range, in which, the distance from the location measure μfto the limit states σfprovides a good measure of the reliability of the Pareto solutions, that is, the larger values of β1 leads to the better solutions.In practice, without an clear indication of optimal diversities for decision making, an engineer can select any optimal solution of the eight variables listed in Table 1 on the Pareto-front surface under Phase1-CIAD. To deal with this issue, in the CIAD phase, a fast approach to the Pareto-optimal solution recommendation (FPR) [45] using the Pareto reliability index is employed to generate a recommendation list of optimal ranking and optimal trend indications with different risk tolerances.As shown in Fig. 11, the workflow chart of the FPR approach can be summarized in six steps [45]: Step (1), initiation of parameters and optimization process; Step (2), optimization using multi-objective algorithms; Step (3), generation of Pareto-optimal solutions; Step (4), PRI1 assessment, which involves the following four substeps: (1) normalization for the multi-objective fitness functions of the Pareto-optimal solutions, (2) determination of the PRI1 index β1; (3) calculation of evolutionary trend indices mmAP and mmSTD [23]; (4) visualization of Pareto front and evolutionary trend indices; Step (5), checking optimization termination conditions; and Step (6), end of the program and post-calculation process.Eqs. (34)–(36) define the fitness functions of Ϝσ(f1 in the simulation), Ϝa(f2 in the simulation) andϜi0(f3 in the simulation), in which σ, a and i0 are given by Eqs. (7), (13) and (16), respectively.(34)Ϝσ=f1=fitnessτ,ϵ,μ,T=maximize:mmAPσ(35)Ϝa=f2=fitnessmp,mc,lc=maximize:mmAPa(36)Ϝi0=f3=fitnessT,PO2=maximize:mmAPi0The fitness function Ϝηfor predicting the fuel cell capacity is given in Eq. (37), in which eps is the floating-point relative accuracy, it can prevent a singularity in case η approaches 0 and Ϝηapproaches ∞; η is defined in Eq. (38) and η1, η2 and η3 are given by Eqs. (20), (21) and (22).(37)Ϝη=fitness(ΔU,rσ13,rσ23,rρ13,rρ23,rδ13,rδ23,l)=maximize:mmAP1η+eps(38)η=η1·rδ13+rδ231+rδ13+rδ23≤l≤1+η2·rδ131+rδ13+rδ23≤l≤rδ13+rδ231+rδ13+rδ23+η3·0≤l≤rδ13+rδ231+rδ13+rδ23To maximize the fitness functions defined by Equations (34)–(36) in the CIAD phase and by Equation (37) in the CIAE phase. This empirical results are generated by two specially designed MATLAB toolboxes SwarmDolphin[46] and SECFLAB[47] on a computer with a 2.1GHz Intel dual-core processor, Windows XP Professional v5.01, and 2.0 GB 800 MHz dual-channel DDR2 SDRAM, in MATLAB R2010a. Table 2gives the initial parameters for the simulations, in which, the max-generation numbers are 50 for the CIAD phase and 200 for the CIAE phase and serve as the termination condition in each test. The total test number is 50, the population is 30, the step is set to 0.01, the visual factor is 2.5, the crowd factor is 0.618, and the try number is 5. Empirical studies on the CIAD and CIAE phases were performed using these parameters (see Sections 6.1 and 6.2, respectively).Figs. 12–14show the fitness mmAP curves of the three fitness functions for the MO optimization in the CIAD phase. The fitness curves decrease rapidly from generation 1 to reach a plateau (within generation 30) and then remain steady from generations 30 to 50. The mmAP and mmSTD curves converge, which indicates the high efficiency and accuracy of the multi-objective optimization in the CIAD phase.The Pareto-optimal solutions shown in Fig. 15reveal three conflicting objectives. In a wide range, any change in design variables that decreases f1 leads to an increase in f2 and f3 and vice versa.In Table 3, the recommended solutions are listed by the solution number in the solution No. column in descending order (Ranking=1 being the most recommended) using the values of β1 generated by the FPR approach.Table 4shows a comparison with the optimal results by the genetic algorithm (GA) and the particle swarm optimization (PSO) in the CIAD phase, which, together with Table 3, suggests the optimal structural/material parameters for the next phase of the optimization in the CIAE phase. The results implies the outstanding performance of the SDA comparing with GA and PSO.As shown in Fig. 16, the mmAP±mmSTD curves of Ϝηfollow a similar shape from generations 1 to 60. A second jump was observed for both from generations 60 to 200, which peaked at the end of the simulation. In addition, Fig. 17is the histogram of Ϝη, which implies that the SDA provides an efficient optimization in CIAE.As shown in Figs. 18–21, the impacts of the eight coupled variables on η can be demonstrated using four 3D figures.Specifically, Fig. 18 shows that a smallerrσ13and a largerrσ23result in a larger η.Fig. 19 indicates that η increases when bothrρ13andrρ23increase, and η is more sensitive torρ23than torρ13.Fig. 20 shows that η increases whenrδ13increases and whenrδ23decreases.Fig. 21 demonstrates that when ΔU<0.05, η is very sensitive to the changes in the range of [0.3, 0.6] of l. When ΔU>0.05, η is steady.Similarly, Table 5provides the optimal results in the CIAE phase, which produces the optimal solutions of eight variables for the CIAE optimization and also enables a comparison with results from a genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) to demonstrate the effectiveness of the SDA algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a theoretical investigation on the spatial distribution of reaction rates across the electrode has been discussed. An analytical model incorporating ten parameters, including: a lumped variable (ΔU), the ratios of the ionic conductivity of three sub-layers (rσ13 and rσ23), the ratios ρ of the three sub-layers (rρ13 and rρ23), the ratios of the thicknesses (rδ13 and rδ23) and the relative location factor l, has been presented to investigate the the transport and electrochemical behaviors of cathode electrodes with a triple-layer configuration in PEFCs.Based on the triple-layer configuration model, the design objectives have been defined as fitness functions, which determined the optimal combinations of the ten parameters to minimize the overpotential difference η. Using the two newly defined indices of mmAP and mmSTD, the fitness functions have been constructed with the ten parameters, which were optimized by the newly developed SDA.The obtained numerical solutions have been applied to optimize the performance of the electrode with the optimal triple-layer configurations. The research outputs can be summarized as follows:1A triple-layer cathode electrode modeling technique for optimal parameter determination has been proposed to present a strong argument on investigating the optimal solutions of each layer's properties and exploring the effects on their behaviors.On the basis of the triple-layer configuration cathode electrode model, an SDA algorithm has been developed and then utilised to determine the optimal parameters for the triple-layer model, which demonstrates its high efficiency and accuracy.Two metrics, the mmAP and mmSTD, have been employed to define the fitness functions, which are able to smooth short-term fluctuations and highlight long-term trends over the full range of the evolutionary generations. This allows researchers to measure the computational performance of the SDA, and also can be utilised to assess the deployment of other CI algorithms.The PRI1 was defined to handle the MO optimizations in the CIAD phase.This research provides new insights into autonomous design and manufacture and into possible ways to increase the production efficiency which shorter the time from lab to market. Beneficiaries in academia include researchers from Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) background. This research would make a step change in smart design capabilities for Industry 4.0, and help turn creative ideas into innovative products, services or processes timely and competitively. In particular, the CIAD/CIAE enabled smart design system will help smart manufacturing achieve: 1) Virtual product verification and rapid product realization; 2) On-demand mass customization of low-cost products; 3) Distributed production; 4) A digitized manufacturing value chain; 5) Integration with product life cycle management, complete from the conceptual design through to the product's end-of-life.Our future research will focus on the following aspects: (1) the implementation of experimental verification and validation for the optimal multi-layer configuration; (2) migration the CIAD/CIAE phases to the next CIVP and CIAM phases; (3) developing new CI algorithms, e.g. artificial wolf pack algorithm, to determine optimal solutions for improving the efficiency of PEFCs with multiple-layer configurations; (4) to develop a CIAD/CIAE framework-based ‘push button’ solution to a smart design system ready for smart manufacturing and Industry 4.0.acatalyst specific area, m2/m3artificial dolphin individualPareto reliability indexexchange current density, A/cm2ratio of ionic conductivity of two sub-layersρ ratio of two sub-layersratio of thickness of two sub-layersrelative location factorpartial pressures of oxygen, atmoverpotential difference, Vionic conductivity, S/mionic resistancecurrent density, A/cm2thickness of sub-layer, μmelectrolyte water contentionomer tortuosityfitness function of σfitness function of afitness function of i0local relative humiditythe mass loading of platinum per unit area of the cathode, mgcm−2the mass loading of carbon per unit area of the cathode, mgcm−2mass fraction, Mass%CL thickness, μmNafion contenttemperature, Kcatalyst specific area and the exchange current density multiplicationlumped variable, VADartificial dolphinbipolar platecomputer-aided designcomputer-aided engineeringcomputational intelligencecatalyst layercomputational-intelligence-aided designcomputational-intelligence-aided engineeringcomputational-intelligence-aided virtual prototypecomputational-intelligence-aided manufacturingenvironmental riskfast approach of Pareto-optimal solution recommendationgas diffusion layersk-nearest neighbor algorithmmembrane electrode assemblymoving mean average precisionmoving mean standard deviationnondominated sorting genetic algorithm IIoxygen reduction reactionphysical prototypeprimary groupPareto reliability indexpolymer electrolyte fuel cellpolymer electrolyte membranesub-groupswarm dolphin algorithmvirtual prototypecomputational intelligence integrated solver