@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An adaptive multimedia streaming dissemination system for vehicular networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This work tackles several challenges for video streaming dissemination system in vehicular networks.The proposed system computes prefetched stream data for each user based on current situation of the users.A bandwidth reservation mechanism for premium user was proposed to ensure the QoS of stream data premium user received.A fuzzy logic inference system is utilized to determine if a BS or a vehicle can be chosen to transfer stream data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicular networks,Adaptable streaming service dissemination,Adaptable dynamic decoding,Stream data prefetch,Fuzzy logic,Bandwidth reservation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An adaptive seamless streaming dissemination system for vehicular networks is presented in this work. An adaptive streaming system is established at each local server to prefetch and buffer stream data. The adaptive streaming system computes the parts of prefetched stream data for each user and stores them temporarily at the local server, based on current situation of the users and the environments where they are located. Thus, users can download the prefetched stream data from the local servers instead of from the Internet directly, meaning that the video playing problem caused by network congestion can be avoided. Several techniques such as stream data prefetching, stream data forwarding, and adaptive dynamic decoding were utilized for enhancing the adaptability of different users and environments and achieving the best transmission efficiency. Fuzzy logic inference systems are utilized to determine if a roadside base station or a vehicle can be chosen to transfer stream data for users. Considering the uneven deployment of BSs and vehicles, a bandwidth reservation mechanism for premium users was proposed to ensure the QoS of the stream data premium users received. A series of simulations were conducted, with the experimental results verifying the effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With advanced network technology, people can share digital media information through the Internet, including vehicular networks, which are expected to become increasingly well developed in the future. Through vehicular networks, vehicles can exchange real time information in order to avoid accidents, and transmit digital media using the P2P technique. At present, a lot of research is focusing on vehicular packet transmission and clustering to improve the efficiency of the overall system. Qadri et al. [1] presented a multi-source video streaming mechanism for VANETs and ensured its practicality and feasibility. Qian et al. [2] provided the basic design selections and rules for unmanned vehicular video streaming, and Gotta et al. [3] proposed a technique called Smart Mode to increase the Quality of Experience (QoE) and decrease the waste of bandwidth for satellite video streaming transmission in urban vehicular environments. These applications show that video streaming in the scope of vehicular networks is both realistic and of practical interest.In future vehicular networks, the requirements for communication between vehicles and the outside world will only increase. Communication modules are expected to be embedded in vehicular entertainment systems, integrating the Microsoft Silverlight streaming technique and Microsoft Expression Encoder to deliver Smooth Streaming effect and provide users with a high-quality viewing experience.Vehicular wireless network access techniques can be classified into two types, namely, Vehicle to Roadside (V2R) and Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) Communications [4–6]. Since all vehicular applications must be able to support high-speed mobility, an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) [7,8] is often adopted to provide drivers with information and maintain connections between vehicles and roadside units (RSU). The communication protocol that is used as a standard to support wireless access in vehicular environment (WAVE) was recently defined by the ITS IEEE 802.11p Task Group [9–11].The explosive increase in commercial usage of the Internet has led to a rapid growth in demand for video delivery technologies. Thus, efficient multimedia streaming techniques should be incorporated into the entertainment systems built into vehicular networks. Multimedia streaming can be operated either on-demand or live. In the case of live streaming, such as interactive video conferencing, the compressed media source needs be promptly transmitted to multimedia players through servers and networks. With on-demand streaming, all compressed media source files need be saved in the database, and the chosen files are transmitted from the database whenever the services are requested by the clients.Currently, streaming techniques can be separated into three types. The first type involves sending multimedia data to the client via traditional Web servers [12]. This type is also called HTTP Streaming, because the web server conforms to HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP). The second type involves playing multimedia files via independent streaming servers [13,14], a technique which is usually referred to as True Streaming. Reflecting the fact that True Streaming conforms to Real Time Protocol (RTP), it is also called RTP Streaming. RTP, which is designed for real time streaming and is similar to HTTP and FTP, involves sending a unidirectional data stream to players, where the data will be played right away if the bandwidth is sufficient. The third streaming type is Clientless Streaming. With this streaming type, users play stream files with Java player, which was not built into the client-side originally. Thus, Java player will be delivered to the client only when it is needed. The ultimate goal of this streaming technique is “Streaming media at anywhere, anytime, anyplace and any device”. However, transmission bandwidth changes in some environments, resulting in failure in transmission or waste of bandwidth. One possible solution is to change transmission modes. For example, P2P technique [15–17] can be used to make all peers share information on an equal basis, to achieve the best quality of viewing experience. In addition, multicast is also a widely used transmission mode which can lower the waste of bandwidth and provide better QoS.There are two kinds of multimedia data encoding methods. The first kind is online encoding, in which the data are encoded instantly and the encoded packets are saved in the transmission buffer. The second type is off-line encoding, which involves pre-encoding and saving multimedia data in the hard disk. Fig. 1illustrates the streaming scenario of a single transmitter to a single receiver. All received data are saved in the transmission buffer and will be decoded after a predefined time period. This kind of play delay is used to lessen the influence of network delay and recover lost packets, if possible. In this kind of one-to-one scenario, encoding and streaming mechanisms can provide users the best QoS according to the current states of the networks. The disadvantage of online encoding is that the viewing quality is easily influenced by network congestion and the limited capacity of the transmission buffer; whereas off-line encoding may waste space hard disk space due to compressing the same video file at different ratios in advance.The second kind of streaming architecture is composed of one transmitter and multiple receivers, as shown in Fig. 2. In this scenario, the transmitter transmits data to several receivers at the same time, so how to allocate bandwidth to the receivers effectively becomes an important issue. A common scheme for solving this problem is to transmit the streaming data with different compression ratios or adjustable byte streams. While this solution cannot guarantee the best QoS, it is able to enhance overall effectiveness of the system.Notably, the types of multimedia streaming techniques mentioned above were designed for traditional Internet. To allow users to receive multimedia data anywhere, many researchers have been working on supporting mobility for streaming. Nasser et al. [18] adaptively compressed multimedia data to fit different multimedia wireless network conditions. Thus, more new users can be allowed to receive the services. If free bandwidth cannot support new users’ requirements, call admission control (CAC) is used to drop the new requests. This method can maximize bandwidth utilization and provide users with acceptable quality service, but it is only designed for low-mobility devices. In the vehicular network environment, various traffic conditions and the clients’ rapid movement make multimedia transmission more complicated.Yoon et al. [19] proposed a mobility profile aided file downloading service (MoPADS) for vehicular networks. MoPADS uses drivers’ mobility records to help data transmission. More specifically, MoPADS predicts users’ routes, moving speeds, and arrival time. It also establishes a mesh network, in which each macro BS is connected with a fiber backbone network and several micro BSs. The advantage of MoPADS is that the cost on BS deployment will be decreased because micro BSs no longer connect to the backbone network. However, service interruption may occur while a vehicle moves out of the coverage of a BS, since multiple route choices will make source transmission more complicated. Besides, vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) transmission is not considered in this approach. Sukuvaara [20] considered both V2V and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications to build a wireless traffic service platform (WTSP) which consists of a central traffic service server, BSs, and moving vehicles. However, this platform provides information that requires less bandwidth, such as accident warnings and local weather reports, so some streaming service was not used smoothly, and in some cases was not even available.Karimi et al. [21] proposed a novel LTE-based solution to support high throughput and continuous multimedia services for high speed train passengers. Basing their approach on cell array architecture, they organized the cells along a railway, together with femto cell services. Assumed that the driving direction and speed of a high-speed train are known in advance, the cell array predicts the upcoming LTE cells in service effectively, and thus enables a seamless handover. However, the driving direction and the velocity of the high-speed train are fixed, and this cannot be applied to cope with the situation where drivers’ destinations and velocities are unknown, as in ordinary vehicular network environments.Annese et al. [22] presented an improved version of the routing protocol for vehicular networks, named smart-windows BATMAN, to allow vehicles to connect to the different roadside mesh nodes in a seamless manner, and Younas and Awan [23] developed a new mobility management scheme that ensures seamless connectivity and reliable execution of context-aware transactions for mobile users by using a combination of different queuing models. However, these two studies only considered the path-selected algorithms in terms of high coverage of the BS. If an area is outside of the coverage of the BS, this raises the possibility of it becoming a blind zone.Wang et al. [24] considered the blind zone and the driving direction for Cooperative VANETs, and designed a network-coding-based packet-exchange scheme that showed how to schedule the broadcast and relay process. However, the higher the relative velocity is, the more packet error ratio the result showed. Moreover, situations where there were no relay nodes, such as the cases where the gap between two vehicles is too long or no vehicles are behind the vehicle that requests the relay service, were not considered.Some researches [25] have pointed out that a centralized architecture lead to a server bottleneck if many clients have to be served simultaneously. Therefore, in order to relieve the server and ensure the scalability, the cooperative network seems to be a promising way to increase network capacity and transmission reliability. For example, Wu et al. [26] presented a headlight perfecting method combined with dynamic chaining of clients that are viewing and sharing the same media. However, a load balancing technique is still needed when dealing with streaming over the clients to ensure that no peers are overloaded, compared to others.Chung and Cho [27] proposed the double-adjustment soft-handoff (DASH) scheme to provide seamless service and to maximize resource efficiency when real-time streaming services are provided in CDMA-based ITSs. The performance of the DASH scheme was evaluated with respect to the blocking probability, the handoff failure probability, and the carried traffic. The results showed that it can provide better maintenance of calls and throughput.In this work, an adaptive seamless streaming dissemination system is proposed to tackle the above-mentioned challenges. The adaptive streaming system computes the parts of a prefetched stream data for each user, and stores them temporarily at the local server, based on the current situation of the users and the environments that they are located at. Several techniques such as stream data prefetching, stream data forwarding, and adaptive dynamic decoding were utilized for enhancing the adaptability of different users and environments and achieving the best transmission efficiency. Considering the uneven deployment of roadside base stations (BS) and vehicles, the bandwidth reservation mechanism for premium users was proposed to ensure the QoS of stream data which premium users received. Notably, a fuzzy logic inference system is proposed and utilized to determine if a BS or a vehicle can be chosen to transfer stream data for users. Fuzzy logic technique is adopted in this work because it has been efficiently used to solve several problems regarding vehicular networks, as well as some problems related to resource assignment [28,29], and is thus a powerful tool for controlling processes that are difficult to model and linearize.This article is organized as follows. The next section presents the multimedia streaming system. The simulation results are given in Section 3, and the final section concludes the work.The simulated road map is first divided into several sections, and the scenario of the proposed multimedia streaming dissemination system is illustrated in Fig. 3. Based on the hierarchical framework shown in Fig. 3, a video-on-demand (VoD) streaming dissemination server collects video, and streaming data buffers are distributed at each local server. Each road section is managed by a local server, whereas an upper-level server at a higher hierarchical level is responsible for a section with a larger scope, which is composed of several nearby road sections. According to an individual user's current status, the VoD streaming dissemination server determines the amount of frames that each local server needs to prefetch and then saves data in the local server so that congestion can be effectively avoided. It is this architecture which shows the scalability of our proposed work. Notably, the VoD stream dissemination server and the local server are connected with a backbone high-speed network. Because the distance from any local server to the roadside BSs is much closer, the wired networks are used to connect the local server to the roadside BSs. Since the connections between local servers and the roadside BSs are via wired networks, and not a wireless network, a bottleneck will not occur between local servers and the roadside BSs during the process of pre-fetching the streaming data.In this work, users are classified into two types: premium users and free users. The proposed system provides free streaming service for free users, but with limited bandwidth. In the case of a shortage of the bandwidth, the quality of the streaming data, compression ratio, and frame per second (fps) for the free users will be degraded in order to release more bandwidth to meet the minimum bandwidth requirements for the premium users who have higher priority. Accordingly, the free users cannot only obtain free seamless streaming service, but they also help premium users to keep accessing Internet resources without interruption and degradation of the service. Hence, a win-win situation could be achieved in our proposed scheme.When a vehicle enters the coverage of a roadside BS, the streaming data will be forwarded to the vehicle via the roadside BS, as illustrated by the V2I symbol in Fig. 3. In contrast, vehicles that are outside of the communication coverage of any BS will require the streaming data to be forwarded via relay vehicles, as illustrated by the V2V symbol in Fig. 3.The proposed adaptive multimedia streaming dissemination system for vehicular networks is shown in Fig. 4. To maintain the reliable quality of the video for the viewers, three cases are considered in our proposed adaptive multimedia streaming dissemination methods. Case 1 represents the situation where the density of roadside BSs and vehicle distribution are both high; Case 2 is applied when the density of roadside BSs is sparse but that of vehicles is dense; while Case 3 is the condition where the density of roadsides BSs and vehicle distributions are both low. With the received data, the system determines each user's case to make sure the performance of video streaming service is maintained at a satisfactory level.As shown in the right portion of Fig. 5, a user first downloads and plays stream data from a roadside BS simultaneously. In Cases 1 and 2, it is not necessary to pre-load the stream data in advance. Although there are few roadside BSs in Case 2, the user can still receive the stream data via other vehicles acting as forwarding nodes. When the number of vehicles and roadside BSs are insufficient to maintain the live streaming service, a pre-loading mechanism will be used to make sure that the users, especially the premium users, can still enjoy high viewing quality. A user will keep receiving the pre-loaded stream data until his or her vehicle leaves the range of the current BS, and then plays the pre-loaded stream data to meet a seamless live stream service. When the user enters into the range of another roadside BS, the user will start receiving the stream data from the BS again. The above-mentioned operations of the server are shown in the right part of Fig. 4.We can expect that the vehicle density and roadside BS distribution are both higher in populated urban areas. Although the number of roadside BSs here is much higher than in the suburbs or along suburban roads, the number of users accessing the Internet also increases at the same time, and this may a result in shortage of bandwidth and the problem of congestion. Therefore, in this case, we have to consider the possibility of the BSs having an unconnected status.Imagine that the green vehicle illustrated in Fig. 5 is leaving the range of the current roadside BS, and it will drive through an intersection on its left shortly. It is possible for the vehicle to leave the range of BS-2 and enter the coverage of BS-3, BS-4, or BS-5 after the vehicle passes through the intersection. The difficulty is that the server cannot determine which direction the vehicle may drive. Let us take Fig. 5 as an example. When the green vehicle is receiving Frame 3, Frame 4 has been preloaded by the BS-2. In our scheme, we allow Frame 5 to be preloaded by BS-3, BS-4, and BS-5 because the user will enter the intersection area, and we have no idea which direction the vehicle will go. Although this method will repeatedly preload the streaming data at different roadside BSs, the time to determine the direction is very short and the amount of repeated preload streaming data is not very large. Thus, the extra overhead is acceptable in our scheme.As shown in the right portion of Fig. 4, when a vehicle is not going to pass through an intersection, and the vehicle can handoff to the neighboring BS after the vehicle disconnects with the current BS, the system will take the actions after label C1, which is also the initial stage shown in Fig. 6. In contrast, if a vehicle is going to pass through an intersection and the vehicle can handoff to a neighboring BS, the system will take the actions after label C1 as well. In both of the above-mentioned situations, the system will check if there is enough free bandwidth at the neighboring BS. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the required bandwidth to prepare transferring streaming data for the vehicle will be reserved if the system gets a positive acknowledgment from the neighboring BS.If the system detects that the vehicle cannot handoff to any neighboring BS after the vehicle is outside of the coverage of the current BS, the system will take the actions after label C2, which is also the initial stage in Fig. 7. In this situation, the vehicle will attempt to find a route along the way to the next available BS via V2V communications. The requesting vehicle first broadcasts a packet to find a route to the destination. Each vehicle on the way to the destination is asked to reply to the source vehicle as to whether or not it is appropriate to act as a relay vehicle for forwarding the streaming data for the requesting vehicle. Notably, a fuzzy logic inference system is employed to determine the optimal transferred route by selecting the most suitable relay vehicle(s) to forward the streaming data for the requesting vehicle. After the broadcast packet reaches the closest base station on the route to the destination, a routing path is then constructed by selecting the most appropriate nodes to forward the packets along the way to the destination or the closest base station. Here, the radius of the coverage area of each relay vehicle is assumed to be identical to the length of a road segment.As mentioned in the preceding subsection, the construction of the routing path via V2V communications can be obtained by selecting the most appropriate intermediate nodes along the way to next roadside BS, assuming the radius of the coverage area of each vehicle is identical to the length of a road segment. The optimal transferred route, as mentioned above, is determined by calculating the so-called appropriateness level for each candidate relay vehicle. The system first calculates appropriateness levels of all vehicles between the requesting vehicle and the next BS with enough bandwidth for the requesting vehicle. Because the distribution of vehicles is dynamic, not only one route would be selected as the transferred path for the requesting vehicle, and a routing path composed of neighboring vehicles with the smallest appropriateness levels along the way from the requesting vehicle to the next available BS will be recommended by the system as the transferred route for relaying streaming data.The determination of the most appropriate intermediate nodes is accomplished by comparing the feedback values sent back by the vehicles distributed at the road segment,(1)inode=maxifli(⋅),where fli(·) represents the output generated by the fuzzy logic inference system established at the vehicle indexed by i.Fig. 8shows the input–output mapping for computation of the appropriateness level of a candidate relay vehicle. There are three input parameters used in the fuzzy logic inference system, including the minimum bandwidth required for satisfying the streaming service for the requesting vehicle, the estimated remaining connection time between the candidate relay vehicle and its neighbor vehicles, and the bandwidth currently being used at the candidate relay vehicle.Notably, the remaining connection time between the candidate relay vehicle and its neighbor vehicles can be easily estimated by a simple computation based on the distance between the two vehicles and their relative speed. Besides, the selected relay vehicles may have similar characteristics, including the same driving direction and the same driving speed as the requesting vehicle, which could provide stability while transferring streaming data. In addition, inadequate bandwidth will affect the QoS of playing stream data, and jittery playback or service disruptions may occur. The number of premium and free users in connection would also influence the quality of communication.The basic function of each component in the fuzzy logic inference system module is described as follows:•Fuzzifier: The fuzzifier performs the fuzzification function that converts three inputs into suitable linguistic values which are needed in the inference engine.Fuzzy rule base: The fuzzy rule base is composed of a set of linguistic control rules and the attendant control goals.Inference Engine: The inference engine simulates human decision-making, based on the fuzzy control rules and the related input linguistic parameters.Defuzzifier: The defuzzifier acquires the aggregated linguistic values from the inferred fuzzy control action, and generates a non-fuzzy control output, which represents the predicted priority.Fig. 9illustrates the defuzzification stage of the fuzzy logic inference system. Here μ denotes the degree of membership. The input M denotes the minimum bandwidth required for satisfying the real-time traffic, R is the expected remaining connection time between the vehicle indexed by i and its neighbor vehicles, and U is the bandwidth currently used at the vehicle indexed by i. The fuzzy linguistic variables “Small”, “Middle” and “High” give different required minimum bandwidth measures in the membership function for the input M. Similarly, three linguistic term sets, “Short”, “Medium” and “Long” are used for R, and “Small”, “Middle” and “High” are used for U. The output parameter of the inference engine, Ai, the appropriateness of the vehicle as an intermediate relay node on the transferred path, is defined as the estimated link quality when the vehicle is chosen as the intermediate node. The range of the output falls between 0 and 1.There are 27 inference rules generated in the Mamdani fuzzy inference system. The non-fuzzy output of the defuzzifier can then be expressed as the weighted average of each rule's output after the Tsukamoto defuzzification method is applied:(2)AL=∑j=127Aj⋅wj∑j=127wj,where Ajdenotes the output of the jth rule induced by the firing strength wj.Take Fig. 10as an example, since roadside BSs are sparse in this case, users might not communicate with any BS, and the system will instead allow a vehicle to maintain the streaming service by using neighboring vehicle(s) to transfer the stream data, with priority given to premium users that enjoy a minimum QoS guarantee. Identical to the situation described in the preceding subsection, the system will request neighboring vehicles to act as transmission nodes to transfer the stream data along the suggested transferred path. As shown in Fig. 10, although the premium user in the intersection is out of the range of any roadside BS, the user can still maintain the viewing quality of streaming data via other neighboring vehicles, which are all free users in this example.Parts of the right portion in Fig. 4 illustrate the operations of the system for Case 2. In this case, the distance between the current BS and the next neighboring one is large, and the vehicle density is high. While entering into label C2 as shown in Fig. 7, the system first uses the fuzzy logic inference system to select proper vehicles for transferring streaming data. Next, the selected vehicles will be asked to provide bandwidth for the requesting vehicle until it enters the transmission range of any roadside BS. The system will then turn to the operations after label C1 to determine if the next BS is appropriate for forwarding streaming data, as shown in Fig. 6.An example of this situation is shown in Fig. 11, where we see that a large gap between BS-2 and BS-3 will result in a possible service disruption for the vehicle that requests streaming service. To maintain the streaming service, the server will ask BS-1 and BS-2 to activate the pre-loading mechanism to download the compressed stream data in advance.Again, we look to the right portion of Fig. 4 to initiate the operations for Case 3. If the system detects that the vehicle requesting streaming service cannot connect to any BS or relay vehicles, as illustrated in the example in Fig. 11, the system will take the actions after label C3, which is also the initial stage in Fig. 12. Because the user cannot obtain streaming service from any roadside BS, nor are other nearby vehicles available to act as relay nodes in the near future, the server will activate the pre-loading mechanism at the BSs so that the user vehicle can remain connected. The compression ratio of the stream data can be estimated based on the current speed of the vehicle and the distance that the vehicle will remain connected. The system will simultaneously keep playing the current stream data and pre-load the necessary streaming data in advance, according to the estimated compression ratio. Once the user enters the coverage of any roadside BS, such as BS-3 in the example shown in Fig. 11, the server will classify the user into Case 1 and prepare the connection with the BS.Let us take Fig. 11 as an example again, a vehicle is driving on the road section LAand is reaching the intersection of BS-1 and BS-2. The server is aware that this vehicle will be outside of the transmission ranges of all the BSs in the following road section LZ. Here the two parameters, LAand LZ, which respectively represent the road section with connection and the road section outside of the transmission range of any BS, are used to calculate the compression ratio of the stream data. Assume that the vehicle moves with constant velocity, and the driving times on LAand LZ, are directly proportional to the distance. Hence, we can determine how much bandwidth we should reserve in advance while driving on LZand further calculate the appropriate compression level of the stream data to avoid the shortage of bandwidth in the following road section where the vehicle will be without connection to any BS.LetaLZrepresent the required bandwidth reserved in advance on the road section Lz, where the vehicle is outside of the transmission range of any BS, and letaLAdenote the allocated bandwidth while the vehicle is on the road section LA, during its connection with BS-2, as shown in Fig. 12. The determination ofaLZandaLAcan be expressed as follows:(3)aLZ=ai−aLA,and(4)aLA=an,ifai×LALA+LZ<anak+1,ifak+1≤ai×LALA+LZ<ak,where i and airepresent the service level of the stream data and the required bandwidth on the road section LA, respectively. Notably, the service level of the stream data and its corresponding video resolution quality used in our simulation are listed in Table 1.Notably, our proposed scheme can adjustaLAaccording to the ratio of the LAand LZ. If the ratio ai×(LA/(LA+LZ)) is between ak+1 and akas specified in the third column in Table 1, our scheme will select the lower bound of the resolution, ak+1 to prevent the shortage of bandwidth and the possibility of service disruption. As a result, if the disconnected road section Lzis not too long, we can still keep acceptable video quality with a better resolution. Otherwise, a degraded service level of stream data will be provided to users to avoid service disruption.We ran a series of simulations to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of our adaptive seamless streaming and dissemination (ASSD) system. The simulation parameters are shown in Table 2. We randomly simulated a street map where the mobility pattern was generated by the VanetMobiSim simulator, as shown in Fig. 5, the half-side width of which is 5m, with bidirectional traffic streams. We assumed that there were 20 vehicles pulling into a broadcast zone and 5 vehicles pulling into a blind zone. The distance between any two adjacent vehicles is about 20m The average speed of the vehicles in the simulation is 60km/h with at most ±5-km/h deviation. We assume that BSs broadcast messages every 100ms and that the packet lengths are equal to 500kb, 200kb, 100kb, and 50kb respectively. In addition, the bandwidth of the broadcast channel is 10MHz, and the transmission range between relay nodes is 80m Notably, Matlab tools were used to generate the network scenario and traffic model addressed in the paper. The resolution quality and the required bandwidth for each video used in our simulation are listed in Table 1.Three representative approaches detailed in the related literature, including Mobility Profile Aided File Downloading Service (MoPADS) Wireless Traffic Service Platform (WTSP), and a recently introduced methodology, the Network Coding Based Scheme (NCBS), were compared with our proposed work. MoPADS [19] is also an intelligent transportation system that integrates cellular infrastructure and as hoc distribution network. It uses vehicular mobility profiles not only to provide quality yet affordable services, but also to predict the vehicle's possible route, velocity, and the required time to get to some specific place in the future. WTSP [20] considers two types of communications, including vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure, to construct a wireless service platform based on the traffic service central unit, the base station network with traffic service base stations, and mobile end users with ad-hoc connectivity and backbone network connectivity. It provides real-time service to mobile users with less bandwidth requirements. NCBS [24] realized the seamless information dissemination associated with V2I and V2V communications by taking into account the interruption in the transmission of information and message loss when vehicles pass through broadcast and blind zones. The experimental results showed that NCBS offered Internet streaming service with lower packet error ratio and higher throughput. Notably, since our proposed scheme makes use of free users to relay streaming service for premium users if needed, we thus evaluated the performance of our proposed scheme for both types of users. The notation ASSD-P is used for the premium users, and ASSD-F is used for free users in subsequent discussions in this section.Throughput, packet loss ratio, and service disruption time were adopted as performance metrics in this work. Throughput represents overall multimedia data transmission capacity, which includes the data received from the adaptive streaming server and the data shared between users through the BSs bandwidth sharing mechanism. Packet loss ratio stands for the percentage of packets that get lost, producing errors in the transmission process. Service disruption time is defined as the period of time during which the vehicle cannot maintain active connection with the current BS until it connects with a new serving BS link and restarts sending and receiving packets.Fig. 13illustrates the packet loss ratios corresponding to the condition of different numbers of vehicles among the four schemes. Our proposed scheme achieves better performance in terms of packet loss ratio than the other systems. The reason is that we ensure the QoS in different traffic conditions. For example, if the density of vehicle distribution is low, the number of relay vehicles is also comparatively low, and thus the proposed prefetching mechanism can avoid the problems of transmitted streaming data interruption and delay. From the results, we can observe that the packet loss ratio is slowly increasing. That is because the number of vehicles is increasing and limited bandwidth is being accessed by more users. However, our design involves using portions of free users’ bandwidth to assist premium users in packet transmission, and our proposed system also lowers free users’ quality in terms of compression and frame per second (fps) to this end. The result show that the premium users in our ASSD scheme achieve the best performance in terms of the packet loss ratio, compared to the other systems, and the free users in our scheme also experience better performance than their counterparts under the other three compared methods.In the architecture of MoPADS, only a few server stations are connected to the backbone via high-bandwidth wires, and the other small BSs access the networks by sharing the bandwidth of large BSs. When the traffic flow increases, a shortage of bandwidth will occur, and thus the packet loss ratio will increase. As for WTSP, it provides real-time service with a lower requirement of bandwidth. The packet loss becomes higher when the bandwidth demand of the real-time service gets larger. WTSP can alleviate the deterioration of the packet loss ratio by adopting vehicle-to-vehicle communication to transfer stream data when the density of vehicles is high. Although NCBS allows the nearby vehicles to forward the data for the vehicle requesting streaming service, this scheme only considers the fairness of each vehicle as a relay node. Thus, the performance in terms of packet loss ratio for NCBS is still slightly worse than for our proposed scheme, which addresses more considerations in its implementation.As shown in Fig. 14, our proposed scheme outperformed the others in terms of service disruption time. Our proposed ASSD scheme will be well controlled, since we considered the distribution of vehicles and BSs. If the density of vehicles is high, the system will transfer stream data via other selected vehicles according to the most suitable distance and velocity among the vehicles. But if the density of vehicles is too low to allow for transfer of the data, the prefetching mechanism will start, to ensure uninterrupted transferring of stream data to maintain the QoS. Notably, the slopes, including ASSD-P and ASSD-F, moderately increase with the increasing number of vehicles. In our proposed scheme, although the vehicles cannot receive signals from the BS while passing out of the coverage range of the BS, they can use other vehicles to relay signals for them. Therefore, the disruption time caused by passing through areas which are outside of the coverage of any BS can be dramatically decreased. In addition, when the number of vehicles is over 150, the service disruption time for free users in our scheme is slightly longer than for premier users. That is because the free users need to assist the premier users in relaying streaming data and the service disruption time for the free users is thus increased more obviously than it is for the premier users.The MoPADS scheme does not consider vehicle-to-vehicle communication, so when the vehicle drives away the coverage of the BS, or faces the shortage of bandwidth provided by the small BS, the service disruption time will obviously increase when the number of vehicles and the requirement of bandwidth increase. As for the WTSP and NCBS schemes, they both allow vehicle-to-vehicle communication but have no service prefetching mechanism to transfer stream data. Accordingly, the service disruption time does not significantly deteriorate when the number of vehicles increases. NCBS can spread forward information with as little loss as possible, while mitigating the interference to other vehicles’ reception of broadcast messages caused by relaying signals. Thus, NCBS outperforms both WTSP and NCBS schemes in terms of service disruption time.Fig. 15illustrates the throughput corresponding to the conditions of different numbers of vehicles among the four respective algorithms. Since some techniques such as stream data prefetching, stream data forwarding, and adaptive dynamic decoding were applied in our model to strengthen the adaptability of different users and environments, our proposed scheme proved optimal in terms of maximizing data throughput, in comparisons between the four schemes. In the MPADS scheme, small BSs may face a shortage of bandwidth with which to transfer stream data, but once the vehicles drive back into the coverage of the small BSs, the system still can complete the packet transmission. In the WTSP scheme, although the platform it constructed based on V2V and V2I communications, it provides real-time service to mobile users with less bandwidth requirements. Hence, the mobile users with high bandwidth requirement will not be suitable for this scheme. Since vehicle speed is not taken into account in the NCBS, it is necessary to find an alternative relay node after the current relay node drops out of the communication range of the neighboring relay vehicle and its performance is thus degraded.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
