@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel algorithm for colour image steganography using a new intelligent technique based on three phases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New steganography algorithm.Proposed new intelligent technique.Proposed seven layers of security.Extract byte characteristics.Construct image segmentation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Steganography,Rich model,Image segmentation,Neural networks,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A three-phase intelligent technique has been constructed to improve the data-hiding algorithm in colour images with imperceptibility. The first phase of the learning system (LS) has been applied in advance, whereas the other phases have been applied after the hiding process. The first phase has been constructed to estimate the number of bits to be hidden at each pixel (NBH); this phase is based on adaptive neural networks with an adaptive genetic algorithm using upwind adaptive relaxation (LSANN_AGAUpAR1). The LS of the second phase (LSANN_AGAUpAR2) has been introduced as a detector to check the performance of the proposed steganographic algorithm by creating a rich images model from available cover and stego images. The LS of the last phase (LSCANN_AGAUpAR3) has been implemented through three steps, and it is based on a concurrent approach to improve the stego image and defend against attacks. The adaptive image filtering and adaptive image segmentation algorithms have been introduced to randomly hide a compressed and encrypted secret message into a cover image. The NBH for each pixel has been estimated cautiously using 32 principle situations (PS) with their 6 branch situations (BS). These situations have been worked through seven layers of security to augment protection from attacks. In this paper, hiding algorithms have been produced to fight three types of attacks: visual, structural, and statistical attacks. The simulation results have been discussed and compared with new literature using data hiding algorithms for colour images. The results of the proposed algorithm can efficiently embed a large quantity of data, up to 12bpp (bits per pixel), with better image quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The steganography algorithm, which uses spatial-based schemes to embed data into pixels within the cover image directly, is one of the most important strategies in the field of data security. This algorithm is a type of camouflage that can embed encrypted data into cover media (e.g., text, image, audio, video) to generate stego-media. The confidential data cannot be observed in the stego-media; while it is transmitted on the public communication channels in common computer networks. The goal of the steganography algorithm is to conceal a large amount of secret data and also to transmit these data with the minimum imperceptibility to fight steganalysis [1].A simple and well-known traditional scheme is the least significant bit (LSB) replacement technique [2]. This technique can embed a secret message in a cover image without producing distortions in the stego-image. However, the maximum payload capacity of LSB is limited because one bit is a replacement for each byte.Many existing LSB-based schemes have been used to improve the hiding capacity and/or to reduce the distortion of the stego-image. These schemes are based on difference expansion (DE), hybrid edge detector, and reversible data hiding (RDH) algorithms, and adaptive pixel adjustment using soft computing and computational intelligence.High capacity data hiding has been proposed by many researchers, but they did not present the effect of the security level against new attackers if the payload capacity has been increased. Al-Qershi and Khoo [3] presented a scheme based on difference expansion (DE) to increase the hiding capacity for medical images. Hiding high payload by employing the LSB substitution technique as a fundamental stage and taking advantage of the edge detection technique was proposed by Chen et al. [4]. Ioannidou et al. [5] applied image steganography by taking advantage of sharp areas in images to hide a large amount of data; this approach is based on a hybrid edge detector. Qu et al. [6] proposed a quantum steganography protocol with a large payload based on quantum secure direct communication using entanglement swapping and building up a hidden channel within the improved ping-pong protocol to transmit secret messages.The reversible image steganographic scheme provides the ability to embed secret data into a host image and later recover the host image without losing any information when the secret data are extracted. However, the reversible techniques do not generate a high-quality stego image, and the values of the statistical and visual measures are average. Lee et al. [7] presented an adaptive, reversible data scheme based on the prediction of difference expansion. Yang et al. [8] constructed a reversible data hiding (RDH) algorithm based on a gradient-based edge direction prediction (GEDP) scheme. Chang et al. [9] presented an index compression and reversible data hiding scheme based on side-match vector quantization (SMVQ) and search order coding (SOC). A framework in lossless and reversible data hiding research based on the histogram difference shift was proposed by Feng and Fan [10]. Lin et al. [11] introduced reversible data hiding to fully recover the original host image after extracting the secret message. A reversible image steganographic scheme based on predictive coding was proposed by Wu et al. [12] to embed secret data into compression codes during the lossless image compression to provide a lossless hiding mechanism in the compression domain. Zeng et al. [13] presented a lossless data hiding scheme; the proposed scheme was based on pixel difference histogram shifting to spare space for data hiding. Pixel differences are generated between a reference pixel and its neighbours in a pre-assigned block. A reversible data hiding method for natural images created by constructing a multilevel histogram based on differences between pairs of adjacent pixels was presented by Zhaoa et al. [14]. Lee and Chen [15] applied an adaptive reversible data scheme based on the prediction of difference expansion.In the literature concerning data camouflage methods, there is research to raise the amount of data hiding in the stego image while maintaining the quality of the stego image; nevertheless, the quality of the stego image has been restricted due to the conventional tools that have been used to develop stego images. Eslami and Ahmadabadi [16] proposed a polynomial-based secret image sharing scheme with two achievements, the first was the proposal of embedding according to the size of the hidden data, and the second was the introduction of an authentication chaining method. An embedding scheme with minimal distortion was proposed by Lin [17], for which the message to be embedded was divided into sub-messages, each of which was embedded into a pixel vector with three pixels instead of one pixel. Sajedi and Jamzad [18] introduced a boosted steganography scheme (BSS) that uses a pre-processing stage before applying the steganography methods, where the goal of the BSS is increasing the undetectability of stego images. Liu et al. [19] proposed an image hiding scheme based on the scrambling process composed of the rotation of the squared sub-image in the gyrator transform domains. Yu et al. [20] constructed a distortion-free data hiding algorithm that can embed secret messages into high dynamic range (HDR) images to satisfy three significant benefits. First, the algorithm can convey secret messages to produce a stego image. Second, adaptive message embedding is used to conceal different amounts of secret messages based on their homogeneous representations, and third, efficient time required for message embedding or extraction is efficient.The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, a brief review of related works is presented. In Section 3, the proposed steganography with seven layers of security is discussed. The steps of the proposed steganography algorithm are provided in Section 4. In Section 5, the learning system based on three phases using adaptive neural networks and an adaptive genetic algorithm with upwind adaptive relaxation is discussed. In Section 6, the implementation images are introduced to demonstrate data hiding for colour images. A discussion of the results is presented in Section 7. Finally, Section 8 summarizes the primary conclusions of the proposed algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new algorithm for data hiding based on seven layers of security to enhance the protection from attacks has been proposed in this paper. These security layers are effectively constructed using a three-phase intelligent technique to produce the novel data hiding algorithm for colour images. Learning systems (LS) for the first and the second phases are based on adaptive neural networks with adaptive genetic algorithms and use a new approach, named upwind adaptive relaxation ANN_AGAUpAR, whereas in the third phase, a new approach, named concurrent learning system CANN_AGAUpAR, has been proposed to improve the stego image and to defend against attacks.The LS of the first phase is constructed to find NBH or NBE, whereas the LS in the second phase is applied to construct a rich model to provide sufficient information to the third phase to fight against steganalysis.Prior to the hiding process, adaptive images filtering and new image segmentation algorithms are introduced to randomly hide a compressed and encrypted secret message in a cover image. Moreover, we define 32 principle situations (PS) with 6 branch situations (BS) to select the appropriate colour for each pixel to hide a large amount of data.The excellent experimental results verify the achievement of the proposed hiding algorithm and its superior hiding rate of secret messages with better invisibility. In addition, the results indicate that the seven layers of protection are valuable and significant to obtain good presentation. The results show that the proposed algorithm can be successfully used to fight against visual, structural and statistical attacks.