@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective energy consumption scheduling based on decomposition algorithm with the non-uniform weight vector

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A decomposition algorithm with non-uniform weight vector scheme is proposed for solving MECSP.The balance factor is designed to maintain the diversity of solutions. The scale factor is utilized to enhance the searching ability in entire solution space.The effectiveness of the non-uniform weight vector is verified by the MECSP problems and the modified standard ZDT problems.The proposed algorithm is efficient for solving the large-scale scheduling problems, especially for problems that have magnitude difference between two optimization objectives.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-objective optimization,Decomposition algorithm,Energy consumption scheduling problem,Non-uniform weight vector,Objective function,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The multi-objective energy consumption scheduling problem based on the third-party management is one essential issue of smart grid. The minimal energy cost and the maximal utility are two optimization objectives. One characteristic of the multi-objective energy consumption scheduling problem is that the magnitude difference between the two objectives increases as the number of users increases. The difference affects the quality of the solution set in the sense that it is harder to obtain the uniformly distributed solutions with good convergence and diversity for problems with a larger difference. In this paper, we propose a decomposition algorithm based on the non-uniform weight vector. The weight vector is designed based on the relationship of the magnitude difference between the two optimization objectives. The weight vector consists of two parts. One is the balance factor that can maintain the diversity of the solutions. The other is the scale factor that further enhances the searching ability with a large number of users. With the non-uniform weight vector, our algorithm can effectively deal with the magnitude difference between the two optimization objectives. The simulation illustrates that the proposed algorithm is very useful for solving large-scale energy consumption scheduling problems. In addition, the modified standard ZDT problems with apparent magnitude differences between two objectives are used to illustrate the versatility and stability of the proposed algorithms based on the non-uniform weight vector.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The energy consumption scheduling is an effective approach for the demand side management and optimal control in smart grid. It can realize the goal of the smart grid for matching the power supply and the demand profile. Recently, the multi-objective energy consumption scheduling problem (MECSP) based on the third-party management has attracted much attention. All users submit their energy demand to the third-party, which schedules the energy consumptions to meet the demands of both the end-users and utility companies [1]. The optimization objectives are to minimize the total energy consumption cost and maximize the utility simultaneously.The multi-objective energy consumption scheduling problem is one kind of nonlinear NP-hard problems with a large solution space. The solution space expands greatly with the increase of the number of users. It is difficult to find the Pareto front in polynomial time. Therefore, the evolutionary algorithm (EA) has become one kind of primary research methods [1,2]. Salinas et al. [1] proposed a load scheduling with an evolutionary algorithm (LSEA) and a load scheduling with an ɛ-approximate evolutionary algorithm (ɛ-LSEA) to retrieve a set of Pareto-optimal solutions. In fact, for some genetic algorithms, such as NSGA-II [3] and ɛ-LSEA [1], the solutions concentrate in a specific area for large-scale problems. Lu et al. [2] investigated an algorithm based on Tchebycheff decomposition to increase the diversity and convergence of the solutions. The algorithm can improve the quality of solutions in the aspect of diversity and convergence. However, the distribution of the solutions of these algorithms is uneven, especially for large-scale problems. The non-uniform distribution of the solutions is a key issue.For the multi-objective energy consumption scheduling problem, the magnitudes of the two objectives are not at the same level. The magnitude difference between the two objectives increases as the number of users increases. As a result, the uniformly distributed weight vector for the multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition (MOEA/D) [4] or other similar algorithms cannot guarantee the uniform distribution of solutions. The larger the magnitude difference between the two objectives is, the worse the distribution is. Therefore, the uniform weight vector needs to be revisited to take into consideration of the magnitude difference between different optimization objectives.By analyzing the weight vectors used in recent work, we find that they are mainly used for solving the uniformity and convergence of complicated Pareto front or Pareto front with a particular shape [4,5]. They do not consider that different objectives have distinct magnitude difference.In this paper, we propose a non-uniform weight vector based on the decomposition algorithm to deal with the multi-objective energy consumption scheduling problem. The weight vector is designed based on the relationship of the magnitude difference between the two optimization objectives. We consider two key factors in the non-uniform weight vector. They are the balance factor and the scale factor. The balance factor is used to maintain the diversity of solutions for the dimension on which the magnitude is large. The scale factor further expands the search scope, and maintains the diversity of the solutions in the entire solution space.In addition, we use different sizes of energy consumption scheduling problems to illustrate the effectiveness of our design. Furthermore, we investigate the variants of ZDT benchmark functions [6] for illustrating the adaptability. For ZDT1, ZDT2, ZDT3, ZDT4 and ZDT6 problems, we change their magnitude of one objective. Different non-uniform weight vectors are investigated to compare the performance. The simulations for both the energy consumption scheduling problems and the variants of ZDT problems demonstrate that the non-uniform weight vector can achieve better results compared with the uniform weight vector.Finally, we give statistical results and evaluate the quality of solutions for the decision-maker. The performance indicator C[7], the performance indicator S[7] and the hypervolume HV[8] are used to evaluate the convergence, diversity and comprehensive performance, respectively. For the energy consumption scheduling problem, we find that the non-uniform weight vector enlarges the search region and enhances the variety of the solution set based on metrics S and C. The convergence of the non-uniform weight vector outperforms the uniform weight vector as the magnitude difference of the two objectives increases. The results of HV illustrate that our proposed weight vector performs better than the uniform weight vector. For the variants of ZDT problems, the comparative analyses further illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach. Our non-uniform weight vector plays an important role in improving the results for all these problems with magnitude differences between the objective functions.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the related work on energy scheduling problems and related algorithms. Section 3 formulates the mathematical model for the multi-objective energy consumption scheduling problem. Section 4 introduces the design of the non-uniform weight vector based on the decomposition algorithm, and describes the balance factor and scale factor in detail. Section 5 presents experimental results and analyses. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
