@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Underwater image quality enhancement through integrated color model with Rayleigh distribution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Method to increase the contrast and reduce the noise of underwater image.Applied histogram modification of integrated RGB and HSV color models.Mapping the image histogram according to Rayleigh distribution.Limiting the dynamic range of color models to reduce under- and over-enhanced areas.Outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in term of contrast and noise reduction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Underwater image processing,Histogram stretching,Contrast enhancement,Noise reduction,Rayleigh distribution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The physical properties of water cause light-induced degradation of underwater images. Light rapidly loses intensity as it travels in water, depending on the color spectrum wavelength. Visible light is absorbed at the longest wavelength first. Red and blue are the most and least absorbed, respectively. Underwater images with low contrast are captured due to the degradation effects of light spectrum. Therefore, the valuable information from these images cannot be fully extracted for further processing. The current study proposes a new method to improve the contrast and reduce the noise of underwater images. The proposed method integrates the modification of image histogram into two main color models, Red–Green–Blue (RGB) and Hue-Saturation-Value (HSV). In the RGB color model, the histogram of the dominant color channel (i.e., blue channel) is stretched toward the lower level, with a maximum limit of 95%, whereas the inferior color channel (i.e., red channel) is stretched toward the upper level, with a minimum limit of 5%. The color channel between the dominant and inferior color channels (i.e., green channel) is stretched to both directions within the whole dynamic range. All stretching processes in the RGB color model are shaped to follow the Rayleigh distribution. The image is converted into the HSV color model, wherein the S and V components are modified within the limit of 1% from the minimum and maximum values. Qualitative analysis reveals that the proposed method significantly enhances the image contrast, reduces the blue-green effect, and minimizes under- and over-enhanced areas in the output image. For quantitative analysis, the test with 300 underwater images shows that the proposed method produces average mean square error (MSE) and peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR) of 76.76 and 31.13, respectively, which outperform six state-of-the-art methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Underwater image processing is a challenging field because of the physical properties of such an environment. Scientists engaging in underwater research face the challenges of light absorption and diffusion effects on underwater imaging [1–3]. For instance, images captured deeper into the ocean turn greenish or bluish.Generally, the quality of underwater images is affected by different factors, such as limited range of visibility, low contrast, non-uniform lighting, bright artifacts, noise, blurring, and diminishing color [1]. As light travels in water, it rapidly loses intensity, depending on the color spectrum wavelength. In clear open water, visible light is absorbed at the longest wavelengths first [4]. Red, the most absorbed light color, is reduced to 1/3 of its intensity after a depth of 1m and is essentially lost after 4m to 5m underwater [5]. Meanwhile, the blue and violet lights are least absorbed compared with other wavelengths. As such, open ocean water appears deep blue to the naked eye.Fig. 1shows an illustration of underwater color diminishing. As can be seen, the red color is the first color component absorbed by water at a depth of 5m, followed by orange, yellow, green, and blue. Underwater images appear blue-green because these color components are least absorbed. Such color absorption results in low color and contrast in the captured underwater images. Important information from the image is also lost. The application of computer vision and image processing are becoming important considerations in restoring the contrast, color, and lost information from the images.Contrast enhancement technique is a widely used technique for underwater image processing, which improves contrast performance and achieves greater dynamic range. The development of the contrast enhancement technique has attracted considerable research attention in recent years, although it remains a new area compared with techniques in processing normal images. Many researchers have used various algorithms to improve the quality of underwater images and extract as much valuable information as possible from the images. Numerous works have been published based on the models of subjective human color vision [4,5], which are presented in the next section.The current study proposes a method of contrast enhancement of underwater images to improve image contrast and noise reduction. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the existing techniques proposed by previous researchers; Section 3 details the proposed technique; Section 4 discusses qualitative and quantitative results; and Section 5 presents the conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
