@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust hyper-heuristic algorithms for the offline oriented/non-oriented 2D bin packing problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel hyper-heuristic algorithms are proposed for oriented/non-oriented 2D bin packing problems.The proposed algorithms introduce new crossover and mutation operators for the selection of the heuristics.The proposed algorithms are robust with their ability to obtain high percentage of the optimal solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
2D bin packing,Hyper-heuristic,Evolutionary,Genetic,Memetic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The offline 2D bin packing problem (2DBPP) is an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem in which objects with various width and length sizes are packed into minimized number of 2D bins. Various versions of this well-known industrial engineering problem can be faced frequently. Several heuristics have been proposed for the solution of 2DBPP but it has not been possible to find the exact solutions for large problem instances. Next fit, first fit, best fit, unified tabu search, genetic and memetic algorithms are some of the state-of-the-art methods successfully applied to this important problem. In this study, we propose a set of novel hyper-heuristic algorithms that select/combine the state-of-the-art heuristics and local search techniques for minimizing the number of 2D bins. The proposed algorithms introduce new crossover and mutation operators for the selection of the heuristics. Through the results of exhaustive experiments on a set of offline 2DBPP benchmark problem instances, we conclude that the proposed algorithms are robust with their ability to obtain high percentage of the optimal solutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Given a set of rectangular items and 2D bins of fixed width and variable length, the 2D bin packing problem (2DBPP) consists of orthogonally placing all the pieces within the bin, without overlapping, such that the overall number of the bins is minimized [1–6]. The 2DBPP is an intractable combinatorial optimization problem and widely faced during the industrial manufacturing processes. For the Offline bin packing (OffBP) version of the problem, the objects to be inserted are known before they are packed so that they can be reordered according to some insertion heuristics. Plane load planning is a typical OffBP problem. On the other hand, with Online bin packing (OnBP) version of the problem objects arrive one by one and there is no way to know complete input sequence, so it must be inserted into a bin immediately without waiting other objects. Hard drive partitioning for online storage systems usually deals with these types of problems. Orientation (whether the objects can be rotated 90 degrees or not) is a key aspect of the 2DBPP. Rotating objects in packing creates better results but objects may not be rotatable in every problem definition. For example textile industry can change the orientation of single color shirts by rotating while the process is in cutting phase, because there is no difference between two processes but shipping industry must consider the orientation of fragile items.Hyper-heuristic optimization methods aim for the process of selecting, combining, generating or adapting various simpler heuristics to solve computational search problems efficiently [7,8]. There may be several heuristics that the algorithm can choose for solving an NP-Hard problem. Given a problem, hyper-heuristic methods select which heuristic should be applied, depending on the search stage. In this study, we propose a set of novel hyper-heuristic solution operators (crossover and mutation) and computation methods inspired from Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) for the solution of the 2D OffBP problem. Reproduction, mutation, recombination and selection are the key mechanisms of EA that are used to solve NP-Hard optimization problems. BPP, Traveling Salesman and Quadratic Assignment Problem [5,9] are some of the well-known challenging NP-Hard problems modelled and solved with EAs. Genetic Algorithm (GA) and Memetic Algorithm (MA) are the most efficient approaches of EAs. GA mimics the natural evolution process and has the ability to find (near-) optimal solutions in a large search space within very short time periods. Survival of the fittest individual is a rule allowing the best solution in each iteration to converge to a (near-) optimal solution. In GA, the fittest of individuals is selected as the solution of optimization problem. Parents mate and produce offspring and the best individuals are selected to survive to the next generation. MA is another growing area of EA. It mimics natural evolution process but it may differ from GA by performing individual learning which is also known as meme(s).In this study, we propose two different algorithms for solving the oriented and non-oriented versions of offline 2DBPP. The algorithms implement novel crossover and mutation operators and make use of well known heuristics. The first algorithm, Hyper-heuristic Algorithm for the Oriented 2D BPP (HHA-O), uses heuristics Finite Next Fit (FNF) [10], Finite First Fit (FFF) [10], Best Fit Decreasing Height (BFDH), Unified Tabu Search (UTS) [13] and oriented Improved Left Gap Fill (LGFof) [14] and optimizes the oriented 2DBPP. The second algorithm, Hyper-heuristic Algorithm for the Non-oriented 2D BPP (HHA-NO), uses heuristics FNF, FFF, BFDH, UTS, LGFof and Improved Left Gap Fill (LGFi) [14] in order to minimize the number of bins for the non-oriented 2D offline BPP. Through exhaustive experiments performed with 500 benchmark problem instances, we report the performance of our novel robust hyper-heuristic algorithms in comparison with the other state-of-the-art 2DBPP methods.In Section 2, we briefly review the relevant and the best performing state-of-the-art algorithms for the solution of 2DBPP. Section 3 gives information about the formal definition of the 2DBPP. Section 4 defines the details of the novel crossover and mutation operators and the proposed algorithms. Experimental comparisons of the proposed algorithms are presented in Section 5. Finally, conclusions and further research directions are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we presented two novel robust hyper-heuristic algorithms for the optimization of offline oriented/non-oriented 2DBPP. Experiments with 500 benchmark problem instances are carried out to verify the performance of the algorithms. The algorithm for oriented 2DBPP, HHA-O, minimizes the number of 2D bins for oriented offline 2DBPP by achieving optimum solutions for 63.4% of the problems with no extra bin, 32.0% with extra one bin, and 4.4% with extra two bins. The algorithm for non-oriented 2DBPP, HHA-O, solves non-oriented offline 2DBPP by making use of two different mutation operators (rotation and swap-mutation). HHA-NO with rotation mutation achieves optimum solutions (according to continuous lower bound) for 41.4% of the problems with no extra bin, 29.0% of the problems with extra one bin, and 14.4% of the problems with extra two bins. HHA-NO with swap-rotation mutation achieves optimum solutions (according to continuous lower bound) for 41.8% of the problems with no extra bin, 28.8% of the problems with extra one bin, and 14.0% of the problems with extra two bins. The reported performance of the HHA-O and HHA-NO algorithms are better than those of FNF, FFF, BFDH, UTS, LGFof, and LGFi algorithms in accordance with the number of 2D bins.For future work, we plan to integrate other well known heuristics such as Touching Perimeter and Floor-Ceiling into our proposed algorithms and parallelize HHA-O and HHA-NO for better 2DBPP solutions.