@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid decision making approach to prevent chatter vibrations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MCDM study has been performed to determine optimum cutting conditions without chatter.Different cutting, tool-working material and modal parameters have been used in the models to maximize stable cutting depth.Hybrid decision making models have produced successful results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
TOPSIS,Regression model,Turning operation,Chatter vibrations,Multi-criteria decision making,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the optimum cutting conditions without chatter vibrations have been determined during turning operations. Chatter vibrations are detrimental and cause poor surface properties. In this study, chatter vibration prevention has been discussed in a different way using a multi-criteria decision making approach. Regression-multi-criteria decision making hybrid models have been developed and applied to the problem of chatter vibrations. First, regression models have been used to determine the criteria weights for TOPSIS (technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution) model. Then, TOPSIS models have been developed. Three different hybrid models have been studied. The results of these three models are the same. It has been seen from the results that the number of revolutions and the workpiece hardness are the most effective parameters. The models are developed to help operators in different manufacturing environments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a turning operation, three different types of vibrations are observed due to insufficient dynamic rigidity of the machine tool system, which includes the tool, the tool holder, the workpiece and the machine tool itself [1]. These are free, forced and self-excited vibrations. Free vibrations are caused by shock, and forced vibrations are a result of unbalanced machine tool assemblies. Free and forced vibrations can be easily detected and suppressed. However, self-excited chatter vibrations are not fully understood because of their complicated nature. Self-excited vibrations are usually categorized into primary chatter and secondary chatter [2].Metal machining is often accompanied by severe relative motion between the tool and the workpiece, which is referred to as chatter vibration. Turning operations are currently restricted by complicated chatter problems. These chatter problems lead to a severe deterioration of the machined surface, increase the rate of tool wear and decrease the spindle life. These problems are challenging because the vibrations cause a reduction in the productivity rate. There are a lot of studies about chatter vibrations in the recent literature. Kong and Liu [3] used the Lyapunov exponent and Kolmogrov entropy values to find the proper cutting states. An experimental study was conducted to select optimum machining parameters using these values. Tyler and Schmits [4] identify an analytical solution for turning and milling stability that involves process damping effects. The velocity dependent process damping model applied in the analysis depends on a single coefficient. The effects of tool wear and the cutting edge relief angle are also analyzed. It is observed that a smaller relief angle or higher wear leads to increased process damping and improved stability at low spindle speeds. Urbicain et al.’s [5] work focuses on the problem of identifying stability charts when cutting Inconel 718. The method estimates the free-chatter regions in longitudinal chatter when the tool vibrates in the tangential direction. The study recommends a one and two degree of freedom (DOF) dynamic model to carry out the effect of the tangential mode on chip regeneration in the regenerative plane. Chen et al. [6] developed a new dynamic cutting force model with nominal chip thickness to estimate the stability of interrupted turning, in which the dynamical cutting force is described by a function of the nominal chip thickness and the dynamical chip thickness. Both numerical and experimental tests demonstrate a strong correlation between the nominal chip thickness and the interrupted turning stability, and the recommended model is competent for the interrupted turning process. Otto et al. [7] analyze chatter vibrations in cutting processes, and a unified method for the computation of the stability lobes for the turning, boring, drilling and milling processes in the frequency domain is provided. The main reason for chatter in turning is the regenerative effect, which is a sum of the instantaneous tool-workpiece relative vibration [8]. Regenerative chatter is effective at medium-high cutting speeds. Regenerative chatter is a self-excited vibration in the turning process, and this effect is the most frequently reported difficulty [9]. Analysis of the chatter vibration has resulted in many scientific works in the past literature [10–13]. The theoretical methods present efficient modelling that studies, in particular, the stability of the operation, which is representative of the chatter. These methods reveal the existence of an optimum axial cut depth and spindle speed, which are needed to reduce the effects of chatter vibrations. Moreover, many chatter reduction solutions have been studied [11–13]. Seguy and Seguy [14] proposed a methodology of decision support for preventing chatter during milling operation. The turning process can be modelled according to the number of degrees of freedom (DOF) [15–19], tool and workpiece flexibilities [20–22] and tool wear and process damping [23–25]. A number of authors have used Nyquist plots and finite element analyses [26–29] and have performed experiments measuring force and vibration in an attempt to predict chatter stability [18,22,30–33].Several literature studies have been performed using multi criteria decision making methods and soft computing techniques in decision making problems such as equipment selection [34], selection of new energy alternatives and sources [35,36], performance measurements [37], management problems [38]. Soft computing techniques in decision making involve fuzzy logic, neural networks, evolutionary and machine learning algorithms.This research attempts to determine the optimum cutting conditions without chatter. The objective of the study is to merge an operational method and a decision-making method with the goal of proposing a methodology from decision making to solve the problem of machining chatter. This paper has five parts. First, it reviews the extant literature relevant to chatter stability prediction. Then, the methods used in the study are explained briefly. Subsequently, the numerical study is presented. Regression-multi-criteria decision making hybrid models have been proposed to address the problem of chatter vibrations in turning operations. Regression models have been developed to obtain criteria weights for TOPSIS model and then TOPSIS models have been developed. Three different hybrid models have been developed. Next, the findings are discussed and summarized. The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoretical and practical applications and directions for further research.The proposed method helps operators and engineers to select optimum parameters without chatter. A few optimization methods and expert systems have been developed in chatter topic but in the literature, some parameters (geometrical, material, etc.) are kept constant, and orthogonal or oblique cutting conditions are assumed. Therefore, analytical models were developed based on these assumptions. In some circumstances, oblique and orthogonal cutting conditions should be taken into account at the same time. Moreover, all cutting, geometrical and modal parameters have not been observed at the same time and MCDM methods have not been developed in chatter reduction topic before. This study offers not only optimal cutting conditions without chatter but also different alternative conditions which are near optimal conditions. Hence, if the optimum cutting conditions are not provided because of different limitations, alternative cutting conditions may be tried. This approach generates different cutting conditions and ranks them. Also, the study will lead to develop a decision support system as a database.A brief review of regression–correlation analysis and TOPSIS model is given below.Multiple linear regression models estimate the best-fit linear equation for the dependent variable using independent variables. The multiple linear regression formula results in a straight line, which minimizes the squared differences between the estimated and the actual output values. This is a very well-known statistical approach for making estimations [39]. Multiple regression models are simple and give an interpreted mathematical formula for predictions. The models are also very easy to train. The multiple linear equations are presented in Eq. (1). The error term is given in Eq. (2).(1)yi=BO+∑i=1nBiXi+ei(2)ei=Yiactual−YipredictedB0, Biconstant termsthe dependent variablethe independent variablesthe error termThe coefficient of determination is calculated as follows.(3)R2=1−SSerrorSStotalSSerrorsum of squares for errorssum of squares for totalCorrelation tests are often used to evaluate the relationship between two variables. In the correlation test, the correlation coefficient (r) is used to test the hypothesis and is calculated using Eq. (4). In the equations, n is the number of input value pairs, X and Y are two variables and Xmand Ymare the average values of these two variables. The calculated value of r can range from −1 to 1. A value of r near 0 indicates little correlation between the variables; a value near 1 or −1 indicates high correlation [40].(4)r=∑i=1n(Xi−Xm)⋅(Yi−Ym)∑i=1n(Xi−Xm)2∑i=1n(Yi−Ym)2TOPSIS is a multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) approach to rank different alternatives using ranking scores. It has several advantages. First, it has a basic procedure. Second, it is simple to use and programmable. The number of steps remains the same despite the number of criteria. One of the disadvantages is that its use of a Euclidean distance does not consider the correlation of the attributes. It is hard to weight attributes and maintain consistency of judgement, especially with additional criteria. The steps of the TOPSIS algorithm are given below [41].Step 1:The decision matrix (Aij) is established. Alternatives and criteria are determined (i: alternatives, 1 to m, j: criteria, 1 to n).Aij=a11a12…a1na21a22…a2n⋮⋮am1am2…amnThe normalized decision matrix is established. Through the use of Eq. (5), the normalized decision matrix is evaluated. Normalized values (rij) and normalized matrix (Rij) are given below.(5)rij=aij∑k=1makj2Rij=r11r12…r1nr21r22…r2n⋮⋮rm1rm2…rmnThe weighted normalized decision matrix is established. The weights are determined in this step. The sum of the weights (wi) should equal 1 (Eq. (6)). The weighted normalized decision matrix (Vij) is calculated as follows.(6)∑i=1nwi=1Vij=w1r11w2r12…wnr1nw1r21w2r22…wnr2n⋮⋮w1rm1w2rm2…wnrmnThe ideal (A+) and a negative ideal (A−) solutions are calculated respectively (Eqs. (7) and (8)). The ideal solutions (A+) are made of all the best performance values, whereas the negative ideal solutions (A−) are made of all the worst performance values.(7)A+={(maxivij|j∈J),(minivij|j∈J'}(8)A−={(minivij|j∈J),(maxivij|j∈J'}A+=v1+,v2+,...,vn+A−=v1−,v2−,...,vn−The distance of the experiments from negative ideal (Si−) and to the positive ideal solution (experiment) (Si+) are calculated (Eqs. (9) and (10)).(9)Si+=∑j=1n(vij−vj+)2(10)Si−=∑j=1n(vij−vj−)2The ranking scores (Ci+) of the experiments are calculated (Eq. (11)).(11)Ci+=Si−Si−+Si+Experimental set up and details are given below. The machine was calibrated and tested before experiments.An accelerometer was connected in the feeding direction and the hammer hit in the X direction. After the hammer test, all data were processed using the Cut-Pro 8.0 Software and the structural coefficients were calculated. The mass (m), stiffness coefficient (k), damping ratio (ζ), and natural frequency (wn) of the tool were evaluated during the hammer test. The tests were performed using a hammer by connecting different overhang lengths of tools. Hammer test was performed separately for each overhang lengths of tools because the rigidity of the system changes for every set upThe chatter sound was recorded using a microphone and processed using a programme in Lab View 7.1 Software. This software was used during the cutting tests to investigate stable cutting depths without chatter. The stable cutting depths were obtained trying different cutting depths at different cutting speeds. The characteristics of the devices used during the tests are given in Table 1. Experimental set up is given in Figs. 1 and 2. The experimental parameters are given in the Appendix. Previous studies were taken into consideration to decide effective variables and levels of the factors [42,43].The change in the chatter frequency and the natural frequency of the system was observed by altering the tool overhang lengths. The cutting tests were performed for each tool set up. The tools that have right cutting way were used. The tool tip radius was 0.8mm. AISI 4140 was used as the tool holder material. The cutting tests were conducted from the highest to the lowest cutting speed and the stable cutting depth was determined. The feed rate was selected as 0.06mm/revolution and the rate was maintained as low as possible.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study sets out to determine the optimum cutting condition without chatter. The study has shown that the optimum cutting conditions are the same based on three developed hybrid models. The models have produced same results and first model is appropriate compared to the other models. The findings of this research provide insights for the optimization of cutting-tool conditions during turning without chatter vibrations. Further research might explore the optimization of the cutting conditions during different process (milling, drilling, etc.) without chatter. Additionally, different hybrid decision making models (regression-ELECTRE, regression-PROMETHEE, Dematel-TOPSIS, etc.) might be developed. In the next studies, a decision support system might be developed with addition of different experiments. DSS will use experiments and it will generate different conditions to find optimal cutting-modal-tool conditions using ranking scores. This database might help operators and decision makers to make correct decisions in different manufacturing environment without chatter vibration.Tables A.1 and A.2.