@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective adaptive clonal selection algorithm for solving optimal power flow considering multi-type FACTS devices and load uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose new multi-objective methods using recently developed evolutionary algorithms.The developed new methods are implemented to solve single multi-objective OPF problem.A maiden attempt has been made to include load uncertainty in solving OPF problem.Multi type VSC based FACTS devices are incorporated in multi-objective optimisation.It is found that the MOACSA performs better than other methods reported in the literature.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adaptive clonal selection algorithm,Optimal power flow,Multi-objective optimisation,Fuel cost minimisation,Transmission loss minimisation,L-index minimisation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a solution to multi-objective optimal power flow (MOOPF) problem using an adaptive clonal selection algorithm (ACSA) to minimise generation cost, transmission loss and voltage stability index (L-index) in the presence of multi-type FACTS devices in power systems. The proposed approach utilizes clonal selection principle and evolutionary concept which performs cloning of antibodies followed by hyper maturation. In this algorithm, a non-dominated sorting and crowding distance have been used to find and manage Pareto optimal front. Various voltage source converter (VSC) based multi-type FACTS devices such as UPFC, IPFC and GUPFC are considered and incorporated as power injection models in multi-objective optimisation problem formulation. The proposed multi-objective adaptive clonal selection algorithm (MOACSA) has been tested on standard IEEE 30-bus test system with FACTS devices. The results obtained from the proposed MOACSA approach are compared with implementation of standard algorithms namely NSGA-II, MOPSO and MODE.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimal power flow (OPF) problem is a static nonlinear programming problem which can optimize an objective function by satisfying a set of operating constraints imposed by equipment limitations and security requirements. Since last three decades, many successful methods have been developed to solve OPF problem [1,2]. Some of these methods are successive linear programming, generalized reduced gradient method, successive quadratic programming, Newton method, interior point method, P–Q decomposition, genetic algorithm and evolutionary programming methods.At present, modern power system is facing new problems in the day-to-day operation. In order to operate the power system network with high efficiency and secured operating conditions, large interconnected systems have been developed. In this context, one of the possibilities for better operation and utilisation of existing facilities is embedding flexible AC transmission systems (FACTS) devices into power system. The power flow control of specific lines can be achieved with integration of various types of FACTS devices into power systems. The FACTS devices can also be used to increase the transmission line capability to their maximum thermal limit, and to improve the transmission system security with minimum infrastructure investment. In addition to that, FACTS devices are able to control bus voltage magnitude, phase angle and reactance of the transmission system.To determine parameters of various types of FACTS devices for controlling the power flow in specific lines, a linear programming based security constrained OPF method [3] and load equivalent method [4] are applied successfully. Malihe et al. [5] applied particle swarm optimisation (PSO) and genetic algorithms (GA) for static VAR compensator (SVC) placement in order to enhance voltage profile and to reduce total real power loss. These two objectives were considered as inputs of fuzzy inference system and the output was an index for satisfaction of objectives. In [6] again, the PSO technique was used to find the optimal location of multi-type FACTS devices, namely SVC, thyristor-controlled series capacitor (TCSC) and unified power flow controller (UPFC) with minimum installation cost and maximum system loadability. For solving this multi-objective problem, two objectives were converted into a single objective function. In [7], GA is used for optimal placement of four types of FACTS devices such as TCSC, thyristor-controlled phase shifting transformer (TCPST), thyristor-controlled voltage regulator (TCVR) and SVC to enhance system loadability. In which three parameters were optimized i.e. location, type and settings of these FACTS devices.In the last few years, various types of evolutionary methods have been developed to solve MOOPF problem. Some of these methods are multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) [8], strength pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA) [9], pareto differential evolution (PDE) [10], non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-II (NSGA-II) [11], multi-objective particle swarm optimisation (MOPSO) and multi-objective differential evolution (MODE) [12] etc. Most of these methods have proved that they are efficient and better than traditional methods in solving multi-objective problems. These evolutionary methods could overcome the difficulties associated with classical methods. Marouani et al. [13] have presented the application of NSGA-II technique to find the optimal location of UPFC for optimal reactive power dispatch (ORPD). In [14], Basu has proposed MODE to solve MOOPF problem with FACTS devices. The paper addressed only series type FACTS devices with multiple objectives such as fuel cost, emission and active power transmission loss.Recently, a new class of computational intelligence algorithms are developed based on biological immunology principal. A natural self defence immune system is adopted and enhanced in most of these techniques to be used in various science and engineering applications [15–17]. Earlier research on these artificial immune systems suggested that the immune algorithms present superior population diversity, fast convergence and better global optimum [18–22]. Several studies are also carried out in multi-objective artificial immune systems. In [23], Gong et al. proposed an multi-objective immune algorithm for multi-resolution network partitioning. In another study, Aydin et al. applied swarm learning based immune classifier for pattern recognition [24]. Adaptive administered immune algorithms [25–27] are also developed to improvise the performance of AIS.In this paper, MOACSA is proposed to solve MOOPF problem in presence of VSC based multi-type FACTS devices such as UPFC, generalized unified power flow controller (GUPFC) and interline power flow controller (IPFC). In the proposed MOACSA method, an adaptive feature and non-dominated sorting technique [11] are used to maintain a well distributed Pareto optimal solutions. Finally, a fuzzy based membership function is used to find the best compromise solution from the Pareto optimal set. In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in presence of FACTS devices, an IEEE 30-bus test system is considered. Results obtained from the proposed approach have been compared by implementing three other standard algorithms namely NSGA-II, MOPSO and MODE.The rest of the paper is organized into eight sections. Section “Load uncertainty” gives a brief description of the load uncertainty. Section “Modelling of FACTS devices” describes modelling of different types of FACTS devices considered in this paper. Sections “Problem formulation” and “Multi-objective optimisation” deals with problem formulation and a brief review of MOOPF problem with FACTS devices. The concept of clonal selection algorithm (CSA) presented in detail in Section “Overview of adaptive clonal selection algorithm”. The detailed algorithm steps of proposed ACSA for multi objective OPF problem are presented in Section “Implementation of adaptive clonal selection algorithm for solving multi-objective OPF problem with FACTS”. The parameter settings for the test system to evaluate the performance of proposed method and the simulation results are discussed in Section “Numerical results”. Finally conclusion is drawn at the end.In order to find the steady state operating condition under specified load and generation values, normally load flow studies are conducted in power system. When there is uncertainty in system load specifications or input specifications, number of cases are to be analysed to fill the gap with uncertainty. Under these circumstances more reliable solution methodologies are required to incorporate the effect of load uncertainty into load flow studies. In interval computation process without using any probability structure [28], basic operations like addition, subtraction and multiplication can maintain and represent the value of unknown quantity in interval form. Different types of interval mathematic techniques [29,30] were proposed in the literature to handle and control these numerical errors with reliable load modelling.All these methods are developed by using the definition of optimal scalar product and interval arithmetic. These methods can maintain more accuracy and can control the errors automatically in numerical computation. The following points are considered in order to develop an effective and a reliable computation method to solve the above problem.i.Formulate mathematical model of the problem using interval method.Apply numerical interval approach to get the solution of the system.Establish relationship between (i) and (ii).To handle this load uncertainty in power flow solution, loads and other parameters are characterized by a range of real values or a real interval. In order to solve load flow problem with load uncertainty, an interval Newton's method [31] is used. The computational procedure of interval algorithm is presented below.The load flow problem can be formulated as set of non linear equations written as:(1)F(X)=(f1(X),…,fn(X))T=0where F(X) – is set of bus power equations,X=(x1,x2,…,xn)T∈Rn– is bus voltages magnitude and phase angle vector which is unknown for a given power system network;xiL≤xi≤xiUfor 1<i<n;xiLandxiUare the lower and upper bounds of load bus voltages and angles xi; f1 to fnare representing bus power equations in terms of bus voltages.The interval Newton method for non-linear systems equations has quadratic convergence and it can be represented in linear interval form as(2)F′(Xk)(X˜k−Xk)=−F(Xk)where Xk∈IRn is the interval vector and the solution X*∈Rnis expected to be found;Xk∈Rnis an inner vector of Xk, i.e. Xk∈Xk(usually the midpoint of Xk) is the unknown interval vector which is expected to contain the solution X*.F′(Xk)∈IRnxnis the interval extension of the Jacobian matrix of F in Xk.X˜kcan be calculated by solving Eq. (2). The iterative vector solution of n variable system is given by(3)Xk+1=Xk∩X˜kThe power flow equations in interval form of Newton method can be represented as(4)J1kJ2kJ3kJ4kθ˜kV˜k−θkVk=ΔPkΔQkwhere J1, J2, J3, and J4 are Jacobian interval sub-matrices; V and θ are interval vectors of voltage magnitude and phase angle.This algorithm was implemented using MATLAB program. In order to demonstrate the effect of load uncertainty in power system, using interval method, a numerical example of three bus test system is considered. It consists of two load buses and a slack bus as shown in Fig. 1. The test system data is available in [31]. The measurement error in load data is assumed to be 3%. The bus voltage magnitude and phase angle at slack bus is assumed to be 1.05∠00 V. The initial guesses for voltages at bus 2 and 3 are considered with flat voltage profile. By using interval Newton's load flow method, the solution is converged at the end of fourth iteration. The bus voltages obtained at the end of each iteration in interval form are presented in Table 1.The same procedure is applied for IEEE 30-bus test system for solving multi-objective OPF problem with load uncertainty.For the past two decades research is focussed on the development of FACTS devices modelling for both steady state as well as transient analysis in power system. The effect of FACTS devices have been incorporated into power system analysis with various types of models depending upon the type of study required. For steady state power flow analysis power injection model [32] is an excellent one because it handles them well in a load flow computation. Since, the power injection model do not destroy the size of existing bus admittance matrix, these models can be easily incorporated into load flow programme. In this section power injection models of multi-type FACTS devices are presented briefly.The effect of UPFC on the network can be incorporated into load flows by power injection model as shown in Fig. 2. The injected powers at bus i and j due to UPFC can be represented as shown below.(5)Pi,UPFC=rbsViVjsin(θi−θj+γ)(6)Qi,UPFC=rbsVi2cosγ(7)Pj,UPFC=−rbsViVjsin(θj−θi+γ)(8)Qj,UPFC=−rbsViVjcos(θi−θj+γ)wherebs=1/xs.The UPFC power injection model [33] can be easily incorporated into NR load flow programme as follows. If an UPFC is connected between nodes i and j in a power system, then the bus admittance matrix is modified by adding a reactance equivalent to Xs, between node i and node j. The elements of Jacobian matrix are modified by adding appropriate derivatives of power injections at the nodes where UPFC is located.The IPFC power injection model [34] can be easily incorporated into NR load flow programme as follows. If an IPFC is connected between nodes i, j and k in a power system as shown in Fig. 3, the bus admittance matrix is modified by adding a reactance equivalent to Xs, between nodes i–j and nodes i–k. The injected powers at each of the buses i, j and k due to IPFC are given below. The elements of Jacobian matrix are modified by addition of appropriate power injections at the nodes where IPFC is connected.(9)Pi,IPFC=−2rbsVi2sinγ(10)Qi,IPFC=−2rbsVi2cosγ(11)Pj,IPFC=rbsViVjsin(θi−θj+γ)(12)Qj,IPFC=rbsViVjcos(θi−θj+γ)(13)Pk,IPFC=rbsViVksin(θi−θk+γ)(14)Qk,IPFC=rbsViVkcos(θi−θk+γ)GUPFC is also known as multi-line UPFC which can control bus voltage and power flows of more than one line or even of sub-networks. The steady state GUPFC mathematical model can be obtained by combining both the shunt power injection at bus i and series power injections at bus i, j and k. The resultant equivalent power injection model of GUPFC [35] is shown in Fig. 4.The injected powers at bus i, j and k due to GUPFC can be represented as shown below.(15)Pi,GUPFC=−2rbsVi2sinγ+Psh=rbsViVjsin(θi−θj+γ)+rbsViVksin(θi−θk+γ)−4rbsVi2sinγ(16)Qi,GUPFC=−2rbsVi2cosγ+Qsh(17)Pj,GUPFC=rbsViVjsin(θi−θj+γ)(18)Qj,GUPFC=rbsViVjcos(θi−θj+γ)(19)Pk,GUPFC=rbsViVksin(θi−θk+γ)(20)Qk,GUPFC=rbsViVkcos(θi−θk+γ)The elements of Jacobian matrix are modified by addition of appropriate power injections at the nodes where GUPFC is located.The OPF problem is a non-linear, non-convex optimisation problem which determines the optimal control variables for minimizing certain objectives subject to several equality and inequality constraints. The OPF problem is generally formulated as follows:(21)Minf(x,u)subject tog(x,u)=0h(x,u)≤0where g(x,u) is the typical load flow equation, h(x,u) is the system operating constraints.Here x is the vector of control variables consisting of generator real power outputs PGexcept at the slack bus, generator voltages VG, transformer tap settings T, reactive power injections QCand FACTS device parameters. Hence the vector x can be expressed as:(22)x=[PG2...PGNG,VG1....VGNG,T1...TNT,Qc1...QcNC,Uc1...UcNF]where NT is the number of regulating transformers, NC is the number of VAR compensators and NF is the number of FACTS device parameters.And u is the vector of state variables consisting of slack bus power PG1, load bus voltages VL, generator reactive power outputs QGand transmission line loading Sl. Therefore the vector u can be represented as:(23)uT=[PG1,VL1...VLNPQ,QG1....QGNG,Sl1...SlNL]where NPQ, NG and NL are the number of load buses, the number of generators and the number of transmission lines respectively.This objective is to minimize the total fuel cost FT of the system. The fuel cost curves of the thermal generators are modelled as a quadratic cost curve and can be represented as(24)FT=∑i=1NGaiPGi2+biPGi+ciwhere ai, bi, ciare the fuel cost coefficients of the ith generator, PGiis real power output of the ith generator and NG is total number of generators.This objective is to minimize the real power transmission line loss PLin the system which can be expressed as follows:(25)PL=∑k=1NLgk[Vi2+Vj2−2ViVjcos(δi−δj)]where gkis the conductance of a transmission line k connected between buses i and j; Vi, Vj, δi, and δjare the voltage magnitudes and phase angles at buses i and j respectively; NL is the number of transmission lines.This objective is to maintain the voltage stability and move the system far away from the voltage collapse point. The L-index value is evaluated by using normal load flow solution and it lies between 0 (under no load) to 1 (at the point of voltage collapse). This can be achieved by minimizing the voltage stability indicator L-index [36] and it can be expressed as(26)Lj=1−∑i=1NGFjiViVjj=NG+1,...,NBFjiis an element of matrix F and is computed by(27)[F]=−[YLL]−1[YLG]where [YLG] and [YLL] are sub-matrices of the bus admittance matrix Ybus.These constraints are typical load flow equations which can be described as follows:(28)PGi−PDi−Vi∑j=1NGVj(Gijcosδij+Bijsinδij)=0i∈NBQGi−QDi−Vi∑j=1NGVj(Gijsinδij−Bijcosδij)=0i∈NBwhere PGiand QGiare real and reactive power generations at ith bus, PDiand QDiare the real and reactive power demands at ith bus, Bijand Gijare susceptance and conductance of the line connected between buses i and j, and NB is the total number of buses in the system.These constraints represent the system operating limits as followsa) Generation constraints: Generator voltages, real power outputs and reactive power outputs are restricted by their lower and upper bounds as follows:(29)VGimin≤VGi≤VGimax,i=1,…,NG(30)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimax,i=1,…,NG(31)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimax,i=1,…,NGb) Transformer constraints: Transformer tap settings are restricted by their minimum and maximum limits as follows:(32)Timin≤Ti≤Timax,i=1,…,NTwhere NT is number of tap changing transformersc) Shunt VAR constraints: Reactive power injections at different buses are restricted by their minimum and maximum limits as:(33)QCimin≤QCi≤QCimax,i=1,…,NCwhere NC is number of shunt compensatorsd) Security constraints: These include the constraints of voltage magnitudes at load buses and transmission line loadings as follows:(34)VLimin≤VLi≤VLimax,i=1,…,NPQ(35)Sli≤Slimax,i=1,…,NLe) FACTS devices constraints: The control variable limits of various types of FACTS devices are given belowFor UPFC:Vse=rVieiγ, where 0≤r≤rmax and 0≤γ≤2πFor IPFC:Vse=rVieiγ, where 0≤r≤rmax and 0≤γ≤2πFor GUPFC:Vse=rVieiγ, where 0≤r≤rmax and 0≤γ≤2πand Qshreactive power generation lies between 0≤Qsh≤0.05For all the above devices rmax value is assumed to be 0.1p.u.All security constraint violations are handled as sum of penalties which is added to one of the objective function is given by:(36)Jpen=JLF+JBV+JQgPenalty function for line flow violations,(37)JLF=Kp∑i=1NL(|Sli|−Slilim)2Penalty function for load bus voltage violations,(38)JBV=Kv∑i=1NPQ(Vli−Vmax)2ifVli>VmaxorJBV=Kv∑i=1NPQ(Vmin−Vli)2,ifVli<VminPenalty function for reactive power generation violation(39)JQg=Kq∑i=1NG(Qgi−Qmax)2ifQgi>QmaxorJQg=Kq∑i=1NG(Qmin−Qgi)2ifQgi<Qminwhere Kp, Kvand Kqare the corresponding scaling factors for penalty functions.Any multi-objective optimisation problem consists of two or more objectives to be optimized simultaneously with several equality and inequality constraints. It can be mathematically formulated as(40)MinF(x)=[f1(x),f2(x),…fi(x),…fN(x)]i=1,2,⋅⋅⋅,N(41)Subjectto:{gj(x)=0,hk(x)≤0}j=1,2,⋅⋅⋅,J;k=1,2,⋅⋅⋅,Kwhere fi, gjand hkare the ith objective function, jth equality constraint and kth inequality constraint respectively. x – is a decision vector which represents a solution;N – is number of objective functions, J – is number of equality constraints and K – is inequality constraints respectively. The solution to a multi-objective optimisation problem is not a single solution as in the case of single objective optimisation. It gives a set of solutions called trade off, from which the decision maker will select best one known as compromise solution. All the solutions in Pareto optimal set obtained for MO algorithms are based on the concept of dominance. Let x1 and x2 are two solutions of MO optimisation problem, a solution x1 is said to be dominates x2 if it satisfy the following two conditions.i) The solution x1 is not worst than x2 in all objectives i.e.(42)∀i∈{1,2,.......,N}:fi(x1)≤fi(x2)ii) The solution x1 is strictly better than x2 for at least one objective, i.e.(43)∃j∈{1,2,.......,N}:fj(x1)<fj(x2)Once the Pareto optimal set of non-dominated solution is obtained, the best compromise solution can be offered to the decision maker with the fuzzy membership function. In this paper, fuzzy membership approach [37] is used to find a best compromise solution. For the ith objective function fiof individual j can be represented by a membership functionμijdefined as(44)μij=1fi≤fiminfimax−fifimax−fiminfimin≤fi<fimax0fi≥fimaxwherefiminandfimaxare the minimum and maximum values of ith objective function among all non-dominated solutions.For every non-dominated solution j, the normalized membership function μjis calculated as(45)μj=∑i=1Nμij∑j=1p∑i=1Nμijwhere ‘p’ is the total number of non-dominated solutions. The best compromise solution is that having maximum value ofμj.With the development of computational intelligence in recent years, the area of artificial immune systems is (AIS) greatly influencing the engineering applications. Clonal selection theory is one of the fundamental models used to explain the behaviour of modern immune system. The biological principles like clone generation, proliferation and maturation are mimicked and incorporated into an artificial immune based algorithm termed as clonal selection algorithm [38,39]. The clonal selection algorithm (CSA) named CLONALG, proposed by Leandro and Fernando [40] is a population based stochastic method. This CSA is more extensively used artificial immune based optimisation method in pattern recognition and multimodal optimisation problems with binary representation of variables. The implementation of clonal selection algorithm for artificial immune system involves the following steps [41].•Initialisation of antibodies.Cloning and selection (proliferation and differentiation on the encounter of cells with antigens).Maturation and diversification of antibody types by carrying out affinity maturation process through random genetic changes.Removal of differentiated immune cells which posses low affinity antigenic receptors.In the process of optimisation with AIS based clonal selection algorithm, affinity is nothing but the fitness or objective function evaluation and constraint satisfaction. Here the constraints are represented by antigens while the constraint satisfaction is attained by antibody–antigen affinity. In other words more the affinity, higher is the constraint satisfaction. Apart from the above, if two solutions equally satisfy their constraints, one with better value of the corresponding objective attains larger affinity or fitness value.The first step in clonal selection algorithm is populating a set of randomly generated initial solutions. This set of population called as antibodies undergo proliferation and maturation. The process of proliferation of antibodies is nothing but cloning each member of initial pool, i.e. copying each one of initial solution based on their affinity value. The rate of proliferation and maturation (or hypermutation) [42,43] are the two important factors which are related to the affinity value. The rate of proliferation is directly proportional to its affinity value. Therefore an immunity cell with higher affinity generates more number of off springs. Obviously, higher affinity antibodies experience a smaller maturation rate. Even though the self-reactive cells are killed after maturation, it can be found that certain B-cells undergo receptor editing occasionally by replacing their low affinity receptors with newer ones through recombination [44] process. Fig. 5explains the clonal selection principle.Step 1: Initially generate a set (N) of candidate solutions, which consists of the subset of memory cells (M) added to the remaining (Nr) population (N=Nr+M).Step 2: Find out (Select) the Nselbest individuals of the population (Psel), based on their affinity value.Step 3: Proliferate (clone) these Nselbest individuals of the population, results in temporary population of clones Nc. The clone size is an increasing function with their affinity.Step 4: Now send the population of clones to a hypermutation process, where the hypermutation rate is proportional to their affinity and a maturated antibody population is generated and stored inNc*.Step 5: Re-select the improved individuals fromNc*to compose the new memory set M. Some members of N can be replaced with these improved members ofNc*.Step 6: Replace Ndantibodies by new ones (diversity introduction) with random generation. The cells which are having lower affinity have higher probabilities of being replaced.In clonal selection algorithm, the number of clones generated per antibody is dependent on the affinity or fitness value. So that higher number of clones is generated for the antibodies with larger fitness value and less number of clones is generated for the antibodies with smaller fitness value. The cloning population size is evaluated using Eq. (46)(46)NC=∑i=1NselNciEach term in summation of above equation represents clone size of selected antibody ‘i’ and is given by(47)Nci=roundβNselcciwhere β – is the multiplication factor of clone size; Nsel– size of population and cc – is accelerating factor.The accelerating factor cc has been considered as fixed value 1, for all generations in conventional CSA. While in adaptive clonal selection algorithm cc value is updated dynamically so that its value is varying for every generation. At the end of every generation the acceleration factor is updated as cc=cc×γ. The initial value of cc<1 and γ value lies between 0.5 and 1.1. The idea here is to use dynamic accelerating factor instead of fixed value to obtain best clonal population size, Nci. With the increase in generation count the cloning population size decreases so that fast convergence can be obtained. The implementation steps of this adaptive feature are shown in the algorithm described in the following section.This section describes application of adaptive clonal selection algorithm for solving multi-objective OPF problem with FACTS devices. The conventional Newton Raphson (NR) load flow programme is modified for incorporating power injection models of different FACTS devices. In load flow programme one type of FACTS device has been placed at a time and the corresponding elements of Jacobian matrix are modified to include the effect of FACTS devices. All type of FACTS devices are incorporated as power injection model in power flow solution as described in Section “Modelling of FACTS devices”. The following steps describe implementation of proposed algorithm with FACTS devices.Step 1: Generate initial population of antibodies with size (Npop×N) randomly distributed across the domain of the problem and store them in an archive X.(48)X=[X1X2…XNpop]TwhereXi=[PGVGTapQcUc]1xNEach element of the vector Xiis of decision variables called them as molecules of each antibody. The vector consists of the antibodies population to be evaluated and is given by Eq. (49).(49)PG=[PG1PG2…PGi…PGNG]VG=[VG1VG2…VGi…VGNG]Tap=[T1T2…Ti…TNT]QC=[QC1QC2…QCi…QCNC]Uc=[Uc1Uc2…Uci…UcNF]where NF – number of control variables of FACTS devices.Step 2: For each antibody satisfy the equality and inequality constraints. That means adjust the sum of PGivalues in an antibody equal to total load demand PD, i.e.∑i=1NGPGi=PDStep 3: Run NR load flow programme with FACTS device for each antibody and calculate the transmission loss, slack bus power and line flows.Step 4: Evaluate the affinity for each antibody which is nothing but objective function values.i)Cost function, FTevaluating from Eq. (24)Real power loss, PLcalculated from Eq. (25)Voltage stability index, Lmaxestimated from Eq. (26)Step 5: The initialised population is sorted based on non-dominated sorting described in [11] and the crowding distance is also calculated.Step 6: Set iteration counter k:=0Step 7: k=k+1Step 8: Select the best population Nselof antibodies which gives non-dominated solution in the archive Xndsand store them in an archive Xbestfor cloning and maturate operation.a) Cloning of population setC=[C1,C2,⋯,Ci,⋯,CNsel], where Cirepresents number of copies of ith antibody from Xbestand total cloning population size is given in Eq. (46).b) The population of clones undergoes somatic hyper maturation results in new antibody is given by(50)Cnew(i)=C(i)+αi∗(Rd1−Rd2)*max(fi)where Rd1 and Rd2 are two randomly generated numbers in the range of 1 to N and αiis mutation rate and is given by an equation,(51)αi=exp(−fiρ)where ρ is the value which controls the decay of exponential function, fiis normalized antigenic affinity over the interval (0,1) and is given by(52)fi=Fi∑i=1NselFiwhere Fiis the fitness or affinity of ith best population.Step 9: Again each molecule of new antibodies are tested for any constraint violation.Step 10: Recalculate the affinity of all mutated clones using Eqs. (24)–(26) and sorted again based on non-dominated sorting and crowded distance.Step 11: Modify the acceleration factor cc=cc×γ where γ value lies in between 0.5 and 1.1.Step 12: Check for stopping criterion. If the number of iterations reaches to maximum iterations go to next step. Otherwise go to step 7.Step 13: Obtain the set of Pareto optimal solutions from final iteration.Step 14: The best compromise solution vector is obtained from Pareto optimal solution set using fuzzy membership function approach.The proposed MOACSA method has been tested on IEEE 30-bus test system in presence of various types of VSC based FACTS devices. The test system has forty one transmission lines, six generators, four transformers and nine reactive power injections. The detailed data of the test system is available in reference [1]. All the generator voltages and active powers (except slack bus 1), and tap settings of the regulating transformers and VAR injections are considered as continuous variables. The lower and upper limits of generator voltage magnitudes and transformer taps are considered between 0.9 and 1.1p.u. The reactive power injections limits are considered between 0 and 0.05p.u. The parameters required for implementation of the proposed ACSA algorithm are adjusted by running the algorithm several times. These parameters include maximum iterations, number of populations and adaptive factor which are set to 200, 50 and 0.8971 respectively.The algorithms used in this paper for solving MOOPF problem are implemented by using MATLAB 7.10 on a PC (Intel core2 duo 3GB RAM, 2.0GHz). The limits of control variables used for different types of FACTS devices are shown in Table 2. In this paper, three objectives, such as fuel cost, transmission real power loss and L-index have been considered for optimisation. For comparison purpose, the simulations are categorized into three cases.Case I: All objective functions are optimized individually with each FACTS device.Case II: Three objectives are optimized simultaneously with each FACTS device.Case III: Same as Case II with load uncertainty.Case I: All objective functions are optimized individually with each FACTS device.First, the three objectives were optimized individually by the ACSA method in presence of various types of VSC based FACTS devices such as UPFC, IPFC and GUPFC. These optimal values are needed to compare the results in multi-objective optimisation process.The convergence characteristics of single objective optimisation with each FACTS device, i.e. UPFC, GUPFC and IPFC placed in appropriate location of IEEE 30-bus test system, are shown in Fig. 6. And the corresponding optimal solutions with and without FACTS device are given in Table 3. It can be observed that when FACTS device is placed in power system network the total generation cost, transmission real power loss reduced slightly and there is no significant improvement in voltage stability i.e. L-index.In case of cost objective optimisation and loss objective optimisation IPFC performance is found to be better than to other devices. The fuel cost with IPFC is reduced from base case value 901.3188 $/h to 789.5621 $/h. The power loss with IPFC is also reduced from 5.5924MW to 1.7259MW. In L-index optimisation with GUPFC, its value is 0.0730 which is better than other devices. It should be noted that no single device can perform better for all the objectives when optimized individually.Case II: Three objectives are optimised simultaneously with each FACTS device.In this section, the proposed MOACSA method is applied for solving MOOPF problem without load uncertainty in presence of various multi-type FACTS devices. For the purpose of comparison, this multi-objective OPF problem has also been solved by implementing three other standard algorithms namely NSGA-II, MOPSO and MODE. The control parameters of proposed MOACSA method and the other three methods are given in Table 4.In this case, all the three objectives cost, loss and L-index are optimized simultaneously with each FACTS device. All the three dimensional Pareto optimal fronts obtained by the four methods with each FACTS device are shown in Fig. 7(a)–(c). It is observed that the proposed MOACSA method is able to give well distributed Pareto-optimal fronts for tri-objective optimisation.The optimal settings of device control variables, generation cost, power loss and L-index obtained by four methods with each FACTS device are given in Tables 5a–5c. It can be observed that with IPFC, total fuel cost, loss and L-index corresponding to minimum cost are [789.4140 $/h, 5.9240MW and 0.1201], for minimum loss are [959.3600 $/h, 1.7518MW and 0.1144] and for minimum L-index are [842.4588 $/h, 3.5822MW and 0.1002] using MOACSA method. The best compromise solution with IPFC using MOACSA method is [821.2163 $/h, 3.7469MW and 0.1233]. For multi-objective optimisation with IPFC using MOACSA method, the best compromise solution is very close to their optimal values when these objectives are optimized individually. The computational time of various methods with each FACTS device are shown in Table 6. It is observed that, the proposed method is comparable with the other methods reported in this paper with reference to computational time. However, the computational efficiency can be further improved by refining the adaptive factor value in MOACSA method.Case-III: Three objectives are optimised simultaneously with load uncertaintyIn most of the OPF algorithms reported in the literature, load is assumed to be fixed for solving single or multi-objective problems. But in real life system, load need not be fixed. It may be varied with certain tolerance. In this case 5% tolerance is assumed and conventional NR load flow method is replaced with interval arithmetic based NR load flow method [31]. This multi-objective optimisation problem was solved by the proposed approach (MOACSA) with FACTS devices considering load uncertainty. The Pareto optimal front corresponding to lower and upper limits obtained by using the proposed method for the three objective functions with multi-type FACTS devices are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b) respectively. The optimal settings of device control variables along with objective function values corresponding to lower, upper limits and compromise solution are given in Tables 7a–7cwith each FACTS device for case-III.The results show that, corresponding to lower and upper bounds of compromise solution for cost, loss and L-index objectives are [830.0167 $/h, 868.7084 $/h], [3.7719MW, 4.0725MW] and [0.1045, 0.1018]. The adaptive feature presented to basic clonal selection algorithm appears to be work good for multi-objective problem with FACTS devices considering load uncertainty. The results confirm that the multi-objective ACSA algorithm is an impressive tool for solving the multi-objective optimisation problem where multiple Pareto-optimal solutions can be obtained in a single run even under load uncertainty.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a new AIS based multi-objective adaptive clonal selection algorithm (MOACSA) has been presented to solve optimal power flow problem in presence of multi-type VSC based FACTS devices namely UPFC, GUPFC and IPFC. The power system having multiple objectives such as fuel cost, loss and L-index are considered for optimisation. In this study, at any point of time only single device is placed at fixed location. The results obtained from the proposed approach have been compared with implementation of three other standard algorithms such as NSGA-II, MOPSO and MODE on the IEEE 30-bus test system. Among various types of VSC based FACTS devices, it is found that IPFC performance is better than other two devices. It is also observed that the proposed approach provides a competitive performance in terms of solution with single as well as multiple objectives in presence of various types of FACTS devices.This paper also presented a methodology for solving MOOPF problem with FACTS devices considering load uncertainty, using the techniques of ACSA and interval mathematics. The effectiveness of the proposed MOACSA method was also tested with load uncertainty in presence of each FACTS device. The presented result analysis demonstrates that the proposed MOACSA method is well suited for the assessment of uncertainty propagation in MOOPF solutions with FACTS devices.