@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Three-and-six-month-before forecast of water resources in a karst aquifer in the Terminio massif (Southern Italy)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ability of artificial neural networks to model the rainfall–discharge relationships of karstic aquifers.Three month before forecast of water resources.Six month before forecast of water resources.Error in forecasting discharge values of just 5% (three months before).Error in forecasting discharge values of just 10% (six months before).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Serino,Karstic aquifer,Spring discharge,Feature extraction,Forecast,Artificial neural network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The ability of artificial neural networks (ANN) to model the rainfall–discharge relationships of karstic aquifers has been studied in the Terminio massif (Southern Italy), which supplies the Naples area with a yearly mean discharge of approximately 1–3.5m3/s. The Mediterranean climate causes a rapid increase in evapotranspiration and a decrease in rainfall towards spring–summer. Especially during drought, and in combination with highly sensitive climatic parameters, there are dramatic changes in the discharge amount especially during the July and August months. A neural network model was developed based on MLP (multi-layer perceptron) network to forecast of water resources three and six month before the main stress months of July and August. Example data were extracted on an ultra-centenarian hydrological serial. The training and validation phases, confirmed by a ten fold cross validation methodology, led to a very satisfactory calibration of the ANN model, with errors in forecasting discharge values of just 5% (three months before) and 10% (six months before).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Karstic aquifers are largely widespread on a worldwide scale since 12% of the emerged grounds are represented by carbonated rocks, and they contain significant water resources. Like any other groundwater resource, karstic aquifers must necessarily be exploited within the framework of a sustainable management strategy, especially for predicting aquifer responses to climatic changes, which are nowadays evolving towards drought. Like other areas across the globe, research carried out on a lengthy historical series has shown an annual drop in rainfall of 18% in Central-Southern Italy and 7% in Northern Italy [1]. In addition, in Southern Italy, the actual number of rainy days displays a downward trend, while rainfall intensity presents a positive trend [2]. These climatic features are known for their tendency to favour run-off and cause a reduction of infiltration. Other karst springs of Central Italy, in the Umbria–Marche regions, were analysed to evaluate their regime in relation to climatic changes, revealing a negative trend in spring discharge during recent decades [3].However karstic aquifers are strongly heterogeneous and discontinuous systems whose hydrodynamic functioning can be highly complex. A review on karst hydrology has been published by White [4]. The application of distributed numerical groundwater models to karstic aquifers is quite problematical, even unrealistic, at least on local or intermediate scales [5,6]. Attempts to model karst aquifers using spatially distributed numerical models proved successful on a regional scale for management purposes [7,8]. Unfortunately, this type of numerical model requires quite large databases (permeability, porosity, transmissivity, piezometry, etc.), specifically when the system is heterogeneous, as are karst aquifers.The objective of this work is to model the rainfall–discharge relationships of the karstic aquifers of Serino in the Terminio massif (Southern Italy), which supplies the Naples area with a yearly mean discharge of approximately 1–3.5m3/s. The Mediterranean climate causes a rapid increase in evapotranspiration and a decrease in rainfall towards spring–summer. Especially during drought, and in combination with highly sensitive climatic parameters, there are dramatic changes in the discharge amount especially during the July and August months.In this context, we apply a modelling method known as ANN (artificial neural network) [9–11]. In particular, ANNs are powerful tools for dealing with function approximation and it has been shown that they are universal function approximators [12,13]. They are particularly useful in situations where the physical processes governing input–output responses are not entirely understood [14–18]. Here an artificial neural network, based on the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) model [10], is developed to forecasting water resources three and six months before the main stress months of July and August.The model is defined of the basis of a set of known input/output relationships (examples). An ultra-centenarian series of spring discharge data is analysed to identify examples of the recharge–discharge relationship of the aquifer. Groundwater resources are known to be related to climate change through hydrological processes, such as precipitation and evapotranspiration, and through interaction with surface water [19]. From raw spring discharge, rainfall and temperature data we extract yearly feature vectors. In this way, we build a dataset of 62 feature vectors from 1934 to 2003. In the following sections, the reasons for choosing these parameters and the way we use them are reported. We label each of the attribute vectors with the corresponding mean spring discharge during the July–August period, which is assumed to be the output variable. Subsequently these labelled vectors (in the following called examples) are used for the training, and the validation of the ANN model.ANN based methods have been considerably developed in hydrogeology (see for example [20–26]) and there are advanced approaches concerning environmental and agricultural applications [27,28]. Specifically Kurtulus and Razack [29,30] used ANN for simulating the La Rochefoucauld aquifer located in the Charente Region, western France. Serino springs were studied from a statistical point of view by Fiorillo et al. [31]. However it appears there are no successful forecasting applications for the Terminio massif area.This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we describe the area we consider and its features. The general background of the neural network implementation and training is presented in Section 3. Feature extraction is reported in Section 4. Experiments and Results for three and six month forecasting are discussed in Section 5 and 6, respectively. Concluding remarks are presented in Section 7.The Serino springs belong to the Terminio karst aquifer (Figs. 1 and 2), located in a well-defined zone of the Sabato valley (Southern Italy) and characterized by high quality and flow rate. These springs are divided into two main groups according to their height: the Acquaro–Pelosi group is located between 377 and 380m a.s.l., while the Urciuoli spring is located at 330m a.s.l. The area has been extensively described by Fiorillo et al. [31].The springs were tapped in Roman times (1st century AD) with the construction of the ‘Claudio’ and ‘Sannitico’ aqueducts (Fig. 1). The ‘Claudio’ aqueduct capped the Acquaro and Pelosi springs to supply Naples and the Phlegraean Fields area [32], a distance of up to 92km. Many of the ruins are still present in Naples, Baia and Miseno. The ‘Sannitico’ aqueduct capped the Urciuoli spring to supply Benevento, following the path of the Sabato river. These ancient aqueducts were abandoned some time later, though exactly when is unknown, most likely due to destruction during wars.To supply the Naples area, the Urciuoli spring was recapped between 1885 and 1888 by the ‘Serino aqueduct’: a gravity channel followed by a system of pressured conduits. Later (in 1934), the Aquaro and Pelosi springs were also re-capped, and the ‘Serino aqueduct’ still supplies the Naples area. The catchment is characterized by a wide karst mountain area (Mt. Picentini), part of which (about 50km2, the Terminio karst aquifer) feed the Serino springs (Fig. 2). Excluding the Sabato plain, morphology is characterized by high slope angle: slope higher than 20° represent more than 50% of the catchment. About 30% of the catchment lies above 1000m a.s.l., up to the top of the Mt. Terminio (1783m a.s.l.).The Terminio aquifer is made up of calcareous and calcareous- dolomite series (Late Triassic-Miocene), 2500m thick, covered by pyroclastic deposits of Somma–Vesuvius activity, which have an important role in the distribution of infiltration, spatially and temporally, into the karstic substratum below. The massif, by tectonic contact, is bounded by terrigenous and impermeable deposits, constituting complex argillaceous and flysch sequences (Fig. 2). This marine substratum is covered by Quaternary continental deposits, including slope breccias and debris, pyroclastic deposits, alluvial and lacustrine deposits.The studies of Civita [33], D’Argenio et al. [34] and Parotto and Praturlon [35], and related bibliographies provide further information on the geological features of the outcropping areas of these terrains.More than 500 structural lines have been surveyed within the Terminio massif, showing a mainly Apennine trend (NW–SE), and N–S and E–W trend [36]. In particular, system faults have made it possible to identify four sub-units within the Terminio aquifer, supplying, respectively, the Cassano Irpino spring group to the east, the Serino group to the west, the Beardo spring to the northeast, and Sorbo Serpico and Salza Irpina to the northwest (Fig. 2). A total of 45 springs have been surveyed in the western sector of the Terminio massif, including the Serino group, the most important in the area.Detailed geological and geotechnical surveys have been carried out along the alluvial plain of the Sabato river. Results of these surveys have shown that the calcareous substratum of the alluvial plain, hydraulically connected to the Terminio massif, supplies the springs through the Quaternary deposits above [33,37]. All the springs are tapped by a system of water tunnels developed in the Quaternary deposits, and specific surveys have shown a shorter water path within the alluvial deposits for Urciuoli spring.An artificial neural network (ANN), also simply called neural network, is a computational model which originally was intended for use in the simulation of the structure and/or functional aspects of biological neural networks [38]. It consists of an interconnected group of processing elements (neurons).Neural networks are usually used to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs or to find patterns in data. Here we aim to express the relationship between the feature vectors related to the aquifer site and a corresponding spring discharge value.Three fundamental elements characterize any neural network:-The network structure or topology, i.e. the way the neurons are linked.The activation function, which represents the answer of a neuron to the input stimuli.The learning algorithm.The neural network structure we adopt is a feedforward one, the well known “Multilayer Perceptron” [10]. Here the neurons are organized into clusters or layers, called “input”, “output” and “hidden” (i.e. those units which are neither input nor output) layers. Each neuron of a given layer is connected to all the neurons of the next one, as depicted in Fig. 3.Our model is synchronous: at each time, each neuron receives as an input the weighted sum of the input values and/or of the other neuron outputs, as shown in the following equation:(1)Ok=f(ΣnWknOn)where Wknis the weight associated to the link from neuron n to neuron k, Onis the output of neuron n or of the n-th input. The neuron output is a continuous and derivable function of its input. For our experiment we chose the sigmoid function,(2)f(x)=11+e−xThe training procedure is the so called “back propagation”. It makes use of a data set of feature vectors, each one labelled with the correct output, as examples of the correct input/output relationship. First a vector is presented to the input neurons and then the network gives its output. If it is not equal to the desired one, the difference (error) between these two values is computed and the weights Wknare changed in order to minimize it. We repeat these operations for each input vector until we minimize the Mean Square Error (MSE) [38] of the system. Given the p-th vector in input, the error Epis:(3)E=12Σj(tj−Oj)2where tjis the p-th desired output value and Ojis the output of the corresponding neuron.After an entire cycle of input vector presentations (epoch), we calculate the MSE for all the input patterns p. Then the epoch is repeated again until we reach an acceptable error. Then the network behaviour is validated by means of an independent set of data (validation set).The weight updating phase in the above algorithm, which is widely known in literature as the “generalized delta rule”, aims at minimizing the error function E. This is done by a method known as Gradient Descent, where weight changes are made in the steepest downward direction of the error function [38].The weights Wknare initially randomly chosen in a fixed range.The error back propagation algorithm has several parameters, and the most important ones are called, respectively, learning rate and momentum term. The first term is a measure of the influence degree, in the formula for updating weights, of the error term, whereas the latter one determines the influence of the past history of weight changes in the same formula. Performing optimal choices for all these parameters is a quite dark side of the procedure and must be achieved on the basis of personal experience and a trial and error approach.For our experiments we adopted an Excel-based system which simulates a neural network developed by Angshuman Saha and which is freely available all over the web11http://xoomer.virgilio.it/srampone/NNpred01.zip.. By using this tool we can define feed-forward, back-propagation networks with 1 or 2 hidden layers, enter training data, set various learning parameters, start a learning phase and see the results (error rate, etc.) presented in various ways, including graphically. Categorical values are automatically converted into numerical ones.As previously described, the dataset is composed of labelled feature vectors called examples. Each example has the following structure(4)X,y=(x1,x2,⋯,xn),ywhere the xi's are the chosen features and y is the expected output.The whole dataset is partitioned into 10 non-overlapping subsets. From these 10 subsets, one can be chosen to evaluate the neural network performance (validation set), and the remaining 9 can be used to instruct it (training sets), i.e., setting the synaptic weights. This procedure is repeated 10 times, corresponding to all the possible choices of the validation set (ten fold cross validation) [39], and the corresponding average performance was gauged in terms of an average error. It is worth underlining that in each trial the validation data is not used for training.To modelling the rainfall–discharge relationship in the Serino spring discharge we take into account 4 classes of parameters:1.Mean monthly rainfall,PiMean monthly temperatureTiPotential evapotranspirationEpMean total monthly spring dischargeQi.In the following we value these parameters during the ANN Hydrological Year Yn−n+1 spanning from the month of October of the year n to September of the year n+1. As evidenced in the following, the ANN hydrological year is different from the hydrological year defined as the time span between two consecutive minimums of spring discharge.Rainfall and temperature data refer to the meteorological station of Serino-Urciuoli (Lat 40°53′30.9″ Long 14°50′48″) at 331m a.s.l. Rainfall data are available from 1919 to 2003 [40]. Temperature data are made available by Aqueduct Company of Naples (A.R.I.N. S.p.A.) from 1962 to 2003. To extend the time span, temperature data from the Mt. Vergine station at 1270m a.s.l., 15km north-west of Mt. Terminio, operating since 1884, and Avellino station at 370m a.s.l. available from 1929 to 2003 [40] are also considered. However there are several breaks in the data before 1933 and in the 1943–1950 range, so in this study we consider the 1934–1942 and 1952–2003 ranges.As shown in Fig. 4, a typical Mediterranean climate is present, characterized by dry and warm summers, and a wet period during autumn, winter and spring. Monthly rainfall,Pi, reaches a maximum during November and a minimum in July. During winter (December–February) precipitation can be snowy, especially above 1000m a.s.l., and represents an important amount in groundwater aquifer recharge.We summarize the rainfall and temperature data for each hydrological year Yn−n+1 in three periods:-PJUL–SEPsum of rainfalls for the months from July to September of year n;POCT-DECsum of rainfalls for the months from October to December year n;PJAN-APRsum of rainfalls for the months from January to April of the year n+1;Figs. 5 and 6depictPJUL-SEPandPOCT-DEC, respectively, in the years 1934–1942 and 1952– 2003.TJUL-SEP, mean of the daily temperatures in the months from July to September of year n;TOCT-DEC, mean of the daily temperatures in the months from October to December year n;TJAN-APR, mean of the daily temperatures in the months from January to April of the year n+1;Figs. 7 and 8depictTJUL-SEPandTOCT-DEC, respectively in the years 1934–1942 and 1952– 2003.We also consider the mean of the daily temperatures in the year from May of the year n to April of the year n+1TMAY-APR.The pattern of potential evapotranspiration,Ep, computed by the method of Thornthwaite and Mather [41] – see Appendix – is almost opposite to that of rainfall, reaching a maximum in July and minimum in December–February.Thus, this distribution of monthly rainfall allows for the maximum amount of effective rainfall,Peff=Pi−Ep. Effective rainfall is null in the period June–August. The Mt. Vergine station data (Fig. 4) show that at high-elevated zones, potential evapotranspiration exceeds rainfall during the summer period (July–August), whereas longer dry periods occur in low-elevated zones. The role of the rainfall in recharging surface and deep aquifer systems in the Campania region has been described by Fiorillo and Wilson [42]. During the dry season, pyroclastic cover reaches a minimum for water content and increases during autumn, up to field capacity. Subsequent storms cause percolation into deep layers and recharge the groundwater aquifer. The amount of rainfall needed to increase water content from minimum to field capacity is 240mm, but due to the effect of evapotranspiration this amount is approximately 350–450mm. Thus, infiltration into the analysed karst aquifer is attenuated during the beginning of the rainy season. This explains why spring discharge decreases generally up to November.Also in this case we summarize the evapotranspiration data in three periods:EpJUL-SEP, mean of the potential evapotranspiration in the months from July to September of year n;EpOCT-DEC, mean of the potential evapotranspiration in the months from October to December year n;EpJAN-APR, mean of the potential evapotranspiration in the months from January to April of the year n+1.Figs. 9 and 10depictEpJUL-SEPandEpOCT-DEC, respectively, in the years 1934–1942 and 1952–2003.Fig. 4 also shows the monthly mean of Serino spring discharges Qi, where the maximum occurs, on average, six months after maximum rainfall; minimum spring discharge occurs, on average, four months after minimum rainfall. Spring discharge data are available from 1887, with a break occurring for some limited periods, but generally not more than a few months. From 1887 to 1920, monthly measurements were carried out; daily records are available after 1920.Hydrographs of the Pelosi, Acquaro and Urciuoli springs for the 1972–1974 period are shown in Fig. 11. Urciuoli spring discharge presents a limited variation with slight oscillations, whereas Acquaro and Pelosi springs present a wider range of discharge values and more smoothed hydrographs.Generally, the range of spring discharge values for the Acquaro and Pelosi springs is 300–800 and 100–600l/s, respectively; Urciuoli is the main spring in the area with a flow range between 1200 and 1600l/s. Acquaro and Pelosi spring hydrographs are characterized mainly by base flow; the slight oscillations (10–20% of the discharge) of the Urciuoli spring hydrograph, on the other hand, indicate a probable quick flow component, due to a shorter water path within the alluvial deposits. However, measurements of the Urciuoli spring discharge are probably less reliable considering daily scale, because they are obtained from the algebraic sum between the total amount spring discharge (Pelosi and Aquaro spring discharges included) and two canals which supply the Sabato river guaranteeing its minimum river discharge.The limited component of the quick flow is also common to the other main karst springs of the adjacent karst system, as the Cassano Irpino springs (Fig. 2) and Sanità-Caposele spring (5km on the E of Cassano Irpino), which supply the Puglia region through the “Acquedotto Pugliese” (the main aqueduct of Italy). This common characteristic is due to factors which attenuate the fast response of the aquifer, such as the presence of a pyroclastic mantle up to several metres thick, which reduces the role of fast infiltration into the karst system. In addition, this pyroclastic mantle has led to a growth of trees (chestnuts and hazel), which densely cover all the karst area.Later, the pyroclastic mantle appears to have an important role, reducing fast and concentrated infiltration and, thus, the quick flow. Added to this, snowy precipitation can occur during winter mainly above 1000m a.s.l., inducing a delay in the infiltration processes, favouring a time lag of the peak spring hydrograph.Due to the limited component of the quick flow, for our purpose monthly spring discharges are considered. For all observed years, the sum of the monthly mean for the Urciuoli, Pelosi and Acquaro spring discharges is shown in Fig. 12from November to October, because the minimum discharge usually occurs in November. Typically, spring discharge increases during winter to reach a maximum during spring. Flow diminishes during summer and reaches a minimum in autumn. Certain years show a different pattern; in particular, during 1948–1949 and 2001–2002, the hydrograph did not follow a typical shape and a constantly decreasing discharge was recorded. During those years, groundwater discharge was higher than aquifer recharge, resulting in the two main droughts of the historical series (Figs. 13 and 14).Hydrological data have indicated that the Serino springs are characterized by a predominant base flow component, and peaks in daily rainfall are not followed by peaks in the spring hydrograph, which appears almost smeared out [4]. As described above, this characteristic is also connected to the pyroclastic mantle and to snowy precipitation.For the three month before forecast of water resources we consider 4 features summarizing the discharge data in the hydro geologic year:QJUL-SEP, the mean of the monthly spring dischargeQiof the months from July to September of year n;QOCT-DEC, the Mean of the monthly spring dischargeQiof the months from October to December of the year n;QJAN-APRthe mean of the monthly spring dischargeQiof the months from January to April of the year n+1;QAPRthe mean monthly spring discharge of April, indicative of the total discharge status in the last month before the forecast.Since we aim to forecast water resources at least three month before the main stress months of July and August, the rainfalls, temperatures and evaporations in the months June and July are not considered.By using the selected features we collect 62 examples of 14 characteristics (1933/34-1942/43 and 1951/52-2002/03).We use these examples to develop an artificial neural network model, as described in Section 3, able to forecast water resources three months before (in April) the main stress months of July and August, i.e. theQJUL-AUGvalues.To this aim, each example has the following structure:X,y=(QJUL–SEP,QOCT–DEC,QJAN–APR,QAPR,PJUL–SEP,POCT–DEC,PJAN–APR,TJUL–SEP,TOCT–DEC,TJAN–APR,TMAY–APREpJUL–SEP,EpOCT–DEC,EpJAN–APR),QJUL–AUGSeveral experiments were conducted over the data, varying the network structure and parameters, as reported in Table 1. As mentioned in Section 3, the computational models using ANN of the type Multilayers Perceptron are in fact dependent on the network structure (topology, connections, neurons number) and their operational parameters (learning rate, momentum, etc.). The form in which the network architecture is defined affects significantly its performance.With reference to the neural network structure described in Section 3, the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons in each hidden layer is arbitrary and should be neither too small nor too high. Too few neurons may deteriorate the network performance, whereas too many neurons may lead to over-fitting the network on the training data without actually improving its performance on the validation ones.Several approaches have been proposed to the problem of automatically designing neural networks, e.g. to calculate the number of hidden nodes required [43], to grow modular neural network systems [44], to build networks in a constructive fashion by automatically adding and pruning one node at a time [45], to generate an improving sequence of networks where at each sequence a new network is trained to minimize the error of previous network [46]. However the computational cost, the application specific environment and in some cases the requirement of an arbitrary large source of training data prevent the use on many of such techniques in the most of real world cases.Here, starting from a greater-than-needed ANN, we apply a simple pruning technique to trim network size [47]. In this way the ANN, starting from 2 hidden layers of 10 and 8 neurons, respectively, is reduced to a single hidden layer of just 3 neurons, while maintaining 14 input neurons and one output (14-3-1 schema).By a trial and error approach, the learning rate has been fixed to 0.6, and the momentum term is zero. The initial weights range in±0.2. The best performance was achieved by iterating the learning for 500 cycles. (Table 1)Table 2reports the Mean Square Error (MSE) behaviour on the ten trials of the ten fold cross validation methodology we adopt. Overall, the selected architecture shows a prediction discrepancy of 5.73% on the validation set.A comparison between the observed and the predicted by the ANNQJUL-AUGvalues in the years 1934–1942 and 1952–2003 is reported in Fig. 15.Furthermore the Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency index, largely used in hydrogeology [48], has been valued.(5)R2=1−∑(Qi−Qi′)2∑(Qi−Qc)2×100%where Qiis the observed spring discharge; Qi′ it the neural network predicted spring discharge; Qcis the mean observed spring discharge.The resulting Nash-Sutcliffe index is of 71%. This index, while good in itself, is a quite approximate measure. In fact, just a single evident discrepancy changes dramatically its resulting value. This is due to the square of the difference. At the same time it is insensitive to the additive and proportional differences between predicted and observed values [49]. So we adopted a different index, the Index of Volumetric Fit (IVF), defined as the ratio between the predicted and observed spring discharge volume:(6)IVF=∑Q′i∑Qiwhere, Qiis the observed spring discharge; Qi′ it the neural network predicted spring discharge.For the IVF we reached the 1.007 value, indicating a perfect correlation.Here we modify the artificial neural network model to forecasting water resourcesQJUL-AUGsix months before (in December).To this aim we reduce the window of available data, by removing all data related to the January-April period, so leaving just 8 characteristics:PJUL-SEPsum of rainfalls for the months from July to September of year n;POCT-DECsum of rainfalls for the months from October to December year n;(PJAN-APRhas been removed)TJUL-SEP, mean of the daily temperatures in the months from July to September of year n;TOCT-DEC, mean of the daily temperatures in the months from October to December year n;(TJAN-APRandTMAY-APRhave been suppressed)EpJUL-SEP, mean of the potential evapotranspiration in the months from July to September of year n;EpOCT-DEC, mean of the potential evapotranspiration in the months from October to December year n;(EpJAN-APR, has been suppressed)QJUL-SEP, the mean of the monthly spring dischargeQiof the months from July to September of year n;QOCT-DEC, the Mean of the monthly spring dischargeQiof the months from October to December of the year n;(QJAN-APRandQAPRhave been suppressed.)Also in this case several experiments were conducted over the data, varying the network architecture and parameters.By the pruning approach the ANN architecture is defined by a single hidden layer of just 2 neurons, while maintaining 8 input neurons and one output (8-2-1 schema). The learning rate has been fixed to 0.7, and the momentum term is 0.2. The initial weights range in ±0.7. The best performance was achieved by iterating the learning for 500 cycles (see Table 3).Table 4reports the Mean Square Error (MSE) behaviour on the ten trials of the tenfold cross validation methodology we adopted. Overall, the selected architecture shows a prediction discrepancy of 9.67% on the validation set. This can be viewed as an exceptionally good result by considering we evaluate our prevision 6 months before with just 8 parameters.A comparison between the observed and the predicted by the ANNQJUL-AUGvalues in the years 1934–1942 and 1952– 2003 is reported in Fig. 16.The Nash-Sutcliffe index here is of 63%. The Index of Volumetric Fit (IVF), is 0.9847, that, while slightly less than the three months prevision computed one, shows a perfect correlation.By graphically comparing the predicted and observed spring discharge we see the almost identical behaviour. A 9.77% mean error implies a prediction error of at most 200l/s. This implies that the difference between predicted and observed spring discharge ranges between 1.5l/s and 450l/s.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An ANN model has been developed to simulate the rainfall–spring discharge relationship in a large karst aquifer in the Terminio massif (Southern Italy), by using data spanning over 62 years.The results confirm that the recharge of the Terminio karst aquifer is strictly connected to the annual hydrological cycle, and spring hydrographs are directly connected to the cumulative effective rainfall from the previous September/October.The ANN is able to forecast of water resources three and six months before the main stress months of July and August. The training and validation phases, validated by a ten fold cross validation methodology, led to a very satisfactory calibration of the ANN model, with an error in forecasting discharge values of 5% (three months before) and 10% (six months before).This can be viewed as an exceptionally good result by considering we evaluate our prevision 6 months before with just 8 parameters. Spring discharge values for 1949 and 2002, highlighting the behaviour of the Terminio karst aquifer during drought, are also correctly predicted.Karstic aquifers are strongly heterogeneous and discontinuous systems whose hydrodynamic functioning can be highly complex. Distributed numerical models proved successful in simulating karst aquifers on a regional scale but are limited by the need for large databases. Previous ANN models were limited to a daily prevision.Further research is towards the application of other soft computing models as genetic programming of fuzzy sets, that potentially can led to better results [50].