@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic fuzzy logic and reinforcement learning for adaptive energy efficient routing in mobile ad-hoc networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To ensure good network performance, a routing protocol for MANETs must change its routing policy online to account for changes in network conditions and to deal with routing information imprecision.The main focus of this paper is on the use of fuzzy logic and reinforcement learning.A dynamic membership function is defined to enhance the adaptivity of legacy fuzzy logic systems.A fuzzy extension of a reinforcement learning based routing protocol for MANETs is presented.Dynamic fuzzy logic is more appropriate than reinforcement learning for adaptive energy aware routing in MANETs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MANETs,Routing protocol,Fuzzy logic system,Dynamic membership function,Reinforcement learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a dynamic fuzzy energy state based AODV (DFES-AODV) routing protocol for Mobile Ad-hoc NETworks (MANETs) is presented. In DFES-AODV route discovery phase, each node uses a Mamdani fuzzy logic system (FLS) to decide its Route REQuests (RREQs) forwarding probability. The FLS inputs are residual battery level and energy drain rate of mobile node. Unlike previous related-works, membership function of residual energy input is made dynamic. Also, a zero-order Takagi Sugeno FLS with the same inputs is used as a means of generalization for state-space in SARSA-AODV a reinforcement learning based energy-aware routing protocol. The simulation study confirms that using a dynamic fuzzy system ensures more energy efficiency in comparison to its static counterpart. Moreover, DFES-AODV exhibits similar performance to SARSA-AODV and its fuzzy extension FSARSA-AODV. Therefore, the use of dynamic fuzzy logic for adaptive routing in MANETs is recommended.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET) is a set of wireless devices having the ability to communicate without referring to any central communication infrastructure. Nodes in MANET are constantly moving. This leads to frequent topological changes and links breakage. Also, the wireless communication medium is errors-prone with limited bandwidth capacity. It follows that finding and maintaining routing paths in MANET are very challenging tasks.In MANET, communicating devices are battery powered. Unfortunately, in many practical usage scenarios, batteries cannot be replaced or recharged. Moreover, battery exhaustion of nodes may not only result in low connectivity but can also lead to network partitioning. With the aim of extending MANET lifetime, energy-aware routing protocols have been proposed. Three main approaches are identified in the related literature [1]. First, maximum lifetime routing that seeks to balance energy expenditure among mobile nodes. Second, power-save approach that searches to minimize energy loss during the inactivity periods. Third, power-control approach where nodes adjust their transmission power so that a good compromise is found between goals of: maximizing network connectivity and minimizing energy dissipation.MANETs are highly dynamic and uncertain environments. On one hand, changes in MANETs’ topology, data-traffic load, bandwidth and energy resources are frequent. On the other hand, due to MANETs’ dynamic and to their distributed organization, available routing information is uncertain and incomplete. To ensure good network performance, a routing protocol for MANETs must change its routing policy online to account for changes in network conditions [2] and to deal with routing information imprecision [3]. In other words, a routing protocol for MANETs should be adaptive. Different adaptivity contexts may be considered such as traffic, energy and mobility. This paper presents adaptive energy-efficient routing solutions.Majority of proposed adaptive routing protocols use techniques derived from computational intelligence (CI) discipline. However, due to limited energy and computation resources in MANETs, some CI techniques are more suitable. This includes swarm intelligence [4,5], reinforcement learning [6–9] and fuzzy logic [10]. The main focus of this paper is on the use of fuzzy logic and reinforcement learning. Particularly, the following questions are answered. Firstly, which CI paradigm is more appropriate for adaptive energy efficient routing in MANETs: fuzzy logic or reinforcement learning? Secondly, does the combination of both paradigms ensure significant improvement? In fact, research in adaptation and hybridization in computational intelligence is receiving growing interest. Examples of recent related works include extensions of: krill herd algorithm [11–16], particle swarm optimization [17,18] and cuckoo search algorithm [19,20].To the best of our knowledge, all fuzzy-logic based routing protocols for MANETs use static membership functions. In this paper, a dynamic membership function is defined to enhance the adaptivity of the proposed fuzzy logic system. Moreover, a fuzzy extension of a previously proposed RL based routing protocol for MANETs [21] is presented. Finally, simulation results demonstrate that the proposed dynamic fuzzy logic system ensures similar performance to those achieved by reinforcement learning system. Thus, the use of dynamic fuzzy logic for the task of adaptive energy aware routing in MANETs is more appropriate.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related work covering adaptive energy aware routing in MANETs using fuzzy logic and reinforcement learning. Section 3 provides an overview of the basics of fuzzy logic and reinforcement learning. Moreover, the AODV routing protocol is presented. Section 4 describes the proposed adaptive fuzzy logic system for Route REQuests (RREQs) probability forwarding tuning problem. In Section 5, SARSA-AODV protocol [21] is presented with its fuzzy extension. Section 6 reports simulation results. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
MANETs are highly dynamic and uncertain environments with limited computing, storage and energy resources. Hence, a routing protocol for MANETs should be adaptive and energy efficient. To meet the adaptivity feature, computational intelligence techniques are generally applied. In particular, fuzzy reasoning and reinforcement learning are widely accepted due to their low computational and memory requirements.This paper deals with the problem of adaptive energy-aware RREQ probability tuning in AODV reactive routing protocol. Two extensions of AODV are proposed and compared, namely: DFES-AODV and FSARSA-AODV. First, DFES-AODV implements a fuzzy logic system with a time varying membership function for residual energy input. In comparison to SFES-AODV that is built on the top of a traditional fuzzy logic system, DFES-AODV is more energy efficient. Second, FSARSA-AODV uses a fuzzy extension with a critic only architecture of SARSA RL algorithm. This hybrid algorithm overcomes the problem of empirical discretization of state space in SARSA-AODV protocol.It has been shown through simulation that DFES-AODV and FSARSA-AODV exhibit similar performance. However, FSARSA-AODV still requires empirical adjustment of several functional parameters. In contrast to FSARSA-AODV, DFES-AODV is self-adaptive. In conclusion, dynamic fuzzy logic is more appropriate than reinforcement learning for adaptive energy aware routing in MANETs.