@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective optimization design of a connection frame in macro–micro motion platform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Connection frame is employed to realize macro–micro actuation concept.Thermal–mechanical analysis of the connection frame should be considered.The explicit function can be obtained by response surface methodEach calculation of ANSYS can be recognized as an experimentExamples are approved to examine the validity of the method represented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Connection frame,Thermal–mechanical deformation,Natural frequency,RSM,Multi-objective optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Connection frame is an essential component to implement high acceleration and ultra-precision positioning motion in a macro–micro motion platform. The performance of the positioning system is mainly affected by two sources which include thermal–mechanical deformation and the natural frequency of connection frame. In the paper, multi-objective optimization and design for the connection frame is constructed and discussed comprehensively by the effects of thermal–mechanical deformation and the natural frequency of the system. The optimization objectives for the connection structure are the minimized displacement when thermal–mechanical deformation is occurred, the maximized natural frequency to avoid system resonance, and the light weight for the connection structure to fulfil high acceleration motion. Using response surface method (RSM) combined with finite element method (FEM), the objective function is formulated as a prediction model. Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGAII) is used to solve the optimization model and attain the matched parameters. A cantilever beam example is tested to examine the validity of the methodology, and the results from prediction model agree well with that from theoretical model. By the above methodology, a high performance with optimal parameters for the connection structure is obtained, and its natural frequency and weight can meet our design expectation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A high acceleration, high speed and ultra-precision positioning platform is popular in the fields of microelectronic manufacturing engineering, optical engineering, precision engineering, nano-scale science, etc. [1–3]. The performance requirement for both of the high acceleration and ultra-precision positioning is ever increasing in recent years [4–6]. The high acceleration motion can help to realize a high speed operation, and the ultra-precision positioning can guarantee high efficient work. However, high acceleration and ultra-precision positioning are always a couple of contradictions in many positioning platforms. The high acceleration motion hinders the improvement of the machining accuracy and ultra-precision positioning also limits the increase of acceleration [7,8].With the technology development, nowadays, the contradictions between the high acceleration and ultra-precision positioning can be solved effectively by a macro–micro stage actuation concept, which is a combination of Voice Coil Motor (VCM) and Piezoelectric Stack Actuator (PSA) [7]. This actuation system uses a VCM for a high acceleration motion while employ a PSA for ultra-precision positioning. Currently, the concept of macro–micro stage actuation has been practiced in many industry environments such as computer hard disc industry, macro–micro robot applications, precision positioning system and so on [9–15]. In a Hard Disc Drive (HDD) system, an ultra-precision positioning obtained by PSA significantly increases the storage density and VCM helps to ensure high read/write speed [9,10]. In the applications of macro–micro robot, macro robot provides a large workspace and micro robot offers ultra-precision adjustment of the posture and position [11–13]. In precision positioning system, macro positioning and micro compensation are obtained by VCM and PSA, respectively [14,15].When the macro–micro concept is used in a precision positioning system, a connection structure is designed to implement the combination between VCM and PSA. The connection structure is driven by VCM to obtain a high acceleration, a high speed and a long stroke motion. It also carries a compensation system driven by PSA to realize ultra-precision positioning. Obviously, the connection structure is one of the key modules in macro–micro motion platform. Dong et al. [7] proposed a connector that was connected to the output coil of VCM at one end and linked to a linear air bearing at the other end. The PSA housed inside the flexure mechanism under preload was fixed on the sliding bar of the air bearing. Zhang et al. [16] developed a connection frame which connects the output coil of VCM and integrated PSA directly. Liu et al. [12] reported a connection structure to connect a VCM and a PSA in a high precision platform. The results showed that the positioning table using combined piezo-VCM actuators was successfully positioned within the positioning accuracy of 10nm by both the forward and backward positioning processes.In research, Static and dynamic analyses of the connection structure are usually implemented to verify its effectiveness and stability. However, the analysis and discussion of the connection system considering thermal–mechanical analysis is scarce nowadays. Actually, deformation from the thermal–mechanical and the natural frequency of the connection frame would affect the performance of high acceleration and ultra-precision positioning [17–19]. The analysis and discussion of the connection system considering thermal–mechanical and natural frequency is necessary. Therefore, some advanced analysis such as multi-objective optimization design for the connection frame will be conducted to achieve the high performance of the positioning platform [20].In order to solve the equation of the model, many algorithms have been developed currently. An optimization solution without explicit expression of objective function is adopted by Genetic Algorithm (GA) [21] or even sensitivity analysis is employed to build an approximation model by Taylor expression [22]. However, the former has a mass of structural analysis steps and the latter is much difficult in deriving sensitivity. These solutions would be solved by response surface method (RSM) along with reasonable design of experiment and obtained calculation result. With the development of computer numerical simulation, RSM has been testified as a fitting of the numerical simulation in engineering. Objective functions can be formulated by RSM, thus complex calculation of derivative in sensitivity analysis is avoided. The formulating objective functions do not involve stiffness matrix and specific analysis process, and it is obtained by least square method based on experimental data. RSM is frequently applied in several fields where the mathematical equation could not be derived directly to express the relationship between objective and design variables. Owing to strong versatility and independence, RSM can combine various commercial software to formulate objective functions of almost all optimization designs. There are many efforts on using RSM to formulate objective function in structural optimization. Kaymaz and McMahon [23] proposed a RSM based on weighted regression to approximate implicit limit state equation, improving the precision of the reliability analysis. Li et al. [24] applied response surface approximation to construct an objective function for the two-level optimization of airframe structures. Marklund and Nilsson [25] proposed the linear and quadratic response surface by global approximations of a car side impact combined with LS-DYNA for solving transient loading problems. B-pillar optimization was studied, and result showed that its weight was reduced by 25% without loss of safety.After objective function is formulated by RSM, optimization model can be built and the optimal design of the connection frame can be approached by a proper planning method. Actually, multi-objective optimization method based on GA has been effectively verified. Mohan and Maiti [26] used response surface equation and a constraint nonlinear optimization algorithm based on GA to conduct the optimization design of a rotating disc. The results showed that computational time and cost were less than that employing finite element analysis in optimization runs. Liu et al. [27] presented multi-objective GA based optimization design of a fixture layout considering locator displacement and force-deformation. Karathanassis et al. [28] reported multi-objective GA based optimization design of a micro heat sink for concentrating photovoltaic/thermal systems. And the Pareto fronts associated with the optimization problem were obtained. Ghaffarizadeh et al. [29] added adding crossover operator to Extinction-based Evolutionary Algorithms (EEA) to outperform classical ones in terms of convergence time and accuracy of optimization on several benchmark optimization functions. Ahmadi et al. [30] applied a multi-objective optimization method based on a fast and elitist Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) to determine the best design parameters for a multigeneration energy system.As to the connection structure in the macro–micro motion platform, some necessary and fundamental analysis would be required. Firstly, the analysis considering thermal–mechanical deformation and natural frequency would be included when design the connection frame. Then, an effective optimization algorithm with multi-objectives should be modelled to the connection structure. Finally, RSM would be applied in formulating objective function of the connection frameIn the paper, multi-objective optimization design of a connection frame in macro–micro motion platform is conducted as follows: (1) Comprehensive analyses considering thermal–mechanical deformation and natural frequency of connection frame are studied by finite element method (FEM). (2) The change trends of thermal–mechanical deformation with the temperature and acceleration load are attained. (3) The method of formulating objective function is practiced by RSM combined with FEM. (4) Based on objective function, multi-objective optimization model is established and NSGA II is presented to realize a multi-objective design. Using this methodology, multi-objective optimization design of a connection frame considering thermal–mechanical deformation and natural frequency is obtained.Connection frame is a bridge between VCM and PSA in the macro–micro motion platform. One end of the connection frame is connected to the VCM and the other end is connected to PSA, as shown in Fig. 1. A high acceleration, high speed and a long stroke motion can be provided by VCM and the ultra-precision positioning can be obtained by PSA. The connection frame plays a key role for the implementation of high acceleration and ultra-precision positioning motion. Therefore, investigation on the connection frame under the actual working condition is greatly significant for precision compensation and performance improvement [17]. The connection frame is simplified, as shown in Fig. 2. There are many structural parameters in the connection frame, which are L, L1, B, B1, H and R represented as length, internal length, width, internal width, height and radius, respectively.In the acceleration motion, the connection frame is employed to transfer a high acceleration (150m/s2) from VCM to position platform, and it also carries PSA to realize ultra-precision position. Because of high acceleration in the macro–micro motion platform, there will be an inevitable mechanical deformation in the connection frame. The deformation would have a negative influence to the motion positioning. While the high acceleration positioning is being kept up, a great deal of thermal energy generated from the change of the winding temperature of VCM leads to an elevated temperature of left end planes of the connection frame [17]. The change of the winding temperature causes a change of the winding resistance, which also depends on the material used for winding [31]. The typical material used for windings is copper. The winding temperature is determined by the ambient temperature at the beginning and at the end of the measurement, the resistance of the cold winding, and the resistance of the heated winding [32]. The elevated temperature comes from motor winding temperature rise by the form of T as follows [33,34].(1)T=R2−R1R1⋅(k+t1)+t1−t2where, R1 and R2 are motor winding resistances when the temperature is T1 and T2, respectively; k is temperature rise coefficient; t1 is the initial ambient temperature of motor; t2 is the ambient temperature after working stability of motor.By importing reference value (as shown in Table 1) into Eq. (1), the motor winding temperature rise T is about 100°C. Here, we define the maximum temperature on the connection frame is 100°C, which cannot be ignored in the continuous high accelerated motion. Under the severe working conditions, considering thermal–mechanical deformation helps to improve the accuracy and reliability of the connection frame, and it is also consistent with the real condition. The thermal–mechanical deformation displacement generating an error of positioning can be calculated by ANSYS.In order to explore the thermal–mechanical deformation of the connection frame, the end planes of arms were applied by the maximum temperature load T=100°C, and the connection frame was applied by the maximum acceleration 150m/s2. The right end plane of connection frame was completely constrained, as shown in Fig. 3. The element type selected was SOLID 87 which is the 10-node tetrahedral thermal solid used in the ANSYS program and other relevant parameters are shown in Table 2. The finite element model was established and meshed freely by APDL in ANSYS 12.1.By the model in ANSYS, the thermal–mechanical deformation can be calculated. Some results show that the maximum thermal–mechanical deformation displacement of connection frame is 365μm which appears on the right end of the connection frame, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Similarly, the maximum thermal–mechanical stress of the connection frame is obtained, which is 365MPa and presents on the end plane of two arms. Under the same situation, the change trends of the displacement and stress of connection frame are obtained by different temperature and acceleration load, respectively. When the temperature is 20°C, the displacement and stress increase with the acceleration, and their maximum values are 0.3μm and 0.25MPa, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4(b). When the acceleration is 150m/s2, the displacement and stress rapidly increase with the temperature, and their maximum values are 365μm and 323MPa, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4(c). Moreover, the total effects by coupling with temperature and acceleration were investigated and results are attained. When the temperature increases, change trends of displacement and stress with the acceleration are not noticeable. They are all similar to a straight line, since the difference between the maximum and minimum displacements is relatively small at each temperature, as well as that of stress. The higher temperature, the greater the corresponding displacement and stress, as shown in Fig. 4(d). When the acceleration increases, the change trend of displacement with the temperature is almost the same as well as that of stress, since the acceleration effect is far less than temperature, as shown in Fig. 4(e). It implies that the acceleration and temperature loads affect the displacement of the connection frame. Especially, the temperature load has greater impact than acceleration on the displacement. Therefore, structural optimization is needed to reduce the influence of thermal–mechanical deformation on the realization of positioning accuracy.The mechanical resonance would happen in the high acceleration motion platform when the natural frequency of the connection frame is consistent with the one of the electrical signal, which is not allowed and must be avoided. Therefore, the natural frequency of the connection frame should be considered for system stability. Commonly, the first order natural frequency of the connection frame must stay away from the driving frequency of VCM (<1000Hz) [3]. In our finite element model, the natural frequency was calculated by ANSYS, and the result is shown in Fig. 5. It is found that the first order natural frequency is about 937Hz which is close to the driving frequency of VCM, which would easily lead to the resonance between the connection frame and VCM. Therefore, structural optimization is also needed for increasing the natural frequency of the connection frame.Based on above analyses, multi-objective optimization design is required to obtain a high performance connection frame. The connection frame should achieve a minimum thermal–mechanical deformation and a maximum first order natural frequency.To meet the high performance requirements, thermal–mechanical deformation and natural frequency should be considered in multi-objective optimization by objective functions. However, the formulations of their objective functions are some challenge. Moreover, when a group of discrete design parameters as input are imported into ANSYS, the corresponding outputs are also discrete. With the development of computer numerical simulation, RSM has been practiced as a fitting of the numerical simulation in engineering. Especially, RSM can combine various commercial software to formulate objective functions of almost all optimization designs.In this paper, each calculation of ANSYS is recognized as an experiment such as a thermal–mechanical deformation experiment or modal experiment. Design parameter is considered as experimental factor. The number of potential discrete values for each parameter is recognized as the level of its factor. Suppose that x1, x2, …, xjare the design parameters. Define that y1, y2, …, yjare function values of the design parameters andyˆ1,yˆ2,…,yˆjare predicted function values of the design parameters. Experiment factor is expressed by xj(j=1, 2, …, m) and m is the level of factor which is the number of every design parameter. Then, orthogonal array (OA) which features equilibrium dispersion and impartiality of experiment is used to experimental design, as shown in Table 3.The objective function can be formulated by completely quadratic regression equation as follows [35]:(2)yˆ=a0+∑j=1majxj+∑k=1m∑j=kmakjxkxjwhere, a0 is regression coefficient of constant term; ajis regression coefficient of linear term; akjis regression coefficient of quadratic term.Eq. (2) can be expressed in the Eq. (3) (for derivation process, see Appendix A)(3)yˆ=∑k=0i−1bkxkwhere, bkis regression coefficient; i=(m+1)(m+2)/2; x0=1; xm=xm(m=1, 2, …, m); xm+k=xk2(k=1, 2, …, m); x2m+1=x1x2; x2m+2=x1x3, …, xm(m+3)/2=xm−1xm; bm=am(m=0, 1, 2, …, m); bm+k=am+k(k=1, 2, …, m); b2m+1=a12; b2m+2=a13, …, bm(m+3)/2=a(m−1)m.The regression coefficient bkis obtained by least square method. Each calculation result of ANSYS is expressed by y(j)(j=0, 1, …, n−1), where, n≥i. Eq. (3) can be expressed by the matrix Eq. (4).(4)yˆ=XbwhereX=1x1(0)x2(0)⋯xk−1(0)1x1(1)x2(1)⋯xk−1(1)⋮⋮⋮⋮⋮1x1(n−1)x2(n−1)⋯xk−1(n−1),y=y(0)y(1)⋮y(n−1),yˆ=yˆ(0)yˆ(1)⋮yˆ(n−1)andb=b(0)b(1)⋮b(n−1).Based on Least square method, squared error sum should be minimized between calculation value y(j) of ANSYS and predicted value of RSM. The error can be described by the norm ofδas follows:(5)δ=Xb−yMinimized squared error sum can be expressed bySas follows:(6)Min:S(b)=δ2=y−XbTy−XbThat is,(7)∇S(b)=∇[(Xb−y)T(Xb−y)]=2(Xb−y)TX=0The regression coefficient will be calculated as follows:(8)b=(XTX)−1XTyObjective function can be formulated by puttingbinto Eq. (4).To assess effectiveness and predictive ability of the objective function, multiple correlation coefficient is adopted as an evaluation index in the paper. The multiple correlation coefficient is a value changing between 0 and 1. The closer to 1, the smaller error influence. Multiple correlation coefficient can be described by the norm of R as follows [35]:(9)R=SSRSSY=1−SSESSYwhere, SSR is sum of squares of regression which is quadratic sum of response estimate and mean difference; SSY is sum of squares of deviations which is quadratic sum of response value and mean difference; SSE is sum of squares of residual which is quadratic sum of response value and estimate difference (for their expressions, see Appendix B).Based on RSM combined with FEM, the objective functions of the connection frame can be formulated. The process is shown in Fig. 6. The process is as follows:Step 1: Determine design factors (x1, x2, …, xj).1.1Obtain number of factors (j).Determine range value of each factor (xjmin, xjmax).Step 2: Encode level of factor. zjis defined as code of xj, xjmin, xjmaxand 0.5(xjmax−xjmin,) are defined as upper level set as zj1, lower level set as zj2 and zero level set as zj3, respectively.Step 3: Determine experimental design.3.1Select OA, as shown in Table 2. 1, −1 and 0 will be replaced by upper level, lower level and zero level.Determine experimental scheme.Step 4: Calculate response value (y1, y2, …, yj) of every group by ANSYS.Step 5: Establish regression equations by least squares.Step 6: Verify the significance by multiple correlation coefficient.Step 7: Formulate objective function by factor level encoding.Based on above work, the objective function can be formulated.Under the actual working condition, the connection frame is subject to high acceleration and high speed. Many factors including acceleration, temperature and natural frequency affect the stability of the connection frame. Therefore, it is not sufficient to take only one objective into account.In the paper, the above three factors were discussed, and three objects of a connection frame optimization will be defined.(1) Total weightTotal weight of a connection frame changes with its structural parameters. The light-weight connection frame is an advantage for high acceleration implementation of macro–micro motion platform. Once there are a given group of design parameters represented by xj, the total weight can be described by the norm of M as follows:(10)M=ρV(x1,x2,x3,…,xj)where, ρ is the density of connection frame; V is the volume of connection frame.(2) Minimum displacement at key pointThe node displacement is another important matter. It is known that the node displacement depends on temperature and acceleration load. When a group of design parameters are determined by employing finite element model, including temperature load and acceleration load, the connection frame's deformation as well as the node displacement can be calculated by ANSYS. The minimum displacement at the maximum deformation point is defined as a criterion for a minimum connection frame's deformation, which can be described by the norm of U as follows:(11)U=Umax(x1,x2,x3,…,xj)(3) The first order natural frequencyAs to the connection frame, mechanical resonance is not allowed and must be avoided when the system is in high acceleration and ultra-precision positioning. Especially, the natural frequency of connection frame must stay away from the driving frequency of VCM. When the given design parameters are presented, the first six order natural frequencies can be calculated by ANSYS, and the first order frequency should be as high as possible to avoid the resonance. Generally, minimization is recognized as an optimization objective. In the paper, negative value of the maximum first order frequency is defined as a criterion by the form of f as follows:(12)f=−fmax(x1,x2,x3,…,xj)In order to guarantee structural performance, the maximum stress occurred should not exceed the allowable stress of the connection frame. In addition, each design parameter must be defined in permissible range of the connection frame.On the above model and criteria, a optimization model for connection frame is established as follows:Find x1, x2, x3, …, xjMinimize M, U, f(13)s.t.σmax=[σ]xjmin≤xj≤xjmaxwhere, σmaxis the maximum stress; [σ] is allowable stress; xjminand xjmaxare the minimum and maximum values of xj.To avoid the limitations of the single object optimization method, multi-objective methods with the Pareto front are presented. Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGAII) proposed by Deb et al. is one of the most efficient and successful algorithms [36]. The algorithm can alleviate three difficulties as follows: [36] Based on a fast non-dominated sorting approach, the computational burden has reduced from O(mN3, where m is the number of objectives and N is the population size) to O(mN2) by performing systematic book-keeping. The crowding distance was proposed as an estimate of the size of the largest cuboid enclosing the point without including any other point in the population. The comparison operator of the crowding distance was used to replace complex sharing parameters. With the availability of a fast non-domination sorting algorithm, combining the parent and child populations was provided to do a complete sort to identify all the fronts and allocate fitness accordingly.The NSGAII has two main advantages which are good convergence property and avoiding the difficulty of setting the sharing parameters.Based on the NSGAII method, an optimum connection frame designing method is presented. The process is shown in Fig. 7.The NSGAII process is described as follows:Step 1: Determine the design parameters and generate a random group.Step 2: Invoke ANSYS to formulate objective function by RSMStep 3: Evaluate the multi-objective functions.Step 4: Rank the design parameters.4.1Rank the design parameters by Pareto rank.Calculate the crowding distance.Step 5: Create a new group of design parameters via repeating the following procedures.5.1Choose the dominant design parameters to be reserved in the next loop based on the Pareto front and the crowding distance.Select two parent chromosomes from the chosen design parameters in 5.1 and cross over the parent to form new design parameters (children).Include a probability mutate at each new chromosome.Step 6: Move the new design parameters into the new loop.Step 7: Test and check to either stop or enter into the new loop and apply the best solution in the current population.Based on the work done, a complete multi-objective optimization using RSM combined with FEM can be constructed.Numerical examples were offered in this section to test the multi-objective optimization using RSM combined with FEM. Firstly, a simple example was used to verify the objective function formulated by the methodology represented in the paper. And then, the necessary actions were taken to check the optimal allocation. Finally, a high performance design case of connection frame was investigated using this methodology.To verify the objective function formulated by RSM combined with FEM, a simple cantilever beam structure in Fig. 8was employed as an example. In the example, the objective functions of deflection and the first order natural frequency were formulated to compare with their theoretical functions. Their multi-objective optimization results were also further verified.Cantilever beam is a simple mechanical structure. Its material properties defined in the paper are the same as that of the connection frame, and the theoretical functions of deflection, frequency and weight can be expressed easily as follows:The theoretical function of deflection [37] is expressed by Eq. (14).(14)U=FL33EIwhere, F is a single force; E is modulus of elasticity; L is length of the cantilever beam.Define: I is inertia moment and I=BW3/12,where, B and W are width and height of the cantilever beam, respectively. The relevant parameters and their value ranges are shown in Table 4.The theoretical function of the first order natural frequency [38] is expressed by Eq. (15).(15)f=ϖ2π=3.5152πEJρAL4where, A is area of section; ρ is density; ω is circle frequency; J is cross-section inertia moment and J=I=BW3/12.The theoretical function of weight is expressed by Eq. (16).(16)M=ρBWLThe weight of the cantilever beam structure was obtained easily. The objective functions of deflection and the first order natural frequency of the cantilever beam were formulated by RSM combined with FEM as follows. Each calculation of ANSYS including deflection and natural frequency of the cantilever beam was recognized as an experiment. Design parameters were x1=B, x2=W and x3=L, that is, the experiment has three experimental factors. y1 and y2 were defined as actual function values of the deflection and natural frequency, respectively. Similarly,yˆ1andyˆ2were defined as predicted function values of the deflection and natural frequency, respectively. The level of factor was set to 17. Then, OA was used for experimental design, as shown in Table 3. Objective function could be expressed by the Eq. (3). The regression coefficient was calculated by least square method. Finally, the objective functions of deflection and the first order natural frequency were formulated, as shown in Appendix C.Fitting effects between the formulating objective functions and theoretical functions of cantilever beam were obtained, as shown in Fig. 9. The fitting effects of their deflection are shown in Fig. 9(a), and the fitting effects of their first order natural frequency are shown in Fig. 9(b). The significance of their fitting effects were verified by multiple correlation coefficient. The multiple correlation coefficients of deflection and the first order natural frequency are about 92.4 and 98.2%, respectively. Their multiple correlation coefficients are all close to 1, that is, the RSM combined with FEM is suitable for formulating objective functions in a small error range.Their consistencies of optimization results were further verifed. When the objective functions of the deflection and the first order natural frequecy were formulated by RSM combined with FEM, multi-objective predicted optimization model and theoretical optimization model were bulit based on Eq. (13), respectively. The formulating objective functions of deflection and the first order natural frequency are shown in Appendix C. The theoretical objective function of the first order natural frequency f′ is obtained from Eq. (15), where,f′=−f=−3.515/2πEJ/ρAL4. The theoretical objective functions of deflection and total weight are shown in Eqs. (14) and (16), respectively. The parameters constrains conditions are shown in Table 4.The multi-objective optimizations could be caculated by NSGAII. Three objectives including weight, deflection and the first order natural frequency were obtained, respectively, and their three-dimension operational process diagrams of NSGAII were also obtained. The difference between the predicted optimization model and theoretical optimization model produced an operational process difference of NSGAII, as shown in Fig. 10(a). However, the difference did not affect the optimization results and the results were revealed by Fig. 10(b) and (c) in detail. Multi-objective optimization processes of weight and the first order natural frequency were shown in Fig. 10(b). The Pareto solutions between the predicted optimization model and theoretical optimization model were almost consistent. The former optimal weight and frequency were about 0.09134g and 24.94kHz, respectively, and the latter were 0.09273g and 23.73kHz, respectively. Their weight error and frequency error were about 1.5 and 5.1%, respectively. In the multi-objective optimization processes of weight and deflection, their Pareto optimal solutions of the predicted optimization model agreed with that of the theoretical optimization model, as shown in Fig. 10(c). Their weight error was the same as that of Fig. 10(b). The former optimal displacement was about 0.002mm which decreased by 5%. The Pareto optimal solutions were obtained as shown in Table 5. Their maximum error was about 5.1% which is very small and ignored.Based on the work done, in the range of allowable error, the predicted optimization model bulit by formulating objective functions is consistent with the theoretical optimization model bulit by theoretical functions. Their Pareto optimal solutions have good consistency.The connection frame structure has been simplified, as shown in Fig. 2. The parameter ranges of the structural parameters are shown in Table 6.To explore the effects of thermal–mechanical deformation displacement and the first order natural frequency with structural parameters of the connection frame, their change trends were obtained and analyzed. Their sensitivities were further calculated to select high sensitivity parameters as design variables.Change trends of displacement and the first order natural frequency with structural parameters of connection frame were obtained by calculation of ANSYS. The displacement and the first order natural frequency increase with L, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11(a). Similarly, other change trends can also be obtained. The first order natural frequency decreases and the displacement increases with L1, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11(b). The displacement increases and the first order natural frequency decreases firstly and then increases with B, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11(c). The displacement decreases and the first order natural frequency decreases firstly, then increases, and decreases lastly with B1, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11(d). The displacement almost keeps unchanged and the increase of the first order natural frequency is tiny with H, as shown in Fig. 11(e). The displacement decreases and the first order natural frequency increases firstly, then decreases, and ultimately increases with R, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11(f).An efficient method to derive sensitivity is global difference method. The method makes the finite element program as a black box, and sensitivity of a parameter can be obtained by two finite element calculation [39]. Given design parameter is xj, when the parameter changes, the thermal–mechanical deformation displacement are calculated by ANSYS and the displacement sensitivity of the parameter can be obtained from Eq. (17). Similarly, the frequency sensitivity of the parameter can also be obtained from Eq. (18).Displacement sensitivity is expressed as follows:(17)dUdxj=ΔUΔxj=Uj−Uj−1Δxjwhere, Δxjis increment of structural parameter xj; ΔU is increment of structural displacement U.The first order natural frequency sensitivity is expressed as follows:(18)dfdxj=ΔfΔxj=fj−fj−1Δxjwhere, Δf is increment of the first order natural frequency f.The bar charts of displacements sensitivity and frequency sensitivity are shown in Fig. 12(a) and (b), respectively, and the displacement sensitivity of H is 0.125 and the frequency sensitivity of H is −0.25 which are the lowest of all.Based on the above sensitivity method, the displacement sensitivity and frequency sensitivity of H are too little to affect the formulating objective functions. To improve computational efficiency, the parameter H is eliminated. Therefore, L, L1, B, B1 and R are selected as the design variables of connection frame.In the paper, the volume of the connection frame can be obtained, and its weight function can also be expressed by product of volume and density as follows:(19)M=ρV(x)=ρHBL−B1L1−πR22Each calculation of ANSYS including the displacement and the first order natural frequency of connection frame was recognized as one experiment. Design parameters are x1=L, x2=L1, x3=B, x4=B1 and x5=R; that is, the experiment has five experimental factors. The displacement y1 and the first order natural frequency y2 were defined as actual function values of the design parameters, respectively. Similarly,yˆ1andyˆ2were defined as predicted function values of the displacement and the first order natural frequency, respectively. The level of factor was set to 46. Then, OA was used for experimental design, as shown in Table 3. Objective function can be constructed by the Eq. (3). The regression coefficient will be calculated by least square method. Finally, the objective functions of the displacement and the first order natural frequency can be formulated, as shown in Appendix D. Fitting effects between the formulating objective function and theoretical function can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 13. The fitting effects of their displacement are shown in Fig. 13(a); The fitting effects of their first order natural frequency are shown in Fig. 13(b). The objective functions of the displacement and the first order natural frequency were formulated, respectively. Multiple correlation coefficients of the displacement and the first order natural frequency are about 99.7 and 98.8%, respectively. Their multiple correlation coefficients are all close to 1, that is, their functions can exactly formulated by RSM combined with FEM in a small error range.Based on above work, A multi-objective predicted optimization model of connection frame is built based on Eq. (13), where, M is shown in Eq. (19), U and f are shown in Appendix D. By exploring change trends of displacement and the first order natural frequency with structural parameters, as well as sensitivity analysis in Section 5.2.1, it is found that these function values are affected by the structural parameters of connection frame. Meanwhile, the volume of connection frame changes with structural parameters, and the weight also changes for a certain density. Therefore, the corresponding value range of each design variable as constraint is applied on the optimization analysis. The parameters constrains conditions are shown in Table 5.Multi-objective predicted optimization model of connection frame could be caculated by NSGAII. Three objectives including weight, displacement and natural frequency were obtained, respectively, and their three-dimension operational process diagrams of NSGAII were also obtained. The Pareto solutions for weight, displacement and frequency are 783.3g, 356.8μm and 1992Hz, respectively. An optimal model can be built and its weight can also be obtained by Solidworks. The weight is 783.1g which is almost the same as the Pareto solution for weight. The thermal–mechanical deformation and the first order natural frequency were calculated by FEM. The maximum thermal–mechanical displacement is 357μm which is almost equal to the Pareo solution for displacement, as shown in Fig. 14(a). The first order natural frequency is 1992Hz which is the same as the Pareo solution for the first order natural frequency, as shown in Fig. 14(b). It is found that that multi-objective optimization results of predicted optimization model caculated by NSGAII can be verified. To verify multi-objective optimization availability, single objective optimization of connection frame is implemented, as shown in Fig. 15. Compared with multi-objective optimization, the single objective optimization setting displacement as optimization objective gets the minimum displacement 339μm which decreases 5%, however, its weight increase by 63.7%; the single objective optimization setting the first order natural frequency as optimization objective gets the maximum frequency 2821.2Hz which is 41.6% more than that of multi-objective optimization, but its weight also increases by 79.5%; the single objective optimization setting weight as optimization objective gets weight 552.3g which decreases by 29.5%, but the first order natural frequency is 971Hz which is less than the driving frequency of VCM and will resonate with machine. The optimal design parameters are L=188mm; L1=88mm; B=140mm; B1=104mm; H=22.5mm and R=53mm. Their related Pareto optimal solutions can be obtained, as shown in Table 7.The paper focuses on multi-objective optimization design of the connection frame considering thermal–mechanical deformation and natural frequency. The optimal model being practiced in application will be further studied in the following work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
