@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quality management of B2C e-commerce service based on human factors engineering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel quality management approach for B2C e-commerce service.We determine credible quality requirements with weights by using Kano’ model.We map quality requirements to quality characteristics with importance determined.Operating practices for quality characteristics entail quantitative output.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-commerce,Electronic commerce service,Quality management,Human factors engineering,Quality function deployment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigates business-to-customer (B2C) electronic commerce services from a quality management perspective. We propose a novel quality management approach that is based on human factors engineering to manage e-commerce service quality and operate according to customer needs. First, we screen credible quality requirements and determine their weights by integrating Kano’s model with our previous work, including the model of B2C website service quality. Then, we can extract quality characteristics according to image words and credible customer requirements. The weights of the quality characteristics are deduced by refining characteristics through a house of quality reconstruction and mapping customer requirements to characteristics. Finally, based on related theories or viewpoints, the operating practices for quality characteristics entail quantitative output with importance and grades taken into consideration. Our experimental results demonstrate that operating practices can help managers understand e-commerce service quality and have useful implications for companies in the management of e-commerce service quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
E-service is an interactive, content-centered and Internet-based customer service. It is driven by the customer and integrated with related organizational customer support processes and technologies (Ruyter et al. 2001). E-service quality is defined as the extent to which a Web site facilitates efficient and effective shopping, purchasing, and delivery (Parasuraman et al. 2005), and it is also crucial for differentiating among electronic commerce (e-commerce) providers and gaining competitive advantage (Benaroch and Appari 2011, Kim and Lee 2009, Shaaban and Hillston 2009).Service quality is increasingly recognized as an important aspect of e-commerce (Santos 2003). Without a quality management approach that guarantees quality from its systems, staff and suppliers, a business will not be able to deliver the appropriate level of service quality to satisfy its customers (Cox and Dale 2001). A stream of research has focused more on identifying the dimensions of e-service quality than on discovering which e-service process attributes can help improve quality (Heim and Field 2007, Riel et al. 2001, Su et al. 2008, Santos 2003, Zhang and Prybutok 2005). Research is therefore needed to develop insights into a quality management approach that facilitates operation according to customer satisfaction requirements. Our intent is to identify operating practices for e-service quality that managers may use to improve their operations and ensure high e-service quality.Forbes (2002) noted that when e-service is properly integrated with the human touch, the resulting synergies create even higher levels of customer satisfaction while maximizing the business value realized from expenditures on both e-service technologies and call center personnel. The study of ergonomics and human factors uses the knowledge of human abilities and limitations to design systems, organizations, jobs, machines, tools and consumer products for safe, efficient and comfortable use (Helander 1997). The applications of ergonomics have evolved over time with the progress of ergonomic knowledge and research and the emergence of new problems around the world (Carayon and Smith 2000). Strawderman and Koubek (2008) improved the evaluation of service quality based on human factors engineering (HFE). They suggested that, by utilizing human factors theories, tools and techniques, service systems can be improved and made more productive, effective, safe and comfortable for employees and customers. The literatures have been aware of the importance of applying HFE to improve E-service quality, but little literatures have applied the HFE from the perspective of service processes. Shostack (1987) considered that the use of nouns obscures the fundamental nature of services, which are processes instead of objects. This paper fills the gap by identifying customer requirements related to business to customer electronic commerce service (B2CS) processes based on HFE.Miles et al. (2000) researched the HFE e-commerce framework, which consists of 4 categories of dimensions: front-end, criteria management, comparison support and marketplace. They have only applied HFE to the aspects related to the usage of shopping sites by buyers qualitatively. Vandermerwe (1993) noted that the most successful companies have started to consider the entire customer experience, from the pre- to the post-purchase stages. This paper fills the gap by studying quality management in B2CS by applying HFE to the entire B2CS process quantitatively.HFE experts usually apply quality function deployment (QFD) to formulate system specifications (Wickens et al. 2004). Chan and Wu (2002) suggested that QFD is a customer-oriented quality management and product development technique originally used for hard products. However, the QFD concept is applicable to soft services as well. Indeed, it was gradually introduced into the service sector to design and develop quality services. Barnes and Vidgen (2000) suggested that QFD might be adopted as a framework for identifying the website qualities demanded by users. They took interactive factors into consideration in subsequent research, improving WebQual 1.0 and proposing WebQual 2.0 (Barnes and Vidgen 2001). Chang et al. (2009) applied QFD to construct an e-commerce website quality model based on the quality requirements of users. The literatures have applied the HFE tool QFD in the service quality research, but little operating practices have been obtained. Based on HFE theories, experts converted user needs and goals into system specifications (Wickens et al. 2004). This paper fills the gap by determining operating practices for the quality management of B2CS according to customer needs by using QFD.Matzler and Hinterhuber (1998) suggested that one of the benefits of combining QFD with Kano’s method for understanding customer-defined quality is a deeper understanding of customer requirements and concerns. Tan and Pawitra (2001) integrated SERVQUAL (Parasuraman et al. 1988) and Kano’s model into QFD to extend the study of service excellence. They suggested that Kano’s model and SERVQUAL can be integrated into QFD to better understand consumer needs. Parasuraman and Zeithaml who proposed the classic SERVQUAL service quality evaluation tool (Parasuraman et al. 1988), worked with Malhotra to generate a tool called E-S-QUAL that evaluates electronic service quality (Parasuraman et al. 2005). In these literatures, the conceptual model of integrating service quality evaluation model and Kano’s model into QFD have only been defined. This paper fills the gap by reporting on empirical research integrating the evaluation indicator system and model of business-to-customer (B2C) websites service quality (EISMB2CWSQ) (Zuo et al. 2010) and Kano’s model with QFD to obtain credible quality requirements (CQRs) of customers and ultimately define operating practices.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the novel quality management approach. We apply this approach to B2CS and discuss our findings in Section 3. The final section discusses the conclusions and significance of our research.As described above, based on HFE, we integrate EISMB2CWSQ and Kano’s model with QFD to obtain CQRs following the framework shown in Fig. 1.Based on EISMB2CWSQ, initial quality requirements (QRs) made by customers are extracted according to items in EISMB2CWSQ. The initial EISMB2CWSQ items are determined by consulting experts, based on summaries of related research (Zuo et al. 2010). According to HFE and human factor experts, product and system design should be user-centered. The objective is to identify the system design that meets user needs, not to design a system that requires users to make adjustments (Wickens et al. 2004). We define the dominant B2CS image words to help customers directly propose questions and expectations. After the 5W1H requirement investigation, we capture original data through a VOC table. Then, the entire user requirement structure is summarized by the KJ grouping method.After the initial QRs are obtained, we continue to apply Kano’s model to screen QRs that significantly affect user satisfaction (Kano et al. 1984). Screening QRs with Kano’s model requires three steps: designing a questionnaire according to QRs, collecting and analyzing data and screening QRs according to Table 1(Matzler and Hinterhuber 1998).The classification of requirements alone cannot improve customer satisfaction. Therefore, Berger et al. (1993) defined a customer satisfaction (CS) coefficient to improve product or service quality.(1)a=(A+O)/(A+O+M+I)(2)b=(O+M)/(A+O+M+I)×(-1)Here, a stands for satisfaction and b stands for dissatisfaction.According to Kano’s model, for the screened QRs, the influence value of the ith demanded quality on satisfaction is aiand the influence value of the ith demanded quality on dissatisfaction is bi. Therefore, the weight of the influence value of the ith demanded quality to satisfaction isAi=aia1+a2+⋯anand the weight of influence value of the ith demanded quality to dissatisfaction isBi=bib1+b2+⋯bn. According to the weight, the influence weight of the ith demanded quality can be expressed asmi=Ai+BiA1+A2+⋯An+B1+B2+⋯Bn, and∑i=1nmi=m1+m2+⋯+mn=1. The weights of inquisitional QRs are adjusted according to the actual level for B2C enterprises to achieve. We continue to modify the weights of QRs according to Kano’s model and then use the modified weights to calculate the weights of the quality characteristics (QCs).The top 10 B2C e-commerce websites (Analysys International 2011) in China in terms of sales are chosen for analysis and divided into 2 groups. The first group, which represents a relatively lower level of e-commerce sales, includes the bottom five companies on the list: VANCL (www.vancl.com), Suning (www.suning.com), M18 (www.m18.com), 51buy (www.51buy.com) and Coo8 (www.coo8.com). The second group, which represents a relatively high level, contains the top five companies on the list: Tmall (www.tmall.com), 360buy (www.360buy.com), Amazon China (www.amazon.cn), Dangdang (www.dangdang.com) and Newegg (www.newegg.com.cn). Experts usually rate the level to which enterprises meet five categories of quality requirements. After the QR ratings of these 2 groups are averaged, the rate of meeting the ith QR in the first group is yiand the rate of meeting the ith QR in the second group isyi′. We determine the rate zithat suggests which level the B2C enterprise should achieve by comparing the first and second groups. Therefore, for the ith QR, the increasing rate is ui=zi/yi.The key demanded quality is determined according to the increasing rate and is indicated by the symbol Φ. An important demanded quality is indicated by the symbol Ю.The absolute importance of the ith CQR ism̃i=zi×ui×si; the importance point sican be set as follows: Φ represents the importance point of 1.5, Ю represents the importance point of 1.2 and Θ represents the importance point of 1. The weight of the ith CQR ism̃i′=m̃i/∑i=1nm̃i.According to the weight of QR, we can screen CQRs. Then, an affinity diagram is used to arrange CQRs based on “customer behavior” in the B2C e-commerce service processes. An affinity diagram is a quality management method proposed by Japanese scholar Kawaki Taziro in 1970, and it is usually used to group QRs (Gong 2006).The entire B2C e-commerce service process can be divided into seven sub-processes: choosing a shopping channel, accessing a B2C website, trading, paying, waiting for purchases, receiving purchases and providing feedback (Piccoli et al. 2001, Menascé et al. 2000). In this paper, B2CS is divided into six sub-services: decision-making, access, trade, payment, logistics and after-sales service.Therefore, the affinity diagram used to arrange CQRs in this study correlates CQRs to user behavior. Decision-making, access, trade, payment, logistics, and after-sale services represent the 2nd level, and “B2C e-commerce service” represents the 1st level during the arrangement process. Because trade and payment are both primarily related to user behavior when operating a B2C website, they are called trade and payment service.Design requirements can be obtained when we translate customer wishes into technical specifications (Govers 1996). Therefore, B2CS QCs are extracted according to the CQRs of B2CS. Design parameters refer to concrete, observable characteristics and methods of measurement and must reflect the valid measurement of customer requirements.Therefore, the QCs are organized into a hierarchy using an affinity diagram. Two types of methods, one based on B2CS image words (Gong 2006) and one based on CQRs (Xiong and Wang 2010), are adopted to obtain B2CS QCs (Fig. 2).Service QCs are extracted according to the B2CS image words. The aim is to analyze, layer by layer, the factors that influence the formation of these images and the B2CS QCs. Finally, a fishbone diagram is drawn.Service QCs are also extracted according to CQRs. We analyze the input and output data associated with quality requirements made by customers and extract QCs one by one to construct a table that illustrates the levels of B2CS QCs.After CQRs and QCs are determined, a mapping relationship between them is built with house of quality (HOQ). HOQ is a matrix-style chart that correlates identified customer needs with technical characteristics (Fig. 3) (Akao et al. 1989, Hauser and Clausing 1988, Shen et al. 2000). Section A in Fig. 3 contains a list of customer needs (whats), which are referred to as CQRs in this paper. Section A also ranks CQRs according to importance. Section B shows the planning matrix, which includes competitive benchmarking in this paper. Section C lists the technical characteristics of a product (hows). The quality characteristics are called QCs. Section D contains the relationship matrix, which indicates the degree that each “how” affects each “what”. Section E, the roof of the HOQ, contains the technical correlations that capture the trade-off between pairs of “hows”. Section F, the basement, contains the technical matrix with information on technical priorities. This section includes targets in this paper.The HOQ relation matrix uses specific symbols that represent the relationship between each quality requirement and the QC:⊚represents a strong relationship, ○ represents a moderate relationship, Δ represents a weak relationship and a blank represents no relationship. When the relationship symbols are filled in, the intersection of the quality requirement rows with the QC columns creates the relationship matrix.To determine the importance of QCs, QFD quantifies their importance with a weighted score, which is determined as follows:⊚is 9 points, ○ is 3 points, Δ is 1 point and a blank is 0 points. The relationship matrix now becomes a score matrix [rij]. rijis the relationship point of the ith CQR and the jth QC, and the importance of the jth QC, wj, is:(3)wj=∑i=1nm̃i′rijEach QC is rated based on its importance according to five grades. We produce the QC quantitative design indexes after a comprehensive consideration of the QC grade and a comparative analysis of the service quality characteristics of the top 10 B2C e-commerce websites, including Tmall, 360buy, Amazon (China), Dangdang, Newegg, Vancl, Suning, M18, 51buy and Coo8, in terms of sales. These design indexes represent the operating practice that managers can use to improve their operations and ensure high quality in their provision of e-services.In 2010, corporate employees accounted for the largest percentage (35.8%) of users of online shopping sites in China. The second largest online shopping group is students, who accounted for 15.1% of the total. However, students accounted for 29.9% of total domestic Internet users (China Internet Network Information Center 2011a). Corporate employees are therefore the main force behind B2C online shopping, whereas only 50.5% of student Internet users are online shoppers. Student groups constitute a huge potential market because Internet users with education at the junior college level or above accounted for 69.5% of all domestic online shoppers (China Internet Network Information Center 2011b). Therefore, students and company employees who are familiar with e-commerce and have education at the junior college level or above are selected as respondents for our investigation.After preliminarily obtaining QRs, we arrange them around “customer behaviors” in an affinity diagram (Table 2).Because the concept of B2CS is abstract, this paper is based on the associated HFE theories. From the perspective of users, image words that express the image of B2CS according to the theory’s four dimensions are collected, including “B2C e-commerce shopping process”, “B2C e-commerce website itself”, “B2C e-commerce website information” and “products provided by B2C e-commerce website”. The following three methods are employed to collect the image words.1.Extraction from the introductions and descriptions of major B2C websites in China.Interviews with respondents and extraction from interviews with target consumer groups.Extraction from the extant literature that describes B2CS (Zhou and Lu 2005).Image words are collected, filtered and sorted in Table 3, upon which a questionnaire about B2C e-commerce service can be designed.After analyzing the statistical results from the B2C e-commerce service questionnaire, the top 12 image words in terms of choice frequency are selected (Table 4).These 12 dominant image words are grouped into four categories: “B2C e-commerce shopping process”, “B2C e-commerce website itself”, “B2C e-commerce website information” and “products provided by B2C e-commerce website”.After the dominant B2C e-commerce image words are determined, it becomes the focal point of the investigation and 5W1H is used to examine and analyze the online shopping activities of users. To ensure a comprehensive survey, the online shopping activities of users are modeled according to “customer behaviors” within the B2C e-commerce service processes. After compiling the results of on-site interviews, the original and attribute data are filled into the VOC table and converted into demanded qualities (Table 5).A more comprehensive table of needs levels is presented in Table 6.The B2C e-commerce service questionnaire used in this study is designed based on Kano’s model. A total of 300 questionnaires were sent to students and enterprise personnel who were familiar with e-commerce and who were educated at the junior college level or above. The questionnaires were sent by email, accessed online (http://www.sojump.com/wjx/manage/myquestionnaires.aspx) or provided in hard copy. This investigation was conducted during the time period between October 20, 2011 and November 14, 2011. A total of 267 questionnaires were completed, with a completion rate of 89%; 249 questionnaires were valid after screening, with a validity rate of 93.3%. Table 7summarizes the questionnaires.According to Kano’s model, the attribute, satisfaction and dissatisfaction levels of each QR can be determined. For example, considering the demanded quality “easy-to-remember domain name”, the frequency of attribute I is 33, which is the maximum frequency. Therefore, attribute I can be determined.(4)a=(A+O)/(A+O+M+I)=(23+32)/(23+32+20+33)=0.509259(5)b=(O+M)/(A+O+M+I)×(-1)=(23+32)/(23+32+20+33)×(-1)=-0.4814A similar process is followed to determine the attribute, satisfaction and dissatisfaction levels of each quality requirement.According to Kano’s model, category I represents an indifferent result, meaning that the user is indifferent to the question. It also means that satisfaction will not be affected, regardless of whether the requirement is met. Attribute of items 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 27, 28 and 42 is I. And then they are deleted. However, item 35, “provide regular shopping receipt (such as regular invoice)”, is retained. The reason for this is that only 16.1% of respondents are enterprise personnel who pay significant attention to invoices, whereas students do not. In accordance with the customer satisfaction coefficient defined by Berger et al. (1993), the statistical evaluation index of satisfaction and dissatisfaction is shown in Table 7.The indexes that have a weak impact on user satisfaction and dissatisfaction can be removed. According to the 80/20 rule, 0.6 is set as the threshold in this paper. Indexes with calculation results between 0.8–0.7 and 0.7–0.6 have a strong impact on user satisfaction and dissatisfaction, meaning that weak influences have values of below 0.6, such as for items 10, 31, 40 and 55. For example, the satisfaction of “pay by phone card” is 49.29%, and the dissatisfaction is 54.29%. It therefore has a weak impact on enhancing B2C e-services and can be deleted. However, item 11, “ability to compare products”, and item 43, “plentiful product information”, are retained. According to the results of investigation (see Table 5), customers who are corporate employees require “ability to compare products” and “plentiful product information” during the online shopping decision-making process.Based on the above analysis, 41 credible quality requirement items are identified in Table 8. The weighted value of each credible quality requirement can be further calculated. For instance, according to the data in Kano’s model, the impact of “ease of finding website using search engine” on satisfaction is a1=0.453704 and its impact on dissatisfaction is b1=−0.68519.Similarly, to calculate the impact of other quality needs, the weight of the impact on satisfaction isA1=a1a1+a2+…an=0.4537040.453704+0.495413+…+0.664286=0.019888372,and the weight of the impact on dissatisfaction isB1=b1b1+b2+…bn=-0.68519-0.68519-0.74312-⋯-0.81429=0.024750013.Therefore, the weight of the impact of “ease of finding website using search engine” is:(6)m1=A1+B1A1+A2+…A41+B1+B2+…B41=0.019888372+0.0247500132=0.022319The weights of other quality requirements can also be calculated.We continue to modify the weights of CQRs. For example, considering “detailed product description”, the expert evaluation method is applied to rate the level of meeting the needs of 2 groups of e-commerce websites. The average scores of the groups are 3.33 and 4.33. “Detailed product description” has a higher original weight of 0.02377. It is recommended to achieve a level of z6=4.5, which is higher than the level of the second group of e-commerce websites. The increasing rate is u6=z6/y6=4.5/3.33=1.35. The key quality requirement is determined according to the increasing rate, which is indicated by the symbol Φ. The important quality requirement is indicated by the symbol Ю. The absolute importance of “detailed product description” is calculated.(7)m̃6=z6×u6×s6=4.5×1.35×1.5=9.11A similar process is followed to calculate the absolute importance of other quality requirements. Whenm̃6is standardized, the weight of “detailed product description” can be obtained.(8)m̃6′=m̃6∑i=141m̃i=9.11/267.28=0.034084A similar process is followed to correct the weight of each quality requirement. The results are shown in Table 9.QCs can be extracted according to the B2C image words related to e-commerce service. Through user interviews, the factors influencing the formation of these image words can be understood. Each instance of the 12 image words and the QCs of B2CS is analyzed. Then, a fishbone diagram is drawn (Fig. 4).For example, through user interviews, it can be shown that B2CS QCs such as “product classification”, “product search”, “compare products”, “quick and expedient to place orders”, etc., influence the formation of a “convenient” image. B2CS QCs such as “level of customer service”, “personalized service”, “attitude towards customers”, “advantageous policy”, etc., influence the formation of a “customer-oriented” image (Fig. 5). A similar process is followed to identify the other QCs that influence the formation of an image.QCs are extracted according to the credible quality requirements of customers. For example, the CQR “ease of finding products by classification” can be fulfilled through the implementation of QCs such as “direct viewing navigation”, “rational layout of webpages”, “product classification”, “product search”, “loading speed of webpage”, etc. The CQR “convenient and user-friendly website operation” is fulfilled through the implementation of QCs such as “design of external appearance”, “loading speed of webpage”, “convenient and fast registration”, “quick and expedient to place orders”, “easy to cancel orders”, etc. A similar process is followed to identify additional QCs that influence the CQR.According to the above analysis, the table “Levels of B2CS QCs” can be obtained (Table 10).According to above analysis, by inputting the CQRs of B2CS, measuring the modified weights of CQRs and QCs in QFD, and applying an appropriate evaluation method to determine the relationship matrix of HOQ, the importance of QCs can be obtained based onwj=∑i=1nm̃i′rij(Table 11).In this paper, each QC was rated based on its level of importance. wj>0.6, 0.6>wj>0.4, 0.4>wj>0.3, 0.3>wj>0.2, 0.2>wj>0.1 are classified as levels 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively. According to the levels of QCs, considerations of importance, a comparative analysis of QCs from the top 10 B2C websites in terms of sales, studies of the design details of services, and combinations of relevant theories, the QC indexes that B2CS should achieve are the quantitative outputs listed in Table 12.The QCs “loading speed of webpage”, “loading speed of homepage” and “loading speed of the whole webpage(s)” are adopted as the next-level items, which are also the website Keynote Network evaluation indexes based on user experience (Networkbench data center 2011). “Loading speed of homepage” refers to the time required to load the top 800×600 resolution of the window area, which measures the performance of opening the first page. “Loading speed of the whole webpage(s)” refers to the time required to open the overall web page, which measures the performance of opening the overall page.For “comparison of products”, it is suggested that B2C websites should provide functions to compare the general attributes and special parameters of products by analyzing domestic large-scale B2C websites including Tmall, 360buy, Newegg, Suning, 51buy and Coo8.For “types of products”, the types of products in 360buy, Dangdang and Amazon China, which are the comprehensive B2C websites, are investigated. The survey shows that 360buy has 800,000 types of products, and Dangdang and Amazon China have over 1 million types of products. The requirements of Internet users are very extensive. The more types of products that are available, the better chance there is of meeting consumer needs.For “product price”, Zhang’s (2007) view is adopted. It is recommended that B2C enterprises apply a pricing process model to develop reasonable prices. The model should consist of six parts, including determining pricing objectives, price modeling, determining price range, selecting pricing strategy, developing specific prices and pricing tests.Our experimental results show that the design indexes of QCs are the operating practices that managers need to guarantee rationality and comprehensiveness in the process of quality management.Regarding input CQRs, initial QRs are obtained using EISMB2CWSQ. Based on HFE, additional QRs are obtained through investigation of requirements, such as “ability to compare products”, “fast loading speed of webpage”, “high performance-cost ratio”, “provide ratings and comments from customers”, etc. In addition, their weights are substantial, thereby ensuring the comprehensiveness of the input process.Regarding the input QCs, “rational layout of webpages”, “personalized service”, etc. are extracted according to semantic B2CS images. At the same time, “loading speed of webpage”, “plentiful product information”, etc. are extracted according to CQRs. This makes the input process rational.Regarding the output QC design indexes, on the one hand, QCs are rated. On the other hand, specific suggestions are proposed to B2C enterprises, according to the related literature and investigation of the market. Table 12 shows that QCs whose grades are 1 or 2 have an average distribution in every module. Therefore, B2C enterprises can readily counter any deficiency by improving service quality according to QC scores and its own conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
