@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Conditional spatial fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm for segmentation of MRI images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A conditional spatial fuzzy C-means (csFCM) clustering algorithm to improve the robustness of the conventional FCM algorithm is presented.The method incorporates conditional affects and spatial information into the membership functions.The algorithm resolves the problem of sensitivity to noise and intensity inhomogeneity in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data.The experimental results on four volumes of simulated and one volume of real-patient MRI brain images, each one having 51 images, support efficiency of the csFCM algorithm.The csFCM algorithm has superior performance in terms of qualitative and quantitative studies on the image segmentation results than the k-means, FCM and some other recently proposed FCM-based algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image segmentation,MRI brain image,Fuzzy C-means,Conditional spatial FCM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The fuzzy C-means (FCM) algorithm has got significant importance due to its unsupervised form of learning and more tolerant to variations and noise as compared to other methods in medical image segmentation. In this paper, we propose a conditional spatial fuzzy C-means (csFCM) clustering algorithm to improve the robustness of the conventional FCM algorithm. This is achieved through the incorporation of conditioning effects imposed by an auxiliary (conditional) variable corresponding to each pixel, which describes a level of involvement of the pixel in the constructed clusters, and spatial information into the membership functions. The problem of sensitivity to noise and intensity inhomogeneity in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data is effectively reduced by incorporating local and global spatial information into a weighted membership function. The experimental results on four volumes of simulated and one volume of real-patient MRI brain images, each one having 51 images, show that the csFCM algorithm has superior performance in terms of qualitative and quantitative studies such as, cluster validity functions, segmentation accuracy, tissue segmentation accuracy and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve on the image segmentation results than the k-means, FCM and some other recently proposed FCM-based algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Image segmentation is an important step in medical imaging analysis [1]. The goal of segmentation is to partition an image into a set of disjoint regions that have similar characteristics such as intensity, colour and texture. In medical image segmentation, dissimilar image components are used for analysis of different structures, tissues and pathological regions. However, manual segmentation is a challenging and time consuming task and prone to error. Its success heavily depends on the expertise of the physician and thereby errors occur in the results and also augmented due to the intrinsic nature of the medical images. For example, in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain images, different tissue regions have poorly outlined or blur edges and slender topological structures. This makes the process of MRI brain image segmentation into a challenging task. Moreover, accurate segmentation is also necessary for detecting and analysing the diseased regions in medical images. Therefore, computer aided segmentation is very significant to achieve effective results. For many clinical applications it is a classical problem to segment brain images into different tissue types, such as white matter (WM), grey matter (GM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). A number of algorithms for segmentation of medical images such as, MRI images have been presented in the past. Among them, intensity thresholding, region-based segmentation, edge-based segmentation and classification-based segmentation are the most frequently used techniques [2–4].In intensity thresholding, the threshold level is automatically determined from the grey-level histogram of the image. The distribution of intensities in medical images, especially in MRI images is usually very complex as stated above, and therefore, thresholding methods fail due to lack of determining optimal threshold. In addition, intensity thresholding methods have disadvantage of spatial uncertainty as the pixel location information is ignored [5]. The edge-based approaches first generate interrupted (scattered) contour lines around an object of interest using some edge detection algorithms. Next, these contour lines are joined based on some similarity criteria to detect the object of region of interest (ROI). However, these methods usually require computationally expensive post-processing to obtain hole free representation of the objects. The region growing methods extend the thresholding by integrating it with connectivity by means of an intensity similarity measure. These methods start with a seed point (pixel) for each region and during the region growing, pixels in the neighbourhood are added to the regions based on homogeneity criteria, resulting connected regions. However, they are sensitive to noise [6] and thus less suitable for medical image segmentation.In classification-based segmentation method, the fuzzy C-means (FCM) clustering algorithm [7], is more effective with considerable amount of benefits. Unlike hard clustering methods, like k-means algorithm, etc., which assign pixels exclusively to one cluster, the FCM algorithm allows pixels to have relation with multiple clusters with varying degree of memberships and thus more reasonable in real applications. Although the FCM is a very popular unsupervised clustering method, it has some serious drawbacks as it does not consider the image spatial information and is therefore very sensitive to noise and imaging artefacts. It can also generate local optimal solution due to poor initialization. In order to make the FCM algorithm more robust to noise and outliers for image segmentation, many modified fuzzy clustering approaches have been reported in the past [8–21]. Pedrycz [8] introduced a conditional fuzzy C-means-based clustering method guided by an auxiliary or conditional variable. The method reveals a structure within a family of patterns by considering their vicinity in a feature space along with the similarity of the values assumed by a certain conditional variable. Mohamed et al. [10] modified the FCM algorithm through the incorporation of the spatial information. They introduced the spatial information into the computation of similarity measure. The similarity measure is modified to drag a pixel closer to the cluster centre if it is in homogeneous region. The drawbacks of this algorithm are its sensitivity to the non-descriptive initial centres and its massively computational load. Ahmed et al. [11] introduced the local grey level information by modifying the objective function with another similarity measure for bias field estimation and segmentation of MRI data. This method is also expensive in terms of computational time. Many researchers subsequently modified the objective functions and developed several robust FCM variants for image segmentation [12–19]. These algorithms were shown to have better performance than the standard FCM algorithm. However, some of these methods depend on a fixed spatial factor which needs to be adjusted according to the real applications. In order to overcome the problem of over-smoothed edges, causes due to use of larger spatial window, adaptive selection mechanisms of the spatial parameters have been proposed [20–22]. The performances of these methods are superior and are able to reduce partly the blurring effects, which arise due to use of filtering and larger spatial window. Another major contribution with spatial information into the FCM membership function was suggested by Chuang et al. [23], known as sFCM algorithm. The spatial function is the summation of the membership function in the neighbourhood of each pixel under consideration. It represents the probability for a pixel to belong into a particular cluster. This spatial function is incorporated into a weighted membership function. The advantages of this method are; it yields regions more homogeneous than those of other methods and it removes the noisy spots and partly reduces the spurious blobs.Recently, Qiu et al. [24] suggested a novel algorithm for fuzzy segmentation by introducing two fuzzifiers and a spatial constraint in the membership function. Benaichouche et al. [25] presented another improvement of the FCM clustering algorithm using particle swarm optimization (PSO) initialization, Mahalanobis distance and post segmentation correction. The first step introduced PSO initialization to overcome the trapping of the solution in local minima, the second step was concerned with the integration of the spatial grey level information and the Mahalanobis distance and the final step refined the segmentation results by reallocating the potentially misclassified pixels. Kannan et al. [26] introduced a class of robust non-Euclidean distance measure for the objective function to enhance the robustness of the original FCM clustering algorithm and to reduce noise and outliers. Liao et al. [27] proposed a fast spatial constrained fuzzy kernel FCM (FKFCM) algorithm for MRI brain image segmentation. The FKFCM algorithm first transforms the pixel intensities into a higher dimensional space using a kernel trick and then performs classification on the transformed data. Selvathi et al. [28] presented a modified version of spatial FCM algorithm for MRI image segmentation. This algorithm first uses wrapping-based curvelet transform to remove any noise in the image and then uses a spatial FCM algorithm to classify the pixels. Adhikari et al. [29] presented a method for MRI brain image segmentation by incorporating intensity inhomogeneity (IIH) and spatial information by using probabilistic FCM algorithm. The method works in two steps. First, it estimates the intensity inhomogeneity by fusing Gaussian surfaces and subsequently generates the IIH-corrected image. In the second step, it classifies the pixels of IIH-corrected image by a probabilistic FCM algorithm.Most of the methods discussed so far suffer heavily due to presence of noise and another additional multiplicative noise factor called intensity inhomogeneity (IIH) or bias field in the MRI medical images. The IIH usually refers to the slow, non-anatomic intensity variations of the same tissue over the image domain and causes due to imperfection of the image acquisition devices, eddy current, poor magnetic field and patient movement, etc.In this paper, we propose a conditional and spatial fuzzy C-means (csFCM) clustering algorithm that can effectively segment MRI brain images with the presence of noise and intensity inhomogeneity. Consequently, we have incorporated local spatial interaction among adjacent pixels in the fuzzy membership function in such a way that if the neighbouring pixels share similar characteristics, the centre pixel should have higher probability of grouping to the same cluster as of the neighbouring pixels. We have also introduced conditioning aspect into the clustering mechanism. The algorithm takes into consideration the conditioning variable associated with each pixel, which describes the level of involvement for construction of membership functions and different clusters. This is realized by introducing a weighted membership function.The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 states the FCM algorithm, the proposed csFCM algorithm is explained in detail in Section 3. Section 4 illustrates the results and discussion of the algorithm with qualitative and quantitative evaluations on MRI data. Finally, a summary and some concluding remarks are given in Section 5.The fuzzy C-means (FCM) algorithm is a fuzzy clustering method based on the minimization of a quadratic criterion where clusters are represented by their respective centres. The FCM algorithm was proposed by Dunn in 1973 and improved by Bezdek [7] in 1981. For a set of N data patternsX={x1,x2,…,xN} the algorithm allows to partition the data space, by calculating the centres of classesvand the membership matrixU, and by minimizing an objective function Jfcmwith respect to these centres and membership degrees as follows:(1)Jfcm=∑i=1C∑k=1Nμikmxk−vi2where N is the number of patterns, C is the number of clusters, m is any real number (>1), which controls the fuzziness of the resulting partition, and m=2 is used in this study, μikis the degree of fuzzy membership of pixelxkin the ith cluster, and ||·|| is any norm expressing the similarity measure.Typically, the Euclidean distance measure is usually used. The objective function is minimized when the large membership values are assigned to input patterns that are close to their nearest cluster centres and low membership values are assigned when they are far from the cluster centres.Minimizing the objective function (1) with the following constraint∑i=1Cμik=1,wehave--(2)∂Jfcm∂μik=0,and∂Jfcm∂vi=0These lead to the following iterative solutions:(3)μik=1xk−vi2m−1/∑c=1Cxk−vc2m−1and(4)vi=∑k=1Nμikmxk∑k=1NμikmAlgorithm 1FCMInput: set values for the number of clusters C, the degree of fuzziness m=2 and the error ɛ.1. Initialize randomly the centres of clustersvi(0)2. j=03. Repeata. j=j+1b. Calculate the membership matrixU(j) using the centresvi(j−1)as follows:μik=1xk−vi2m−1/∑c=1Cxk−vc2m−1c. Update the centresvi(j)usingU(j):vi=∑k=1Nμikmxk∑k=1Nμikm4. Untilvi(j)−vi(j−1)<ε5. Return the cluster centreviand the membership value μik; i=1,2,…,C; k=1,2,…,N.In the present study, the segmentation process is modelled as a classification problem of pixel intensities into different homogeneous regions. In MRI image, neighbouring pixels have strong correlation and usually dependant on each other. The FCM algorithm, where the correlation between the neighbouring pixels is not considered, fails to generate accurate clusters. Thus, we have incorporated local spatial interaction among adjacent pixels in the fuzzy membership function in such a way that if the neighbouring pixels share similar characteristics, the centre pixel should have higher probability of grouping to the same cluster as of the neighbouring pixels. Introducing the spatial information is also helpful to reduce the effects of noise and intensity inhomogeneity in the segmentation results of MRI images.Unlike the sFCM algorithm, we have also introduced conditioning aspect of the clustering mechanism. The algorithm takes into consideration the conditioning variables assuming the values f1,f2,…,fNfor all the pixels x1,x2,…,xN, respectively. The fk(k=1,2,…,N) describes a level of involvement of the pixel xkin the final membership values and the constructed clusters.Let μikandviare the parameters of the conventional FCM algorithm as given in (3) and (4), respectively. Furthermore, unlike sFCM algorithm, another conditional spatial parameter uikis introduced incorporating the conditional variable into the membership function, which defines the belongingness of pixel xkinto the ith clusterviand is defined as follows:(5)uik=fikxk−vi2m−1/∑c=1Cxk−vc2m−1where fikis the conditioning variable which defines the level of involvement of pixel xkinto the ith cluster by considering its neighbourhood in a spatial domain and is defined as follows:(6)fik=∑j∈N(xk)μijMwhere N(xk) is the square neighbourhood having the pixel xkas its centre and M is the total number of pixels in the neighbourhood.A larger neighbourhood will over-smooth the edges; leading to higher rate of misclassification of pixels. Therefore, its size is determined empirically yielding better results. In the present study N(xk)=3×3 is used. It may be noted that fikis within the range 0≤fik≤1.The global and local membership values μikand uik, respectively are assumed to independent to each other and thereby by combining these two membership parameters we have introduced another weighted membership variable zikand cluster centrewi, which incorporate the local and global spatial information and are defined as follows:(7)zik=μikpuikq∑c=1Cμckpuckq(8)wi=∑k=1Nzikmxk∑k=1Nzikmwhere p and q are the parameters to control the relative importance of both the membership functions. In particular, these parameters control the trade-off between the local and global membership values for construction of final membership values and cluster centres.A small value in either of the μikand uikwill yield insignificant final membership value zik. This mechanism ensures that if the neighbouring pixels share similar characteristics, the centre pixel should have higher probability of grouping to the same cluster as of the neighbouring pixels. Again, the values of p and q are determined empirically. In the present study, the proposed method provides better results for p=2 and q=2. In a homogeneous region the conditional spatial membership parameter uikwill be same as the original and the clustering result remains unchanged. However, a noisy pixel, which usually belongs to the either regions of an edge, can easily be corrected by the labels of its neighbouring pixels. Thus it makes the csFCM algorithm robust to the presence of noise and intensity inhomogeneity in the image. The conditional spatial FCM algorithm with parameter p and q is denoted as csFCMp,q. Again, it may be noted that csFCM1,0 is identical to the conventional FCM algorithm.Algorithm 2csFCMInput: set values for the number of clusters C, the degree of fuzziness m=2, p=2, q=2 and the error ɛ.1. Initialize randomly the centres of clustersvi(0)2. Initialize randomly the centres of joint clusterswi(0)3. j=14. Repeata. j=j+1b. Calculate the membership valueU(j) using the cluster centresvi(j−1)as follows:μik=1xk−vi2m−1/∑c=1Cxk−vc2m−1c. Calculate the conditional spatial membership valueuik(j)using the centresvi(j−1)as follows:uik=fikxk−vi2m−1/∑c=1Cxk−vc2m−1wherefik=∑j∈N(xk)μikMd. Calculate weighted membership valuezik(j)as follows:zik=μikpuikq∑c=1Cμckpuckqe. Update joint cluster valuewi(j)as:wi=∑k=1Nzikmxk∑k=1Nzikmf. Update centresvi(j)as:vi=∑k=1Nμikmxk∑k=1Nμikm5. Untilwi(j)−wi(j−1)<ε6. Return the cluster centrewiand the membership value zik; i=1,2,…,C; k=1,2, …,N.The performance of the proposed method is evaluated first on the simulated and later on real-patient MRI images of human brain both in qualitatively and quantitatively. In the comparative study, for a fair comparison, we have included the k-means, FCM, FGFCM [21] and sFCM [23] methods and also a recently proposed competing technique, ASIFC [22].The BrainWeb simulated MRI brain images are acquired from the McConnell Brain Imaging Centre of the Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University [30]. Four different combinations of simulated T1-weighted data volumes consisting of 51 images each, where the CSF, GM and WM regions are prominent, have been collected. The first image volume contains images of 9% noise, 40% inhomogeneity; whereas the second image volume is of 9% noise and 20% inhomogeneity. The third and fourth image volumes contain images of 7% noise, 40% inhomogeneity and 7% noise, 20% inhomogeneity, respectively. The image resolutions are 181×217×181 voxels and sized 1mm×1mm×1mm.We first examine the behaviour of the csFCM algorithm with different values of p, q and N(xk) and then set the values of these parameters of the weighted membership functions and the neighbourhood of a pixel under consideration. Finally, the experimental results are first presented in qualitatively and later in quantitatively along with critical discussions.The parameters p and q of the weighted membership function have significant influence on the final membership values zikand cluster centreswiand thereby effecting the final segmentation results. Fig. 1shows the performance of the csFCM algorithm in terms of similarity index ρ (in %) as defined by the Eq. (11) by varying the values of p and q using a fixed neighbourhood N(xk) of size 3×3. It may be noted that csFCM algorithm provides superior results using p=2 and q=2. The results indicate that the local and global membership values are required to be concentrated in the convolution process while generating the final membership values and cluster centres giving equal importance to the μikand uik.In MRI image, there is a strong correlation between the neighbouring pixels. However, it diminishes gradually from the centre pixel with increase of size of the neighbourhood. Fig. 2shows the performance of the csFCM algorithm by varying the size of the neighbourhood N(xk) using p=2 and q=2. It may be noted that the algorithm provides superior results for N(xk)=3×3. The results support our above claim regarding the correlation between the neighbouring pixels and therefore, the subsequent experiments are performed by using p=2, q=2 and N(xk)=3×3.The qualitative evaluations provide useful information on the target application, the type and quality of the images, the weaknesses of the segmentation algorithm, and the results of the individual steps of a method. The qualitative evaluation includes segmentation results of different tissue regions, like cerebro spinal fluid (CSF), grey matter (GM), white matter (WM) and the total segmented result. We have tested the performance of the proposed method at various levels of noise and inhomogeneity on T1-weighted simulated MRI brain image volumes. Fig. 3shows the qualitative results of segmentation of a T1-weighted image (slice 95, Fig. 3(a)) with 9% noise and 40% inhomogeneity. Fig. 3(b)–(e) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and the original image, respectively by the k-means algorithm. Fig. 3(f)–(i) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and the original image, respectively by the FCM algorithm. Fig. 3(j)–(m) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and the original image, respectively by the FGFCM algorithm. Fig. 3(n)–(q) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and the original image, respectively by the sFCM algorithm. Fig. 3(r)–(u) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and the original image, respectively by the ASIFC algorithm. Fig. 3(v)–(y) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and the original image, respectively by the proposed csFCM algorithm. It may be observed from Fig. 3(b)–(q) that several artefacts are present in the segmented regions of the CSF, GM and WM. A careful investigation of the segmentation results of the proposed csFCM algorithm (Fig. 3(v)–(y)) reveals the absence or slender presence of these artefacts and thereby demonstrates its superiority over the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, csFCM and ASIFC algorithms even in the presence of high percentage of noise and inhomogeneity in MRI images.Quantitative evaluation is essential for comparison of the results of different segmentation methods. We have presented four types of quantitative evaluations based on (i) cluster validity functions, (ii) segmentation accuracy, (iii) tissue segmentation accuracy and (iv) receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. The cluster validity functions are presented in terms of (i) partition coefficient, (ii) partition entropy and (iii) similarity index.(a)Partition coefficient (Vpc): partition coefficient (Vpc) [22,24,31] is an important indicator of fuzzy partition and provides best performance with less fuzziness when the Vpctakes its optimal value as 1, with higher values being “better”. It is defined as follows:(9)Vpc=∑i=1C∑k=1Nzik2NPartition entropy (Vpe): another important indicator of fuzzy partition is partition entropy [22,24,32]. Best clustering result is achieved when the Vpeis minimal and its value is 0, with lower values being “better”. It is defined as follows:(10)Vpe=−∑i=1C∑k=1NziklogzikNSimilarity index (ρ): if Aiand Birepresent the sets of pixels belonging to clusterviin the segmentation result and in “ground truth”, respectively, then the similarity index ρ[24] is defined as follows:(11)ρ=1C∑i=1C2Ai∩BiAi+Biis ranged in [0,1] and the optimal clustering result is achieved when ρ=1, with higher value being “better”. Similarity index is a very efficient validity measurement as it compares the segmentation results with the ground truth. Noise and inhomogeneity free image is considered here as the ground truth image.To reduce the influence of the selected images, results are provided as the average values of the 51 images (slice 50 – slice 100) from each image volume of simulated MRI brain images for the cluster validity functions, segmentation accuracy, tissue segmentation accuracy and ROC curve.Table 1shows the average values of different cluster validity functions, i.e. partition co-efficient (Vpc), partition entropy (Vpe) and similarity index (ρ), of six different algorithms: the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and the proposed csFCM. It may be noted from Table 1 that the average values of Vpcand Vpeof the proposed csFCM method in four image volumes are close to 1 and 0, respectively, even with the presence of high % of noise and IIH. These results indicate that the csFCM algorithm generates more accurate segmentation results with less fuzziness. Furthermore, these results are also superior to those of the FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC methods. In may be worth mentioning here is that since the k-means algorithm does not provide any fuzziness about the segmentation results, its Vpcand Vpevalues are not computed. In each image volume, the value of ρ (in %) of the csFCM algorithm is also higher than that of the values of the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms. These results also demonstrate its superiority over the said competing algorithms.Fig. 4shows a comparative behaviour of the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and csFCM algorithms in terms of Vpc(Fig. 4(a)), Vpe(Fig. 4(b)) and ρ (in %) (Fig. 4(c)) over an image volume having 51 different T1-weighted MRI brain images (slice 50 – slice 100) with 9% noise, 40% IIH. This gives an insight view of the performance of the above algorithms. Fig. 4 shows that the proposed csFCM algorithm performs consistently well on all the images of the data volume. It also demonstrates its superiority over the other competing algorithms.The SA is defined as the sum of the correctly classified pixels divided by the sum of the total number of pixels of the clustered image. The SA can be defined as follows:(12)SA=∑k=1Mcard(Ak∩Ck)∑k=1Mcard(Ck)where M is the total number of pixels in a cluster, Akis the set of pixels belonging to the kth cluster found by the algorithm, Ckis the set of pixels of the kth cluster in the ground truth image. For an ideal result, the value of SA will be 1, with higher values being “better”.Table 2shows the average values of SA for three segmented parts of the MRI brain images: CSF, GM and WM by the six different algorithms with different level of noise and IIH. The average SA values of the proposed csFCM algorithm for CSF, GM and WM regions are close to 1 and higher than that of the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms. These results indicate that the csFCM algorithm performs well and outperforms its said competing algorithm with presence of different levels of noise and IIH.Fig. 5shows the comparative values of the SA for the CSF, GM and WM regions by the six different algorithms over the 51 MRI images with 9% noise and 40% IIH. It may be noted that the csFCM algorithm consistently outperforms the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms while segmenting the CSF (Fig. 5(a)) and WM (Fig. 5(c)) regions. In the case of GM region (Fig. 5(b)), the csFCM algorithm performs slightly less than that of the ASIFC algorithm for the image slices 50–65. However, for the slices 66–100, it outperforms the ASIFC algorithm and its overall performance is superior to the above six algorithms.The TSA [23] is defined as follows:(13)TSA=2NCTKNCITK+NGTKwhere NCTKdenotes the number of pixels that are correctly (inside the mask of ground truth) assigned to tissue k by a given method, NCITKis the total number of pixels (inside and outside the mask of ground truth) assigned to tissue k and NGTKis the number of pixels belonging to tissue k in the discrete anatomical model (the ground truth mask). For an ideal result, TSA will be 1, with higher values being “better”.Table 3shows the average TSA values for the three segmented parts of the MRI brain images: CSF, GM and WM by the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and the proposed csFCM algorithms with different level of noise and IIH. Again, it may be noted that for each image volume, the average TSA values of the csFCM algorithm are higher than that of the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms and thus demonstrates its superiority.Fig. 6shows the comparative values of the TSA for the CSF, GM and WM regions by the six different algorithms over the 51 MRI images with 9% noise and 40% IIH. It may be noted that the csFCM algorithm again consistently performs well on all images of the image volume and outperforms the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms while segmenting the CSF (Fig. 6(a)), GM (Fig. 6(b)) and WM (Fig. 6(c)) regions.An ROC curve is a useful technique for visualizing, organizing and selecting classifiers based on their performance [33]. It takes the entries regarding true positive rate (TPR) or sensitivity and false positive rate (FPR) or fall-out by varying the threshold on the outputs of the classifier. It allows us to depict the acceptable trade-off between the true positive rates (hit rates) and false positive rates (false alarm rates). Let for an experiment (in our case it is MRI brain image segmentation) P and N denotes the number of positive (p) and negative (n) instances. If the outcome of a prediction is p and the actual value is also p, then it is called a true positive (TP); conversely if the actual value is n then it is said to be a false positive (FP). The TPR and FPR are defined as follows:(14)TPR=TPP(15)FPR=FPNFig. 7shows the ROC curves for segmenting the CSF, GM and WM regions using the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and csFCM algorithms. It may be noted that being a discrete classifier, the performance of the k-means algorithm is represented as a point in the ROC space. The ROC curves are drawn by averaging the ROC curves obtained on the 51 T1-weighted simulated MRI brain images having 9% noise and 40% IIH. Fig. 7 clearly shows that the ROC curves of the proposed csFCM algorithm for the CSF (Fig. 7(a)), GM (Fig. 7(b)) and WM (Fig. 7(c)) regions lie above the corresponding ROC curves of its competing algorithms in the ROC space. The ROC curves indicate that the proposed csFCM algorithm provides superior results while segmenting the CSF, GM and WM regions.The performance of a classifier can also be measured by the area under ROC curve (AUC). For an ideal (perfect) classifier the value of AUC is 1; whereas a random classifier has 0.5. The AUC values of the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and csFCM algorithms while segmenting the CSF, GM and WM regions are presented in Table 4. It may be noted that the AUC values of the csFCM algorithm for segmenting the CSF, GM and WM regions are close to 1 and also higher than the other competing methods. These results indicate that the integration of spatial information into the membership functions essentially enables the csFCM algorithm to perform superior over the competing algorithms while segmenting the MRI images.We have tested the performance of the csFCM algorithm on an image volume consisting of 51 real-patient MRI image data, which are collected from the Advanced Medical Research Institute (AMRI) Hospital, Kolkata, India. As the ground truth of segmentation for real-patient MRI images is not usually available, thereby the performance of the proposed csFCM method on real-patient MRI data is evaluated first qualitatively and later quantitatively in terms of cluster validity functions.Fig. 8shows the qualitative results of segmentation of a real-patient MRI brain image (Fig. 8(a)) by the k-means, FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and csFCM algorithms. Figs. 7(b)–(e) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and original image, respectively by the k-means algorithm; Fig. 7(f)–(i) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and original image, respectively by the FCM algorithm; Fig. 7(j)–(m) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and original image, respectively by the FGFCM algorithm; Fig. 7(n)–(q) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and original image, respectively by the sFCM algorithm; Fig. 7(r)–(u) show the segmented regions of the CSF, GM, WM and original image, respectively by the ASIFC algorithm; and Fig. 7(v)–(y) show the CSF, GM, WM and total segmented results, respectively by the csFCM algorithm. A careful investigation of the results presented in Fig. 8 again suggests that the proposed csFCM algorithm provides superior results as compared to the other five competing algorithms. It may be worth mentioning here is that this claim also supported by the comments of a radiologist from the AMRI Hospital, Kolkata, India.Table 5shows the average Vpcand Vpevalues from the 51 real-patient MRI brain images for the FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and the proposed csFCM algorithms. It may be again noted that the Vpcand Vpevalues of the csFCM algorithm are close to 1 and 0, respectively and thus demonstrate its effectiveness. Table 5 also shows that the csFCM algorithm outperforms the FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms while segmenting the real-patient MRI brain images.Fig. 9also shows the comparative values of the Vpc(Fig. 9(a)) and Vpe(Fig. 9(b)) on the 51 real-patient MRI brain images for the FCM, FGFCM, sFCM, ASIFC and the proposed csFCM algorithms. It may be again noted that the Vpcand Vpevalues of the csFCM algorithm are close to 1 and 0, respectively for each of the 51 real-patient MRI brain images. These values are also greatly superior to the values of the FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms. The results presented here show the efficiency of the csFCM algorithm and also demonstrate its superiority over the FCM, FGFCM, sFCM and ASIFC algorithms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
