@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy reliability analysis of repairable industrial systems using soft-computing based hybridized techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The present study analyzes the fuzzy reliability of a repairable industrial system utilizing uncertain data.One traditional (FLT) and two soft-computing based hybridized techniques (GABLT and NGABLT) are used.Some very important fuzzy reliability indices of a washing system in a paper plant have been computed.It is observed that GABLT performs consistently well in comparison to other two techniques.The analysis may be helpful for improving the performance of the considered system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FLT technique,GABLT technique,NGABLT technique,Nonlinear programming,Genetic algorithm,Artificial neural networks (ANN),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of the present study is to analyze the fuzzy reliability of a repairable industrial system utilizing historical vague, imprecise and uncertain data which reflects its components’ failure and repair pattern. Soft-computing based two different hybridized techniques named as Genetic Algorithms Based Lambda–Tau (GABLT) and Neural Network and Genetic Algorithms Based Lambda–Tau (NGABLT) along with a traditional Fuzzy Lambda–Tau (FLT) technique are used to evaluate some important reliability indices of the system in the form of fuzzy membership functions. As a case study, all the three techniques are applied to analyse the fuzzy reliability of the washing system in a paper mill and results are compared. Sensitivity analysis has also been performed to analyze the effect of variation of different reliability parameters on system performance. The analysis can help maintenance personnel to understand and plan suitable maintenance strategy to improve the overall performance of the system. Based on results some important suggestions are given for future course of action in maintenance planning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, researchers are giving more attention to improve the overall performance of industrial systems (e.g. systems from paper or chemical industries). To maximize the overall performance of the system, it is expected that system will be operational and available for the maximum possible time. However, system failure is unavoidable phenomenon and the causes of failure may be human error, poor maintenance, inadequate testing/inspection or improper use. To reduce the frequency of failures or to enhance the reliability of the system, maintenance personnel give special attention to the types of maintenance action, their frequencies and costs then finally select a suitable strategy. Generally industrial systems are repairable and consist of several subsystems/components. Therefore the probability of system failure depends directly on each of its constituent subsystem/components. Sometimes explicit modeling of system failure/reliability may be difficult due to complexities of industrial systems and nonlinearity in their failure behavior. Under these limitations reliability analysts analyze system reliability with the help of various methodologies like reliability block diagram (RBD), fault tree analysis (FTA), event tree analysis (ETA), petri nets (PN), markov models (MM), failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA), Baysian approach, etc. [1–4]. FTA is a powerful technique used for providing logical functional relationship among components and subsystems of a system and identifying the root causes of undesired events in a system failure [5]. In conventional FTA, it is assumed that exact failure probabilities of events are given or failure data is collected before analysis. The estimation of precise probabilities require large quantity of failure data which adds to the problem and this is due to rare event of its components, human error and economic restraints. Some important events may be omitted during the fault tree construction, which may give incorrect results. Also, it is difficult to obtain past failure data due to environmental change of process and FTA is done at early design stage [6]. Even if data is available (historical), it is often inaccurate, out of date or collected under different operating and environmental conditions because age, adverse operating conditions and the vagaries of manufacturing processes affect each part/unit of the system differently. With raw data, only rough estimates of failure probabilities can be worked out and thus the issue is subject to uncertainty. Some of the main sources of uncertainties in reliability analysis are input parameters uncertainties (e.g. failure rate/repair time, etc.), modeling uncertainties (e.g. numerical approximations, coding error, etc.) and completeness uncertainty [7]. Under these modeling and data constraints, it is very difficult to construct a precise and comprehensive mathematical model for reliability analyses of an industrial system which may be close to real situation. Thus the probabilistic approach to the conventional reliability analysis is inadequate to account for such built-in uncertainties in data. As a result, in real life situation, it is a complicated task to enhance the performance of a system for achieving desired industrial goals utilizing available resources and uncertain data. This is the main reason why there is a growing interest in investigation and implementation of reliability principles for improving industrial systems performance under uncertain environment. Considering these facts, many researchers gave attention on this issue and analyzed various industrial systems behavior in terms of reliability/availability using traditional techniques [8,9]. They analyzed the system without quantifying uncertainties. Knezevic and Odoom [10] extended the concept of Lambda–Tau methodology initiated by Mishra [11] by coupling it with fuzzy set theory and named it as FLT. In their approach, PN is used to model the system while fuzzy set theory is used to quantify the uncertain, vague and imprecise data. Fuzzy arithmetic is used for computing different reliability indices of the system [12]. Sharma [13] analysed reliability of different subsystems of a paper mill using FLT and FMEA. It is analyzed that when FLT is applied for large and complex systems, the computed reliability indices in the form of fuzzy membership functions have wide spread (support) i.e. high range of uncertainty exists [14]. This is because various fuzzy arithmetic operations are used in the computations [12,15,16]. To overcome the problem, Komal et al. [17,18] established a new technique named as GABLT which is based on nonlinear programming approach for evaluating fuzzy reliability indices of repairable industrial systems. It is analyzed that GABLT provides reduced range of prediction of each reliability index at any level of confidence in comparison to FLT. The limitation of GABLT is that it works only for the systems whose components’ functional dependencies are precisely known. So, the approach in its current form cannot be used for the systems whose components’ functional dependencies are partially known. To overcome the problem, Sharma et al. [19] presented a NGABLT technique based on ANN and applied it for behavior analysis of feeding system in a paper mill. Komal et al. [20] used NGABLT technique for stochastic behavior analysis of forming unit in a paper mill. The major benefit of using ANN is that it can be effectively used in the situations where output pattern is precisely known (supervised) and where output pattern is partially known (unsupervised) [21–24]. In the present study, system components functional dependencies are precisely known, so a three-layer backpropogation with supervised learning is used which has an advantage in processing complicated, non-linear and uncertain data.The objective of the paper is to analyze the fuzzy reliability of washing unit in a paper mill using available information and uncertain data. FTA is used to model the system and fuzzy is used to incorporate quantitative uncertainty in the analysis. The analysis has been conducted using FLT, GABLT and NGABLT techniques. Some important reliability indices such as system's failure rate, repair time, mean time between failures (MTBF), expected number of failures (ENOF), availability and reliability are computed in the form of fuzzy membership functions using above three techniques and results are compared. The short version of this paper has been presented in the “17th Online World Conference on Soft Computing in Industrial Applications (WSC17)” [25].This paper is organized in six sections. A detailed discussion on ANN with procedural steps of designed ANN for the present study is given in Section “Architecture and procedural steps of ANN designed for the study”. In Section “A brief overview of FLT, GABLT and NGABLT techniques” a brief overview of FLT, GABLT and NGABLT techniques are given. System components working are described in Section “System description”. FLT, GABLT and NGABLT techniques are applied to compute fuzzy reliability of the system and comparison with relevant findings are discussed in Section “Result and discussion”. Limitations of the present study and a brief future scope are given in Section “Limitations and future scope”. Concluding remarks and managerial implications are given in Section “Conclusion”.A brief idea of architecture of ANN along with basic procedural steps of designed ANN for the particular problem considered in the study are given in this section.A typical multi-layer ANN [21] comprises of•an input layer, an output layer and hidden (intermediate) layers of neurons to implement arbitrary complex input/output mappings and separating different patterns,activation functions attached with input, hidden and output layers that determined the output from the relevant layer,a training algorithm to minimize the output error by adjusting network weights and biases.A three-layer feed-forward neural network with n units in input layer, m units in output layer and N units in the hidden layer is shown in Fig. 1. The complexity of real neurons is highly abstracted when modelling artificial neurons. These basically consist of inputs, which are multiplied by weights, and then computed by an activation function attached with hidden layer which determines the activation of the neuron. Another activation function attached with output layer computes the output of the artificial neuron. To minimize the output error, training algorithm is used. During training weights are assigned to the synapses. Three types of ANN training algorithms are most common: supervised, unsupervised, and hybrid. Our study is based on supervised learning. In supervised learning the ANN is given with a set of inputs and corresponding outputs. Once an input vector is processed, the output obtained is compared to the desired known output. The difference between the two is the error used as the basis to adjust the weights in order to reduce the error. The algorithm is stopped when stopping criterion (maximum number of generations or predefined minimum value of error function) is reached [21,23].The procedural steps of designed ANN for the particular problem considered in the present study is given as follows:Step 1:Identify input parameters relevant to the repairable system. Some important input parameters are system components failure rate, repair time, environmental factors, duration, load, spare-parts availability, etc. [24]. Present study considered system components failure rate and repair time as input parameters.Identify output parameters which can be used to measure the performance of the system. For repairable system some very useful performance measures are system failure rate, repair time, mean time between failures, expected number of failures, reliability and availability.Prepare number of input–output pairs data set. Randomly divide this data set into two parts, one part for training and remaining for validation. About two-third of the data is used for the training and the rest for validation.Choose appropriate activation function for input, hidden and output layers. There are many classes of activation functions e.g. log-sigmoidal, tan-sigmoidal and pure-linear whose details are as follows:•Log-sigmoidal is an important transfer function where the values of input x varies from −∞ to +∞, and corresponding output varies from 0 to 1. Mathematically, log-sigmoidal transfer function is expressed as(1)logsig(x)=11+e−xTan-sigmoidal transfer function takes input x values between −∞ to +∞, and squashes the output into the range between −1 and 1. Mathematically, tan-sigmoidal transfer function is expressed as(2)tansig(x)=ex−e−xex+e−xA pure-linear function whose output is equal to its input x generally used at the output stage of the neural network and is mathematically expressed as(3)purelin(x)=xGenerate bias and interconnecting weight matrices of random numbers (between −1 and 1) attached between input-hidden and hidden-output layers. The bias weights are denoted by θvjand θwk. The inputs to hidden layer interconnection weights are denoted byvjiand the hidden-layer to outputs interconnection weights bywkj.Now the output vector y is determined in terms of the input vector x by the formula(4)yk=∑j=1Nϕwkjσ∑i=1nvjixi+θvj+θwk;k=1,…,mwhere, σ(.) and ϕ(.) are the activation functions of the neurons of the hidden-layer and output-layer.In order to train a neural network to perform some task, we must adjust the weights of each unit in such a way that the error between the desired output and the actual output is reduced. So, to compute the necessary corrections in the weight matrices for achieving desired output, we have to compute the error derivative of the weights. There are algorithms like Levenberg–Marquardt, backpropagation, conjugate gradient algorithm, etc. for this purpose. Depending upon the nature of the problem we can select appropriate method because no one algorithm suits all the problems. Backpropagation is a systematic method for training multi-layer ANNs [23]. It is built on high mathematical foundation and has very good application potential. Even though it has its own limitations, it is applied to a wide range of practical problems and has successfully demonstrated its power [22,24,26]. The algorithm can be decomposed in the following four steps:•Feed-forward computation.Backpropagation to the output layer.Backpropagation to the hidden layer.Updation of weights.In this algorithm input signals are sent forward and then the errors are propagated backward. This method is gradient descent based algorithm for determining the error derivative of weights by minimizing the total squared error of the output, computed by the network. Each output unit (yk, k=1, …, m) receives a target pattern (tk) corresponding to an input pattern for which the corresponding error term is given as(5)E=12∑k(tk−yk)2This error term is to be minimized. Once we have error derivative term for output, then we can easily evaluate error derivative term for hidden layers. Now using error derivative terms for output and hidden layers, we can find weight correction terms for output and hidden layers. To accelerate the computation an additional factor is generally used which is called as learning rate. A high learning rate leads to rapid learning but the weights may oscillate, while a lower learning rate leads to slow learning. The weight correction term for output unit is given by(6)Δwkj=−α∂E∂wkjwhere α is the learning rate. The corresponding bias correction term is given by(7)Δθwk=αδkwhere δkis known as the error information term for output unit. The weight correction term for the hidden unit is given by(8)Δvji=−α∂E∂vjiThe corresponding bias correction term is given by(9)Δθvj=αδjwhere δjis known as the error information term for hidden unit. Now using these weights correction terms, we can update current interconnection weights. The updated weights are given as(10)wkj(new)=wkj(old)+Δwkj(11)θwk(new)=θwk(old)+Δθwk(12)vji(new)=vji(old)+Δvji(13)θvj(new)=θvj(old)+ΔθvjOnce the training is complete, we have the approximated function in the form of matrix of weights attached in between input-hidden and hidden-output layers of ANN. By collecting all the neural network weightsvjiandwkjinto matrices of weights VTand WT, we can write the ANN equation in terms of vectors as(14)y=ϕ(WTσ(VTx))The basic assumptions used in the study are given as:•component failures and repair rates are statistically independent, constant, very small and obey exponential distribution function;the product of the failure rate and repair time is small (less than 0.1);after repairs, the repaired component is considered as good as new;system structure is precisely known.Fuzzy Lambda–Tau methodology [10] is a traditional method for analyzing system fuzzy reliability. The methodology is based on qualitative modeling using petri-nets (PN) and quantitative modeling using Lambda–Tau method derived by Mishra [11] and presented herein Table 1with basic events (AND-gates and OR-gates). To incorporate uncertainty in the analysis, Knezvic et al. [10] converted basic crisp events into triangular fuzzy numbers with known spread because it is easy for presentation, evaluation and interpretation of engineering data [27]. Fuzzy arithmetic operations are used to find the probability of top event of the system and are presented in Table 2. Approach has been applied to find different reliability indices of a general repairable system. In our study, we have considered six reliability indices given in Table 3. Out of these six reliability indices, system failure rate, repair time and MTBF are time independent while system reliability, availability and ENOF are time dependent reliability indices. Time independent reliability indices use system components’ failure rate (λ′s) and repair times (τ′s) as input while time dependent reliability indices use time (t) together with system components’ failure rate (λ′s) and repair time (τ′s) as input. In their approach instead of PN, fault tree analysis (FTA) may be used to model the system. This approach is limited as the number of components of the system increases or system structure becomes more complex, the computed reliability indices (Table 3) in the form of fuzzy membership function have wide spread due to various fuzzy arithmetic operations used in the computations [12]. It means these indices have high range of uncertainty and cannot give exact idea about the system reliability and consequently its performance. Thus this approach is not suitable for large and complex repairable industrial systems’ reliability analysis when data is imprecise and represented by fuzzy numbers.In this paper GABLT technique [17,18] has been used to analyze the fuzzy reliability of a repairable industrial system up to a desired degree of accuracy. GABLT utilizes ordinary arithmetic and mathematical programming approach instead of fuzzy arithmetic. In this technique expression of various reliability indices of the system in terms of system's components’ failure rate and repair time are evaluated using Tables 1 and 3. Since system have complex structure, so evaluated reliability indices are nonlinear in nature. Also, system's components’ failure and repair data is not precisely known and hence represented by triangular fuzzy numbers [12,27]. For finding system fuzzy reliability indices at each cut-level α, optimization problem (15) has been formulated as follows.Minimize/maximize:(15)F˜(λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)orF˜(t/λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)Subjectto:μλi(x)≥α,μτj(x)≥α,0≤α≤1,i=1,2,…,n;j=1,2,…,m.whereF˜(λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)andF˜(t/λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)are time independent and dependent fuzzy reliability indices. The obtained minimum and maximum value of F are denoted by Fminand Fmaxrespectively. The membership function values ofF˜at Fminand Fmaxare both α that is,μF˜(Fmin)=μF˜(Fmax)=αThe obtained optimization problem is non-linear in nature, needs some effective techniques and tools for its solution. Variety of methods and algorithms have been developed for solving nonlinear optimization problems and have been applied in various types of real life problems [26,28–30]. Genetic algorithm (GA), one of the most popular evolutionary algorithm is basically a random search technique. GA has been applied effectively to many different problems like system reliability/availability/maintainability optimization [18,30–33]. GA is capable to solve nonlinear optimization problems without checking the convexity and differentiability of objective functions [34]. Pseudo code of a simple GA is given below.Procedure: Genetic AlgorithmBeginn←0Initialize P(n);evaluate P(n);while (not termination condition) dobeginrecombine P(n) to yield Q(n);evaluate Q(n);select P(n+1) from P(n) and Q(n);n←n+1;endendAfter solving nonlinear optimization problem (15) for each cut-level α by using GA, we have fuzzy reliability indices with reduced spread at each cut-level α.The aim of the present study is not only to present a methodology for behavior analysis of large-scale systems with precisely known components’ functional dependencies but also to present the methodology which may be extended further in future for behavior analysis of systems with imprecisely known components’ functional dependencies. Thus, to make the decisions more realistic and generic, a hybridized technique named as NGABLT has also been used for behavior analysis of the industrial system with precisely known components’ functional dependency. NGABLT technique provides the flexibility of extension of its present form in future for the systems’ whose components’ functional dependencies are imprecisely known because it is based on ANN. The major benefit of using ANN in NGABLT technique is that it can be used effectively in the situations where components functional dependency is precisely known (supervised learning) and where it is imprecisely known (unsupervised learning). In the present study, as system's components’ functional dependency is precisely known so supervised learning has been used.This technique and GABLT technique are same from beginning of first step to the step of reliability indices’ expression evaluation. Further procedural steps of this technique are described here. We know that for a complex repairable industrial system, the expression of each reliability index is non-linear in nature. So to decrease the spread of each reliability index i.e. range of prediction at each cut level α and to simplify the calculation process, each reliability index expression is to be approximated. There are tools like functional approximation and ANN, etc. which can be used for this purpose [35–37]. ANN rely heavily on computation and have been used in many types of systems for various purposes. Thus, in light of applicability, ANN is a better choice and has been used in the present study. The detailed structure of designed ANN is already explained in Section “Architecture of a general ANN”. For all the reliability indices, the transfer function used in the hidden layer is the tan-sigmoidal function. Since the reliability and availability values are in between 0 and 1, we choose the transfer function for the output layer to be the log-sigmoidal function. For other reliability indices (failure rate, repair time, MTBF and ENOF), the transfer function of the output layer is the linear function.After approximation of these reliability indices, fuzzified data (λ′sandτ′s) at cut level α are used as input variables in the approximated reliability indices for estimating these reliability indices at the same cut level α. The aim is that the computed reliability indices in the form of fuzzy membership functions should have optimized spread i.e. small range of prediction at each cut level α. In this search process, a nonlinear optimization problem is formulated. To find the lower and upper boundary values of any fuzzy reliability index at cut level α in the process of membership function construction, we need to solve the optimization problems (16) as given below.Minimize/maximize:(16)G˜(λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)orG˜(t/λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)Subjectto:μλi(x)≥α,μτj(x)≥α,0≤α≤1,i=1,2,…,n;j=1,2,…,m.whereG˜(λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)andG˜(t/λ1,λ2,…,λn,τ1,τ2,…,τm)are approximated time independent and dependent fuzzy reliability indices using ANN.The obtained minimum and maximum value of G are denoted by Gminand Gmaxrespectively. The membership function values ofG˜at Gminand Gmaxare both α that is,μG˜(Gmin)=μG˜(Gmax)=αAs the problem is nonlinear in nature and also the reliability indices are approximated by ANN, so conventional methods like gradient projection method or feasible-direction method could not be used to search for the optimal solution. To prevail over these obstacles, GA as discussed in previous Section “GABLT technique” may be used which do not require any pre-assumptions such as continuity and differentiability and rely heavily on computational power.In the present analysis binary coded GA is used to find the optimal solution of the nonlinear optimization problems (15) and (16). To solve the nonlinear optimization problems, system's components’ failure rate (λ′s)and repair time (τ′s) are encoded in strings of desired bit length l, that finally constitute a chromosome. The objective function for maximization problems (15) and (16) while the reciprocal of the objective function for minimization problems (15) and (16) are taken as the fitness function. Roulette wheel selection criterion is employed to choose better fitted chromosomes. One-point crossover and random point mutation are used in the present analysis. To stop the optimization process maximum number of generations and change in population fitness value are used. MATLAB 7.1 has been used for coding purpose.As a case study, a paper plant is taken as the main system. The paper plants are large capital-oriented engineering systems. Each of them comprises subsystems namely chipping, feeding, pulping, washing, screening, bleaching, production of paper and collection, arranged in complex configuration. This paper considers the washing system, an important functionary part of the paper plat [13,38]. The washing of prepared pulp is done in three to four stages, to get it free from blackness and to prepare the fine fibers of the pulp. The system consists of four main subsystems, defined as:•Filter (A): It consists of single unit which is used to drain black liquor from the cooked pulp.Cleaners (B): In this subsystem three units of cleaners are arranged in parallel configuration. Each unit may be used to clean the pulp by centrifugal action. Failure of anyone will reduce the efficiency of the system as well as quality of paper.Screeners (C): Herein two units of screeners are arranged in series. These are used to remove oversized, uncooked and odd shaped fibers from pulp through straining action. Failure of any one will cause the complete failure of the system.Deckers (D): Two units of deckers are arranged in parallel configuration. The function of deckers is to reduce the blackness of pulp. Complete failure of decker occurs when both the components will fail.The Fault tree model of the system is shown in Fig. 2.The washing system of a paper mill consists of mainly eight components. Herein, the interactions among the working components of the system are modeled using fault tree as shown in Fig. 2. Under the information extraction phase, the data related to failure rates (λi′s) and repair times (τi′s) of the main components of the system is collected from the present/historical records of the paper mill. The collected data is integrated with expertise of maintenance personnel and is given in Table 4. The minimal cut sets are {A}, {B1, B2, B3},{Ci}i=1,2and {D1, D2}, obtained using matrix method [10].By making use of Table 1, the expressions for system failure rate (λs) and repair time (τs) for the system are as following.(17)λs=λ1+λ5+λ6+λ2λ3λ4(τ2τ3+τ3τ4+τ2τ4)+λ7λ8(τ7+τ8)(18)τs=λ1τ1+λ5τ5+λ6τ6+λ2λ3λ4τ2τ3τ4+λ7λ8τ7τ8λsNow using these expressions and Table 3, the system reliability indices expressions are obtained. After that, FLT,GABLT and NGABLT techniques have been applied to analyze the behavior of the system. Different values of all the parameters of GA and ANN are taken by hit and trail keeping in view the convergence. The selected values of all the parameters for GA and ANN for applying GABLT and NGABLT techniques are given in Table 5. Following the basic steps of GABLT and NGABLT techniques, the fuzzy reliability indices for mission time t=10 (h) with left and right spreads are computed by solving nonlinear optimization problems (15) and (16). Computed results are depicted graphically in Fig. 3for ±15% spreads along with FLT results. When NGABLT technique has been applied, the error curves obtained during approximation of all the reliability indices by ANN are plotted and shown in Fig. 4. The crisp and defuzzified values for all the three techniques with ±15%, ±25% and ±60% spreads are computed and tabulated in Table 6. The defuzzified values have been obtained by Center of Gravity (COG) method of defuzzification because it has the advantage of taking the whole membership function into account [39]. From Table 6, it is evident that defuzzified values change with change of spread. For example the failure rate of the system increases by 0.09%, 0.18% and 6.36% for FLT, GABLT and NGABLT respectively, when spread changes from ±15% to ±25%, and it further increases by 0.54%, 0.18% and 9.73%, when spread changes from ±25% to ±60%. To analyze the effect on system reliability for each of the components of the system by the variation in its failure rate and repair time simultaneously at fixed time t=50 (h) with fixed failure rates and repair times of other components, computation have been done. The maximum and minimum values of system reliability obtained for each component of the unit are noticed and given in Table 7.Sensitivity analysis has been done for nine combinations of reliability, availability and failure rate and the effects on MTBF are computed. Throughout these combinations, ranges of repair time and ENOF for all the three techniques are fixed and computed by their membership functions (Figs. 3(b) and (d)) at cut levels α=0. The computed ranges of repair time are 1.8580–4.6785, 2.6059–3.3786, and 2.4933–3.3850 for FLT, GABLT and NGABLT respectively. Similarly computed ranges of ENOF are 0.0893–0.1295, 0.0951–0.1234, and 0.0657–0.1431 for respective techniques. The effects on MTBF for first three combinations and for all the techniques are shown graphically in Fig. 5. The computed ranges of MTBF for all other combinations as well as for all the three techniques are also tabulated in Table 8. For the first combination of Table 8, the selected values of reliability, failure rate and availability are 0.86, 0.008 and 0.95 respectively. For this combination, the computed ranges of MTBF are 146.3–213.6, 153.8–200.0 and 132.6–289.4 for Fuzzy Lambda–Tau, GABLT and NGABLT respectively. It may be observed that for this combination the prediction range of MTBF is reduced almost by 31.4% from Fuzzy Lambda–Tau when GABLT technique is applied while prediction range of MTBF is increased almost by 133% from Fuzzy Lambda–Tau when NGABLT technique is applied. This is due to the errors involved in the approximation by ANN. At different α-cuts (0, 0.5, 1), FLT, GABLT and NGABLT reliability and availability curve for 0–50 (h) have been plotted in Fig. 6–8, respectively along with their membership functions at t=40 and t=15 (h) respectively to show their behavior with different level of confidence. Error curves for reliability and availability came during their approximation by ANN are shown in Fig. 9. It is observed that for washing system, NGABLT results do not perform consistently well while GABLT performs well. Thus, it is inferred that if system analysts use GABLT results, then they may have less range of prediction which finally leads to more sound decisions. Thus, based on the behavioral plots and corresponding table, the system manager can analyze the critical behavior of the system and plan for suitable maintenance.The research work presented in this paper is an attempt to facilitate the reliability analysts/engineers for studying, characterizing, analyzing and predicting the behavior of the system more closely using uncertain data. The method of analysis, design and reliability/availability optimization aspects in the engineering system can be extended in the following directions:(i)The presented GABLT and NGABLT hybridized techniques do not rely on fuzzy arithmetic rather use ordinary arithmetic and optimization techniques. Also, these are fully stochastic techniques and so have scope of their further extensions in future.The presented approach is limited only for the system whose components’ functional dependencies are precisely known. In some practical situations it may be possible that the system structure is not precisely known. In this situation, NGABLT technique can be extended because it relies on ANN.The presented techniques will be further improved using other optimization tools/algorithms such as Real Coded Genetic Algorithms (RCGAs), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), and other ANNs such as Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN), Kohonen Self-Organizing Feature Maps (SOM), Recurrent Network and Stochastic Neural Network for the reliability analysis of industrial systems in more efficient way [30,34,40,41].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
