@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An effective biomedical image retrieval framework in a fuzzy feature space employing Phase Congruency and GeoSOM

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
BIRS (Biomedical Image Retrieval System) framework for diverse medical image collection.Phase Congruency-based features for acute image characterizations.Building codebook using GeoSOM for image encoding thereby achieving dimensionality reduction.SIFT features combined with fuzzy function for significant improvement in information retrieval.Performance analysis indicates reduction in retrieval time with efficient indexing and effective retrieval.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
L*a*b* color space,Phase Congruency,SIFT transform,GeoSOM,Fuzzy logic,Image retrieval,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a detailed study about a biomedical image retrieval framework by extracting Phase Congruency (PC) features from L*a*b* triplets of images (query, target) and representing them in fuzzy feature space. These features correspond to an edge-corner map of the given image. The resulting map is then processed by Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) to derive keypoints, that are invariant to affine transformations. The ensuing features were vector quantized to build a codebook of keypoints. The codebook was produced using a Spherical Self-Organizing Map (SOM) built with a geodesic data structure termed as GeoSOM. Then keypoints of the query image are mapped with the codebook and their occurrences are counted to formulate a histogram termed as Phase Congruency-based Bag of Keypoints (PC-BoK). This histogram is generated offline for target images and a similarity measure was performed with the query image to yield the nearest match based on a global fuzzy membership function. Exhaustive experiments of the proposed framework named as BIRS (Biomedical Image Retrieval System) were performed on a diverse medical image collection (NBIA, MESSIDOR, DRIVE). Finally, performance of BIRS demonstrates the advantage of the proposed image representation approach in terms of Precision (P)–Recall (R) parameters. Furthermore relative comparison of the proposed scheme with existing feature descriptors depicts improved P–R values. The proposed feature extraction and representation scheme was also robust against quantization errors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The advent of various imaging mechanisms across several domains has enormously increased the generation of images in diverse fields. Evidentially, the medical image databases have tremendously increased owing to the fact that hospitals and medical research centers produce medical images of diverse modalities in increasing numbers. This leads to the need for economical storage, rapid retrieval of images, access to images acquired with multiple modalities whether stored in Picture Archival and Communication Systems (PACS) server or in patient health records or on the web. The images in PACS are stored in DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine) format containing relevant information in image headers, whereas, the images available in the other formats lack such header information. So, there is a need for storing, organizing, accessing, and retrieval of images for further processing and analysis. Therefore, a mechanism for efficient indexing and effective retrieval of stored images evolved known as Content Based Image Retrieval (CBIR). CBIR encompasses three modules, viz., Feature Extraction, Similarity Matching and Relevance Feedback. This mechanism evaluates visual similarity between query and target (database) images. The images retrieved are ranked as an image list based on their similarities with query image. These features are well deemed to categorize and describe an image completely. The feature vectors corresponding to query and target images are extracted, the similarity amongst them are ranked based on the distance between feature vectors of those images. Visual characteristics such as color, texture, shape, etc., formulating the feature vectors of an image are used for indexing by many retrieval mechanisms. The systems that utilize color and texture features for indexing and retrieval include IBM's QBIC [34] and SIMPLIcity [35]. These systems adopt global features that are very sensitive to the local variation of a given shape. Hence a representation based on global features may result in unsatisfactory retrieval [39]. The main objective of CBIR research is to develop a user-friendly framework that allows users to interact with digital image libraries effectively to retrieve the most visually similar images for a given query image.Medical images captured across different modalities and views of body parts under varying lighting and imaging conditions have to be indexed and retrieved. Hence, a flexible feature that represents each image uniquely under a variety of visually different illustrations under the same category with high discerning capability is desired between images of different modalities. This paper aims to offer an approach that considers the aforesaid issue.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
