@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Routing fleets with multiple driving ranges: Is it possible to use greener fleet configurations?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Importance of considering multiple driving ranges in fleets including electric vehicles.Describes an integer programming formulation and a multi-round heuristic algorithm for solving the problem.The algorithm is used to analyze how distance-based costs are increased when considering ‘greener’ fleet configurations.The paper contributes to support the hypothesis that hybrid and electric vehicles can be used in routing problems without necessarily incurring significantly higher distance-based costs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple distance-constrained vehicle routing,Heterogeneous fleet,Heuristics,Electric vehicles,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper discusses the vehicle routing problem with multiple driving ranges (VRPMDR), an extension of the classical routing problem where the total distance each vehicle can travel is limited and is not necessarily the same for all vehicles – heterogeneous fleet with respect to maximum route lengths. The VRPMDR finds applications in routing electric and hybrid-electric vehicles, which can only cover limited distances depending on the running time of their batteries. Also, these vehicles require from long charging times, which in practice makes it difficult to consider en route recharging. The paper formally introduces the problem, describes an integer programming formulation and a multi-round heuristic algorithm that iteratively constructs a solution for the problem. Using a set of benchmarks adapted from the literature, the algorithm is then employed to analyze how distance-based costs are increased when considering ‘greener’ fleet configurations – i.e., when using electric vehicles with different degrees of autonomy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It has been echoed in the literature that future transportation systems will include heterogeneous fleets consisting of common internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles, as well as those using “green” technologies such as plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) and electric vehicles (EV) (e.g., [1]). Several factors necessitate resorting to such new technologies, such as (a) companies to focus on reducing their carbon footprint of their transportation activities, either as part of their corporate social responsibility strategies or other external requirements, (b) variability of cost of and long-term cost risk associated with dependence on oil-based energy sources, (c) availability of government subsidies to reduce acquisition cost as well as the potential for increased regulation on corporate fleets, and (d) advances in alternative energy technologies (such as EVs and PHEVs), which have potential for a more environmentally sustainable solutions at a cost that is starting to be competitive from an economic point of view [2,3].In providing a useful service, one can assume that ICEs and PHEVs have unlimited driving-range capabilities since they can refuel at any service station along their route. The driving range for electric vehicles, however, is constrained by the amount of electricity stored in their batteries since these vehicles cannot quickly recharge en-route. In effect, EVs issues due to long charging times and short driving ranges are recognized by several authors. For instance, as stated in Ferreira et al. [4]: “Being the next big step in automobile industry, electric vehicles continue to have limited autonomy which associated with the long charging times, limited charging stations and undeveloped smart grid infrastructures demands a hard planning of the daily use of the vehicle”. Similar arguments can be found in Achtnicht et al. [5], Wirasingha et al. [6], or Chan et al. [7]. Also, as reported by the ISOE institute: “As long as there is no global infrastructure for replacing batteries or directly inducting power from outside the car while driving, the reduced range will remain the main issue concerning electric mobility. According to experts this is not likely to change considerably in the medium term.” (http://www.isoe.de/english/projects/futurefleet.htm). Electric vehicles with different battery sizes give rise to problems where each vehicle having its own driving ranges which needs to be accounted for in route-planning. With EVs becoming more prevalent, an efficient routing of heterogeneous fleets with multiple driving-range vehicles is emerging as a new issue in the transportation industry.The vehicle routing problem with multiple (heterogeneous) driving ranges (VRPMD) is an extension of the well-known capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP) where each vehicle has its own restriction on the total distance it can cover. To the best of our knowledge, the VRPMDR has not yet been addressed in the literature, neither from a theoretical nor a practical perspective. The main goals and contributions of this article are the following ones: (i) to formally define the VRPMDR and discuss the difficulty of obtaining exact solutions for it; (ii) to introduce a heuristic method for solving the VRPMDR based on a multi-round approach; and (iii) to employ this method to analyze how distance-based costs vary when “greener” fleet configurations – those in which ICE vehicles are partially replaced by EVs – are considered.In order to solve the aforementioned VRPMD, we were interested in taking benefit of the existence of well-tested and efficient algorithms for solving simpler versions of the VRP. For that reason, we designed a strategy based on decomposing the VRP with multiple (heterogeneous) driving ranges into a series of CVRPs with route-length restrictions (CVRP*). Each of the latter can be solved by adapting any of the metaheuristics already published for the CVRP. In particular, the one employed in this paper to solve each of the CVRP* in the series is an adaptation of the algorithm by Juan et al. [8]. For that purpose, our algorithm uses a multi-round process, and at each round a new homogeneous problem is solved. An overview of the logic behind this multi-round approach is advanced next (it will be explained later in more detail): Consider a heterogeneous fleet composed of several types of vehicles, each type characterized by a different degree of driving autonomy. At each round, the algorithm considers a different type of vehicle. Then, assuming an unlimited number of vehicles of that type, it solves a CVRP*. At this moment, those routes which are feasible – i.e., those which can be covered by available vehicles – are saved as routes of a partial solution and a new round is started. Once all vehicle types have been iterated over, the final solution is constructed by aggregating the feasible routes previously saved at each round. The algorithm in Juan et al. [8] that we used in our experimental section to solve each CVRP* employs a reduced number of parameters. It combines a multi-start biased randomization of a classical VRP heuristic with a memory-based local search, and is able to quickly generate alternative solutions with similar costs to classical CVRP instances. Thus, the approach described in this paper is practical as it is simple to implement with only a few parameters, and provides a set of alternative routing solutions for a fleet manager to consider.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a review of literature relevant to the VRPMDR. Section 3 formally defines the VRPMDR and presents an integer linear programming formulation of the problem. A more detailed description of the proposed multi-round methodology is described in Section 4. Data generation and the details of computational experiments are given in Section 5, which also includes a discussion of the results. Finally, Section 6 presents general conclusions and suggestions for future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper introduces the vehicle routing problem with multiple driving ranges (VRPMDR), which is motivated by the practical challenge driven by the increasing number of EVs – with different degrees of autonomy – in corporate fleets. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that multiple values for the maximum route length have been simultaneously considered in the vehicle routing literature. A further contribution has been made by describing an integer programming formulation of the problem as well as a multi-round heuristic algorithm that can be used to generate solutions for the VRPMDR with pre-specified fleet configurations. The multi-round approach relies on a biased randomized algorithm that can also be used on its own to generate alternative fleet configurations whenever feasibility of the pre-specified fleet configuration is not guaranteed. Numerical experiments demonstrate that this approach provides attractive solutions for all tested benchmarks. Most of the alternative solutions obtained offer competitive distance-based costs while requiring fewer long- or medium-range vehicles than the best-known solution. Consequently, the paper also contributes to support the hypothesis that hybrid and electric vehicles can be used in routing problems without necessarily incurring significantly higher distance-based costs.The VRPMDR offers numerous research lines to explore, both from a theoretical and from a practical point of view. First, scenario analysis could be used to identify an effective fleet composition. Exploring how distance-based costs vary as the fleet composition changes, one could determine the best number of EVs to add before incurring prohibitive costs or infeasible service situations. Second, including fixed investment and infrastructure costs, such as those mentioned in De Los Rios et al. [3], would offer a more formal, economically driven analysis of the tradeoff between fleet configuration and distance-based cost. Furthermore, models that monetize the carbon footprint could be incorporated to evaluate solutions across an economic-environmental continuum. Third, the impact of topography could be explored. It could be assumed that EVs work better in dense clusters of customers close to the depot. But the characteristics of customer density and their distances from the depot and the impact of these parameters on the ability to deploy EVs is an avenue yet to be explored. Fourth, the general structure of the multi-round procedure could incorporate new algorithms (both of exact and approximate nature) that exploit the problem structure to provide better solutions.