@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Decision-making framework for user-based inter-cloud service migration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presents an overview of the user-side cloud service management (UCSM) framework.Presents intelligent decision making on the basis of QoS and user’s preferences.Presents algorithms to find the cost and time to migrate to other cloud services.Utilizes multi-criteria decision making to find the best service to migrate to.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud computing,QoS,Service migration,MCDM,Inter-cloud VM migration,Cloud service management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cloud computing has rapidly become the most effective computing paradigm for today’s increasingly technology-dependent society. The emerging concepts of federated clouds with support for interoperability between different cloud providers and open standards in cloud middleware have opened up new challenges in cloud service management. One of the emerging research areas in cloud computing is the possibility of live virtual machine migration between different clouds. This is of importance when the quality of a cloud service currently used by a user degrades or a new cloud service is developed which is better in terms of quality, performance and cost than the current service being used. In such scenarios, the user needs to make a decision as to whether to continue with the currently used service or migrate to the newly available service. In our previous work, we presented a decision-making approach that assists a cloud service user in selecting a cloud service provider based on the QoS of its services. In this paper, we extend our previous work in the pre-interaction time phase and discuss the decision-making process involved in the migration from one cloud service to another cloud service through inter-cloud virtual machine migration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud computing has become the chief computing paradigm for today’s increasingly technology-dependent society. The advent of mobile handheld devices and the availability of faster broadband connectivity for such devices via new communication technologies such as 3G and 4G has further strengthened the role of cloud computing in today’s world. However, the rapid growth and quick adoption has also unearthed several challenges in cloud computing (Dillon et al. 2010). From a service provider’s side, these issues include resource management, energy efficiency, and Service Level Agreement (SLA) compliance. From a cloud service user’s point of view, one of these challenges is how to select a service from amongst the multitude of cloud services and once a service has been selected, how to ensure that a cloud provider is delivering the promised computing resources by which the user’s outcomes will be achieved. This process is called user-side cloud service management (UCSM) (Rehman et al. 2014), which consists of two phases, namely the pre-interaction phase and the post-interaction phase. In the pre-interaction phase, the user selects a service from the available services and in the post-interaction phase, the user monitors the selected service by using the early warning framework to verify that the desired or promised Quality of Service (QoS) levels are maintained. If the user determines that the selected service fails to meet these QoS levels, it needs to take appropriate steps for service management to ensure the achievement of the desired outcomes. The two parts of the user-side cloud service management have been explained in detail in our previous paper (Rehman et al. 2014, 2013c; Hussain et al. 2015) where we discussed a user-side cloud service management (UCSM) framework for cloud service selection, QoS forecasting and early-warning. In this paper, we discuss the next phase of decision-making in user-side cloud service management wherein the early warning system determines that the currently selected service fails to meet the user’s required QoS levels and a decision has to be made to migrate from the currently subscribed service to another service. This is one of the steps required in the post-interaction phase of user-side cloud service management. The objective of this paper is to develop an approach that assists a cloud service user or an intelligent service management agent in decision-making in a service migration scenario.The migration between different cloud service providers has been made possible by the recent advances in interoperable cloud middleware, aimed at addressing the vendor lock-in problem. This has led to the emergence of Inter-cloud VM migration as a new research area in cloud computing (Messina et al. 2014, Liu et al. 2014, Kondo et al. 2014, Kurtadikar et al. 2013, Hirofuchi et al. 2009, Zhang et al. 2014) that enables the user to switch from one cloud provider to another.In many aspects, the service migration decision-making process, which happens in the post-interaction time phase, is analogous to the service selection problem in the pre-interaction phase where the best service has to be selected from the available ones. However, in service migration decisions, apart from the decision-making criteria required in the pre-interaction phase, another additional criterion required is the migration cost which the user incurs. But migration cost is an additional parameter in the post-interaction phase. Our approach in this paper considers the additional parameters and based on the user’s requirements, recommends whether or not it is advantageous to migrate to a different service than the currently used one; and if it is, then what is the most appropriate service to migrate to from the currently available ones. This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present a background of our related work in this area and briefly discuss the user-side cloud service management (UCSM) framework. In Section 3, we explain the working of the post-interaction decision-making process. In Section 4, we discuss the three different types of migration of cloud services and the metrics for determining migration costs are explained in Section 5. In Section 6, we explain how these metrics are used for multi-criteria decision-making. We explain this method by a case study in Section 7 and discuss the related work in Section 8. Section 9 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
