@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid genetic and imperialist competitive algorithm for green vendor managed inventory of multi-item multi-constraint EOQ model under shortage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing a new modeling to the VMI supply chain problem.Adding a VMI contractual agreement between the vendor and the buyer.Considering GHG emissions tax cost and limitation.Proposing a hybrid GA and ICA to solve the problem.Comparing the results with the ones obtained using a GA and lower bounds for validation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Economic order quantity (EOQ),Genetic algorithm (GA),Imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA),Vendor managed inventory (VMI),Hybrid algorithm,Green house gas (GHG) emissions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this paper is to develop a multi-item economic order quantity (EOQ) model with shortage for a single-buyer single-supplier supply chain under green vendor managed inventory (VMI) policy. This model explicitly includes the VMI contractual agreement between the vendor and the buyer such as warehouse capacity and delivery constraints, bounds for each order, and limits on the number of pallets. To create a kind of green supply chain, tax cost of green house gas (GHG) emissions and limitation on total emissions of all items are considered in the model. A hybrid genetic and imperialist competitive algorithm (HGA) is employed to find a near-optimum solution of a nonlinear integer-programming (NIP) with the objective of minimizing the total cost of the supply chain. Since no benchmark is available in the literature, a genetic algorithm (GA) is developed as well to validate the result obtained. For further validation, the outcomes are also compared to lower bounds that are found using a relaxed model in which all variables are treated continuous. At the end, numerical examples are presented to demonstrate the application of the proposed methodology. Our results proved that the proposed hybrid procedure was able to find better and nearer optimal solutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the most important problems in companies that utilize vendors to provide raw materials, components, and finished products is to determine the order quantity and the points to place orders. Various models in production and inventory control field have been proposed and devoted to solve this problem in different scenarios. Two of the models that have been employed extensively are the economic order quantity (EOQ) and economic production quantity (EPQ) models (see for example [1,2]). However, these models are developed based on some assumptions and conditions that bound their applicability in real-world situations. The EOQ formula gives an optimal solution when the vendor and buyer inventory problems are treated in isolation under the deterministic conditions [3].In real business world, sometimes a manufacturer, supplier and markets/retailer would like to make a long-term cooperative relationship as an integrated system to get a tensionless stable source of supply and demand of items as well as reliability to gain optimum profit from each other. Globally, the industrial environment gradually becomes more and more competitive and much effort has been made toward the efficiency and effectiveness. So in this connection, the supply chain (SC) management plays an important role in the present situation [4]. Several programs of collaboration and coordination between SC partners have been successfully implemented in practice. Vendor managed inventory (VMI) is collaborative initiatives that have been theoretically and empirically shown to improve SC efficiency and responsiveness [5]. Under VMI partnership, the vendor (supplier) is responsible for managing inventory levels at the retail store by determining the right timing and size of the orders. In return, the vendor gets a better visibility about the final customer demand. Historically, VMI originated in the retail industry to overcome some of the problems regarding the amount of required retail shelf space, the amount of inventory to be kept on hand, inventory obsolescence, and the logistics of returned products [6,7]. The benefits of VMI are well recognized by successful retail businesses such as Wal-Mart, JC Penney, and Dillard Department Stores [8]. Successful VMI implementations in retailing are more observed in the apparel industry. For example, VF Corporation was able to increase the sales of its men's jeans by 20% through the adoption of a replenishment system based on point-of-sales data and VMI principles [9].With the developing global consciousness of environmental protection and the corresponding growth in legislation and regulations, green purchasing has become an essential issue for enterprises to improvement environmental sustainability. Now, numerous businesses have begun to perform green SC management and take into account environmental subjects and the measurement of their vendors’ environmental performance. In recent literature [10–12], incorporating environmental performance into inventory and logistics systems has been strongly accentuated, and has been achievement momentum in the past few years. Numerous models that investigated the classical economic order quantity (EOQ) for some environmental problems have been suggested. A common outcome among these models is that the performance of an inventory policy becomes sensitive when greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions (e.g. CO2) are accounted for.While a substantial amount of research works are available in the literature, a brief review of the works on the vendor-managed inventory of supply chains is presented in the next section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
