@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy lagged variable selection in fuzzy time series with genetic algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new partial high order fuzzy time series forecasting model is proposed.The proposed model has high accuracy level since it does not use all lagged variables unlike other available fuzzy time series models.In the proposed model, the selection of fuzzy lagged variables is performed by using genetic algorithms.The proposed model is applied to some real life time series and very good forecasts are obtained.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,Fuzzy time series,Genetic algorithms,Partial high order model,Variable selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Fuzzy time series forecasting models can be divided into two subclasses which are first order and high order. In high order models, all lagged variables exist in the model according to the model order. Thus, some of these can exist in the model although these lagged variables are not significant in explaining fuzzy relationships. If such lagged variables can be removed from the model, fuzzy relationships will be defined better and it will cause more accurate forecasting results. In this study, a new fuzzy time series forecasting model has been proposed by defining a partial high order fuzzy time series forecasting model in which the selection of fuzzy lagged variables is done by using genetic algorithms. The proposed method is applied to some real life time series and obtained results are compared with those obtained from other methods available in the literature. It is shown that the proposed method has high forecasting accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The definition of fuzzy time series was firstly introduced by Song and Chissom [26]. In the study of Song and Chissom [26], fuzzy time series were divided into two classes which are time variant and time invariant and for the solution of both types of fuzzy time series, first order and higher order fuzzy time series forecasting models were defined. The forecasting models based on first order fuzzy time series were proposed by Song and Chissom [27] and Song and Chissom [28] for the time invariant and the time variant fuzzy time series, respectively.Fuzzy time series approaches are generally compose of three main stages such as fuzzification, determination of fuzzy relationships and defuzzification. In the literature, new methods have been improved by making contributions to each of these main stages. In the stage of fuzzification, different approaches have been used to get better results. While fixed interval lengths are used in Song and Chissom [28–30], Chen [7], Hurang [19], Chen [8], Tsaur et al. [32], Singh [27], and Egrioglu et al. [14,15], dynamic length of interval lengths are employed in Huarng and Yu [21], Davari et al. [13], Yolcu et al. [33], Kuo et al. [23,24], Park et al. [26], and Hsu et al. [18] in order to partition the universe of discourse. Besides, clustering methods are used in the stage of fuzzification by Cheng et al. [12], Li et al. [25], Aladag et al. [4], Egrioglu et al. [16], Chen and Tanuwijaya [9], Bang and Lee [5].In the stage of defuzzification, Song and Chissom [30] utilized feed forward artificial neural networks. Chen [7], Huarng [19], and Huarng and Yu [21] used centralization method. And, Aladag et al. [2] and Cheng et al. [11] preferred to use a method based on adaptive expectation and centralization methods.The stage of the determination of fuzzy relationships is also quite effective on the forecasting performance of fuzzy time series approach. For establishing fuzzy relationships, Song and Chissom [26] used fuzzy relationship matrix and Sullivan and Wodall [31] employed transition matrices based on Markov chain. Chen [7] proposed an approach using the fuzzy logic group relationship tables. Cheng et al. [11], Huarng [19], Huarng and Yu [21], Yu [35] and Egrioglu et al. [16] used fuzzy logic group relationship tables to determine fuzzy relationships. Huarng and Yu [22] and Aladag et al. [1] preferred to use feed forward artificial neural networks to determine fuzzy relationships. In the study of Aladag et al. [3], Elman recurrent neural networks were utilized for the process of determining the fuzzy relationships. To determine the fuzzy relationships, Yu and Huarng [36,37] and Yolcu et al. [34] proposed different approaches in which feed forward artificial neural networks using membership values are used.Many real life fuzzy time series contains complex relationships which cannot be explained by only using first order lagged variables. Since first order fuzzy time series forecasting models do not include high order lagged variables, these models can be insufficient. In the high order models used in the literature, all lagged variables take place in the model depending on the model order. In this case, fuzzy lagged variables which are not significant in explaining fuzzy relationships will be also in the model and the forecasting performance will be affected negatively. In modeling, it is a well-known fact that variable selection phase is an important issue which directly affects the forecasting performance of a model. However, variable selection has never been performed in the literature for any fuzzy time series approaches. This motivated us to suggest a new fuzzy time series approach in which variable selection is done using genetic algorithms in order to increase forecasting accuracy. In the literature, there has been no variable selection in fuzzy time series method is performed. Bahrepour et al. [6] dealt with determination of model order. However, variable selection was not performed in Bahrepour et al. [6]. In this study, by defining partial high order fuzzy time series forecasting model, a new fuzzy time series forecasting method is proposed. In the proposed method, fuzzy lagged variables are selected by using genetic algorithms. Since only significant lagged variables are used in the model, the constructed model is a partial high order fuzzy time series forecasting model.Basic definitions of fuzzy time series are given in the second section of the paper. Genetic algorithms are briefly summarized in the third section. In the fourth section, the algorithm of the proposed method is presented. In Section 5, the proposed method is compared to other methods in the literature. Finally, in the last section, the obtained results are discussed.The fuzzy time series was firstly introduced in Song and Chissom [28]. The fuzzy time series, time variant and time invariant fuzzy time series definitions are given below [28].Definition 1Let Y(t) (t=…, 0, 1, 2,…), a subset of real numbers, be the universe of discourse on which fuzzy sets fj(t) are defined. If F(t) is a collection of f1(t), f2(t), … then F(t) is called a fuzzy time series defined on Y(t).Suppose F(t) is caused by F(t−1) only, i.e., F(t−1)→F(t). Then this relation can be expressed as F(t)=F(t−1)° R(t, t−1) where R(t, t−1) is the fuzzy relationship between F(t−1) and F(t), and F(t)=F(t−1)° R(t, t−1) is called the first order model of F(t). “°” represents max–min composition of fuzzy sets.Suppose R(t, t−1) is a first order model of F(t). If for any t, R(t, t−1) is independent of t, i.e., for any t, R(t, t−1)=R(t−1, t−2), then F(t) is called a time invariant fuzzy time series otherwise it is called a time variant fuzzy time series.Song and Chissom [29] firstly introduced an algorithm based on the first order model for forecasting time invariant F(t). In [29], the fuzzy relationship matrix R(t, t−1)=R is obtained by many matrix operations. The fuzzy forecasts are obtained based on max–min composition as below:(1)F(t)=F(t−1)°RThe dimension of R matrix is dependent number of fuzzy sets which are partition number of universe and discourse. If we want using more fuzzy sets, we need more matrix operations for obtain R matrix. In this situation, the method suggested by Song and Chissom [29] is more complex.Definition 4Let F(t) be a fuzzy time series. If F(t) is caused by F(t−2), F(t−1),…, and F(t−n) then this fuzzy logical relationship is represented byThe genetic algorithms were first proposed by Holland [17]. Genetic algorithms have successfully solved many complex optimization problems. It does not require the specific mathematical analysis of optimization problems. Genetic algorithms is based on the principle while good generations survive, the bad generations disappear. The genetic algorithms have some parameters such as population size, evaluation function, crossover rate, mutation rate and maximum generation number. The genetic algorithms search optimal solution with many chromosomes. In one chromosome, there are many gens. The genes are decision variables when genetic algorithms are used for optimization. These genes are represented with some codes. In genetic algorithm binary code system (0.1) is used commonly. But there are other code systems in the literature like real-code or decimal code. This code system plays an important role for the problem. Therefore the researcher must be determined it carefully. Genetic algorithms are generally starting from a random population. The population size can be determined by researchers due to the characteristic of the problem. After first population is randomly generated, various techniques can be utilized in the production of the next generation. When the genetic algorithm cycle finishes the last generation's fittest chromosome is taken as the optimal solution for the problem. The genetic algorithm does not provide the variety after a point so it needs some techniques to ensure the genetic variety. These techniques provide a new variety for the algorithm and also they lead to create new generations.Some of these techniques are crossover, mutation and natural selection which can be summarized as follows:Crossover: The system randomly selects two chromosomes from a population and randomly picks a crossover point from the two selected chromosomes in order to swap genes after this crossover point. This operation is called as the crossover operation. Crossover operator is applied to a population with the probabilityPC. Crossover rate controls the frequency of using crossover operator. Crossover operator is applied toPC.l.npieces of chromosomes in a population. In herePCis the crossover rate, l is the number of genes in a chromosome and n is the number of chromosomes in a population. Crossover rate should be selected carefully. Because high crossover rate performs the population change quickly and low crossover rate reduce the searching velocity. And also, the crossover operation is depending on the crossover rate. A random number is generated from the uniform distribution. Then, the crossover operation is performed if random number is bigger than the crossover rate. The crossover operation is performed as in Fig. 1.Mutation: First of all, the researcher has to determine the mutation rate. Then, one chromosome is randomly selected. If a real value generated from the interval (0,1) is smaller than or equal to the mutation rate, the mutation operation will be performed with a randomly selected gene from the chromosomes. There are various mutation operations based on the characteristic of the problem. Mutation operator is applied toPm.l.npieces of chromosomes in a population. In herePmis the mutation rate, l is the number of genes in a chromosome and n is the number of chromosomes in a population. Mutation rate should be selected carefully like crossover rate. Because high mutation rate enlarge the searching space and this can obstruct to find the suitable solution. If mutation rate is taken low, chromosomes resemble each other more and more and algorithm is chocked. A chromosome structure with four genes is given in Fig. 2. In this figure the second gene of this chromosome is mutated. This means a new gene (the second gene) is generated randomly instead of the old gene. The mutation operation is performed as in below.Natural selection: Each chromosome of any generation is evaluated by using an evaluation function. All chromosomes are ordered according to their corresponding evaluation function values. The best chromosomes are transferred the next generation. Some chromosomes among the worst ones are discarded from generations. Then, the new chromosomes instead of discarded chromosomes are placed to the new generation. The important rule in natural selection is protecting the population size.To solve fuzzy time series faced in real life fuzzy time series forecasting models are frequently used which is given in Eq. (2). In these models, it is unavoidable that fuzzy lagged variables which cannot make any contribution to the explanatory power of the model will be found in the model. This situation will also cause to reduce the forecasting performance of the model. Moreover, it could cause operation congestion. Although Bahrepour et al. [6] dealt with the selection of model order, fuzzy lagged variables selection was not executed. Therefore, in Bahrepour et al. [6], all fuzzy lagged variables are also take place in the model so similar problems exists. It would be wiser to solve the problem of variables selection instead of trying to determine only model order. That will significantly increase the forecasting performance. The model which arises from the result of the selection of fuzzy lagged variables is called as partial high order model which is given in Definition 5. We would like to note that in this study, Definition 5, which describes a partial high order fuzzy time series model, is firstly introduced.Definition 5Let F(t) be fuzzy time series. If F(t) is caused by F(t−m1),…, F(t−mk) (1≤m1<…<mk), where mi(i=1,2,…, k) take integer values, fuzzy logical relationship can be represented byThe first step is the fuzzification step. The universe of discourse U can be defined for time series as given in (4) then, and the universe of discourse can be partitioned into “c” subintervals according to a given interval length as seen in (5). Then, fuzzy sets Aj(j=1,2,…, c) can be defined according to the generated subintervals ui(i=1,2,…, c) as given in (6).Finally, each of real observations of time series is mapped into a fuzzy set which has the highest membership value in the interval includes this real observation. Thus, F(t) is generated.Step 2In this step, parameters of the genetic algorithm are determined. These parameters are the number of chromosome cn, the number of gene in a chromosome gn, crossover ratio cr, mutation ratio mr, maximum iteration number maxin, and the number of chromosome, which will be eliminated in each iteration, dcn. The parameter gn also represents the maximum model order. The Length of all chromosomes equals to maximum model order and all of lengths are equal. Maximal order of the model is decided due to the time series. If the number of observations of the time series is great enough, maximum model order can be increased as much as requested. Evaluation function is a measure which is used to evaluate the forecasting performance. Evaluation function is modified version of AIC:The initial population is generated in the third step. For each of cn chromosomes, gn genes are randomly generated. To generate a gene value, an α value is randomly generated from the interval [0,1]. If α≤0.5 the gene value is taken 0, otherwise it is taken 1. An example structure of a chromosome is given in Fig. 3when the number of gene is 8.Chromosomes contain the inputs of the high order partial model. In other words, they consist of fuzzy lagged variables. If a gene in a chromosome is 1, fuzzy lagged variable which corresponds to this gene will be included in the model. If it is 0, then it will not be found in the model.Step 4Evaluation function values are calculated in this step. AICC values are computed by repeating the Steps 4.1–4.5 for each chromosome in the current population.Model order is determined by examining the gene values of a chromosome. For instance, the first, the second and the fourth gene values are 1 for the chromosome given in Fig. 1. Thus, the following high order partial fuzzy time series model corresponds to the model represented by this chromosome.In the model above, m1=1, m2=2, and m3=4 and it is a third order partial fuzzy time series forecasting model.Step 4.2Fuzzy logic relations and fuzzy logic group relations are composed by using generated high order partial model. For example, when the fuzzy time series given in Table 1is examined, fuzzy logic relations and fuzzy logic group relations will be as follows for the model presented in (8).Fuzzy forecasts are calculated with the help of fuzzy logic group relations. Three different situations could arise in the calculation of fuzzy forecasts. For example, ifIfAi1,Ai2,...,Aik→Ajfuzzy logic group relation only exists, the forecast value equals Aj.IfAi1,Ai2,...,Aik→Aj2,Aj2,...,Ajsfuzzy logic group relation exists, the forecast value equalsAj1,Aj2,...,Ajs..IfAi1,Ai2,…,Aik,→#fuzzy logic group relation exists, the forecast value equalsAi1,Ai2,…Aik.Defuzzificated forecasts are calculated. Centralization method is applied for the defuzzification. For Case 1 which is given in Step 4.3, when fuzzy forecast is Aj, the corresponding defuzzificated forecast is the midpoint of the interval ujwhich has the highest membership value in fuzzy set Aj. For Case 2 and 3, when the fuzzy forecast composes more than one fuzzy set, the defuzzified forecast is the mean value of the middle points of intervals which has the highest membership value of corresponding fuzzy sets.When predictions are calculated for Case 3, defuzzified forecasts are computed by using Master Voting (MV) scheme as follows:MV scheme procedure proposed by Kuo et al. [23] obtains forecasts of test set by giving weights to the past linguistic values in the current state. MV scheme gives the highest weight to the latest past linguistic value and the weight of other past linguistic value is increased by one. In accordance with the MV scheme procedure, forecast value of untrained test set values can be calculated with followed equation.Forecasted Value=(mt1×Wh)+mt2+mt3+⋯+mtλWh+(λ−1)In (10), Whand λ represent the highest weight determined by the user, and fuzzy relationship order, respectively. Also,mt1andmtk(2≤k≤λ)are mean values of the intervals which related to the last and the other linguistic values in the current state, respectively.Step 4.5AICC value is calculated by using the formula given in (7).Chromosome (chromosomebest) which is the best solution found so far.Natural selection process is applied by using sequence method. In this method, all chromosomes are sequenced according to their AICC values and dcn chromosomes are discarded with the highest AICC value. Then, dcn chromosomebests are added to the generation by using elitist strategy.Crossover process is performed in this step. In order to perform this process, a mating pool is randomly generated. For each pair of chromosomes in the mating pool, a random value is generated from uniform distribution on the interval (0,1). If the produced random value is smaller than the ratio cr, crossover is applied. Single point crossover method is used in the application of crossover process. In this method, a crossover point is randomly chosen and genes of these chromosomes are exchanged at this random point.Mutation process is executed in this step. A random value is generated from uniform distribution on the interval (0,1) for each chromosome. If the generated value is smaller than ratio mr, mutation operation is applied. In the mutation process, a gene in a chromosome is randomly chosen. If the gene value is 0, it is transformed to 1. Otherwise, it is transformed to 0.Steps from 4 to 8 are repeated until a predetermined number of iterations (maxin) is reached.Optimal solution is taken as chromosomebest.We would like to note again that the flowchart of the algorithm of the proposed approach is also presented in Fig. 4.In the implementation, four real life time series were employed to evaluate the forecasting performance of the proposed approach. These time series are Taiwan Stock Exchange Capitalization Weighted Stock Index (TAIEX) and, three different time series from Index 100 in stocks and bonds exchange market of İstanbul (ISBEMI).In order to evaluate the generalization ability of the proposed method, holdout cross validation method was utilized in the implementation. In this validation method, data set is divided into two subsets which are training and test sets. When the best model and fuzzy relations are determined, the training set is only used. Then, the generalization ability of methods can be evaluated according to a performance measure calculated over the test set.There are some parameters that have to be determined when the proposed method is used. Like in most of fuzzy time series approaches available in the literature, selection of these parameters depends on some factors which can change due to data. In fuzzification phase of the proposed method length of interval is determined. Other parameters are parameters of genetic algorithm that is utilized to determine fuzzy lagged variables for fuzzy time series forecasting model.In the fuzzification step of the proposed approach, length of interval is decided. Determination of length of interval is an important issue in fuzzy time series. The effects of length of interval were discussed in details by Huarng [19]. In the literature, length of interval has been generally determined by trial and error although there have been some systematic approaches to find the best length of interval. In the implementation part of this study, different interval lengths were examined and the best one among them was selected like in most studies available in the literature. Examined values are determined due to the range of related time series. Details can be seen in the following paragraphs.It is a well-known fact that the selection of parameters of genetic algorithms still remains a problem in the literature. May be, utilizing experiment design could be a good way to determine these parameters. However, it could not be possible because of very high computational cost for most applications. Therefore, in the literature, possible values of a parameter have been restricted and the best value of it has been selected among these values specified due to related problem. Another way is that some values for a parameter which were examined in previous studies have been used. In a similar way, in the proposed method, selection of the parameters cn, cr, mr, maxin, dcn, and gn was done due to the related time series or previous studies. In the literature, it is known that good solutions can be obtained for numerical optimization problems when cn is picked as 30. Thus, we also took cn as 30. As mentioned in Step 2 of the proposed algorithm presented in the previous section, gn equals to maximal order of the model and this order can be determined due to the number of observations of related time series. The parameter dcn can be decided proportional to number of chromosomes. The value of maxin can be selected depending on related time series. Other parameters, namely cr, and mr, were taken as 0.1 and 0.01, respectively like in other studies available in the literature.In order to show the performance of the proposed method, the Taiwan Stock Exchange Capitalization Weighted Stock Index data between 01.01.2004 and 31.12.2004 was analyzed. The graph of the time series is shown in Fig. 5. The first 205 observations between 01.01.2004 and 31.10.2004 were used as training set and the last 45 observations were used as test set. The results of the proposed method were compared to those obtained from some fuzzy time series methods proposed by Song and Chissom [29], Chen [7], Chen [8], Huarng and Yu [21], Huarng et al. [20], Yu and Huarng [37], Aladag et al. [1] and Chen and Chen [10]. When the methods proposed by Song and Chissom [27], Chen [7], Chen [8] and Aladag et al. [1] were used, the number of fuzzy sets were taken as 10, 15, 20 and 25 and lengths of interval are determined for these numbers. The results for the methods proposed by Chen and Chen [10], Huarng et al. [2], Yu and Huarng [37] were taken from the study conducted by Chen and Chen [10].As a result of experimentations, parameters of the genetic algorithm were determined as cn=30, cr=0.1, mr=0.01, maxin=500, dcn=5, gn=30. Therefore, there are∑k=13030k=1.073.741.824alternative models. For determining length of interval, 60, 65, 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, and 100 were examined and the best one was found as 75. And, a model which has a satisfactory forecasting performance could be determined by only 500 iterations. It is possible to reach a suitable solution in a reasonable time without examining lots of alternative models. “chromosomebest” which obtained from the proposed method is shown in Fig. 6.1th order partial fuzzy time series forecasting model which corresponds to chromosomebest can be given as follows:F(t−9)→F(t)where k=1, m1=9.The results obtained from all methods are summarized in Table 2. RMSE values calculated over both training and test sets are shown in this table.Root mean square error (RMSE) given in (7) is used as evaluation function in this study.RMSE=∑t=1n(xt−xˆt)2nwhere xtis crisp time series,xˆtis defuzzified forecasts and n is the number of forecasts.When Table 2 is examined, it is clearly seen that the proposed method has the best forecasting accuracy. Also, the proposed method produces very consistent results according to obtained RMSE values for training and test sets. In addition, the forecasting performance of the proposed method is also examined visually. The graph of the observations and forecasts for test set is given in Fig. 7.We divide the data of ISBEMI into three parts to evaluate the forecasting performance of the proposed method better. These three time series were separately forecasted by the proposed method and other methods available in the literature. Then the obtained forecasting results were compared. The periods, from 03.10.2008 to 31.12.2008, from 01.10.2009 to 31.12.2009, and from 01.10.2010 to 23.12.2010 of ISBEMI were referred as Data Set 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The time series graphs of the data sets are given in Figs. 8–10.The last 15 observations of Data Set 1 were employed as test set. These observations are between 05.12.2008 and 31.12.2008. The parameters of genetic algorithm were taken as follows: cn=30, cr=0.1, mr=0.01, maxin=500, dcn=5, and gn=20. To determine the length of interval, 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600, and 1700 were examined and the best one was found as 1500. For these parameters, the obtained chromosomebest was presented in Fig. 11. For comparison, Data Set 1 was also analyzed with other forecasting approaches available in the literature presented in Table 3. For the test sets including 15 observations, the forecasting results produced by all methods were summarized in Table 3. Also, corresponding RMSE values calculated over the test are shown in this table. The results obtained from other methods were taken from [34]. When Table 3 is examined, it is seen that the proposed forecasting approach produces the most accurate results in terms of RMSE measure for Data Set 1.For Data Set 2, the last 15 observations between 11.12.2009 to 31.12.2009 were used as test set. The parameters of genetic algorithm were taken as follows: cn=30, cr=0.1, mr=0.01, maxin=500, dcn=5, and gn=20. To determine the length of interval, 700, 800, 900, 1000, and 1100 were examined and the best one was found as 1000. When these parameters were used for the proposed method, the obtained chromosomebest was presented in Fig. 12. For comparison, Data Set 2 was also forecasted using other forecasting approaches given in Table 4. For the test sets including 15 observations, the forecasting results produced by all methods were summarized in Table 4. Also, corresponding RMSE values calculated over the test are shown in this table. The results obtained from other methods were taken from [34]. According to Table 4, it is seen that the best forecasts are obtained when Data Set 2 is forecasted by the proposed approach.When Data set 3 was analyzed with the proposed method, the last 15 observations from 01.12.2010 to 23.12.2010 were employed for test. cn=30, cr=0.1, mr=0.01, maxin=500, dcn=5, and gn=20 were employed as parameters of the genetic algorithm. To determine the length of interval, 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600, and 1700 were examined and the best one was found as 1500. For these values of the parameters, the chromosomebest obtained from the proposed approach can be seen in Fig. 13. For comparison, Data Set 3 was also forecasted using other forecasting approaches given in Table 5. For the test sets including 15 observations, the forecasting results obtained from all methods were summarized in Table 5. Also, corresponding RMSE values calculated over the test were given in this table. The results obtained from other methods were taken from [34]. When Table 5 is examined, it is observed that the proposed approach has the best forecasting accuracy for Data Set 3 in terms of RMSE.Using first order fuzzy time series forecasting model can be insufficient since complex relationships included in many real life fuzzy time series cannot be explained by only using first order lagged variables. In high order forecasting models available in the literature, all lagged variables have been used in the model depending on the model order. Therefore, fuzzy lagged variables which are not significant in explaining fuzzy relationships will be also in the model and the forecasting performance will be affected negatively. Variable selection has never been performed for any fuzzy time series method in the literature. On the other hand, it is a well-known fact that variable selection process directly affects the forecasting performance of a model. In this study, a high order partial fuzzy time series forecasting model is defined and a new method in which fuzzy lagged variables in this forecasting model are determined by using genetic algorithms is proposed. Since fuzzy lagged variables of the model are determined, the model order is also decided at the same time. Since the defined high order partial model does not include some variables which have no significant effect on the explanatory power of the model, this model has less modeling error than that included by other high order models. To evaluate the forecasting performance of the proposed method was applied to four real time series. For comparison, these time series were also forecasted with other fuzzy time series forecasting methods available in the literature. As a result of the comparison, it was observed that the proposed method has the best forecasting accuracy in terms of RMSE value. Therefore, it can be said that the proposed approach can be used as a good alternative fuzzy time series forecasting approach. In the future studies, in order to improve of forecasting performance of the method proposed in this study, different methods such as artificial neural networks can be used in the stage of determination of fuzzy logic relations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
