@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-view classification of psychiatric conditions based on saccades

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Using saccadic information to classify different psychiatric conditions.Classifiers could be used to reduce the possible diagnoses for a given patient.Simple descriptors are extracted from the saccades.Fictitious saccades help to improve the classification accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Psychiatric conditions,Saccades,Classification,Feature engineering,Biosignal analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Early diagnosis of psychiatric conditions can be enhanced by taking into account eye movement behavior. However, the implementation of prediction algorithms which are able to assist physicians in the diagnostic is a difficult task. In this paper we propose, for the first time, an automatic approach for classification of multiple psychiatric conditions based on saccades. In particular, the goal is to classify 6 medical conditions: Alcoholism, Alzheimer's disease, opioid dependence (two groups of subjects with measurements respectively taken prior to and after administering synthetic opioid), Parkinson's disease, and Schizophrenia. Our approach integrates different feature spaces corresponding to complementary characterizations of the saccadic behavior. We define a multi-view model of saccades in which the feature representations capture characteristic temporal and amplitude patterns of saccades. Four of the current most advanced classification methods are used to discriminate among the psychiatric conditions and leave-one-out cross-validation is used to evaluate the classifiers. Classification accuracies well above the chance levels are obtained for the different classification tasks investigated. The confusion matrices reveal that it is possible to separate conditions into different groups. We conclude that using relatively simple descriptors of the saccadic behavior it is possible to simultaneously classify among 6 different types of psychiatric conditions. Conceptually, our multi-view classification method excels other approaches that focus on statistical differences in the saccadic behavior of cases and controls because it can be used for predicting unseen cases. Classification integrating different characterizations of the saccades can actually help to predict the conditions of new patients, opening the possibility to integrate automatic analysis of saccades as a practical procedure for differential diagnosis in Psychiatry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Differential diagnosis is commonly used by physicians to diagnose a specific disease in a patient or at least to discard potential candidate conditions. Differential diagnosis may be complicated in the early stages of some diseases, and further complicated if the symptoms are common to different medical conditions. The use of automatic procedures that analyze patient data can contribute to improve early diagnosis. However, the implementation of these procedures is not straightforward in many cases due to the characteristics of the available biological data, its complexity, and the wide variability between patients.It has been recognized that eye movement recordings may serve as an early differential diagnostic tool for many psychiatric conditions [1–5]. Fixation and saccades are two primary eye movements whose association to psychiatric conditions has been extensively investigated. Oculomotor fixation is defined as the ability to suppress ocular drifts while maintaining a steady retinal image of a single target of interest. A saccade is a rapid intermittent eye movement, such as that which occurs when the eyes fix on one point after another in the visual field.In this paper we focus on the use of saccadic recordings for the classification of psychiatric conditions. While several researchers confirm that the saccadic behavior contains relevant information, a more challenging task is to actually use this information to predict the psychiatric condition of a given subject. From the machine learning point of view, the prediction task is considerably difficult due to the intrinsic nature of the saccade information (e.g. short time series with a different number of samples) and the potentially wide inter-trial and inter-subject variability. There are also a number of alternative ways to track eye movement that influence the choice of the classification technique. Usually, the electric signal that can be derived using two pairs of contact electrodes placed on the skin around one eye, i.e., electrooculogram (EOG), is used. Another possibility is the use of a portable saccadometer that consists of a transducer, which is worn on the head and measures the subject's eye movement using infra-red reflection.We used data from the 2012 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN 2012) Competition: “Classification of Psychiatric Problems Based on Saccades”. The IJCNN 2012 Competition comprised different classification tasks that involved 165 subjects with 6 medical conditions: Alcoholism, Alzheimer's disease, opioid dependence (two groups of subjects with measurements respectively taken prior to and after administering synthetic opioid), Parkinson's disease, and Schizophrenia. Three different types of saccade measurements were available, although not every type of measurement was available for each subject. The general classification task was to maximize the accuracy of the classifiers using the leave-one-out cross-validation paradigm.Our approach is based on the use of multiple and complementary views of the data. We design features that capture characteristic temporal and amplitude patterns of the saccades. Features are extracted from the direct measurements of the saccades and from interpolations derived from these measurements. We use four possible representations of the data and combine them in different ways in order to identify relevant feature combinations. We show that this multi-view representation of the same data can help to increase the amount of information available for the classification process. Finally, the application of appropriate classifiers, which are able to benefit from this multiple representation is proposed. We evaluate four different classifiers: affinity propagation [6], k-nearest neighbor classifier (KNN) [7], support vector machines (SVM) [8], and random forests [9].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
