@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Particle swarm optimization based nonlinear active noise control under saturation nonlinearity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Saturation nonlinearity effect on the ANC performance is addressed.PSO based nonlinear structure ANC algorithm is proposed.Filter bank based FLANN structure is tuned with PSO.The proposed ANC algorithm does not require secondary path estimate.Computer simulations are carried out for performance evaluation.Sensitivity analysis is done for PSO parameter tuning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Active noise control,Nonlinear ANC,Saturation nonlinearity,Particle swarm optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a method is proposed to overcome the saturation non-linearity linked to the microphones and loudspeakers of active noise control (ANC) system. The reference microphone gets saturated when the acoustic noise at the source increases beyond the dynamic limits of the microphone. When the controller tries to drive the loudspeaker system beyond its dynamic limits, the saturation nonlinearity is also introduced into the system. The secondary path which is generally estimated with a low level auxiliary noise by a linear transfer function does not model such saturation nonlinearity. Therefore, the filtered-x least mean square (FXLMS) algorithm fails to perform when the noise level is increased. For alleviating the saturation nonlinearity effect a nonlinear functional expansion based ANC algorithm is proposed where the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm is suitably applied to tune the parameters of a filter bank based functional link artificial neural network (FLANN) structure, named as PSO based nonlinear structure (PSO-NLS) algorithm. The proposed algorithm does not require any computation of secondary path estimate filtering unlike other conventional gradient based algorithms and hence has got computational advantage. The computer simulation experiments show its superior performance compared to the FXLMS, filtered-s LMS and genetic algorithms under saturation present at both at secondary and reference paths. The paper also includes a sensitivity analysis to study the effect of different parameters on ANC performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The feedforward active noise control (ANC) system employs a reference microphone to sense the undesired noise, a secondary loudspeaker to produce anti-noise and an error microphone to sense the residual noise. The residual noise is used as the error signal for updating the weights of the adaptive controller [1–6]. The schematic diagram of a widely used single channel feedforward ANC system is shown in Fig. 1.The convergence performance of linear ANC techniques is severely affected when it is applied to nonlinear noise process [7–17]. The nonlinearity introduced in ANC may be due to nonlinearity in primary and secondary paths as well as due to chaotic noise and nonminimum phase secondary path. Novel nonlinear ANCs using radial basis function based neural network [7], artificial neural network (ANN) [8,9], Volterra series based algorithms [10–12] and functional link neural network (FLANN) [13] with filtered-s LMS (FSLMS) [14–17] training scheme offer superior performance over the FXLMS based ANCs.The FSLMS algorithm is well accepted due to its low computational burden and better performance over the Volterra filtered-x LMS (VFXLMS) algorithm. In recent past, improved nonlinear ANC algorithms using the VFXLMS and FSLMS algorithm [18–20] have been reported. In all these papers except [18], the authors have evaluated the performance of their algorithms in presence of nonlinearity due to primary path and chaotic noise.The nonlinearity introduced due to the saturation effect of the microphones and loudspeakers are also important while designing the ANC. The saturation nonlinearity effect of the microphones and loudspeakers is observed when the amplitude of inputs is relatively high. This high amplitude of the undesired primary noise drives these microphones and loudspeakers beyond their dynamic range because of their low power characteristics. Therefore, the saturation nonlinearity of the microphones and loudspeakers is considered as the primary source of nonlinearity in the ANC application. The standard FXLMS algorithm does not consider the saturation effect of these microphones and loudspeakers, and hence does not perform satisfactorily and offers poor convergence performance. In last two decades, many researchers have addressed the saturation nonlinearity problem and have proposed various techniques to tackle them.The nonlinearity exhibited by the microphones and loudspeakers due to their saturation behavior is modeled by a scaled error function and a statistical analysis of these error functions in the secondary path by the FXLMS is presented in [21]. A stochastic analysis of the least mean square (LMS) algorithm under saturation nonlinearity is made in [22,23]. A modified cost function to avoid nonlinear saturation effect in FXLMS algorithm is presented in [24]. An indirect method for analyzing the saturation effects in steady state using Fourier analysis [25], bilinear FXLMS algorithm [26] and a nonlinear multiple channel FXLMS using Hammerstein structure to model the secondary path is proposed [27] to analyze and tackle this saturation nonlinearity issue. Nonlinear ANC controllers using neural networks [28] and a training algorithm based on back propagation algorithm for a multilayer perception neural network [29] are developed for nonlinearity due to saturation. Recently, a new method based on predistorter technique is proposed to alleviate the saturation nonlinearity problem of the loudspeaker present in the secondary path [30]. It is observed that all these algorithms use a gradient based adaptive algorithm to train the parameters of a nonlinear or linear control structure. In many situations these derivative based algorithms have a tendency to provide sub-optimal performance.In recent past, a variety of soft and evolutionary computing algorithms has been reported in the literature for performing multivariable and multi-constrained optimization tasks. These population based optimization tools have been successfully employed for many engineering applications such as low-frequency oscillation damping control for energy storage [31], textile defects inspection system [32], optimal freeway local ramp meter [33], proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller in automatic voltage regulator system [34], pulse width modulated based series compensator (PWMSC) damping controller [35], photovoltaic-fuel cell of hybrid electric vehicles [36], driving guidance of full electric vehicles [37], image processing [38], test array generator for fault detection [39] and damage detection using vibration data [40]. These optimization schemes can also be used as derivative free learning of the weights of adaptive systems with less probability of being trapped by local minima problem. Various popular evolutionary computing algorithms recently used in designing efficient ANC systems are genetic algorithms (GA) [41–43] and particle swarm optimization (PSO) [44,45].After reviewing the literature in the area of ANC, it is observed that the implementation of an efficient adaptive ANC system depends on the proper operation of the microphones and loudspeakers systems. These two subsystems ideally should operate within their dynamic limits for achieving proper convergence of the weights of the controller during tuning of the ANC. However, in practice, it is not possible to meet these ideal conditions as the noise source and the environment are mostly dynamic in nature. Thus, there is a requirement to design an efficient ANC system which can update the control parameters properly in presence of saturation nonlinearity of the two subsystems used.To achieve this objective, the paper proposes an evolutionary computing based adaptive training scheme using a nonlinear ANC structure. Out of varieties of evolutionary computing tools the PSO has been chosen because of its simplicity and potentiality of effective optimization of the cost function. The novelty of this paper is the use of nonlinear filter bank adapted with PSO based tuning algorithm for nonlinear ANC problems unlike the previously proposed PSO based ANC [44] where the FIR filter based ANC controller has been tuned with PSO algorithm. In addition to this, a number of simulation cases with varied degree of saturation nonlinearity both at input and output of the controller have been carried out in this paper for the performance evaluation of the proposed algorithm. Unlike the linear ANC algorithms, the nonlinear ANC algorithms need more computation for a number of filtering through secondary path estimate filters for parameter tuning. However, the use of PSO based tuning algorithm for nonlinear ANC algorithm does not require any filtering operation for secondary path estimate and hence is computationally efficient. The conventional linear and nonlinear ANC algorithms also have performance degradation when there is saturation effect as the secondary path is estimated using a low level auxiliary noise excitation and a linear adaptive filter. However, since the present PSO based nonlinear ANC algorithm does not require the secondary path estimate, the performance of the ANC algorithm is not affected due to this estimation error. This is another advantage of the proposed algorithm in addition to the computational advantage.The paper is organized as follows. The ANC system using FXLMS algorithm with saturation nonlinearity is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 presents in detail, the proposed method of PSO based nonlinear structure (PSO-NLS) ANC. Section 4 deals with the computer simulation results of the FXLMS, FSLMS, GA and the proposed PSO-NLS ANC. The sensitivity analysis for parameter tuning is carried out in Section 5. The conclusion of the paper is presented in Section 6.The conventional FXLMS algorithm [1–6] assumes that the secondary path is linear in nature. Accordingly, a linear estimate of the secondary path,Sˆ(z)is pre-evaluated and is used to filter the reference signal, x(n). The secondary path is an electro-acoustic path consisting of a digital to analog converter, reconstruction filter, power amplifier, loudspeaker, acoustic path from the canceling loudspeaker to the error microphone, preamplifier, anti-aliasing filter and analog to digital converter. As explained earlier, when there is a nonlinear response seen within the secondary path, due to the saturation effect of the loudspeaker and amplifiers, this algorithm fails to adapt its parameters and hence provide poor performance. The increase in the noise level may also drive the reference microphone to its saturation limit which again introduces further nonlinearity. Therefore, the block diagram shown in Fig. 1 is modified for FXLMS algorithm considering the saturation nonlinearity in Fig. 2.In this study, the saturation nonlinearity is assumed as a hyperbolic tangent function, (tanh(βx)), where β is termed as ‘saturation grade’. By varying the value of β, the nonlinear response varies. Fig. 3shows a set of input–output response of this form of saturation nonlinearity which is obtained by varying β. It is observed that as β increases the function saturates after a smaller range of the input variable. In other words, the linear range of operation of these functions gets reduced with increase in β. The microphone and the loudspeaker systems generally have this type of inherent nonlinearity which limits the dynamic range of operation.In this study, the secondary path is modified as a sigmoidal nonlinearity function (tanh(βx)) followed by a linear dynamic transfer function [18]. The microphone signal is directly used by the FXLMS algorithm based controller without considering saturation nonlinearity. In addition, it is assumed that the reference signal is collected by a microphone exhibiting a sigmoidal type nonlinearity function. It is also assumed that the error microphone operates in linear region of its characteristics. The noise level near the source is generally higher than that at the point of cancelation. Therefore, there is a greater chance that the reference microphone saturates by the received noise signal more than the error microphone.In the remaining portion of the paper the following notations have been employed.Notation convention:x(n)Reference signal at nth timeNLength of the adaptive FIR filterMOrder of functional expansioniFunctional expansion indexPPopulation sizepParticle index in the populationKNumber of samples used to calculate mean square error (MSE)kGeneration/iteration indexnTime indexW, Ws,i, Wc,iPopulation matrix of FIR filters excited by x(n), sin(iπx(n)) and cos(iπx(n)), respectivelywp, ws,ip, wc,ipThe pth column vector of W, Ws,iand Wc,imatrices, respectivelyV, Vs,i, Vc,iVelocity matrices of FIR filter excited by x(n), sin(iπx(n)) and cos(iπx(n)), respectivelywpbestp,wSpbesti,p,wCpbesti,pPersonal best value of wp,Ws,ip, andWc,ip, respectivelywgbest,wSgbesti,wCgbestiGlobal best value in W, Ws,iand Wc,imatrices, respectivelyξ(p)MSE of K samples for the pth particler1 and r2Two random numbers in the range [0, 1]ωInertia weight in the range [1, 0]c1 and c2Positive constants called acceleration coefficientsSince the gradient based algorithm in FXLMS [2–6] or FSLMS [15–17] based ANC system optimize their weights sub-optimally under saturation effect of microphone and loudspeaker systems, an evolutionary algorithm called the PSO is proposed to be suitably applied for this problem. The design of ANC system is formulated as an optimization problem to minimize the mean square error (MSE) computed from the error signal received by the error microphone. The parameters of the ANC are trained in such a way that the desired anti-noise is produced to destroy the noise present in the region of interest. For achieving this objective the PSO based training scheme of the coefficients has been proposed and presented in Fig. 4(a). As explained in [44], the reference microphone signal is passed through a demultiplexer (DMUX). The outputs of demultiplexer are connected to each of the nonlinear adaptive filter banks. According to the select input of the demultiplexer, only one of the P nonlinear adaptive filter banks is activated by the reference microphone signal to generate the output. The outputs of these nonlinear adaptive filter banks are connected to a multiplexer (MUX). The MUX has the same select input as that of the DMUX. The output of this MUX is the control signal used to drive the loudspeaker to generate the antinoise. The nonlinear adaptive filter bank structure presented in Fig. 4(b) is followed from [14–16].The PSO optimizes the objective function efficiently by continuously updating the position of the particles, which represent the solution candidates. According to the basic PSO [46], the particles move around the search space and at any time it has a position and a velocity. The position and velocity of each particle are updated by using its present position and velocity, its personal best position (pbest) and global best position (gbest) among them. Two basic equations on velocity and position, (7) and (8) update the particles toward the global best position. After few such movements all particles tend to reach the best solution, which represents the global best position (gbest). The filter coefficients of each of the nonlinear adaptive filter banks represent a particle and P sets of filter coefficients of the adaptive filters are regarded as the population. Nonlinear ANC algorithm using FSLMS algorithm [14–17] has an efficient structure where the reference signal, x(n) is transformed to nonlinear terms as:(1){x(n),sin(πx(n)),cos(πx(n)),…,sin(Mπx(n)),cos(Mπx(n))}where M is the order of expansion of sine and cosine terms. Each of these functionally expanded signal elements is passed through an adaptive finite impulse response (FIR) filter as shown in Fig. 4(b). Let N be the number of coefficients in each of these FIR filters. Therefore, for Mth order functional expansion, there will be (2M+1)N number of parameters required to be updated. On the other hand when PSO based weight update scheme is used, a random population with P sets of (2M+1) parameters is required to be initialized as position matrix. For simpler representation, population matrix of each of these FIR filters is defined as follows:(2a)W=w11w12⋯w1Pw21w22⋯w2P⋮⋮⋯⋮wN1wN2⋯wNP,(2b)Ws,i=ws,i,11ws,i,12⋯ws,i,1Pws,i,21ws,i,22⋯ws,i,2P⋮⋮⋯⋮ws,i,N1ws,i,N2⋯ws,i,NP,(2c)Wc,i=wc,i,11wc,i,12⋯wc,i,1Pwc,i,21wc,i,22⋯wc,i,2P⋮⋮⋯⋮wc,i,N1wc,i,N2⋯wc,i,NP,where W represents the position matrix of the population matrix which is equivalent to the coefficient matrix of P number of FIR filters whose input is x(n). Similarly Ws,iand Wc,irepresent the position matrices corresponding to the FIR filter coefficients which are excited by sin(iπx(n)) and cos(iπx(n)), respectively. Each of these matrices is of size N×P, where N represents number of parameters to be optimized and P is the population size. Similar to conventional PSO algorithm, velocity matrices, V, Vs,iand Vc,iof same size (N×P) are initialized and updated, where i=1, 2, 3, …, M. Each column of W, Ws,iand Wc,irepresents a particle in a swarm. These particles correspond to the coefficients at a particular instant of the nonlinear filter.The reference microphone signal is functionally expanded and input signal vectors are created as(3a)X(n)={x(n),x(n−1),x(n−2),…,x(n−N+1)}1×N(3b)Xs,i(n)={xs,i(n),xs,i(n−1),xs,i(n−2),…,xs,i(n−N+1)}1×N(3c)Xc,i(n)={xc,i(n),xc,i(n−1),xc,i(n−2),…,xc,i(n−N+1)}1×Nwhere(4a)xs,i(n)=sin(iπx(n))and(4b)xc,i(n)=cos(iπx(n))where i=1, 2, 3, …, M. The output of this ANC controller using the p th particle of the population matrix is given by(5)yp(n)=x(n)wp(n)+∑i=1Mxs,i(n)ws,i,p(n)+xc,i(n)wc,i,p(n)where wp, ws,i,pand wc,i,pare the pth column vector of W, Ws,iand Wc,imatrices, respectively. This control signal, yp(n) is passed through the secondary path to getdˆp(n).The mean square error (MSE) when K input samples are passed is defined as(6)ξ(p)=1K∑n=1K[d(n)−dˆp(n)]2where d(n) is the output of primary path, i.e., the noise at the point of cancelation and x(n) is the noise at the source. Consecutive K samples are fed to each particle of the swarm. Therefore, in each generation KP samples are used and a vector of P numbers of MSE is generated. This MSE is considered as the cost function and is minimized using the principle of the PSO. It is also used to choose the pbest of each particle as well as the gbest of the swarm after unit time (every generation).The update equation has been derived using the flying experiences of its own and that of the other members in the swarm. The position of the pth particle and its velocity in the kth move are denoted by [wp(k), ws,i,p(k), wc,i,p(k)] and [vp(k), vs,i,p(k), vc,i,p(k)], respectively, where i=1, 2, 3, …, M. The position of the pth particle with the lowest MSE or cost function in the previous position is denoted as personal best and is represented as [pbestp, Spbesti,p, Cpbesti,p] and the corresponding position is represented as[wpbestp,wSpbesti,p,wCpbesti,p]. The best among all the particles is denoted as the global best and is represented as [gbest, Sgbesti, Cgbesti] and its position is represented as[wgbest,wSgbesti,wCgbesti]. The PSO algorithm updates the velocity and the position of each particle to reach the global best position which represents the desired solution. The position and velocity of each particle are updated according to the following update equations.(7a)vp(k)=ω(k)[vp(k−1)]+c1r1[wpbestp−wp(k−1)]+c2r2[wgbest−wp(k−1)],(7b)vs,i,p(k)=ω(k)[vs,i,p(k−1)]+c1r1[wSpbesti,p−ws,i,p(k−1)]+c2r2[wSgbesti−ws,i,p(k−1)],(7c)vc,i,p(k)=ω(k)[vc,i,p(k−1)]+c1r1[wCpbesti,p−wc,i,p(k−1)]+c2r2[wCgbesti−ws,i,p(k−1)]and(8a)wp(k)=wp(k−1)+vp(k),(8b)ws,i,p(k)=ws,i,p(k−1)+vs,i,p(k),(8c)wc,i,p(k)=wc,i,p(k−1)+vc,i,p(k),where, r1 and r2 are two random numbers and are generated independently in the range [0, 1] and ω which is in the range [ωi, ωe] called the inertia weight that compromises the effect of the previous velocity of particle on its current velocity. In the initial stage, the value of ω decreases rapidly from maximum value ωiand then decreases slowly around the optimum value till ωe. c1 and c2 are positive constants called acceleration coefficients which control the maximum step size. Equations in (7) computes new velocities for each particle using its previous velocities, [vp(k−1), vs,i,p(k−1), vc,i,p(k−1)]; the particle's position at which the best fitness has been achieved,[wpbestp,wSpbesti,p,wCpbesti,p], and the best positions of each particle achieved so far among the neighbors[wgbest,wSgbesti,wCgbesti]. Eq. (8) updates the position of each particle in the solution hyperspace. This process is continued until the cost function remains almost constant and does not decrease further. This algorithm is termed as PSO based nonlinear structure (PSO-NLS) ANC. This algorithm becomes a PSO based linear structure (PSO-LS) ANC when it uses only the W matrix [44].To assess the performance of the proposed PSO based nonlinear structure (PSO-NLS) ANC algorithm a number of simulation experiments is carried out with and without saturation nonlinearity in the secondary path. The linear part of the secondary path is chosen as S(z)=z−1+1.5z−2−z−3. The nonlinear function which is followed by this linear transfer function of the secondary path is a tanh(βx) function. The value of β is adjusted to vary the saturation nonlinearity. The primary path can be either linear or nonlinear in characteristics. The transfer function of the linear primary path is taken as P(z)=z−5+0.2z−6+0.5z−7−0.9z−8. To simulate a nonlinear primary path the output of this linear transfer function d1(n) is operated nonlinearly as follows to get d(n) which is regarded as the output of the primary path.(9)d(n)=d1(n)+0.2d12(n−1)+0.4d13(n−1)The error signals obtained by FXLMS and FSLMS algorithms are plotted with respect to input sample number for comparison purpose. The results of the two evolutionary computing algorithms are presented by plotting the MSE value of the best particle in the population called the gbest. In genetic algorithm (GA), the MSE corresponding to the fittest candidate is plotted for every generation. This minimum MSE is progressively reduced and finally attains a lowest possible value. This minimum steady state MSE is used as the performance criterion to compare different algorithms.The simulation study is grouped into two parts. Part A deals with linear primary path and PSO based linear structure (PSO-LS) ANC by using only W matrix as defined in (2a). The performance comparison is made with GA based linear ANC under different saturation nonlinearity situations.In Part B, the performance of the PSO-NLS ANC proposed in Section 3 is presented for saturation nonlinearity with both linear and nonlinear secondary paths. Both FXLMS and FSLMS algorithms are also simulated for comparison of the steady state MSE obtained using either linear or nonlinear ANC structure. Table 1provides a list of ten experiments carried out under different input noise sources and saturation nonlinearities in the reference and secondary paths.In this case, the PSO based linear structure (PSO-LS) ANC with W matrix defined in (2a) is used. The performance of this algorithm is evaluated assuming the primary path to be linear. In Part A, all simulation experiments are carried out with P=100, K=200, c1=c2=ω(k)=1 for PSO-LS and with P=600, K=200 for GA based weight update scheme.In this experiment, the nonlinearity in the secondary path is chosen as tanh(βy(n)), where β=1, 2, 3. The noise source is generated using 2(rand−0.5) which generates uniformly distributed random numbers between −1 and +1. This represents a uniformly distributed white noise. Simulation of the FXLMS, GA and PSO-LS based training scheme algorithms is carried out considering different grades ‘β’ of saturation nonlinearity and a linear primary path. The FXLMS algorithm based controller shows degraded performance under loudspeaker saturation (shown in Fig. 5(a)). The performance of the GA and PSO-LS based ANC algorithms are presented in Fig. 5(b) and (c), respectively, for all the three nonlinear cases. It is found that compared to the GA, the PSO-LS algorithm provides better convergence of the MSE both in terms of rate as well as the residual MSE. To have a fair comparison, the steady state residual noise in terms of the MSE is compared in Table 2which shows the effectiveness of the PSO-LS algorithm.In this experiment, saturation nonlinearity is considered both at reference and secondary paths. It is assumed that the saturation nonlinearities are of tanh(·) nature. This type of saturation functions offers linear characteristics when the level input is low. But, when the input level is increased the nonlinearity effect becomes prominent. Therefore, simulation of FXLMS, GA and PSO based ANC algorithms is conducted for three different random signals (rand−0.5), 2(rand−0.5) and 3(rand−0.5) whose dynamic ranges are (−0.5to+0.5), (−1to+1) and (−1.5to+1.5), respectively. The plots in Fig. 6(a) reveal that the FXLMS algorithm shows poor performance when the level of the input noise increases. The GA based algorithm converges under no saturation or low level of reference noise (rand−0.5), but when this noise level increases, the GA based training leads to poor convergence (Fig. 6(b)). The performance of the PSO-LS based ANC is shown in Fig. 6(c) which shows satisfactory convergence till the dynamic range of the input is 2(rand−0.5), but it shows divergence when the input is 3(rand−0.5).Table 3presents the residual noise at steady state in terms of MSE for the FXLMS, GA and PSO-LS based ANC algorithms. From Table 3 it is evident that the performance of PSO-LS in terms of steady state MSE is better than the other two algorithms.In this experiment, a saturation nonlinear function is placed in the reference path. The secondary path nonlinearity is withdrawn. The noise source is chosen as a uniform random number generated by 2(rand−0.5) which generates random number between −1 and +1. The FXLMS, GA and PSO-LS based algorithms are used to tune the linear ANC parameters under three different reference nonlinearities: tanh(x(n)), tanh(2x(n)) and tanh(3x(n)). Fig. 7(a) shows that the FXLMS degrades the ANC performance under higher saturation at reference path. Using the GA based ANC having P=600 with K=200, the convergence performance is better than the FXLMS algorithm as shown in Fig. 7(b). It is found that at higher nonlinearity, tanh(3x(n)), the GA converges to a higher MSE. However, the PSO-LS based ANC algorithm converges to better minimum MSE with P=100 and K=200 as shown in Fig. 7(c). The comparison of steady state residual error in terms of the MSE is presented in Table 4. This shows that the PSO-LS has better performance compared to both the FXLMS and GA based ANC algorithms.In this experiment, the reference nonlinearity is chosen as tanh(x(n)). The secondary path saturation is not used. The input noise power is increased by generating them as (rand−0.5), 2(rand−0.5) and 3(rand−0.5). The plots in Fig. 8(a) show that the ANC system using FXLMS algorithm does not converge for higher noise levels. The convergences performance of the GA and PSO-LS based training schemes are presented in Fig. 8(b) and (c), respectively. The corresponding MSE comparison at steady state is presented in Table 5. Table 5 shows the superior performance of the PSO-LS based ANC compared to the GA and FXLMS based ANC algorithm.In this experiment, saturation nonlinearity is considered at both reference and secondary paths. The reference noise amplitude is kept constant and is generated by using (rand−0.5). The saturation grade ‘β’ is varied. The FXLMS based ANC system has failed to converge under these dual nonlinear saturation cases as shown in Fig. 9(a). The GA based algorithm having P=600 with K=200 shows convergence only for β=1 and 2 as shown in Fig. 9(b). But, the PSO-LS based algorithm having P=100 and K=200 exhibits better convergence performance than that of GA as shown in Fig. 9(c). However, both GA and PSO-LS based ANC algorithms are diverged for β=3 (very high saturation nonlinearity case). Table 6shows the performance comparison of the FXLMS, GA and PSO-LS based ANC algorithm under saturation nonlinearity at both reference and secondary path which indicates that the proposed PSO-LS based ANC shows the superior performance compared to the other two.In this part, the performance of the PSO based nonlinear structure (PSO-NLS) ANC is evaluated and compared with that obtained from the FXLMS trained linear ANC, FSLMS based nonlinear ANC and PSO-LS based ANC under different saturation nonlinearity cases. The primary path is considered either linear or nonlinear depending on the specific experiment. All simulation experiments are carried out with P=200, K=200, c1=c2=ω(k)=1 for the PSO-LS ANC and P=600, c1=2, c2=1, K=200, and inertia parameter, ω(k)=[0.8, 0.1], where 0.8 and 0.1 are the initial and final values of ω(k) which varies from 0.8 to 0.1 at equal interval during the complete experiment, for the PSO-NLS. Both the FXLMS and FSLMS based ANCs are also simulated for comparison of performance.In this experiment, a tonal noise source consisting of 160Hz, 320Hz and 480Hz with amplitudes 0.3, 0.2 and 0.1, respectively is chosen. The sampling frequency used is fs=8kHz. The saturation in the secondary path is only considered. The primary path is considered as linear. A linear structure of ANC with only one FIR filter is used in the FXLMS and PSO-LS based training scheme. The corresponding error convergence is shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b), respectively. The PSO-NLS based training scheme with M=1 is chosen for the nonlinear scheme. The error convergence characteristics of these two algorithms are presented in Fig. 10(c) and (d), respectively. Table 7presents the steady state residual noise in terms of MSE for all these algorithms. It is found that the PSO-NLS based ANC yields the minimum MSE as compared to other three algorithms with a linear primary path.In this experiment, the noise source is considered as a multi-tone noise as used in Experiment 6. The primary path is nonlinear as defined in the beginning of the simulation section. The grade, β, of the secondary path nonlinearity is varied and the performance of the FXLMS, FSLMS, PSO-LS and PSO-NLS ANCs are evaluated. It is found from Fig. 11(a) that the FXLMS converges with a higher steady state error level as nonlinear primary path has been used. The PSO-LS also converges similarly to a higher steady state error level. However, the nonlinear algorithms like FSLMS and PSO-NLS converge to lower steady state MSE level (Fig. 11(c) and (d)). It is observed that, as expected, the PSO-NLS exhibits the best results as compared to the other three schemes. Table 8shows the comparative MSE of the four different ANC schemes under nonlinear primary and secondary paths. It is observed from Table 8 that the PSO-NLS ANC provides the best performance among these four ANC schemes.In this experiment, the random noise input is generated by 2(rand−0.5) and the primary path is nonlinear as defined in the beginning of the simulation section. The grade,‘β’, of saturation nonlinearity in the secondary path is increased and the convergence performance for FXLMS and PSO-LS are plotted in Fig. 12(a) and (b), respectively. This shows that the performance of both the linear ANCs is degraded under saturation nonlinearity and nonlinearity in the primary path. The conventional FSLMS based ANC also shows degraded performance under high saturation nonlinearity (Fig. 12(c)). However, the PSO-NLS is capable of converging to a lower MSE as shown in Fig. 12(d). Table 9exhibits a steady state MSE obtained using the FXLMS, FSLMS, PSO-LS and PSO-NLS ANC schemes. The results indicate that the performance of the PSO-NLS based ANC scheme is a better candidate than that of the FSLMS based counterpart under nonlinear primary and secondary path conditions.In this experiment, the primary path is assumed to be nonlinear and the reference path is saturated by a tanh(x(n)) function. Depending on the power of the noise source the secondary path allows saturation of the signal and hence the performance of the conventional FXLMS based ANC degrades. The input noise power is increased by generating them as (rand−0.5), 2(rand−0.5) and 3(rand−0.5). The performance of the FXLMS, PSO-LS, FSLMS and PSO-NLS ANCs is obtained through simulation study and plotted in Fig. 13(a)–(d), respectively. It is found that the PSO-NLS provides the best result in presence of both primary and reference paths nonlinearities. Table 10compares the MSE of all these four ANCs, which shows that the PSO-NLS achieves the minimum MSE among all these schemes and hence is the preferred one.In this experiment, the primary path is considered to be nonlinear; and the reference and secondary paths have saturation nonlinearity. The performance of the FXLMS, FSLMS and PSO-NLS are compared under these conditions. Plots of simulation results in Fig. 14(a) show that the FXLMS does not converge at all in any of the cases. Fig. 14(b) shows that the FSLMS being a nonlinear ANC system converges under the given nonlinearity condition. But, the PSO-NLS converges to the minimum MSE level. The comparative MSE obtained through the simulation study at steady state is tabulated in Table 11.Since the performance of the PSO based ANC algorithm depends on many parameters with random initialization of particle and velocity matrices, the following analysis is made for parameter tuning. Out of ten simulation experiments, one such simulation case of nonlinear primary path with noise generated using 2(rand−0.5) and considering both input and output saturation with β=2 as in Experiment 10 is chosen for sensitivity analysis. The PSO based nonlinear structure (PSO-NLS) with different parameter combinations for population size, sample size, filter length, c1 and c2 (as shown in Table 12) are chosen.Conventional full factorial design requires 45=1024 runs to study the impact of five parameters (shown in Table 12) each at four levels. However, by using Taguchi's factorial experimental design only 16 runs are required that offers a great advantages of deciding which simulation runs should be performed for parameter tuning [47]. The simulation observations are further transformed into signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) based on loss function proposed by Taguchi [47]. According to Taguchi's L16 (45) orthogonal array design the results of the error trials are calculated in Table 13. Since minimum error is taken into consideration for the analysis, the SNR are calculated under “smaller-is-better” characteristics as logarithmic transformation of loss function, given by(10)''Smalleristhebetter''characteristic:SNR=−10log101n∑e2where ‘n’ is the number of observations and ‘e’ is the observed error. The mean value of error obtained for each parameter combination from 10 simulation runs is used for analysis. The overall mean value of the SNR is found to be∑SNR/16dB.The analysis is made by using MINITAB14 software specifically used for design of experiment (DOE) applications. The response table for SNR under “smaller-is-the-better” characteristic is shown in Table 14. Table 14 indicates the delta value of the individual control factor based on SNR and accordingly a rank is assigned to indicate the relative significance of the control factors on the performance of the nonlinear ANC. The filter length having higher delta value is found to be most significant factor followed by sample size for this ANC application. Fig. 15shows the main effects plot for SNR of individual control factors. From graphical analysis (Fig. 15) it is concluded that the minimum error could be obtained with combinations of population size=600, sample size=200, filter length=10, c1=2, c2=1.The sensitivity analysis that is required to know the impact of various factors, the analysis of variance (ANOVA) table [48–51] is presented which shows the order of significant factors. The ANOVA uses the SNR responses for these calculations. Table 15shows the result of ANOVA with the error. This analysis is taken for a confidence level of 95% significance. The last column of Table 15 indicates the percentage of contribution of different control parameters on the ANC performance. It is observed that the filter length has highest impact (67.16%) and the factor c2 has the least impact (0.76%) for the performance outcome of the ANC.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper deals with the issues related to saturation nonlinearity linked to the reference microphone and the secondary path. The performance of the conventional FXLMS algorithm which is employed to a linear combiner scheme degrades under saturation nonlinearity because the nonlinear behavior of secondary path does not reflect in its estimate by a linear model. Also, the secondary paths are conventionally estimated with a low level auxiliary signal. The saturation nonlinearity behavior is not observed in case of low level inputs. Therefore, a derivative free training scheme based ANC system is proposed which does not require the secondary path estimate to update the ANC algorithm. The PSO based algorithm which does not require the estimation of the secondary path is suitably applied to tune the parameters of a filter bank based nonlinear FLANN structure, named as PSO based nonlinear structure (PSO-NLS) ANC. Through various simulation based experiments, it is shown that the PSO offers improved training of the parameters of both linear and nonlinear ANC structures and hence capable of reducing the MSE to much lower value under higher grade of saturation nonlinearity both in reference and secondary paths. The proposed PSO-NLS ANC is also capable of controlling the noise under nonlinear primary path. The performance of the proposed PSO-NLS ANC is compared with the FXLMS, FSLMS and GA based ANC algorithms. It is observed that the performance of the proposed PSO-NLS based ANC algorithm shows superior performance than that of other ANC systems under saturation nonlinearity of primary and secondary paths. Through sensitivity analysis the effect of different parameters on the ANC performance is evaluated and it is found that in a specific case of input and output nonlinear saturation, the filter length has highest impact on the performance of ANC. Therefore, for optimizing these parameters in a specific ANC situation, such sensitive analysis is required for parameter tuning.