@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identifying the tool-tissue force in robotic laparoscopic surgery using neuro-evolutionary fuzzy systems and a synchronous self-learning hyper level supervisor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing two novel hybrid intelligent systems.Applying the proposed systems to estimation of the tool-tissue force in robotic laparoscopic surgery.Evaluating the performance of hyper-level supervision for extracting the optimum architecture of fuzzy systems.Conducting a comparative study to elaborate on the authenticity of the proposed methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Soft tissue modeling,System identification,Neuro-fuzzy computing,Evolutionary-fuzzy computing,Pareto optimality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, two different hybrid intelligent systems are applied to develop practical soft identifiers for modeling the tool-tissue force as well as the resulted maximum local stress in laparoscopic surgery. To conduct the system identification process, a 2D model of an in vivo porcine liver was built for different probing tasks. Based on the simulation, three different geometric features, i.e. maximum deformation angle, maximum deformation depth and width of displacement constraint of the reconstructed shape of the deformed body are extracted. Thereafter, two different fuzzy inference paradigms are proposed for the identification task. The first identifier is an adaptive co-evolutionary fuzzy inference system (ACFIS) which takes advantage of bio-inspired supervisors to be reconciled to the characteristics of the problem at hand. To learn the fuzzy machine, the authors propose a co-evolutionary technique which uses a modified optimizer called scale factor local search differential evolution (SFLSDE) as the core metaheuristic. The concept of co-evolving is implemented through a consequential optimization procedure in which the degree of optimality of the ACFIS architecture is evaluated by sharing the characteristics of both antecedent and consequent parts between two different SFLSDEs. The second identifier is an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) which is based on the use of some well-known neuro computing concepts, i.e. back-propagation learning and synaptic nodal computing, for tuning the construction of the fuzzy identifier. The two proposed techniques are used to identify the force and maximum local stress of tool-tissue. Based on the experiments, the authors have observed that each of the identifiers have their own advantages and disadvantages. However, both ACFIS and ANFIS succeed to identify the model outputs precisely. Moreover, to ascertain the veracity of the derived systems, the authors adopt a Pareto-based hyper-level heuristic approach called synchronous self-learning Pareto strategy (SSLPS). This technique provides the authors with good information regarding the optimum controlling parameters of both ACFIS and ANFIS identifiers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computational intelligence (CI) and soft computing techniques have significant contributions for handling a variety of deficiencies associated with real-world problems. Reported researches cover a wide spectrum of applications including healthcare issues [1,42], manufacturing [2], robotics [3], control [4], aerospace [5], design [6], structural systems [43,51], risk minimization [44,45], etc. Such versatility persuades the researchers of both CI and engineering communities to focus on different concepts of soft computing to extend the current techniques to be applied to various real-world nonlinear engineering problems [46–48,52]. It would not be an exaggeration if we contend that hybrid intelligent methodologies are among the most practical soft techniques. This is because handling a real life problem requires different rudimental issues such as finding a fast and interpretable model, finding the optimum tolerance of a soft system and its robustness to be taken into account. To do so, one needs different types of soft techniques including evolutionary and swarm based heuristics, neural systems and fuzzy inference systems (FISs). There exist several rationales which endorse the authenticity and applicability of hybrid techniques for handling real-world problems.Zhou et al. [7] developed a new fuzzy neural network for manufacturing process control. To elaborate on capabilities of the proposed method, they developed a physical experiment for manufacturing process control task. They observed that the hybrid soft method has an acceptable stability and computational complexity. Fathi and Mozaffari [8] proposed a hybrid evolvable recursive black-box which uses cellular naturally inspired supervisors for real-time modeling of the behavior of a shape memory alloy. Based on numerical experiments, they observed that the proposed technique can effectively evolve the structure of the black-box. Besides, their investigations proved that the resulted hybrid neuro-evolutionary method has an aptitude to be applied for modeling the nonlinear hysteresis behavior of shape memory alloys. Gao et al. [9] engaged a hybrid cellular particle swarm optimization algorithm to find the optimal parameters of a multi-pass milling process. Based on numerical simulation, they proved that traditional optimization methods are not able to cope with the problem at hand. This is partially due to the existence of constraints of different types which need to be taken into account to achieve a practical solution. To tackle the problem, they integrated the concepts of cellular computing and swarm intelligent computing. Finally, they concluded that the method could overcome the complexities of the problem. In [10], a number of hybrid intelligent systems were proposed to predict the reliability of softwares. To do so, several comparative tests were conducted. The results indicated that hybrid soft systems have their own advantages, e.g. robustness, speed, generalization, for predicting the reliability of softwares. Syafaruddin et al. [11] developed a hybrid fuzzy wavelet network identification system to find the optimum operating point of non-crystalline silicon solar cells. They observed that the method has a very good generalization capability for different conditions. Koker [12] developed a hybrid genetic neural network to find the inverse kinematics solution of six-joint Stanford robotic manipulator. The results revealed that combining the Elman neural networks with genetic algorithm (GA) can yield a very promising solution. Chen et al. [49] proposed a fuzzy controller for nonlinear time delay systems with disturbance. They used fuzzy Lyapunov method to derive the stability criterion. Based on numerical experiments, they observed that the proposed controller can not only stabilize the nonlinear chaotic system, but also has robustness against external disturbance. Yeh et al. [50] proposed a neural controller based on TSK fuzzy method and parallel distributed compensation scheme for a time-delay chaotic building system. To attest the applicability of the intelligent controller, it was used for a tuned mass damper system. The experimental results indicated that the controller can effectively cope with nonlinear engineering problems.In the light of such promising reports, hybrid intelligent systems achieved reputability, and researchers extend the realm of applications of CI to much more intricate engineering fields.Applications of hybrid intelligent techniques in medicine are not new to the engineering society [13]. In recent decades, soft computing has come to the aid of the researchers of medical engineering. These researches range from the applications of soft techniques in surgery and medical robotic to verifying the effects of chemical substances on human's health. Becker et al. [14] used fuzzy logic to design an intelligent patient monitoring and alarm system for high invasive surgery. It was reported that the developed intelligent tool can cope with the inter-individual variability of the patients. Stoean et al. [15] developed a hybrid evolutionary-driven support vector machine (SVM) to determine the degree of liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Through the experiments, it was observed that the use of evolutionary computing (EC) for evolving the parameters of SVM alleviated the computational complexity associated with fibrosis degree prediction. Heydari et al. [16] applied a hybrid neuro-fuzzy inference system for classification of ACL-ruptured knees using arthrometric data. It was observed that the intelligent classifier is capable of dealing with marginal arthrometric data of knees with partially disrupted ACL or hyper-mobility syndrome. Qidwai et al. [17] adopted a FIS method to predict the failed back surgery syndrome. The results implied that the expert system can assist medical professionals to make better decisions in terms of posture management, life style, and pain management to prevent the back surgery from failing. Santamaria et al. [18] proposed hybrid memetic approaches for 3D reconstruction of forensic objects. They concluded that memetic algorithms can properly be applied on the craniofacial identification problem. Shih and Wu [19] used a hybrid intelligent scheme by embedding the watermark of signature information as well as textual data in the proximity of the region of interest of a medical image based on GA. Through the experiments, they observe that the proposed hybrid technique can effectively extract important information from medical images. In a seminal work by Pattaraintakorn and Cercone [20], a foundation of rough sets theoretical and computational hybrid intelligent system was proposed for the sake of verifying the association between diabetes and survival time. It was observed that the proposed framework is capable of performing a neat attribute mining procedure. Gorunescu et al. [21] utilized both evolutionary-driven neural network and feature selection in tandem to derive an intelligent decision making tool for liver fibrosis stabilization. Based on experimental procedures and statistical analysis, they concluded that the resulted hybrid intelligent system clearly outperforms the traditional machine learning techniques for the problem at hand. Otriz et al. [22] utilized a hybrid intelligent technique including probabilistic growing hierarchical self-organizing map (GHSOM) and a multiobjective method to improve the segmentation of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) systems. Based on comparative study, they concluded that the developed hybrid technique outperforms some state-of-the-art methods for the problem at hand.Taking advantage of the promising reports on the performance of expert systems in medical sciences, in this research, the authors are to engage two different hybrid intelligent systems to estimate the tool-tissue force in laparoscopic surgery. Although the concept of intelligent automation in surgery is a deep seated provision, there are only a few reports in the literature addressing the performance of hybrid intelligent systems in laparoscopic surgery. Greminger and Nelson [23] used a neural network together with images of an elastic rubber torus deformed under compressive load to estimate the applied force. Kohani et al. [24] utilized a feed forward neural network and geometrical features to estimate the tool-tissue force estimation in laparoscopic surgery.In this paper, the authors intend to take the advantages of hybrid intelligent computing to derive fast, robust and accurate predictive model to estimate the tool-tissue force in laparoscopic surgery. To this end, intelligent tools of different properties are considered, and integrated through hybridization. Besides, a hyper-level learning algorithm is adopted to perform a proper sensitivity analysis.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is devoted to a concise definition of laparoscopic surgery. The details of the developed hybrid intelligent tools are presented in Section 3. The concept of hyper-level supervision and the required algorithm are explained in Section 4. The experimental procedures are scrutinized in Section 5. In Section 6, the authors present the results. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 7, and some potential investigation topics are presented.In laparoscopic surgery, instruments are inserted into the body through small incisions, and are controlled with the aid of a camera [25]. Such a procedure leads to a faster recovery and lower risk of complications such as infection. However it also causes reduced force feedback and tactile perception. In robotic laparoscopic surgery, instead of hands, surgeons use robots to manipulate the surgery tools. A robotic surgery system consists of three main components, i.e. master robot, slave robot and communication channel. The master robot receives the movements from the surgeon's hand. It may also emulate the tool tissue interaction forces on the surgeon's hand in order to provide a feeling of the tissue reactions during the operation. The slave robot emulates the commanded motions on the real surgery tools working inside the patient's body. These two robots (i.e. master and slave robots) are connected to each other by a communication channel. Surgeons can observe the slave robot movements through a 2D or 3D video system, and realize the next motions of the robot. Such a system provides a suitable and ergonomic environment for surgeons, and also allows them to observe the results in a real-time fashion. Fig. 1depicts an overview of a robotic laparoscopic system.The salient asset of laparoscopic surgery lies in the use of robots which in turn causes less damages and hazards by filtering the sudden movements as well as vibrations of the surgeon's hand. Nevertheless, it is essential for surgeons to have a sense from the tool-tissue interaction to verify the exerted forces on the tissue. One solution is use of sensorized tools to measure the forces directly; however, such an approach has limitations. Design of such intricate sensors with high SNR is challenging due to the size and sterilizability requirements. Hence, it would be a very deliberate choice to use intelligent expert systems to measure the tool-tissue force in real-time. In such systems, for instance, some features are extracted from the real-time images taken from the surgery site and are transferred to intelligent identifiers. The identifier estimates the tool-tissue interaction forces which are then implemented in the master robot to provide the force feedback for the surgeon.In the current work, the above mentioned idea is developed using hybrid intelligent predictive tools. The result is then utilized to provide input for a haptic master robot which realized the same forces under the surgeon's hand. The main target system for this intelligent predictive tool, is a master–slave robot developed for laparoscopic telesurgery. The system includes two master and two slave robots each if which provides five degrees of freedom (i.e. pitch, yaw, roll, inset and grip) sufficient to manipulate a standard laparoscopic tool. Nevertheless, the use the proposed technique is not limited to robotic laparoscopic. It can be used in any laparoscopic surgery setup as long as the image data of the surgery site is captured and a 3D surface model can be built.In this section, two different hybrid fuzzy-based identifiers called adaptive co-evolutionary fuzzy inference system (ACFIS) and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) are used for extracting knowledge from the collected database. The main reasons behind using these hybrid fuzzy-based identifiers are listed below:(1)It has been proved that the use of fuzzy rules and appropriate membership functions in tandem can effectively mitigate the un-desired effects of uncertainty [2,11]. Therefore, the authors take the advantages of ACFIS and ANFIS (as fuzzy identifiers) to capture the uncertainty of the collected database.Using two different fuzzy learning scenarios, i.e. evolutionary learning and neural learning, enables us to obtain fuzzy rule bases of different characteristics. By exploring the main features of the rule bases, the authors make a deliberate trade-off (with respect to the number and impact of the rules) to find out which types of rules can effectively map the input space to the output one. As it can be inferred, fuzzy identifiers are not only capable of identifying the tool-tissue force in laparoscopic surgery, but also help us interpreting the main relation between input–output domains [30,33].ANFIS and ACFIS are not only among most computationally efficient (fast) surrogate models, but also can yield precise models with a very low prediction error. Therefore, when a database is available, they can be good alternatives to costly numerical methods (such as finite element techniques) and even complex neural identification systems [16,17].ACFIS uses the concept of co-evolutionary computation [26] to learn the characteristics of physical systems. Here, both antecedent and consequent parts of the FIS are tuned using a well-known metaheuristic called scale factor local search differential evolution (SFLSDE) [27]. Additionally, the degrees of optimality of both antecedent and consequent parts are shared to achieve a practical compromise for the optimal architecture of the ACFIS identification system. The rough fuzzy paradigm is a TSK-FIS [28], which includes both antecedent and consequent parts. Let the input and output vectors of TSK-FIS be defined as x=[x1,x2,…,xr]T∈Rrand yk=[y1,y2]T∈R2 respectively. As it can be seen, the TSK-FIS is a multi input multi output (MIMO) identifier since it should predict two different outputs, i.e. tool force and maximum local stress, simultaneously. r represents the number of input parameters required for system identification.The steps required for implementing the ACFIS model are given below:Step 1: Each feature of the input vector is transformed into a linguistic expression using Kifuzzy sets, {A1(i), A2(i),…,AKi(i)}, where i=1,…,r. The fuzzy sets of the developed fuzzy model have a gaussian shape in which each linguistic expression (Aj(i)) is set to have a center value mj(i)∈ℵj. This can mathematically be expressed by following double sided membership function (MF):(1)μj,L(i)=exp−(xi−mj(i))2(σj,L(i))2,μj,R(i)=exp−(xi−mj(i))2(σj,R(i))2To ensure that the consecutive linguistic expressions possess 0.5° of overlapping, the following criteria are taken into account:(2)σj,R(i)=(mj+1(i)−mj(i))2ln2=σj+1,L(i)ifj≠1,kiσ1,L(i)=m1(i)2ln2ifj=1σki,R(i)=(1−mki(i))2ln2ifj=kiwhere j=1,…,ki, i=1,2,…,r and σj,L(i) and σj,R(i) are the MF widths of Aj,L(i) and Aj,R(i), respectively. It is worth mentioning that, in the state that the refining of the MFs is conducted, the authors allow the memetic supervisor approach to even change the degree of overlapping. In other word, the granulation of the MFs may undergo another type of adjustment which does not guarantee the 0.5° of overlapping anymore. Nevertheless, at the beginning step, the granulation of 0.5° of overlapping is taken into account.Step 2: After initializing the antecedent parameters, the approximation reasoning and defuzzification procedures are conducted. Firstly we need to define a full-rank rule base which includes R rules derived using the following equation:(3)R=∏j=1rkjith rule in the rule base has the following form:(4)Rm(i):IFx1isAi1(r)AND…ANDxrisAir(r)THENy1(i)=⁡g1(i)ANDy2(i)=⁡g2(i)Usually a set of TSK rules with crisp consequents are capable of handling complex problems effectively. This is mathematically expressed as:(5)g1(i)g2(i)=ω0,1(i)ω0,2(i)Step 3: Perform the complexity reduction of the rule base of FIS through the following steps:(1)Calculate the percentage of pattern concentration for each rule using the following formula:(6)n¯i=niN×100where i=1,…,R and ni deligates the number of patterns coincided with Ailinguistic by a degree of firing greater than 0.3 (i.e. μi(x)≥0.3).Sort the rules in a descending order with respect to their percentage of pattern concentration, and define a threshold value ζ (the optimum value of the threshold is obtained at hyper-level supervision stage).Elicit the eligible rules (R˜) with the criterionn¯i≥ζ.Step 4: For each patternx, the degree of firing of a rule is obtained using the below antecedent aggregation formula:(7)μi(x)=∏j=1rμij(i)(xj)Step 5: Using the desired output of each pattern (p), use the SFLSDE (the steps are explained in Appendix A) to find the optimum values of the consequent parameters so that the following function is minimized:(8)e(q)=yd−yo(p)where yo(p) is calculated using the following mathematical expression:(9)yo(p)=∑i=1Rμ¯i(x(p))⋅g(i)(x),μ¯i(x(p))=μi(x(p))∑i=1Rμi(x(p))where j=1, 2, andμ¯i(x)is the normalized firing strength of the fuzzy rule base.Step 6: After obtaining the optimum values of crisp consequent values, a post optimization process (antecedent optimization) is conducted to find out whether the arrangement of MFs can be improved further. As mentioned before, here, we do not set any constraint to oblige the MFs to be arranged with 0.5° of overlapping. Also, the constructive elements of gaussian MFs, i.e. m (center of MFs) and σ (deviation of MFs), are refined taking the feed-back of the consequent optimization results into account. Fig. 2depicts a potential movement of MFs after termination of antecedent part optimization.After the abovementioned procedures, ACFIS can learn the characteristics of any nonlinear physical system. The architecture of ACFIS is indicated in Fig. 3.The second hybrid system (ANFIS) is constructed based on the concept of developing a FIS using neuro computing methodologies, i.e. multi layered architecture and back propagation learning approach. Let the input and output vectors of TSK-FIS be defined as x=[x1,x2,…,xr]T∈Rrand yk=[y1]T∈R respectively. As can be seen, ANFIS is a multi input single output (MISO) identification system. Hence, the authors should train two different ANFISs to estimate the tissue force and maximum local stress. Just like the prior model, the rules of ANFIS are of TSK type. However, there is a slight difference in the consequent part of the rule base.(10)Rm(i):IFx1isAi1(r)AND…ANDxrisAir(r)THENy1(i)=⁡g1(i)The architecture of ANFIS includes 5 different layers. Number of nodes in layer one is related to the number of inputs and the number of membership functions (Ki) for each of inputs. Number of nodes in layers 2–4 depends on the number of rules (R) in the fuzzy rule base. The steps required to construct each layer of the ANFIS are explained in what follows the sub-section.Step 1: the first layer is also known as fuzzification layer. The input Xi(p) is transformed to linguistic labels Aijthat represent the membership grade of fuzzy set. The node function of this layer can be defined as:(11)Oij1=μij(Xi(p)),i=1,…,r;j=1,…,Kiwhere μijrepresents the jth membership function for input Xi(p) andOij1is the output of node ij. Similar to ACFIS, for ANFIS, the gaussian shaped MFs are selected based on trial and error.Step 2: the second layer is also known as product layer. The output of each node (k) at this layer is a product of incoming inputs.(12)Ok2=∏j=1rμij(i)(xj)Step 3: the third layer is known as normalized layer. The kth node determines the ratio of the kth rule's firing strength to the sum of all rule's firing strengths.(13)Ok3=μ¯i(x(p))=μi(x(p))∑i=1Rμi(x(p))Step 4: the next layer is known as defuzzification layer. Each node in this layer yields the weighted output of the TSK-type FIS as below:(14)Ok4=wkOk3wherewkrepresents the output of kth TSK-FIS rule.(15)wk=∑i=1rpi+rkwhere (pi, rk) is the parameter set. The parameters in this layer will be referred to as consequent parameters.Step 5: the last layer is also known as the output layer in the ANFIS structure.(16)Ok5=yo(p)=∑i=1Rμ¯i(x(p))⋅wkStep 6: the back propagation (BP) algorithm [29] is utilized to adjust the characteristics of both antecedent and consequent parts.The schematic of ANFIS architecture is indicated in Fig. 4.The hyper-level optimization of fuzzy systems has been proved to be a very promising policy to the researchers of CI [30]. The salient asset of the policy lies in the capability of hyper-level optimizers to extract the most efficient structure of FIS systems in terms of complexity and accuracy. In the best condition, the researchers in CI community devise a hyper-level optimizer in a fashion that it yields a set of efficient architectures. Then, a trade-off needs to be performed among the optimum architectures. After a precise interpretation of the obtained solutions, the elite architecture is extracted from the archive, and used for system identification tasks. The structure of the multiobjective optimization techniques (also known as Pareto based optimizers) is a good fit to be applied as hyper-level optimizers. There exist a number of rationales which endorse the authors’ claim [31,32]. In a study by Ishibuchi et al. [33], hybrid Pareto-based scenarios were used to automatically extract a set of non-dominated optimum FISs. To do so, two objective functions, i.e. accuracy and complexity, were considered. As it is clear, accuracy of a FIS can be calculated based on the feed-back of its prediction error. Also, the complexity of a FIS is directly related to the number of rules in the rule-base. Ideally, researchers would like to use a FIS with fewer rules and higher accuracy. However, these two characteristics contradict, and therefore searching for such a condition requires an optimization process with two conflicting objectives. This justifies the use of Pareto-based approaches. The type of Pareto-based method is of high importance. This is because a slight difference between the architecture of FISs may result in different identification outcomes. As we know, during the surgery, both computational complexity and prediction accuracy are of great importance. Therefore, even slight deviations in the identifier may result life hazards. Based on such considerations, the authors use an intensified explorative Pareto based approach which aims at unveiling the maximum possible architecture of FISs. To do so, synchronous self-learning Pareto strategy (SSLPS) [2], which is a hybrid method previously proposed by the authors, is adopted for current study. SSLPS is the ensemble of evolutionary exploration technique (EET), quasi artificial bee colony (QABC) and adaptive self-organizing map (SOM). The superior characteristics of the Pareto-based techniques have been proved through different studies [2,28,34,35]. It has been proven that the method is capable of performing an intensified exploration, and therefore has a potential of finding a high number of Pareto solutions. However, for current case study, the hyper-level optimization is conducted at a very high computational cost. Therefore the authors have no choice but to inflict a lot of simplifications on the objective function.The steps required to perform the hyper-level optimization are as below:Step 1: Define the controlling parameters such as mutation probability (Pmut), number of neurons (NuEETand NuQABC) in SOM center for each phase, sharing factor (ξ), pool size, iteration number (t), population size (Ps), descending constant (sf), α, μ and stopping criterion.Step 2: Initialize Pssolution with random distribution.Step 3: Share the solutions between the QABC and EET phases using the following equation:(17)Solution’s Sharing:NPEET=[ζ×Ps]NPQABC=Ps−NPEETStep 4: Evaluate the fitness of QABC solutions (foods) in PQABC and rank them based on non-dominate sorting and crowding distance.Step 5: Generate the weight vectors for SOM unit center in QABC operator phase (NuQABC) in a uniform distribution spanning to problem solution space. Evaluate the fitness of weight vectors.Step 6: Train the weight vectors of SOM center (Wj, j=1, 2, …, NuQABC) using obtained non-dominated solutions (elite bees).Step 7: Compare the quality of the trained weights with the initial values, and move the SOM weights toward better detected regions.Step 8: Engage the employed bees to explore for new food sources.Step 9: Evaluate the fitness of new obtained solutions, and sort the new solutions based on non-dominated sorting and crowding distance.Step 10: Select a food source (solution) and employ the onlooker bees to execute a neighbor search in vicinity of the chosen solution. Thereafter, perform a greedy selection based on the evaluated fitness.Step 11: If all of the onlooker agents contribute in searching process, go to the next step; otherwise, return to Step 10.Step 12: Export the current solutions of QABC phase to the collection site.Step 13: Evaluate the solutions fitnesses at EET phase and rank them based on non-dominated sorting and crowding distance.Step 14: Repeat the Steps 4–7, this time for SOM center at EET phase.Step 15: Generate a random number with uniform distribution. If the random number is less than Pmutation, produce children using mutation operator, else produce children using crossover operator.Step 16: Evaluate the fitness of produced solutions and combine them with old population. Rank all of the solutions using non-dominated sorting and crowding distance.Step 17: Select PEETbest solutions from current population.Step 18: Export the current solutions of EET phase to the collection site.Step 19: If the stopping criteria are satisfied, go to Step 20; otherwise, return to Step 4.Step 20: latest population, the weight vectors in both SOM centers and also the recorded solutions (Archived ones) are considered as the final solution.A graphical block diagram of the SSLPS method is shown in Fig. 5.The most prominent feature of the deformed shape is the location of points on its edge. Most works in this area have used the coordinates of all nodes as the geometric feature to estimate the exerted force on the deformed body [3,36]. However, using the coordinates of all nodes for training an identification system has some disadvantages. Firstly, using a large number of training samples may trap the predictive systems into a substantial problem called over-fitting. As is clear, an over-fitted identification system has a very poor generalization. Secondly, using coordinates of points yields no clues about mechanical behavior of the object. Thirdly, tracking of all points after the deformation is a relatively demanding procedure. To tackle the abovementioned dilemmas, three geometric features of the deformed tissue were found that could be used as the inputs of the identification systems (ACFIS and ANFIS). Here, the authors consider the interpolation of points on the edge of the tissue to determine the deformed body. Such a policy reduces the size of input vectors to only three and the training sample size needed to avoid over-fitting is decreased remarkably. Besides, based on experiments, it was observed that the extracted features, i.e. maximum deforming angle, maximum deformation depth and the width of displacement constraint, have indeed physical interpretations which naturally correlate with the mechanics of the tissue. Additionally, the use of such features relaxes the authors from tracking all points on edge of the body.During laparoscopic interventions, the surgeon manipulates and grasps internal organs with laparoscopic tools and therefore, imposes displacement constraints on the surface of the tissue.For our experiment, a commercial FEM software was used to model and simulate the tool-tissue interactions during a laparoscopic surgery for 2D analyses. The simulation results in turn provide training samples for ACFIS and ANFIS identifiers, and these hybrid systems infer the interaction measurements from geometric features of the deformed shape. Fig. 6shows a typical tool-tissue interaction.In this work, we define X–Y–Z coordinates of points on the surface as shown in Fig. 6. Z direction is defined in the direction of the gripper. For 2D simulation, a model of a 0.5m×0.25m rectangle, with hyper-elastic properties of in vivo porcine liver [37], was built. Two points on the upper edge of the rectangle was selected to impose displacement constraint on the line segment between them (constraint line), in opposite Y direction. The bottom line of the rectangle was constrained in all directions. Solving the problem for large displacement under static condition, the reaction force, stress intensity and the location of each node of the meshed object were found. This problem was solved for different sizes and locations of the constraint line and for different displacement constraint imposed on it. Fig. 7shows a deformed soft tissue, the constraint line and the displacement constraint imposed on it.Here, the authors seek two desired outputs, i.e. maximum local stress and the sum of the reaction forces on the nodes on the constraint line (gripper's force), through the simulation. The gripper's force is equal to the force exerted by the tool on the tissue and the surgeon feels it in his/her hands. Maximum local stress also serves as a reliable indicator of possible damage to the tissue [38]. The calculations of the proposed features are carried out using analytical geometry. Deforming angle is a geometric feature used in this work. As illustrated in Fig. 8, for a two-dimensional curve, the deforming angle is the angle between the largest positive and negative derivatives of y with respect to x. To verify the proposed features of the deformed shape, it is necessary to interpolate the nodes of the meshed domain, and reconstruct the shape of the deformed body. Based on these results, other geometric features, i.e. width of the displacement constraint (y) and maximum deformation depth (D), could be calculated.Through the simulation, the authors collected 1691 data points, which are used to train and evaluate the authenticity of the identification system. The variations of the input features as well as the desired outputs are depicted in Fig. 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
