@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of members’ return visit rates using a time factor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The method is easy-utilize and low-complexity for the return visit rate prediction.We propose a novelty time function.The method could be effectively applied in marketing strategy design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioral targeting,Customer profile,Time function,Concept drift,Return visit rate prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The profit of portal companies in Taiwan is generated by online advertising and e-commerce. Effective advertising requires predicting how users respond to advertisements and then targeting (presenting advertisements) the users in ways that reflect their preferences. The behavioral targeting leverages historical users’ behaviors in order to select for display the ads which are most related to the users’ preferences. Although we may not want to provide advertisements that repeat the same concept, we can exploit predicted return visit rates for the registered members at the specific category of a portal site. However, customers’ preferences change over time. In order to capture the ‘concept drift’, we propose a novel and simple time function to increase/decrease the weight of the old data in evaluating various members’ past behaviors. Then, we construct a member’s Click Preference Index with a Time factor (CPIT) model in order to effectively distinguish the different kinds of member behaviors and predict return visit rates. The marketers of a portal site can thus target the members with high return visit rates and design corresponding marketing strategies. Experimental results with a real dataset have demonstrated that this CPIT model can be practically implemented and provide satisfactory results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A portal is a website which acts as a linking page among websites. It presents information from diversified sources in a unified way (van Riel et al. 2001). Generally speaking, the portal company only has statistical information about customers’ browsing clicks for registered members. However, the portal often integrates with e-commerce in Taiwan. It provides information and abundant services on nearly all conceivable major topics (categories): news, sports, travel, finance, entertainment, games, shopping, goods consignment, and much more. Therefore, in addition to click information, the portal company in Taiwan also has information on purchase records.In Taiwan, one of the profits for the portal companies is generated by their core services. Online advertising channels such as sponsored search and contextual ads are showing great market potential. However, effective advertising requires predicting how a user responds to an advertisement and then targeting (presenting the ad) to reflect the users’ favor. Behavioral targeting is therefore one way of increasing the value of advertising (Chen et al. 2010).Behavioral targeting aims to target a marketing message to a segment of customers which has the highest likelihood of acting upon that message. For example, if we were in the sports marketing business, our target customer base would be individuals who are enthusiastic about sports and people who visit sports related websites or blogs would naturally be our target. Therefore, to analyze historical behaviors in order to recognize users’ preferences and to build customer profiles is the essence of behavioral targeting.Customer preferences change over time. Often the cause of changes is hidden, which makes the learning task complicated. Hidden changes can induce some radical changes in the target concept, and this is known as ‘concept drift’ (Widmer and Kubat 1996). There are two basic types of concept drift which may occur in the real world: (1)sudden concept drift, and (2)gradual concept drift (Tsymbal 2004). For example, upon seeing a movie, if someone suddenly starts collecting soundtracks by a singer who he previously disliked, this is sudden concept drift. On the other hand, when someone graduates from school and is ready to take up an occupation, his career preference may gradually move towards a specific type of professional knowledge, so this is gradual concept drift.In recent years, the processes of capturing the customer preferences and constructing customer profiles on the Internet have been gaining considerable attention, especially in the research of Recommender System (Middleton et al. 2004, Liu and Liou 2011, Huang 2011, Huang and Huang 2009, Jinhyung et al. 2007). Generally speaking, there are two approaches to constructing customer profiles with a time factor: one is tracking the temporal dynamics along the full extent of the time period with time bins (Koren 2010, Bell et al. 2008, Xiang and Yang 2009), and the other is instance weighting (Ding and Li 2005, Ma et al. 2007). With regards to concept drift, researchers who have supported tracking the temporal dynamics along the full extent of the time period consider that this is the key to being able to extract signals from each time point, while neglecting only the noise. They have considered three sources of drift, which are movie biases (popularity changes over time), user biases (natural drift of users’ rating scale benchmarking to the recent ratings) and changes in user preferences. Researchers who support instance weighting consider that instances are weighted based on their estimated relevance, with the recent data having a higher impact. That is, the recent rating is seen as comparatively more valuable than the old one. Therefore, we should assign a high level of importance to recent rating.The behavioral targeting leverages historical users’ behaviors in order to select for display the advertisements which are most related to the users’ preferences. Although we may not want to provide advertisements that repeat the same concept, we can exploit predicted return visit rates (the possibility of each registered member clicking (browsing) on a website at least once or purchasing at least one product with respect to a specific category for the portal) within a given time frame. Therefore, we use the frequencies of members’ browsing and purchasing products with respect to a specific category to construct a preference model for return visit rate predictions. Also, we can provide a basis for the marketers of portal sites to design corresponding marketing strategies.Ding described that the recent data (rating) should have a higher impact and time function is used to lower the influence of past data for predicting member preference (Ding and Li 2005). However, for the members’ return visit rate predictions, past feedback concerning different behavior patterns may imply different types of members, and different behavior patterns may imply different future return visit rates. For example, the return visit rates of loyal customers are often higher than wandering customers. Thus, we analyzed the real dataset over three months (April, May, June), and differentiated past behaviors into some patterns (O: visited, X: not visited). In Table 1, the relation between the five different past behavior patterns and the return visit rates is shown. The results indicate that the return visit rate is related to the members’ past behavior patterns. If we purely apply the recent members’ feedback as a basis for constructing the member’s profile and use the time function to decay the impact of their feedback, it will lead to an inaccurate customer return visit rate prediction. As a result, the basic idea of this research is to consider the influence of different types of members’ past behavior patterns. We not only use the time function to decrease the weight of the past feedback but also increase the weight of the past feedback with the iteration in the model.The main purpose of this study is to construct a members’ preference model with a time factor for the members’ return visit rate predictions. The main contributions are conducted as follows:(1)We propose an easy-to-utilize and low-complexity time function component for the members’ return visit rate predictions. The experimental results with a real dataset show that the model can achieve our goal and can predict members’ return visit rates more accurately.Unlike the previous literature, we consider that the return visit rate prediction is closely related to the long-term members’ preferences, our time function will increase/decrease the weight of the implicit feedback in accordance with various members’ past behaviors.This model has been successfully applied in practice in a portal company in Taiwan. The marketer of the portal company could design proper marketing strategies based upon the members’ return visit rate prediction.The remaining parts of this paper are organized as follows. The related works are described in Section 2. The problem statements are stated in Section 3. The proposed approach is described in Section 4. Experiments and discussions are reported in Section 5, and then the conclusions are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we leverage historical members’ behaviors and time factors to construct a novel CPIT model for making return visit rate predictions for registered members. The time complexity of this model is low and it is simple to implement. Also, the model can effectively target members with a high return visit rate. It can prove a useful tool for marketers of portal sites and has been applied in designing corresponding marketing strategies in practice. Although our data set has its limitations, we hope that the model and results can serve as a basis for further study in considering members’ detailed web usage behaviors for different data sets. Besides return visit rate prediction, future work will hopefully apply this model to purchase behavior prediction so as to further assist marketers in areas of their promotional work.