@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Suspended sediment concentration estimation by stacking the genetic programming and neuro-fuzzy predictions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a new approach based on stacking to predict the suspended sediment.A neural network is used as a meta-model of the stacking method.The genetic programming and neuro-fuzzy results are stacked via the meta-model.Streamflow and suspended sediment are used as input data of model.The results indicate that our method greatly improved the prediction accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Suspended sediment prediction,Stacking method,Linear genetic programming,Neuro-fuzzy,Neural networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the new decade due to rich and dense water resources, it is vital to have an accurate and reliable sediment prediction and incorrect estimation of sediment rate has a huge negative effect on supplying drinking and agricultural water. For this reason, many studies have been conducted in order to improve the accuracy of prediction. In a wide range of these studies, various soft computing techniques have been used to predict the sediment. It is expected that combining the predictions obtained by these soft computing techniques can improve the prediction accuracy. Stacking method is a powerful machine learning technique to combine the prediction results of other methods intelligently through a meta-model based on cross validation. However, to the best of our knowledge, the stacking method has not been used to predict sediment or other hydrological parameters, so far. This study introduces stacking method to predict the suspended sediment. For this purpose, linear genetic programming and neuro-fuzzy methods are applied as two successful soft computing methods to predict the suspended sediment. Then, the accuracy of prediction is increased by combining their results with the meta-model of neural network based on cross validation. To evaluate the proposed method, two stations including Rio Valenciano and Quebrada Blanca, in the USA were selected as case studies and streamflow and suspended sediment concentration were defined as inputs to predict the daily suspended sediment. The obtained results demonstrated that the stacking method greatly improved RMSE andR2statistics for both stations compared to use of linear genetic programming or neuro-fuzzy solitarily.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the new decade due to lack of water resources, it is vital to have an accurate sediment prediction for different purposes such as dam service life evaluation or water management. In order to predict the sediment, because of its paramount importance and its nonlinear nature, there have been great challenges for water and hydraulic structures engineers. Sediment has severe effects on hydraulic and geomorphologic features of the rivers and hydraulic structures. Furthermore, prediction of sediment has detrimental effects on the dams’ reservoirs. So, incorrect estimation of sediment rate reduces the amount of waters stored behind the dams and consequently has a huge negative effect on supplying drinking water and agricultural water. This is why scientists and experts are constantly seeking for new ways to predict the sediment accurately and suggesting various empirical formulas for this purpose [1–4]. Accuracy of these empirical formulas was evaluated by some researchers [5,6]. Due to some innate errors in measuring the input parameters, applying empirical methods leads to uncertainties in the final results [7]. The nonlinear and seasonal nature of the related parameters in estimating sediment, inaccurate measurement and lack of sufficient data are some factors that cause uncertainties in the results obtained by empirical models [8].Besides the empirical formulas, the sediment rating curve has been used for estimating the sediment in the both gauged and ungauged stations as well [9–13]. Heng and Suetsugi [13] showed that using sediment rating curve could increase the uncertainties. Thus, it is essential to use a method which is able to estimate the sediment more accurately and confidently. Soft computing methods, which are widely used in various fields, are able to help us in this way as well. In this study, among various methods of soft computing, our attention is focused on three methods of soft computing. These methods are artificial neural network, neuro-fuzzy, and genetic programming. Researches done by these methods for predicting sediment will be reviewed in Section 2.In order to improve the prediction accuracy of soft computing methods, a combination of several predicting algorithms can be used. These methods, called ensemble learning [14], have such different varieties as Bayesian model averaging, bagging, boosting, model tree ensembles, and stacking. In some previous studies, to enhance accuracy, some ensemble learning methods such as bagging, boosting, and model tree ensembles were used to predict the hydrological quantities. These studies will be reviewed in Section 2. However, as will be shown, in all of these researches, the hydrological quantities other than sediment have been predicted and none of them was related to the prediction of sediment. Also, to the best of our knowledge, among various methods of ensemble learning, none of the previous studies used the stacking method to predict any hydrological quantity.In the stacking method, at first, some predicting algorithms are trained by using the existing data. Then the predicted data are used as the inputs for training the combining model. Normally, this method performs better than using a single algorithm [14].As it will be reviewed in Section 2, former studies show that some of the soft computing methods are able to predict the suspended sediment successfully. On the other hand, as mentioned above, combining the results of single algorithms based on stacking method usually performs better than using them separately. Considering these facts, it is expected that stacking and combining the results of the successful soft computing methods for predicting the suspended sediment can improve the prediction accuracy. This is the main contribution of our work; in this paper, a new method is proposed to predict the sediment of river based on stacking method. In our proposed method, to obtain the accurate prediction, neural network is applied as a combining meta-model to combine the predictions made by linear genetic programming and neuro-fuzzy based on cross validation.The paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2, the previous researches conducted on predicting sediment and hydrological data by soft computing methods are reviewed. In Section 3, our proposed method will be presented for using stacking to predict the suspended sediment. In Section 4, case studies on which the proposed method will be evaluated are brought and the results of the proposed method will be analyzed, comparing with those of other methods. Finally, in Section 5, conclusions are presented briefly.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
