@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Class imbalance learning via a fuzzy total margin based support vector machine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A fuzzy total margin based support vector machine (FTM-SVM) method to handle the class imbalance learning (CIL) problem in the presence of outliers and noise was presented.The proposed method incorporates total margin algorithm, different cost functions and the proper approach of fuzzification of the penalty into FTM-SVM and formulates them in nonlinear case.We thoroughly evaluated the proposed FTM-SVM method on two artificial data sets and sixteen real-world imbalanced data sets

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Support vector machine (SVM),Fuzzy support vector machine (FSVM),Class imbalance learning (CIL),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The classification of imbalanced data is a major challenge for machine learning. In this paper, we presented a fuzzy total margin based support vector machine (FTM-SVM) method to handle the class imbalance learning (CIL) problem in the presence of outliers and noise. The proposed method incorporates total margin algorithm, different cost functions and the proper approach of fuzzification of the penalty into FTM-SVM and formulates them in nonlinear case. We considered an excellent type of fuzzy membership functions to assign fuzzy membership values and got six FTM-SVM settings. We evaluated the proposed FTM-SVM method on two artificial data sets and 16 real-world imbalanced data sets. Experimental results show that the proposed FTM-SVM method has higher G_Mean and F_Measure values than some existing CIL methods. Based on the overall results, we can conclude that the proposed FTM-SVM method is effective for CIL problem, especially in the presence of outliers and noise in data sets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Support vector machine (SVM) has been successfully applied to many real-world classification problems [1,2]. It has a solid mathematical background, high generalization ability and the ability to find global classification solutions in a variety of domains. Therefore, in the past few years, there has been significant development in the understanding of the theory of SVM, in the algorithmic strategies for implementing them and in the practical application problems [3–5].It has been recently reported that SVM is not very successful when it is applied to the imbalanced data sets [6–10]. SVM can produce a model that is biased toward the majority class and has a low performance on the minority class when it is trained in an imbalanced data set. Most of traditional algorithms assume or expect the balance of class distribution or the equal misclassification costs. When these traditional algorithms are confronted with imbalanced data sets, they cannot represent the distributive characteristics of the data correctly, and therefore, they cannot provide appropriate accuracies across the classes of the data. In order to alleviate these problems, some techniques have been put forward to develop better performing classifiers for imbalanced data sets. These learning methods are generally called class imbalance learning (CIL) methods. For instance, some applications are known to suffer from CIL problem, face recognition [9], fault diagnosis [11,12], anomaly detection [13], e-mail foldering [14], etc. In recent years, many researchers have been focusing on the topic of CIL [15–17].As shown in previous researches [8,9], SVM is sensitive to outliers and noise because it considers all the training examples uniformly. However, most of real-world data sets usually contain some outliers and noise examples. Thus, the standard SVM may result in the occurrence of overfitting problem if one or a few data points have relatively large error value. To handle the problem of outliers and noise, fuzzy support vector machine is presented [18,19]. FSVM is a variant of the standard SVM learning algorithm. Nevertheless, FSVM is sensitive to CIL problem [8].To alleviate both the CIL problem and the problem of outliers and noise, total margin-based adaptive fuzzy support vector machines (TAF-SVM) [9] and fuzzy support vector machines for class imbalance learning (FSVM-CIL) [8] are emerging. TAF-SVM not only alleviates the overfitting problem occasioned by the outliers and noise with the approach of fuzzification of the penalty, but also corrects the skew of the optimal separating hyperplane (OSH) owing to the imbalanced data sets by using different cost functions. What's more, TAF-SVM can obtain a lower generalization error bound by introducing the total margin algorithm to replace traditional soft margin algorithm. The total margin algorithm, fuzzy membership functions and different cost functions are imbedded in the traditional SVM so that the TAF-SVM is reformulated in both linear and nonlinear cases. In the FSVM-CIL, fuzzy membership values for training examples are assigned to reduce the effect of both the problems of CIL and the problems of outliers and noise under the principle of cost sensitive learning. Although TAF-SVM and FSVM-CIL can be used to address both the problems of CIL and the problem of outliers and noise, they have some limitations.•TAF-SVM is mainly designed to remedy the defects of traditional SVM when applied to face recognition. It not only introduces the different cost algorithm and the method of fuzzification of training set to improve the class boundary skew problem as well as the overfitting problem but also introduces the total margin algorithm to enhance the generalization ability of SVM. However, the circle-like membership model for the training set fuzzification used in [9] is not a very efficient model since the distributions of most data sets are non-Gaussian and nonconvex.FSVM-CIL can be used to handle CIL problem in the presence of outliers and noise. The generalization ability of FSVM-CIL is not satisfied because the soft margin algorithms only consider the errors of the classified data points in the construction of OSH. An OSH is found with maximal margin of separation by maximizing the minimum distance between few support vectors and the separating hyperplane. However, only few training data used in the construction of OSH would cause the loss of information because most information is red contained in the majority of the training set.In this paper, we proposed a method to improve TAF-SVM and FSVM-CIL. We named this method fuzzy total margin based support vector machine (FTM-SVM). The proposed method incorporates total margin algorithm, different cost functions and the proper approach of fuzzification of the penalty. FTM-SVM has several major benefits:•FTM-SVM introduces different cost functions and the appropriate fuzzy membership functions. Therefore, FTM-SVM can be used to alleviate the problem of CIL better than some existing CIL learning methods.Because FTM-SVM introduces fuzzy membership functions with sound nature, it is not sensitive to outliers and noise and can deal with this overfitting problem when the data sets contain some outliers and noise examples.FTM-SVM has good generalization ability because it introduces the total margin algorithm to replace traditional soft margin algorithm.We considered six forms of fuzzy-membership values and got six FTM-SVM settings. We evaluated the FTM-SVM method on two artificial data sets and 16 real-world imbalanced data sets and compared its performance with six existing CIL methods. Experimental results show that the proposed FTM-SVM method has higher F_Measure and G_Mean values than some existing CIL methods. Statistical test validates the significance of the results obtained by the proposed FTM-SVM method over the results obtained by the existing learning methods considered in this paper.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews background knowledge. Section 3 presents FTM-SVM algorithm. Section 4 shows the classification results obtained by the proposed method and compares them with the results obtained by different existing CIL methods under different metrics. Section 5 utilizes a statistical test to compare the performance of the proposed method with the existing methods considered in this paper. In Section 6, the paper is concluded.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
