@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Scheduling of multi-component products in a two-stage flexible flow shop

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The first stage consists of several parallel machines in site I with different speed in processing components and one machine in site II, and the second stage consists of two dedicated assembly lines.The products that compose of only single-process components are assigned to the first assembly line and products that compose of at least a two-process component are assigned to the second assembly line.Due to the complexity of solving flexible flow shop problems, we consider this type of problem in NP-Hard problem family and suggest a metheuristic method which is created by combinations of simulated annealing (SA) and imperialist competitive algorithms (ICA).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Flexible flow shop,Dedicated assembly lines,Two-process components,Imperialist competitive algorithm,Simulated annealing algorithm,Taguchi design of experiment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this research, the problem of scheduling and sequencing of two-stage assembly-type flexible flow shop with dedicated assembly lines, which produce different products according to requested demand during the planning horizon with the aim of minimizing maximum completion time of products is investigated. The first stage consists of several parallel machines in site I with different speeds in processing components and one machine in site II, and the second stage consists of two dedicated assembly lines. Each product requires several kinds of components with different sizes. Each component has its own structure which leading to difference processing times to assemble. Products composed of only single-process components are assigned to the first assembly line and products composed of at least a two-process component are assigned to the second assembly line. Components are placed on the related dedicated assembly line in the second phase after being completed on the assigned machines in the first phase and final products will be produced by assembling the components. The main contribution of our work is development of a new mathematical model in flexible flow shop scheduling problem and presentation of a new methodology for solving the proposed model. Flexible flow shop problems being an NP-hard problem, therefore we proposed a hybrid meta-heuristic method as a combination of simulated annealing (SA) and imperialist competitive algorithms (ICA). We implement our obtained algorithm and the ones obtained by the LINGO9 software package. Various parameters and operators of the proposed Meta-heuristic algorithm are discussed and calibrated by means of Taguchi statistical technique.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A hybrid flow shop scheduling problem (HFS), as described by Linn and Zhang [1], is to optimize processing of a set of n jobs in a series of m production stages, each of which has multiple machines operating in parallel and at least one stage must have more than one machine to differ from traditional flow shop environment. HFS scheduling problem with different settings and special cases has been extensively studied in the literature, such as two-stage hybrid flow shop (e.g., [2,3]), no-wait or blocking hybrid flow shop (e.g., [4]), HFS problems with sequence-dependent setup times (e.g., [5]), HFS problems with availability constraints (e.g., [6]), and HFS problems with precedence constraints (e.g., [7]).But there are two other special kinds of two-stage HFS scheduling problem, namely (1): two-stage HFS scheduling problem with dedicated machines at stage 2 where different jobs require processing in the first stage, and then depending on the specifications of the jobs, they are processed on a dedicated machine in stage two, and (2): two-stage assembly-type HFS scheduling problems in which each product composes of several components. When all of the components are processed at the first stage, a machine at the second stage, namely the assembly machine, assembles the components to produce final product.These two kinds of problems are common in real-world situations and can be used in many manufacturing environment such as: label sticker manufacturing [8], furniture assembly, and pottery production [9], another example can be found in the process industry where multiple servers (machines) are available at each stage [10]. For further review on the industries where the hybrid flow shop organization is found, see Riane et al. [11].This paper considers a combination of these two special kinds of HFS scheduling problem, that is, a two-stage assembly-type hybrid flow shop scheduling problem with dedicated assembly lines which produces different multi-component products according to requested demand during the planning horizon with the aim of minimizing maximum completion time of products. The first stage consists of several parallel machines in site 1 with different speed in processing components and one machine in site 2, and the second stage consists of two dedicated assembly lines which the products are assigned to one of them depending on their specifications.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the literature review of hybrid flow shop scheduling. Section 3 is the problem description and mathematical model. Section 4 introduces the proposed hybrid algorithm. Taguchi design of experiments to set parameters of ICA–SA algorithm is explained in Section 5. Section 6 presents the computational results which compares the results achieved by proposed hybrid algorithm with those achieved by LINGO9 software. Finally, Section 7 is devoted to conclusions and future works.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
