@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid OC–GA approach for fast and global truss optimization with frequency constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hybrid OC–GA method is presented to speed up the convergence and obtain the global solution of truss frequencies optimization.OC method for multiple frequency constraints is developed to update the design variables.OC method serves as a local search operator and is integrated with GA.Hybrid OC–GA method has powerful capacity in searching for more optimal truss structures and requiring less computational effort.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Truss optimization,Genetic algorithm,Optimality criteria,Frequency constraints,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The truss optimization constrained with vibration frequencies is a highly nonlinear and more computational cost problem. To speed up the convergence and obtain the global solution of this problem, a hybrid optimality criterion (OC) and genetic algorithm (GA) method for truss optimization is presented in this paper. Firstly, the OC method is developed for multiple frequency constraints. Then, the most efficient variables are identified by sensitivity analysis and modified as iteration scheme. Finally, OC method, serving as a local search operator, is integrated with GA. The numerical results verify that the hybrid method provides powerful ability in searching for more optimal solution and reducing computational effort.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Structural optimization with vibration frequency constraints is helpful to enhance the dynamic performance of truss structures [1–3]. However, frequency responses are highly implicit, non-convex and nonlinear with respect to the cross-sectional area of bar elements [4], so the search spaces normally contain multiple local minima. So far, the classical techniques for the frequency optimization mainly contain the optimality criterion (OC) and mathematical programming (MP) methods. These two kinds of methods both make use of the gradient information (also known as sensitivity information) to construct the iteration formats, which are efficient but easily trapped into infeasible and local optimum. Consequently, global optimization methods are urgently needed to reliably solve the frequency optimization problem of truss structure.Since 1980s, evolutionary algorithms (such as genetic algorithm (GA)) and swarm algorithms (such as particle swarm optimization (PSO), artificial bee colony algorithms (ABCA), mine blast algorithm (MBA)) have been greatly developed. These heuristic methods are particularly effective for global and nonlinear optimization problems [5–13] and has been recently applied in structural optimization [13–15]. Among these population-based methods, GA is proposed earlier and more extensively tested by numerical functions and structural benchmark examples. Gero researched the optimization of 3D steel structures by comparing GA with classical techniques. It was suggested that the weight of 3D steel structures was improved using the GA, although at a higher computational cost [16]. Pan and Wang applied adaptive GA to topology optimization of truss structure with frequency domain excitations [17]. Kameshki and Saka [18] applied GA to nonlinear multi-storey steel frames with semi-rigid connections, and Liu et al. [19] proposed genetic evolutionary structural optimization. These examples demonstrate that GA has ability to be effective in searching for global optimal results. So in this paper, GA is chosen as a representative heuristic method to globally optimize the truss structure with frequency constraints.Although the GA is very robust for global optimization, stochastic searching character makes GA very computationally intensive and hence slower than gradient-based methods, i.e. OC and MP methods. On the contrast, gradient-based methods use the sensitivity of responses (stress, displacement, frequency and so on) with respect to the design variable, it is a better way to reduce computational costs and accelerate convergence. Between the OC and MP methods, the former is easy to formulate and combine with GA. So a hybrid OC–GA approach, which inherits the merits of OC and GA, is presented to solve the frequency optimization problem of truss structures.The paper is constituted as follows. Section 1 gives an introduction of background. Section 2 describes the optimization formulation. Section 3 presents the OC iteration scheme for frequency optimization of truss structures. Section 4 states the general steps of GA optimization for this problem. Section 5 considers how to effectively integrate GA with OC. Section 6 provides three classical examples to verify the proposed method. The last section summaries the whole paper.In this work, we only consider sectional area size optimization of the bars in truss structure with frequency constraints. A reasonable dynamic design usually directs at searching a lightweight structure while meeting the preassigned frequency constraints. The corresponding optimization formula can be defined as(1)minimizeW(X)=∑i=1nρixilisubject to(2)gj(X)=ωj2−ω˜j2≥0j=1,2,…,m(3)xil≤xi≤xiu(i=1,2,…,n)where n is the number of bar elements, ρi, xi, and liare the density, cross-sectional area and length of the ith bar element, respectively. xiis also the design variable, and X is a vector representing all of the design variables. Eqs. (2) and (3) describe, respectively, the frequency and side constraints. Also, ωiandω˜iare the ith frequency and the corresponding lower bound, respectively.The Lagrangian formulation for the stated structural optimization problem in Eqs. (1) and (2) is written as(4)L(X,λ)=W(X)−∑j=1mλjgj(X)where L(X, λ) is the Lagrangian function and the λjis the Lagrangian multiplier of the jth frequency constraint. When the Lagrangian function is differentiated with regard to variables, the K–T optimality conditions are constructed as [20,21](5)∂L∂xi=∂W(X)∂xi−∑j=1mλj∂gj∂xi=0(6)gj(X)≥0(7)λj⋅gj(X)=0(8)λj≥0From Eq. (5), the optimality condition can be expressed as(9)∑j=1mαijλj=1i=1,2,…,nwhere(10)αij=∂gj/∂xi∂W/∂xi=∂ωj2/∂xi∂W/∂xi=∂ωj2∂Wαijis defined, in Eq. (10), as the sensitivity number of each design variable, which indicates the ratio of the effect on the jth natural frequency to the effect on the structural weight due to the change of the ith design variable. It is understandable from Eqs. (8) and (10) that, at the optimum, all of the variables ought to have the same positive sensitivity number, no matter what the nature of the variable is. On the other hand, it is obvious from the definition that αijalso denotes the efficiency of the modification of the ith design variable. The largest value of αijimplies the larger increment of ωjtogether with the smaller increment of structural weight. Therefore, Eq. (10) also implies, by intuition, that all of the design variables should have equal efficiencies at the optimum.The eigenvalue problem corresponding to the linear system is written as(11)(K−ωj2M)βj=0where K and M indicate the global stiffness and mass matrices of the truss, respectively; ωjis the jth vibration frequency, and βjis the jth vibration mode, which has been normalized such that(12)βjTMβj=0Premultiplying Eq. (11) byβJTyields(13)βjT(K−ωj2M)βj=0When Eq. (13) is differentiated with regard to variable xi, one obtains(14)∂βjT∂xi(K−ωj2M)βj+βjT∂(K−ωj2M)∂xiβj+βjT(K−ωj2M)∂βj∂xi=0From Eq. (11), the first and third expression of Eq. (14) equal to zero, so Eq. (14) is rewritten as(15)βjT∂(K−ωj2M)∂xiβj=0Expanding Eq. (15), the derivative of a distinct frequency is given as(16)∂ωj2∂xi=βjT∂K∂xi−ωj2∂M∂xiβjβjTMβj=βjT∂K∂xi−ωj2∂M∂xiβjGenerally, the derivatives of K and M with respect to xican be evaluated at element level:(17)∂K∂xi=∑e=1n∂Ke∂xi(18)∂M∂xi=∑e=1n∂Me∂xiThe derivative of the structural weight is(19)∂W∂xi=∑e=1nρe∂(xele)∂xi=ρiliTherefore, the sensitivity number of the ith design variable is computed as(20)αij=∂ωj2/∂xi∂W/∂xi=∑e=1nβejT((∂Ke/∂xi)−ωj2(∂Me/∂xi))βejρiliwhereβejis the jth mode of the eth element, which contains the related entries of βj.The optimality condition for multiple frequency constraints can be stated as: the weighted sum of the Lagrangian energy densities corresponding to multiple frequency constraints should be equal to unity in all of the elements. This can be achieved by satisfying the condition given in Eq. (9). By multiplying both sides of Eq. (9) byxipand taking the pth root (μ=1/p), we obtain(21)xik+1=xik∑j=1mCjαijkμwhere μ controls the step size and Cjcontains the weighting parameters that can be approximated as functions of the Lagrangian multipliers [20]. The iteration scheme is repeated until the set convergence criterion is satisfied [21].Let ∂L/∂ωj=0, then it can be obtained from Eq. (4)(22)ωj=ω˜jj=1,2,…,mTaylor's formula of ωjcan be written as(23)ωjk+1≈ωjk+∑i∈P1∂ωj∂xi(xil−ωjk)+∑i∈P2∂ωj∂xi(xiu−ωjk)where P1 and P2 are passive bar sets controlled by lower and upper bounds, respectively.When Eq. (21) is substituted into Eq. (23) and let ωjsatisfies Eq. (22), one obtains(24)∑i=1n∂ωj∂xi∑j=1mCjαijkμ−1xik=ω˜j−ωjk−Δωj0whereΔωj0=∑i∈P1∂ωj∂xi(xil−ωjk)+∑i∈P2∂ωj∂xi(xiu−ωjk). Eq. (24) can be expanded as(25)f11f12f21f22…f1m…f2m……fm1fm2………fmmλ1λ2⋮λm=γ1γ2⋮γmwhere(26)fjk=∑i=1n1ρili∂ωj∂xi∂ωk∂xixik(27)γj=(ωjk+Δωj0−ω˜j)−∑i=1n∂ωj∂xixikIn sum, λiis firstly solved from Eq. (25), and then we obtainxik+1from Eq. (21). In the following, GA is briefly introduced to solve this problem.To evaluate the fitness of GA, a normalized penalty function converts the constrained optimization Eqs. (1) and (2) to unconstrained one with the following expression(28)Fitness=W(X)=∑i=1nρixili+∑j=1mpjThe penalty function pjis defined as(29)pj=cp(ωj2−ω˜j2)/ωj2forωj2<ω˜j20otherwisewhere cpis an penalty coefficient. Side constraints Eq. (3) is handled by binary coding.The aim of the present work is directed towards an understanding of the hybrid character. Thus, simple GA is adopted although there are many improved GA [22–24]. There are five steps to form the simple GA: binary coding, roulette selection, elitist preservation, uniform crossover and simple mutation. In the following, we mainly discuss the integration GA with OC.In the presented method, the OC scheme is introduced into the GA process and serves as a local search operator, like crossover and mutation operation in simple GA [25]. The OC operator is a gradient-driven method which can deterministically update the sizes of bar elements using the iteration scheme Eq. (21) and obtain a result satisfying the K–T optimality conditions Eq. (5)–(8). In order to achieve a better solution, the balance between global evolution of the GA and local iteration of the OC is extremely important. A satisfactory balance includes population diversity in the GA and accelerating convergence in the OC.Thereby, OC operator probability is introduced to determine the local search. After crossover and mutation operator of each generation, a random number in the interval [0, 1) is produced for child generation. If this number is less than the predefined value, the child individual is iterated by Eq. (21). The corresponding flow chart of the hybrid method is shown in Fig. 1.Three example problems were adopted to verify the proposed method. The first two, being of small scale, demonstrated the accuracy of the optimal solution. The third example, a larger scale truss, was employed to discuss the efficiency. The OC–GA method and the numerical examples were programmed in our extended finite element software [26]. Crossover, mutation and OC probability used in the following examples are 0.5, 0.02 and 0.4, respectively.This truss was investigated for the solution existence of frequency optimization problem [4], shown in Fig. 2. The Young's modulus and density are, respectively, 2.1×1011 Pa and 7.8×103kg/m3. The sectional area for each bar belongs to interval 10–60cm2. The lower bounds of the first two frequencies are assigned as: ω1≥35Hz, ω2≥120Hz. In the following, the advantages and disadvantages among OC, simple GA and hybrid OC–GA are discussed, compared with analytical analysis. The numbers of population and generation for simple GA and hybrid OC–GA are both 10.The eigenvalue-equation of this truss structure corresponding to Eq. (11) can be written as:(30)7.0×103×375A1+192A2144A2144A2108A2βi=λi×3.12A1+3.9A2003.12A1+3.9A2βiwhere variables A1 and A2 indicate the cross-sectional areas for bar 1 and bar 2; λiis the ith eigenvalue and the corresponding eigenvector is βi. Eq. (30) can be written as(31)aλ′i2+bλ′i+c=0where(32)a=9.734A12+24.336A1A2+15.21A22(33)b=−(8.190×102A12+1.679×103A1A2+8.190×102A22)(34)c=1.985×104A1A2The two eigenvalues are expressed as(35)λ1=−b−b2−4ac2a×104,λ2=−b+b2−4ac2a×104Therefore, the frequencies are obtained in the following(36)ω1=λ1/2π,ω2=λ2/2πResponses of frequencies ω1 and ω2 with design variables A1 and A2 are shown in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. Then, feasible region is intersected from Figs. 3 and 4 and depicted in Fig. 5. Obviously, the minimum weight is theoretically at point (10, 10). The evolutionary process of simple GA at 1st, 5th and 10th generation is presented in Fig. 6. During the OC optimization, shown in Fig. 7, design variables iterate along the constrained curves. After 35 steps, convergence criterion is satisfied and the design is trapped into the local optima. Fig. 8illustrates that (1) the truss weight obtained by the hybrid OC–GA is lighter than that obtained by the simple GA and (2) the design variables of hybrid OC–GA march along the constrained curves, but ones of simple GA randomly distribute on the feasible region. It can be concluded that the hybrid method inherits the merits of OC and GA.This classical truss structure, with elastic modulus 6.98×1010Pa and density 2770kg/m3, is shown in Fig. 9. The lower bound of the sectional area for all bar members is assigned to be 0.645cm2. A lumped mass of 454kg is jointed at each of the four nodes. The first three frequencies are constrained: ω1≥7Hz, ω2≥15Hz and ω3≥20Hz. The numbers of population and generation for simple GA and hybrid OC–GA are 80 and 100, respectively.This example has been widely optimized using OC method [1], SQP technique [27] and evolutionary node shift methods [20]. The results are summarized and compared in Table 1. The optimal weight obtained by the hybrid OC–GA is lighter than that obtained by the simple GA. Moreover, the optimal weight is reduced to 535.73kg and frequency constraints are all satisfied, which is the optimal design among the references. The optimal solutions prove that the hybrid OC–GA is high accuracy and feasible for frequency optimization. The generation history, shown in Fig. 10, demonstrates that OC operator does speed up the convergence of the simple GA.This planar structure, depicted in Fig. 11, has 77 nodes. All members are divided into 29 groups [28], whose material properties are as the same as those of Example 1. The intervals for all design variables are, respectively, 1.0–10cm2. The first three frequencies are constrained by: ω1≥5Hz, ω2≥10Hz and ω3≥15Hz. The numbers of population and generation for simple GA and hybrid OC–GA are 200 and 120, respectively.The optimal design solved by these two methods is compared in Table 2. The truss weight obtained by the hybrid OC–GA is superior to that obtained by the simple GA. The generation history, shown in Fig. 12, proves that the speed of convergence of the hybrid method precedes that of the simple GA. The hybrid method is apt to search the optimal truss in fewer generations. Therefore, the OC operator significantly enhances the convergence ability of the simple GA. The results, listed in Table 3, show the prominent computational accuracy and efficiency of the hybrid method. Obtaining the same weight, hybrid procedure requires less generations and computational cost than simple GA.Furthermore, lots of numerical examples are tested to study the impacts of OC operator probability on the optimal truss weight and computational cost. Fig. 13shows that the computational cost is positively correlated to the OC operator probability. However, the relationship between computational cost and OC operator probability behaves like a parabola. When OC operator probability is equal to 0.4, truss weight reaches minimum. So OC operator probability in the interval [0.3, 0.5] is preferred for this problem.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
By inserting a gradient-based OC operator into simple GA, a hybrid OC–GA method is developed and verified by sizes optimization of truss structure with frequency constraints. Design variables of OC determinately iterate along the constrained boundaries but are fast trapped into the local optima. In contrast, the population of simple GA evolves in the global design space randomly and slowly. However, the evolved population of hybrid OC–GA advances not only along the constrained boundaries but also in the global design space, which is controlled by OC operator. Therefore, the hybrid method inherits the merits of fast OC and global GA. Compared with the performance of simple GA, the hybrid method provides powerful ability in searching for optimal solution and reducing computational cost. The hybrid method is hopeful to become a useful solver for optimization in large-scale practical structures.