@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigating the relationship between adverse events and infrastructure development in an active war theater using soft computing techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the relationship between adverse events and infrastructure development investments in an active war theater.We develop soft computing techniques (ANN, FIS, and ANFIS) for estimating the number of adverse events based on the occurrence of economic improvement projects.The performance of each model was investigated and compared to all other models using the calculated mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) values.When the model accuracy was calculated based on the MAPE for each of the models, ANN had better predictive accuracy than FIS and ANFIS models, as demonstrated by experimental results.The sensitivity analysis results show that the importance of economic development projects varied based on the specific regions and time period.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Infrastructure development,Adverse events,Soft computing,Artificial neural networks (ANNs),Fuzzy inference system (FIS),Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this paper is to investigate the relationship between adverse events and infrastructure development investments in an active war theater by using soft computing techniques including fuzzy inference systems (FIS), artificial neural networks (ANNs), and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) where the accuracy of the predictions is directly beneficial from an economic and humanistic point of view. Fourteen developmental and economic improvement projects were selected as independent variables. A total of four outputs reflecting the adverse events in terms of the number of people killed, wounded or hijacked, and the total number of adverse events has been estimated.The results obtained from analysis and testing demonstrate that ANN, FIS, and ANFIS are useful modeling techniques for predicting the number of adverse events based on historical development or economic project data. When the model accuracy was calculated based on the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) for each of the models, ANN had better predictive accuracy than FIS and ANFIS models, as demonstrated by experimental results. For the purpose of allocating resources and developing regions, the results can be summarized by examining the relationship between adverse events and infrastructure development in an active war theater, with emphasis on predicting the occurrence of events. We conclude that the importance of infrastructure development projects varied based on the specific regions and time period.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Irregular warfare is defined by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) as “a violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population(s).” Such warfare includes non-proportional force to convince and coerce where opposite forces are not large and effective in the region [1]. The success of irregular warfare operations depends heavily on the safety of civilian population, because the civilian population is the primary target of irregular warfare. Actors in warfare can work more effectively with a better understanding of this dynamic.The U.S. military has made some adjustments to its force structure in response to the challenges of irregular warfare. Bhattacharjee [2] outlined the application of a program called human social culture behavior (HSCB) modeling to guide the U.S. military in achieving a better understanding of the different types of cultures encountered while operating in overseas countries [3]. The overarching aim of the HSCB modeling is to enable DoD and the U.S. Government to better organize and control the human terrain during nonconventional warfare and other missions [4]. In particular, models of human behavior could be used to predict the effects of actions intended to disrupt terrorist networks.HSCB models are formed in order to understand the behavior and structure of organizational units at the macro level (economies, politics, socio-cultural regions) and at the micro level (terrorist networks, tribes, military units) [5]. These models are attracting much attention with regard to current and future operational requirements. HSCB models are complex systems and require computational modeling and simulation techniques to handle this complexity. Computational social scientists are currently researching how observations of human behavior might be used to develop scientifically based models of HSCB events [6]. To our best knowledge, there is currently no other study on the use of any computational methodology for representing the relationship between adverse events and infrastructure development investments in an active war theater.Various challenges have been encountered while trying to address problems related to representing social sciences data. Numrich and Tolk [7] summarized these challenges: lack of common vocabulary, variations in modeling approaches, and data acquisition. Schmorrow et al. [8] emphasized the challenge of leveraging modeling and simulation (M&S) for HSCB. They cited the difficulty in understanding which M&S tools are actually useful and when and how best to use M&S tools within different complexity levels. All these challenges must be understood and researchers should meet specific modeling requirements before proceeding to apply various methodologies in the HSCB field.There are modeling challenges with social data, particularly with regard to handling complexity, uncertainty, etc. Prediction is a particularly difficult task. Tools such as fuzzy inference systems (FIS), artificial neural networks (ANN), and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) are especially effective in handling the uncertainty and imprecision inherent in prediction modeling, and have demonstrated a high degree of accuracy in prediction applications. To demonstrate this, we’re going to use soft computing to analyze a certain characteristic we know aligns with stability and lack of violence (infrastructure and economic spending) and see if we can use it to do a really difficult but useful modeling task: predict adverse events.In summary, this study extends the investigation into using the soft computing techniques ANN, FIS, and ANFIS for predictive modeling. In this study, we analyze real-world data, use ANN, FIS, and ANFIS to predict future behavior, and measure the accuracy of each methodology. Using data on activity in an active war theater (seven geographical regions in Afghanistan), we explore the relationship between the size and scope of infrastructure development within each region and the number of “adverse events” (people killed, wounded, or hijacked). We then use ANN, FIS and ANFIS to evaluate that relationship and predict the number of adverse events in the future.Two different kinds of Afghanistan datasets provided by the HSCB program management (2001–2010) were utilized in this research, including: (1) the adverse event dataset, which includes information regarding the date of event, incident type, number of people killed, wounded, and hijacked, province, city, district, description of the event, and simple event summary. (2) The infrastructure aid dataset, which includes information regarding the population density, province, city, district, project types, and allocated budget information for different sectors.In this research, the total budget of 14 project types considered at years t=0 (i.e., the current year), t−1 (the previous year), and t−2 (two years ago), the number of adverse events (killed, wounded, and hijacked) in the previous month, and the urban and rural population for males and females were used to estimate the number of adverse events in year t+1. The data included a total of 89 inputs and four outputs reflecting adverse events. The format of the data is shown in Table 1.All data used in this study reflect incidents and infrastructure development projects that took place between 2004 and 2010. The data were grouped for training and testing into two batches: the years between 2004 and 2009 (for training purposes) and the year 2010 (for testing).Prediction models were developed based on the number of output variables and the number of regions and for all of Afghanistan (Fig. 1). Each region had different numbers of provinces and districts and the training and testing information for each region was organized into separate files (Table 2). General model framework used in this research is illustrated in Fig. 2.Initially, correlation analysis was conducted using training data (between years 2004 and 2009) to identify the statistically significant relationships between the independent and dependent variables. Based on the correlation analysis results, we can conclude that most independent variables are significantly related to the dependent variables (p<0.05). A large number of independent predictor variables remain even after eliminating some of them, based on correlation results (68 variables for number of people killed, 68 variables for number of people wounded, 31 variables for number of people hijacked, 71 variables for total number of adverse events). Consequently we applied stepwise regression analysis to finalize the number of independent variables.Stepwise regression analysis is simply a combination of backward and forward procedures and is probably the most preferable approach [9] when there are a large number of independent predictor variables that might have an effect on the response variable. Stepwise regression analysis looks at one particular question: whether or not dropping the particular independent variable reduces the predictive efficiency of the model [10]. Although stepwise regression is a type of multiple regression analysis, it differs from the standard multiple regression techniques. Stepwise regression introduces independent variables sequentially, based on partial-F statistics. The best model is therefore selected according to the most significant variables. During this iteration, the accuracy of the selected model is not affected significantly [11]. If F>Fα (the variable included is statistically significant), the variable should be entered in this equation. If F>Fα (the variable is not significant), the final model constitutes the equation from the previous iteration. Based on stepwise regression analysis, a refined number of independent variables used in model construction are represented in Table 3.Data normalization is necessary where the inputs are in different scales; it usually occurs before training the network. There are several types of data normalization approaches. For ANN approach, the selection of ranges for input and output values mostly depends on the type of activation function of output nodes, in general [0,1] for a logistic function and [−11] for a hyperbolic tangent function [12]. The hyperbolic tangent function was selected for output nodes; all data were normalized between −1 and 1 to produce uniformity for ANN models in this work. For FIS and ANFIS models, all data were normalized between 0.1 and 0.9 to produce uniformity for both models. The network output values were rescaled to the original form and the prediction performance accuracy was calculated based on the converted original dataset form.Performance metrics were used for calculating the error (the difference between actual and predicted values) in the model. There are several performance metrics including the mean square error (MSE), the root mean square error (RMSE), the mean absolute error (MAE), and the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE).In this study, and in order to calculate the performance of ANN, ANFIS, and FIS models, model accuracy was evaluated based on the MAPE between predicted and actual values. The following equation was used for this calculation:MAPE=100%n∑i=1nAi−PiAiwhere Aiand Piare actual and predicted values, respectively, and n is the total number of testing records.This research was conducted according to the sequence of steps illustrated in Fig. 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
