@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new membrane algorithm using the rules of Particle Swarm Optimization incorporated within the framework of cell-like P-systems to solve Sudoku

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper proposes a new membrane algorithm based on rules of PSO defined within the framework of cell-like P-systems to solve Sudoku.A novel way is introduced to define the search space for solving the problem of Sudoku.Using the proposed algorithm the success rate for Sudoku puzzles of order 3 of “easy”, “medium” and “hard” level is 100%.For “Evil” puzzles the success rate is however only 93% but it is the best ever recorded by any algorithm using PSO rules, as per the knowledge of the authors.Also, Sudoku of higher order is solved for which the success rate is about 87%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sudoku,Membrane algorithm,P-system,Particle Swarm Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sudoku, of order n, is a combinatorial puzzle having partially filled n2×n2 grid consisting of sub-grids of n×n dimension. In this paper, a new membrane algorithm, namely MA_PSO_M, is presented. It uses the modified rules of Particle Swarm Optimization coupled with a carefully designed mutation operator within the framework of cell-like P-systems. Another significant contribution of this paper is the novel way in which the search space for solving the Sudoku problem is defined. Initially, the proposed algorithm is used to solve Sudoku puzzles of order 3 available in literature. On the basis of experiments performed on sample Sudoku puzzles of ‘easy’ and ‘medium’ difficulty levels it is concluded that the proposed membrane algorithm, MA_PSO_M, is very efficient and reliable. For the ‘hard’ and ‘evil’ difficultly levels, too the algorithm performs very well after incorporating an additional deterministic phase. The performance of the algorithm is further enhanced with an increased population size in a very small computational time. To further demonstrate efficiency of algorithm it is applied to Sudoku puzzles of order 4. The obtained results prove that the proposed membrane algorithm clearly dominates any of the PSO based membrane algorithm existing in the literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sudoku is a logic based number placement puzzle. It is a single player mind game played on a partially filled n2×n2 grid. The grid contains(n2)2cells in which only digits ranging from 1 to n2 can be placed. Some of the cells of grid already have a digit placed in them while a player has to fill the remaining empty cells. However, while doing so a player has to follow specified rules according to which each of these numbers should occur exactly once in all the rows, columns and sub-grids, besides the fact that none of the fixed cells can be changed. For a proper Sudoku puzzles, there exist a unique solution that satisfy all the given constraints. The solution for most popular form of Sudoku, i.e., Sudoku of order 3 having 9×9 grid, can be attained very quickly for any of its difficulty levels as the easy Sudoku can be solved just by using algorithms based on logic derived from human intuitions [1]. However, a bit harder puzzles can be solved using backtracking algorithms [1]. However, the computational time of the backtracking algorithm increases, with the increase in the number of guesses to be made to solve the Sudoku and hence its efficiency decreases. Moreover, a general problem of solving Sudoku, of order n, is NP-complete [2]. Thus, deterministic algorithms fail for the Sudoku of higher order. Hence, researchers tried to solve this problem using nature inspired optimization techniques as these techniques can solve even the difficult puzzles as efficiently as the easy puzzles.Nature inspired optimization techniques explore and exploit the complete search space in order to find the global optimum solution for the problem. However, the search space besides having global optima may also contain many local optimal points. Hence, these algorithms sometimes tend to get stuck in region of local optima. In such cases, the operators like mutation help the algorithm escape the local optima. Sudoku, being constrained in nature, can have many local optima satisfying some of its constraint while not all of them. Hence, not all the nature-inspired techniques can successfully solve these puzzles. In literature, it can be found that techniques like Genetic Algorithms which have such operators as the part of the process are more successful as compared to algorithms like Particle Swarm Optimization [3].In this paper, a membrane algorithm MA_PSO_M, which uses the parallel and distributed framework of cell-like P-systems, is presented to solve the general form of Sudoku, i.e., Sudoku of order n. The rules used within the framework of cell-like P-systems are that of modified Particle Swarm Optimization coupled with specifically designed mutation. Since, PSO is a population based algorithm, the population from a defined search space has to be generated in each membrane of the system. However, in this paper, a different way (described later) to generate any individual of a population has been defined. Hence, the search space for any given Sudoku puzzle is different from that of others. The defined PSO rules have been applied on this differently generated population set. To avoid the trapping of the search process in any region of local optima a mutation operator has been applied following specified conditions. Initially, the algorithm is applied on the set of randomly selected Sudoku puzzles from the database available at Ref. [4]. The set contains 15 puzzles each of ‘easy’, ‘medium’, ‘hard’ and ‘evil’ difficulty levels. The results show that the algorithm works efficiently for ‘easy’ and ‘medium’ levels but success rate for puzzles of ‘hard’ and ‘evil’ levels is low. Thus, an additional deterministic rule is incorporated in the proposed algorithm and is applied on the same set of Sudoku puzzles. The obtained results show that updated algorithm, with an additional phase, can efficiently solve puzzles of all difficulty levels. To further prove the efficiency of updated algorithm it is applied to Sudoku puzzles of order 4 available in an online database at Ref. [5].This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the concept of PSO based membrane algorithms and the rules of Sudoku. This section also presents a brief literature survey on the topic. The proposed membrane algorithm, MA_PSO_M, is presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the deterministic phase introduced in algorithm to improve its performance. The obtained results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 presents conclusions of the work done and the future aspects to be studied.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
