@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-criteria selection of a deep-water port in the Eastern Baltic Sea

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A comprehensive framework was proposed for strategic selection of deep-water sea port's construction site.A group decision-making procedure was proposed to deal with the conflictive opinion of DMs on preferences of criteria.Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) was proposed to achieve weights of criteria in a group decision-making problem.A fuzzy ARAS (Additive Ratio Analysis) method was applied for measurement of alternatives preference ratio.We find that model could to be applied for similar problems solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Deep-water port,MCDM,AHP,ARAS-F,Fuzzy,Integrated model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sea ports play a significant role in the development of a modern economy. The Baltic Sea is an arterial transport corridor between Eastern and Western Europe. There is need to develop a deep-water sea port in the Klaipeda region to satisfy economic needs. This problem involves a multitude of requirements and uncertain conditions that have to be taken into consideration simultaneously. Numerous studies have been designated for the resolution of similar problems by employing multi-criteria as an aid. This paper proposes an integrated multi-criteria decision-making model to solve the problem. The backbone of the proposed model consists of a combination of Analytic Hierarchy (AHP) and Fuzzy Ratio Assessment (ARAS-F) methods. This model is presented as a form of decision aiding that could to be implemented when regarding any specific port or a like site selection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
International logistics is a problem of crucial importance for the development of a modern world [1]. Critical infrastructures play a significant role in countries due to the essentiality of national security, public safety, socioeconomic security and life style [2]. Infrastructures are very important for integrating EU countries. Scenario planning helps explore how the possible futures may look like and establishing plans to deal with them [3]. Modelling real world problems with crisp values under many conditions is inadequate because human judgement and preference are often ambiguous and cannot be estimated with exact numerical values [4]. Multiple and conflicting criteria including quantitative as well as qualitative can be considered and evaluated during the site selection process [5]. Construction projects are initiated in dynamic environment which result in circumstances of high uncertainty and risks due to accumulation of many interrelated parameters [6]. In actual environmental the stakeholders are often required evaluating the investment strategies according to their own subjective preferences in terms of numerical values from various criteria [7].Klaipeda is the only ice-free port on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea. Unfortunately its infrastructural capacity will not be sufficient for further effective activities, not even after fully mastering the existing and reserved port areas. The Port of Klaipeda has problems in handling Baltmax-type ships.Problems in selecting seaports have been investigated by many researchers. Wiegmans [8] presents the problem faced by deep-sea container carriers regarding container terminal selection. This study reveals that port selection and terminal selection are not the same, when it comes to the criteria for terminal selection, which mainly depend on handling speed, handling costs, reliability and hinterland connections. This analysis concludes that decision-making differs per container carrier, per trade and per port type, thereby implying the irrelevancy of a one size fits all approach.A number of research approaches have been proposed for solving decision-making problems. Most of these approaches focus on developing quantitative models for dealing with objective data or qualitative models for dealing with subjective ratings.Meanwhile shipping lines attach great value to often neglected factors, such as feeder connectivity, environmental issues and the total portfolio of a port in addition to the aforementioned criteria.The major problem faced by port professionals (e.g., port risk managers and port auditors) is the lack of an appropriate methodology and evaluation techniques to support their decisions [9].Önüt and Soner [10] point out the importance of site selection as an issue. The complexity of a system involved in site selection requires consideration of multiple alternative solutions and evaluation criteria. Evaluation procedures involve several objectives, and compromises are often necessary when facing possibly conflicting tangible and intangible factors. These are the reasons why multiple criteria decision-making has been found to be a useful approach for solving this kind of problem. There are many methods that could be applied to resolve the complexities involved in site location. Different MCDM (Multi-Criteria Decision-Making) models have been applied to solve this problem. Fuzzy TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) and AHP (Analytical Hierarchy Process) techniques are used to solve the problem of site selection.The importance of choosing an optimal port for callings is highly important for shipping carriers to reduce their total transportation costs.Decision-makers are required to use linguistic variables to express their preference [11]. The fuzzy multi-criteria analysis provides an effective framework for ranking competing alternatives in terms of their overall performances with respect to criteria [12]. One of the challenging and famous types of MCDM problems that include both quantitative and qualitative criteria is facility location selection problem [13]. Fuzzy set theory combined with MCDM methods provides a suitable language to handle imprecise criteria, being able to integrate the analysis of qualitative and quantitative factors [14].Many researchers assumed that shippers would aim to minimize their total operation costs by selecting an appropriate port as the most favourable and that inland freight costs could be minimized by shippers selecting the nearest port as the most favourable for their international trade imports and exports. This combined model consists of two stages [15]. For stage one, the container transportation demand split rate is first computed by using the fuzzy multiple criteria decision-making method. For stage two, an optimization mathematical programming network model is proposed for determining the inland origin destination (O-D). The operational performance of merchant ship fleets depends on establishing an effective ship-shore interface, especially on logistic support. This process includes the selection of a marine supplier with respect to a ship's operational requirements, which appears to be a key decision-making issue. Metin [16] offers an integrated decision aid for modelling the marine supplier selection process. The backbone of the proposed methodology consists of a combination of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats, an analytic hierarchy process and a technique for order preference by similarity to an ideal solution. This allows decision-makers to combine market dynamics and the logistic needs of a ship's operating environment, which also includes sea voyages, port periods and docking facilities. A user-friendly interface of the integrated methodology provides shipping executives with opportunities to integrate the proposed methodology into technical ship management procedures.Chou [17] constructs an Analytic Hierarchy Process model for simulating the behaviour of a carrier when choosing a port and identifying the importance weight of every factor influencing the choice of a port in a multiple-ports region. Finally, the cases of five shipping companies illustrate the utilization of this proposed model.Fuzzy data represents the uncertain, subjective and imprecise data that must be dealt with very often. Dheena and Mohanraj [18] consider an ideal solution and an anti-ideal solution and assess each alternative in terms of distance as well as similarity to the ideal solution and the anti-ideal solution. Normalization of fuzzy data is carefully avoided to minimize error. OWA operators with maximal entropy are used to aggregate across all criteria and to determine the overall score of each alternative. This proposed method is more flexible in modelling a decision-maker's preferences and more appropriate and effective in handling multiple criteria problems of considerable complexity.Chou [19] presents a new Fuzzy Multiple Criteria Decision-making Method for solving the selection of a port for a transhipment container under a fuzzy environment.Chou's [20] study deals with subjective ratings, which are quite commonly used in real life problems. Although a number of research approaches for solving decision-making problems have been proposed, most approaches focus on developing quantitative models for dealing with objective data or qualitative models for dealing with subjective ratings. Few researchers propose approaches to dealing with both objective data and subjective ratings. Use of the proposed fuzzy logic approach is demonstrated with a case study of location choice for a container transhipment port.Wang et al. [21] proposes an evaluation method to assess logistic distribution centre locations. Logistics service providers find that the selection of a logistic distribution centre is crucial for maximizing their profits and minimizing the costs of their investments. The human preference model usually involves uncertainty in the decision-making process, and it is extremely difficult for decision-makers to express the strengths of their preferences. This paper resolves this problem by establishing a fuzzy multiple criteria decision-making model based on fuzzy AHP for the logistic distribution centre assessment. Thereby decision-makers can express their preference with uncertainty.The study by De Feo and De Gisi [22] deals with verifying the efficacy of using an innovative criteria weighting tool (the “priority scale”) when involving stakeholders. They rank a list of suitable municipal solid waste facility sites with the multi-criteria decision-making technique, known as the analytic hierarchy process.Tabari et al. [23] states that site selection is part of strategic management activities. This author proposes a hybrid method of multi-criteria decision-making that makes it possible to select the optimal location, which will satisfy the decision-maker. The model is based on the AHP method.Selection of a proper construction site is of major importance, since this practice is intrinsically collaborative within knowledge-rich and multi-functional working environments [24]. Success at selecting a construction site is what highly determines whether a project is a success or a failure. Different methods for the solution of problems are known. Peldschus et al. [24] proposes applying the theory of two-person, zero-sum games for resolving this problem. Anagnostopoulos et al. [25] proposes the multiple criteria method. TOPSIS and OWA operators are used to aggregate across all criteria with maximal entropy and determine the overall score of each alternative.Brauers and Zavadskas [26] propose applying the MOORA (Multiple Objectives Optimization by Ratio Analysis) method to resolve location problems.Önüt [27] presents a model for a shipping centre site selection problem with a real world application in Istanbul, the most populated city in Turkey. A number of conflicting qualitative and quantitative criteria exist for evaluating alternative sites. Qualitative criteria are often accompanied by ambiguities and vagueness. This makes fuzzy logic a more natural approach to these kinds of multi-criteria, decision-making problems. Fuzzy AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process) is utilized for assigning weights to the criteria for site selection. Meanwhile fuzzy TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) is used to determine the most suitable alternative using these criteria weights. A sensitivity analysis of the results followed in this study.Zolfani et al. [28] applied AHP and the COPRAS-G method for evaluating the best place for constructing a road. Site selection is very important, because environmental pollution in harbours can have detrimental effects on the port, its users and the surrounding environment. Marin [29] develops a flexible and site-specific, multistep, indicator-based approach, which gives special consideration to local features. Yazdani [2] adopts the fuzzy COPRAS (COPRAS-F) as a fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making technique to determine importance of alternatives with respect to criteria.Chou [30] proposes an approach for selecting the location of a distribution centre in a hub port by combining multiple criteria decision-making and fuzzy multiple criteria decision-making. Investment preferences for present investment environments of alternative distribution centre locations can be evaluated with the MCDM method. The FMCDM (Fuzzy Multiple Criteria Decision-making) Method can then be used to evaluate the investment preferences for an environment of an alternative distribution centre for future operations.Chou [31] attempts to establish a fuzzy multiple-criteria decision-making model for risk evaluation of an investment location.The cargo turnover at Klaipeda Port throughout 1999–2011 has more than doubled, from 15 million tonnes to 36.6 million tonnes of cargo respectively. The annual capacity of Klaipeda Port amounts to over 52 million tonnes; therefore, the presumption is that the port capacity will be entirely exhausted by 2017, due to the growth of cargo throughput.Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) experts completed a feasibility study during 2003–2004, which presented a comprehensive assessment of business conditions in the Klaipeda region, port technological parameters and the natural environment. The study experts concluded that port expansion within the existing Klaipeda port territory is limited.A deep-water port should be developed within the present territory to deal with the lack of capacity and to satisfy the shipping needs of Baltmax-type ships. This is necessary to remain competitive in the Baltic Sea.Another important factor for the port expansion involves using the potential of the East–West transport corridor linking the transport nodes of Southern Sweden, Denmark, Germany and Lithuania with the transport systems of Belarus, Ukraine and Russia as well as with Asian countries. The East–West Transport Corridor Association has been established for this purpose. It is aimed at generating a global competitive chain of transport and logistics via Lithuania.There are two strategic advantages for having a deep-water port in Klaipeda:–Constantly growing cargo flows from the Far East andOpportunities for developing an attractive, competitive and modern infrastructure in an absolutely new port.The best construction site for a deep-water port can be selected after a detailed analysis and investigation of the targeted number of alternatives. A deep-water port would only involve development of strategically important terminals.Hearings, case studies, new studies and environmental studies have been performed. Nonetheless, how and where to expand the Port of Klaipeda remains unresolved for over a decade. There are proposals for expanding the internal port or exploiting the existing unused areas, referred to as the external port of Butinge and the external port Melnrage.There are many physical constraints for expanding the port in its southern part, which include existence of conservation areas for fresh water intakes and deficits in the development areas, both on land and in the water basin. Conversely, the sea basin to the east of the existing sea channel and off of Melnragė Beach can provide a large open space for outer port expansion. Furthermore, it has been projected that the existing inner channel will reach its full capacity and not be able to handle the growing shipping demand in the future. As a result, it is necessary to expand outside the existing port. This expanded port is referred to as the Outer Port [32]. The following are the major reasons justifying development of Artificial Islands:–Infrastructure (ports and airports);Urban development;Industry;Recreational structures like hotels or water parks;Mining natural resources.The Lithuanian government signed an agreement with JICA (Japan International Cooperation Agency) for Klaipeda port development feasibility studies to come to some resolution regarding the development of Klaipeda Port. JICA experts conducted the study and presented four options (Fig. 1) for construction of the outer port in Klaipeda (at Melnragė) [32].The most similar and nearest (by geographic dimension) to the St. Petersburg Marine Façade is the Melnragė Island project for a new passenger seaport project in Russia. This project calls for a new land area of 450 hectares developed in the bay near Vasilievsky Island, in St. Petersburg.There are similarities and differences between these two projects. The Russian project involves the territory of Vasilievsky Island, whereas the Klaipeda project plans for a new island placed some 300–400m offshore.Each of the presented feasible construction site alternatives has different advantages and disadvantages. Neither one of them is Pareto optimal. Each criterion has a different significance – i.e., an assigned weight. A number of methods could be applied to establish criteria weights [33]:–AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process) [34];Expert judgement method [35];Entropy [36];SWARA [37].The AHP method is the most widely used to establish criteria weights. It is therefore clear that construction site selection is a multiple criteria problem. ARAS-F and AHP [38] methods serve as the bases for ranking the outer (Avant) deep-water port development alternative and selecting the most feasible alternative.The AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process) method is applied to establish the criteria weights for the ARAS and ARAS-F methods.Fuzzy logic is an extension of traditional logic to intermediate and approximate values that capture the meaning of words, human reasoning and decision-making. Fuzzy systems and logic have their origins in ancient Greek philosophy. Zadeh [39] makes a crucial step in the design of a problem solving tool. He proposes and develops a concept of fuzzy logic in his seminal papers.Bellman and Zadeh [40] were the first who introduced fuzzy sets into the field of MCDM as an important tool to represent uncertainty and imprecision in the human decision-making process involving multiple criteria.Many FMCDM methods evaluate the ratings of alternatives and the weights of criteria (AHP, TOPSIS, ELECTRE, PROMETHEE).Fuzzy set A defined in space X is a set of pairs [39]:(1)A={(x,μA(x)),x∈X},∀x∈X,where fuzzy set A is characterized by its membership function μA:X→[0;1] which associates a real numberμAx∈[0;1]with each element x∈X.A fuzzy number is defined to be a fuzzy triangular number (α, β, γ), if its membership function is fully described by three parameters (α<β<γ):(2)μ|A(x)=1β−αx−αβ−α,ifx∈[α;β]1β−γx−αβ−γ,ifx∈[β,γ]0otherwiseA defuzzification process needs to be applied to obtain a crisp output. Defuzzification is the process of producing a quantifiable result in fuzzy logic, given fuzzy sets and corresponding membership degrees. The output of the defuzzification process is a single number. Many defuzzification techniques have been proposed in literature. The most typical fuzzy set membership function is the triangular membership function (Fig. 2). The basic operations of fuzzy triangular numbersn˜1andS˜iare defined as follows:(3)n˜1⊕n˜2=(n1α+n2α,n1β+n2β,n1γ+n2γ)addition(4)n˜1(−)n˜2=(n1α−n2γ,n1β−n2β,n1γ−n2α)subtraction(5)n˜1⊕n˜2=(n1α⊗n2α,n1β⊗n2β,n1γ⊗n2γ)multiplicationVarious approaches could be applied for assessing weights [40], e.g., the eigenvector method, SWARA [37], expert method [35], Entropy method [36], AHP [33] and others.The decision is made by using a derived weight w of the evaluative criteria [34]. Saaty shows by his experiments that most individuals cannot compare more than seven, plus/minus two criteria (Table 1).The AHP decision matrix is:(6)A=(aij)=1w1w2⋯w1wmw2w11⋯w2wm⋮⋮⋱⋮wmw1wmw2⋯1,aij=1,aij=1aij,aij≠0.The fuzzy group weight is determined as follows:After obtaining criteria weights from AHP, the ratio judgements are synthesized as follows.Suppose fuzzy group weight for n criteria is a fuzzy triangular number:(7)w˜j=(wjl,wjm,wju)wherewjl=minkyjk,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯is the minimum possible value;wjα=∏k=1pyjk1/p,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯is the most possible value andwjβ=maxkyjk,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯is the maximal possible value of the jth criterion;wjγ=maxkyjk,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯.The ARAS method [41] is based on the argument that the phenomena of a complicated world could be understood by using simple relative comparisons [41], [42].Susinskas [43] applies the ARAS and Entropy methods to select the best pile-column instalment alternative.Kersuliene and Turskis [44] apply the fuzzy ARAS and SWARA methods to rank and select architects.Ports and offshore terminals are vital for seaborne trade and international commerce, since more than 80 percent of international trade by volume is seaborne. The study conducted by Mokhtari [45] is applied to support the risk assessment phase of a proposed Risk Management (RM) framework used for seaport and offshore terminal operations and management. This has been fulfilled by integrating a generic, bow-tie based, risk analysis framework into the risk assessment phase as the backbone of the phase. For this reason, Fault Tree Analysis and Event Tree Analysis are used to analyze risk factors.The first stage is forming the FDMM (Fuzzy Decision-making Matrix):(8)X˜=x˜01⋯x˜0j⋯x˜0n⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮x˜i1⋯x˜ij⋯x˜in⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮x˜m1⋯x˜mj⋯x˜mn,i=0,m¯;j=1,n,¯where m – number of alternatives, n – number of criteria describing each alternative,x˜ij– fuzzy value representing the performance value of the i alternative in terms of the j criterion andx˜0j– the optimal value of the j criterion. A tilde ‘∼’ will be placed above a symbol, if the symbol represents a fuzzy set.If the optimal value of j criterion is unknown, then(9)x˜0j=maxix˜ijifmaxix˜ij,is preferableand(10)x˜0j=minix˜ijifminix˜ij,ispreferableThe second stage is normalizing the initial values of all the criteria–defining valuesx¯˜ijof the normalized decision-making matrixX¯˜:(11)X¯˜=x¯˜01⋯x¯˜0j⋯x¯˜0n⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮x¯˜i1⋯x¯˜ij⋯x¯˜im⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮x¯˜m1⋯x¯˜m1⋯x¯˜mn,i=0,m¯;j=1,n,¯The criteria with maxima preferable values are normalized as follows:(12)x¯˜=x˜ij∑i=0mx˜ijThe criteria with minima preferable values are normalized by applying a two-stage procedure:(13)x˜ij=1x˜ij*,x¯˜ij=x˜ij∑i=0mx˜ijThe third stage is defining a normalized-weighted matrix –Xˆ˜. The sum of weights wjwould be limited as follows:(14)∑j=1nwj=1(15)Xˆ˜=xˆ˜01⋯xˆ˜0j⋯xˆ˜0n⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮xˆ˜i1⋯xˆ˜ij⋯xˆ˜in⋮⋱⋮⋱⋮xˆ˜m1⋯xˆ˜mj⋯xˆ˜mn,i=0,m¯;j=1,n¯Normalized-weighted values of all the criteria are calculated as follows:(16)xˆ˜ij=x¯˜ijw˜j,i=0,m¯where wjis the weight (importance) of the j criterion andx¯ijis the normalized rating of the j criterion.The following determines values of the optimality function:(17)S˜i=∑j=1nxˆ˜ij,i=0,m¯whereS˜iis the value of the optimality function of ith alternative.The greatest value is the best, and the lowest one is the worst. Considering the calculation process, the optimality functionS˜ihas a direct and proportional relationship with valuesx˜ijand weightsw˜jof the criteria under investigation and their relative influence on the final result. Therefore the greater the value of the optimality functionS˜i, the more effective the alternative. The priorities of alternatives can be determined according to the valueS˜i. Consequently use of this method is convenient to evaluate and rank decision alternatives. The result of fuzzy decision-making for each alternative is fuzzy numberS˜i. The centre-of-area is the most practical and simple application as follows:(18)Si=13(Siα+Siβ+Siγ)A comparison of the variant under analysis determines the degree of the alternative utility, where the most ideal is S0. The equation for calculating the utility degree of alternative Atis presented below:(19)Ki=SiS0;i=0,m¯,where Siand S0 are the optimal criterion values obtained from Eq. (19).Clearly, the calculated value Atis in the interval [0; 1], and values can be ordered in an increasing sequence constituting the wanted order of precedence. The complex relative efficiency of a reasonable alternative can be determined according to the utility function values.Study experts conclude that port expansion within the existing territory of Klaipeda Port is limited. Considering the city and port development trends at that time, JICA experts recommend constructing an artificial island (1.5km long and 700m wide) next to the northern breakwater of the port's entrance (near Melnragė settlement), 350m from the coast, with a natural depth of 17.5m [32].A two-way sea channel in a 300m width is to be provided to meet the growing shipping traffic demand for port services. The water depths of the channel and the basin are set at 17.5m and 17m [32].Breakwaters are required to protect the inner channel of the Outer Port by turning basins and berths, since it is exposed to the waves of the Baltic Sea. The breakwaters are to be built to provide protection for the port from the waves coming from the south, west and north.There must be five terminals for the Outer Port to work effectively. Namely, it is to include a Petroleum Jetty, Grain Terminal, Fertilizer Terminal, General Cargo Terminal and Container Terminal [32].Petroleum Jetty is a dolphin-type berth with a water depth of 17m to be built to receive the Baltmax-type oil tanker (244m in LOA [Length Overall]). This berth is meant to decrease the congestion of existing tanker berths, as well as to meet shipper needs for larger vessels for their shipping economy [32].Grain Terminal is a berth with a water depth of 17m and a length of 310m to be built to receive Baltmax-type bulkers (123,000 DWT (Dead Weight Tonne) and 266m LOA). This berth is meant to attract transit grain shipments from CIS countries for ocean transport savings [32].Fertilizer Terminal consists of two berths with water depths of 15/17m to be built in a length totalling 570 or 620m (the general dimensions of the associated design for the Panamax-type of bulk cargo, 225m LOA) [32].General Cargo Terminal is a berth with a water depth of 15m and a length of 260m to be built to receive Panamax-type bulkers (225m LOA). Two rail mounted level ruffing cranes are to be installed. There are also provisions of a 4-hectare open yard and an 11,000m2 warehouse [32].Container Terminal is a berth with a water depth of 15m and a length of 330m to be built to receive a maximum container vessel of 4800 Twenty Foot Equivalent.The geometrical parameters (Table 2) along with the other 12 indicators (Table 3) must be taken into account when facing the challenge of selecting the best alternative.Decision-makers (experts) assisted in determining the criteria weights of 12 indicators. Experts provide most of the criteria values. The numerical indicators also presented are:X4 – efficiency of land use – 104m2X7 – construction cost – 106€X11 – storage capacity – freight tonnage – 104tonnesThe first stage for resolving this problem consists of three decision-makers determining the criteria ranks by applying the AHP method. Seven experts prepared the pairwise comparison matrixes (Table 4).The fuzzy group criteria weights were established by applying AHP method to the calculations (Table 5).SupposeW˜=[w˜1,w˜n¯]=[w˜j]is a fuzzy group weight for n criteria, andw˜jis a fuzzy triangular numberw˜j=(wjα,wjγ,wjβ), wherewja=minkyjk,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯is the minimum possible value,wjy=∏k=1pyjk1/p,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯is the most possible value andwjy=∏k=1pyjk1/p,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯is the maximal possible value of the jth criterion.The semantic associated with the six linguistic term set is considered in this study (Table 6and Fig. 3).The ratings of the candidates are presented here. The data regarding the general selection of an accountant are presented in Table 7.Table 7 is the matrix prepared according to Table 6 with fuzzy group criteria values (Table 8) and a fuzzy decision-making matrix with fuzzy group weights (Tables 8 and 9).SupposeW˜=[w˜1,w˜n¯]=[w˜j]is a fuzzy group weight for n criteria andw˜jis a fuzzy triangular numberw˜j=(wjα,wjγ,wjβ), wherewja=minkyjk,j=1,n,¯k=1,p¯is the minimum possible value,wja=minkyjk,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯is the most possible value andwjβ=minkyjk,j=1,n¯,k=1,p¯,is the maximal possible value of the jth criterion.A normalized fuzzy decision-making matrix is presented in Table 10.Solution results are presented in Table 11(Fig. 4).The best candidate from the available and feasible candidates is the fourth one (Fig. 5). The decision-makers selected it.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Facility location decisions are a critical element in strategic planning for a wide range of private and public firms. Numerous individual and integrated approaches were found as proposals to solve the site selection problem. All of them are capable of handling multiple quantitative and qualitative criteria. Extensive multi-criteria decision-making approaches have been proposed for site selection, such as the analytic hierarchy process, analytic network process, case-based reasoning, data envelopment analysis, fuzzy set theory, genetic algorithm, mathematical programming and simple multi-attribute rating technique as well as their hybrids. The presented case study shows that the model developed by applying two different MCDM methods and integrated with the fuzzy sets theory is suitable to solve complicated location problems.The best alternative according to the proposed model for resolving the problem is the fourth alternative. The proposed model shows the performance ratio of each alternative to the optimal alternative. The performance of the best alternative only achieves 90% of the performance of the optimal alternative.The present investigation and calculation results show that the presented algorithm performs better than the algorithms with crisp criteria. It can be efficiently employed to resolve highly complex engineering and location problems. Eventually the proposed methodology and model can be implemented as a form of decision support for any specific port and the like. The research on the presented study is expected to continue in the nearest future.