@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joint topology control and routing for multi-radio multi-channel WMNs under SINR model using bio-inspired techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a mathematical formulation for the joint optimization problem in WMNs.We design an optimization framework based on bio-inspired optimization techniques.We apply GA and PSO algorithm to find optimal solution for the entire network.We design constrained control mechanisms to accelerate convergence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bio-inspired optimization,Throughput optimization,SINR,Topology control,Routing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi-channel communication in a wireless mesh network (WMN) equipped with multi-radio routers can significantly enhance the network capacity. Channel allocation, power control and routing are three main issues involved in the performance of multi-channel multi-radio WMNs. In this paper, the joint optimization of channel allocation, power control and routing under signal-to-interference-and-noise ratio (SINR) model for multi-channel multi-radio WMNs is investigated. It is proven to be NP hard. As we know, no optimal polynomial time solutions have been proposed in the previous literatures. In order to tackle this problem, we apply bio-inspired optimization techniques for channel allocation and power control, and use linear programming for routing optimization. To reflect the cross-layer interaction property among these three issues, the routing optimization is further defined as the fitness value of a chromosome in bio-inspired optimization. Further, we propose an effective joint optimization framework, in which two representative bio-inspired optimization methods (genetic algorithm and particle swarm optimization algorithm) are hybridized to enhance the searching ability. The detailed evolution processes for both genetic algorithm and particle swarm optimization algorithm are demonstrated. Extensive simulation results show that the proposed algorithm converges fast and approaches the sub-optimal solution effectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A wireless mesh network [1,2] is a novel multi-hop wireless network consisting of a large number of wireless nodes, some of which are called gateway nodes and connected with a wired network. Recently, wireless mesh networks have become a practical wireless solution for providing community broadband Internet access services, such as last-mile broadband Internet access, neighborhood gaming, Video-on-Demand (VoD), distributed file backup, and video surveillance [3]. However, affected by the interference among multiple simultaneous transmission and the characteristics of multi-hop communication, capacity degradation becomes a serious problem for wireless mesh networks [4].The aggregate capacity and performance of WMNs can be increased by the use of multi-radio and multi-channel technology [5,6]. In a multi-radio multi-channel network, simultaneous communications are possible by the use of non-interfering channels. However, compared to single-radio single-channel wireless mesh networks, mesh routers equipped with I radios does not necessarily mean that the network capacity is also increased by I-fold [7]. The potential network capacity gain with multiple radios and multiple channels highly depends on issues related to channel assignment, power control and routing optimization [8,9]. Since both channel assignment and power control determine the connectivity between mesh nodes, we jointly refer them as topology control mechanisms. Since the routing algorithm unambiguously determines the flow requirements of each link, while the transmission capacity of each link is determined by topology control mechanisms. Thus routing in upper layers and topology control in bottom layers are inseparable for multi-radio multi-channel WMNs. As a consequence, the joint optimization across multiple layers should be investigated.The other research issue which needs to be addressed before applying joint optimization is how to model channel conditions and characterize interference. Generally, this work can be classified into two types, the protocol interference model and the physical interference model. In protocol interference model, the impact of interference is solely determined by whether or not a node falls within the interference range of other transmitting nodes. Although this model is very simple in calculating interference, it does not accurately capture physical layer characteristics, and the accuracy of results developed under this model remains unclear [10]. The physical interference model is more realistic than the protocol model [11]. Due to transmissions by non-intended transmitter, concurrent transmissions are allowed and interference is treated as noise in the physical model. A transmission is deemed successful if and only if the SINR (signal-to-interference-and-noise ratio) is larger than a threshold at the receiver. Moreover, the achieved transmission capacity is also a function of SINR (via Shannon's formula). However, due to the high complexity in SINR computation, few methods were proposed for solving the joint topology control and routing problem under SINR model in polynomial time in previous literatures.For this reason, the cross-layer optimization for multi-radio multi-channel WMNs under SINR model is investigated in our paper. We first formulate this challenging problem mathematically, and dig up its special structure which allows us to design an effective optimization framework based on bio-inspired optimization techniques. The optimization process is carried out by utilization of a network layer sub-problem (corresponding to throughput optimization) and a link-physical layer sub-problem (analogous to topology control). For the link-physical layer sub-problem, considering that the search of the optimal solution in a huge solution space, two representative bio-inspired optimization methods (genetic algorithm and particle swarm optimization algorithm) are hybridized to enhance the searching ability. For network layer sub-problem, linear programming techniques are applied. To reflect the interaction property of these two sub problems, we define the fitness value of an individual in bio-inspired optimization as the value of a linear objective function. In this manner, we can achieve a sub-optimal solution in polynomial time for moderate wireless mesh networks (which is testified by simulation), balance the demand of link bandwidth at the network layer and increase the link capacity at the link-physical layer, thus to improve the entire network performance. We also design high-efficiency coding strategies and constrained control mechanisms, which can ensure the individual efficiency in the evolutionary process and accelerate convergence to the optimal solution.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We discuss the related work in Section 2. We state our network model and assumptions in Section 3. We theoretically describe the cross-layer optimization problem in Section 4 and propose cross-layer optimization framework in Section 5. The hybrid algorithm is described in Section 6 in details. We evaluate our algorithm in Section 7, and conclude our paper in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
