@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Combining fuzzy AHP and fuzzy Kano to optimize product varieties for smart cameras: A zero-one integer programming perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A product is characterized by multiple-level core attributes and dichotomous optional attributes.Fuzzy analytical hierarchy process is efficient to extract customers’ preferences for core attributes.Fuzzy Kano model is effective to elicit customers’ perceptions of optional attributes.Zero-one integer programming is conducted to optimize product varieties by maximizing overall customer utility and considering manufacturing cost constraints.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Customer preference,Customer perception,Fuzzy analytical hierarchy process,Fuzzy Kano model,Zero-one integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In an era of global customization, dominating the majority market with a single product has become increasingly difficult and almost impossible for most companies. In contrast, they must provide various product varieties that attract diverse customers, particularly when acquiring distinct market segments. In practice, however, most companies cannot effectively reduce the gap between customer requirements and design characteristics, although this impacts the profitability and future growth of companies. Meanwhile, companies often get stuck in the trade-offs between enhancing product varieties and controlling manufacturing costs. Accordingly, this paper proposes a hybrid framework that combines fuzzy analytical hierarchy process (AHP), fuzzy Kano model with zero-one integer programming (ZOIP) to incorporate customer preferences and customer perceptions into the decision-making process of product configuration. Specifically, fuzzy AHP is used to extract customer preferences for core attributes while fuzzy Kano model is utilized to elicit customer perceptions of optional attributes. Finally, by virtue of ZOIP, the optimal product varieties (smart cameras) for distinct segments are determined by maximizing overall customer utility (OCU) and taking a firm's pricing policy into account.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today, owing to dynamically changing business uncertainties, achieving successful product development for multiple segments is becoming much more challenging than before. Traditionally, companies offered products with high quality, low cost, fast delivery and courteous after-sales service at most to satisfy market majorities. Nowadays, the concept of “mass customization” establishes a new paradigm for modern manufacturing industries since it treats each customer as an individual and provides “tailor-made” featured products that were only offered in the pre-industrial “craft” era [13]. In practice, balancing the trade-off between enhancing product varieties and controlling manufacturing cost, configuring attractive but limited product alternatives and launching them into niche segments has dominated the competition paradigm, particularly when a transition has been shifting from “mass” marketing to “target” marketing [5,13,15]. In particular, when the market becomes saturated (i.e. digital cameras, LCD TVs, and smart phones), brand companies must differentiate themselves from their main competitors.Reuters News [34] reported one of the astounding news in Eastman Kodak's corporate bankruptcy in 2011 although it is one of the biggest brands in the U.S. Kodak has filed with the U.S. court in Manhattan for bankruptcy protection and plans to significantly shrink its business in the future. Unfortunately, several Taiwanese OEM/ODM camera manufacturers are now incurring huge losses for “accounts receivable” because of Kodak's bankruptcy. The digital camera, an ultimate cause of Kodak's decline, was also invented by this company. Most business consultants ascribe Kodak's bankruptcy to one primary driver- “inability to adapt to the rise of digital photography and the end of film”. Although Kodak invented the digital camera in 1975, it had vacillated for a long time and failed to rapidly switch to digital cameras.As a matter of fact, four crucial terms are frequently indicated to influence companies’ market shares: product, price, place and promotion [17]. Among them, the first two “P”s (product and price) are more significant than the latter pair (place and promotion) because both are directly perceived by customers when making their purchase decisions. To significantly lower manufacturing cost (similar to a pricing weapon), brand companies have begun to outsource their manufacturing capacity and even their design capability to Asian partners. Despite the fact that greater “product” variety significantly stimulates product sales, brand companies need to balance the trade-off between controlling manufacturing cost and enhancing product variety. In addition to higher manufacturing cost, product varieties also result in several adversities, such as larger inventory cost and longer cycle time [22].To the best of our knowledge, numerous schemes have been proposed to balance the trade-offs, including product platform architecture [14], product family design [13,24], and data-mining based approaches [1,30]. Nevertheless, most of these merely support manufacturers without taking customer preferences or customer perceptions into account [3]. In a globally customized economy, as it was previously mentioned, this “supplier-driven” approach is too risky to achieve successful product development. Consequently, to assist companies in fulfilling multiple product design for distinct segments, this paper presents a framework that quantitatively captures customer preferences and perceptions and fuses them into the overall customer utility (OCU). For convenience, an overall comparison between the proposed framework and other previous publications is summarized in Table 1.Customer preference for a product, by definition, is a reflection of an individual's inner perception [4], especially when a product's capability can be hierarchically decomposed in advance. Without loss of generality, this study partitions the entire market into several ad-hoc segments in which consumers’ affordable prices and desires for products are jointly considered and quantitatively defined. In particular, this paper offers a systematic approach that allows a company to determine the optimal product varieties with respect to the recognized segments. The contribution of this work is summarized as follows:•Without loss of generality, product attributes are functionally decomposed into multiple-level core attributes and dichotomous optional attributes for simplifying product complexity,A market-oriented approach is presented to quantitatively incorporate customer preferences and customer perceptions into the decision-making process of product development,The optimal product varieties for multi-segments are systematically determined with consideration of overall customer utility and a firm's pricing policies.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews several representative techniques including quality function deployment, conjoint analysis, and Kano model. Section 3 presents the details of the proposed framework. An industrial example for optimizing product varieties of smart cameras for multi-segments is illustrated in Section 4. Conclusions are drawn in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In order to survive in a wide range of market segments, companies must offer sufficient product varieties to satisfy diverse customer needs while maintaining controllable manufacturing complexities. Consumers are usually scattered in the whole market in affordable prices, preference patterns, and their buying behaviors. Consequently, a cost-effective approach that incorporates customer preferences and customer perceptions into the decision-making process of product development has become much more difficult to achieve. Unlike most previous studies, this paper proposes a systematic, quantitative, yet, feasible framework that addresses the aforementioned issues. More importantly, it contributes to this domain by demonstrating the following merits:•Fuzzy AHP is efficient to extract customer preferences for core attributes associated with multiple levels of specification when a product is functionally characterized.Fuzzy Kano model is effective to assist product designers in eliciting customer perceptions of optional attributes that correspond to dichotomous outcomes (i.e. functional presence and dysfunctional absence).For acquiring distinct segments, zero-one integer programming is capable to optimize product varieties by maximizing overall customer utility as well as considering a firm's pricing policies.Depending on consumers’ affordable prices, the entire market is partitioned into three distinct segments (low/medium/high). In future studies, market segmentation might be carried out according to customer demographic profiles (i.e. age, gender, occupation, and social status) or preferences for affective features (i.e. form style, body material, and color). Furthermore, other data-mining or soft-computing techniques such as association rule mining, decision tree and rough set could be fused to accomplish multiple product design for the recognized niche segments.