@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Social network analysis for customer churn prediction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the use of social network information for customer churn prediction.We develop an alternative modeling approach using relational learning algorithms.We present the results of two large scale real life case studies in the telco industry.A large group of classifiers yields comparable performance.A significant impact of (higher order) social network effects on the performance of a customer churn prediction model is found.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data mining,Social networks,Customer churn prediction,Relational classification,CDR data,Profit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examines the use of social network information for customer churn prediction. An alternative modeling approach using relational learning algorithms is developed to incorporate social network effects within a customer churn prediction setting, in order to handle large scale networks, a time dependent class label, and a skewed class distribution. An innovative approach to incorporate non-Markovian network effects within relational classifiers and a novel parallel modeling setup to combine a relational and non-relational classification model are introduced. The results of two real life case studies on large scale telco data sets are presented, containing both networked (call detail records) and non-networked (customer related) information about millions of subscribers. A significant impact of social network effects, including non-Markovian effects, on the performance of a customer churn prediction model is found, and the parallel model setup is shown to boost the profits generated by a retention campaign.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, vast amounts of networked data on a broad range of network processes and information flows between interlinked entities have become available, such as calls and text messages linking telephone accounts [12] and money transfers connecting bank accounts [26]. These massive, networked data logs potentially hide information that is highly valuable to companies and organizations, and as such open new perspectives for innovative business applications [4,38].Networked data present both complications and opportunities for predictive data mining. The data are patently not independent and identically distributed, which introduces bias to learning and inference procedures [19,24]. Relational learning aims to exploit the information contained within the network structure of data instances, and to incorporate this information within a network classification or regression model [13,16]. Relational classifiers (RC) learn directly from a graph or network, as opposed to non-relational classifiers (N-RC) which require an attribute-value representation of the data.The central research question in this study consists of a theoretical and an applied component, concerning respectively the use and the merits of social network information for customer churn prediction in the telco industry. More specifically, this study develops a number of approaches to mine social network information for churn prediction, and examines the effect on the predictive power of the resulting models. Customer churn undermines the profitability of telco operators, facing annual churn rates up to 20% and higher. Therefore customer relationship management, and more specifically customer retention, receives a growing amount of attention from telco operators. Customer churn prediction (CCP) models aim to detect customers with a high propensity to attrite. This allows a company to improve the efficiency of retention campaigns which aim to prevent customers from churning, by directing personalized retention efforts to the customers that are effectively about to churn.Fig. 1introduces a general framework for customer churn prediction modeling in the telco industry. The top panel of the figure describes the current state-of-the-art approaches. A telco operator has access to two main data sources11A third source concerns external data providers, which have not been included to keep the framework transparent.: (1) subscription records, i.e. the information a customer provides when subscribing to a service (e.g. postal address, name, etc.); (2) call detail records (CDRs), i.e. communication logs describing the identity (i.e. the phone number) and operator of interacting subscribers, and the exact type, time, and duration of each interaction. Typically, subscription records are only available for the contractual postpaid (as opposed to the non-contractual prepaid) customer segment. These records can be converted into local attributes, which summarize general information related to individual customers, and network attributes, which aggregate information related to the (social) network of a customer. Using historical data, non-relational classifiers are able to learn a classification model to predict future churn based on these attributes. A differentiation between the type of CCP model is made based on the types of attributes that are included in the model. Currently, a great focus exists in the industry on the use of network attributes in order to incorporate social network effects and to improve the predictive power of a CCP model (yielding models of types 2 and 3 in Fig. 1). However, to our knowledge, the merits of incorporating social network attributes in a CCP model thus far have not been studied thoroughly in the literature. Therefore, in this study the impact of network attributes on the predictive power of a non-relational CCP model will be examined in more detail.As an alternative to the currently applied non-relational approaches discussed above, this study develops an alternative approach which is depicted in the bottom panel of Fig. 1. CDRs can be converted into a graph, with the nodes in the graph representing subscribers and the links between the nodes representing social ties between the subscribers. This graph is called the call graph [30] and represents the social network of the subscribers of the telco operator. From a theoretical perspective, this paper contributes by developing relational classifiers that allow to incorporate social network effects within a CCP model and to handle the specific characteristics of a customer churn prediction setting. For instance, the class distribution of churners and non-churners is typically very skewed, since there are much less churners than non-churners. This may cause existing data mining techniques to experience difficulties in learning powerful models. In a relational learning context, typical methods to handle a skewed class distribution, such as sampling techniques, are not applicable. Therefore, the existence of non-Markovian or higher order social network effects and their use for customer churn prediction is examined. Relational learners typically restrict the impact of the network on a node to the first order neighborhood, i.e. the nodes in the network that are directly connected to a particular node (e.g. Macskassy and Provost [24], Neville and Jensen [32]). Existing relational learners are extended in order to incorporate higher order network effects by allowing them to take into account higher order network effects as if first order network effects. Furthermore, existing techniques are adjusted to properly handle the time dimension present in customer churn, as well as to deal with the massive size of the graph representing the social network of the customer base of a telco operator, which typically consists of millions of subscribers. Finally, a number of approaches to combine a non-relational and a relational CCP model are presented, aiming to reinforce the predictive power of current CCP modeling approaches by adding a relational model. From an application perspective, this study contributes by evaluating and comparing the CCP modeling approaches summarized in Fig. 1 in two extensive, real life case studies. This will allow to assess the impact of social network attributes on the performance of a non-relational CCP model, as well as to compare a non-relational, a relational, and a combined CCP model. The two case studies concern the prediction of churn in respectively a prepaid and a postpaid customer segment. To this end, two large-scale, real life data sets have been obtained containing networked (CDRs) and non-networked (usage statistics, sociodemographic, marketing related) information about millions of customers. The results of the experiments will be assessed using lift as well as the novel maximum profit measure, which allows to assess the performance of a CCP model from a profit point of view.Boccaletti et al. [3] defines graph theory as the natural framework for the exact mathematical treatment of complex networks, and formally, a complex network can be represented as a graph. In this study the graph and the complex network coincide, since the analyzed networks are approximate mathematical representations of the social ties between the customers of a telco operator. A graph G consists of a set of vertices (or nodes, or points)v∈Vthat are connected by a set of edges (or links, or lines) e∈E, and G=(V, E). The number of elements in the sets V and E are denoted respectively by n and k. The links in a graph can be directed or undirected. Directed links point from an origin to a destination node and incorporate a direction property, while undirected links do not. In an undirected graph maximum one link exists between two nodesviandvj, whereas in a directed graph maximum two links exist between two customersviandvj, with one link representing the interactions going fromvitowardsvjand the other representing the interactions fromvjtowardsvi.A graph can be represented by an adjacency matrix A=(aij) or a weight matrixW=(wij)of size n×n. An entry aijorwijrepresents the edge between vertexviand vertexvj. The value of aijin an adjacency matrix is equal to one if an edge exists between verticesviandvj, and equal to zero when no connection exists. In principle, the weightswij∈Wcan take any value. Typically, a weight expresses a characteristic of a link, such as the strength of a social tie between two customers of a telco operator in a call graph. A value ofwijequal to zero means that no relation exists between two vertices. When the weights represent distances, e.g. the length of links in traffic networks, the weight matrix is called the distance matrix. The values aiion the diagonal of an adjacency matrix depend on the convention that is adopted, and either equal once or twice the number of edges from vertexvito itself or so-called loops. In case of a weight matrix, the valueswiion the diagonal depend on the property expressed by the weights. For instance, when the weights represent distances, the values on the diagonal will be equal to zero. In this study, the values of aiiandwiiwill be set equal to zero by definition.Defintion 1The orderonetwork neighborhoodNioof nodeviis defined as the subset of nodes of the set of all nodes in the network V that are directly or indirectly connected to nodevi, with the maximum number of links constituting the shortest path between the nodes in the neighborhood and the nodeviequal to the order o, and including nodeviitself.The first order neighborhoodNi1or equivalentNiofviconsists of all the nodes in the network that are directly connected toviand nodeviitself. The second order neighborhood adds to the first order neighborhood the nodes that are directly connected to the nodes in the first order neighborhood, which are not already in the first order neighborhood, etc. The neighborhoodNi0of order zero is a singleton with element nodevi. Section 5 will discuss some further properties of graphs. For an extensive overview on graph theory, one may refer to, e.g. Newman [33].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
