@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Offline and online fault detection and diagnosis of induction motors using a hybrid soft computing model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Perform offline as well as online fault detection and diagnosis of induction motors.Extract current harmonic patterns with the Motor Current Signature Analysis method.Deploy the Fuzzy Min-Max (FMM) neural network to learn fault patterns incrementally.Use the Classification and Regression Tree (CART) to refine the knowledge from FMM.Monitor multiple motors and provide predicted fault conditions to users (engineers).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fault detection and diagnosis,Fuzzy Min-Max neural network,Classification and Regression Tree,Induction motor,Motor Current Signature Analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a hybrid soft computing model comprising the Fuzzy Min-Max (FMM) neural network and the Classification and Regression Tree (CART) for motor fault detection and diagnosis is described. Specifically, the hybrid model, known as FMM-CART, is used to detect and classify fault conditions of induction motors in both offline and online environments. A series of experiments is conducted, whereby the Motor Current Signature Analysis (MCSA) method is applied to form a database containing stator current signatures under different motor conditions. The signal harmonics from the power spectral density (PSD) are extracted, and used as the discriminative input features for fault classification with FMM-CART. Three main induction motor conditions, viz. broken rotor bars, stator winding faults, and unbalanced supply, are used to evaluate the effectiveness of FMM-CART. The results indicate that FMM-CART is able to detect motor faults in the early stage, in order to avoid further damage to the induction motor as well as the overall machine or system that uses the motor in its operations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the demand for accurate and robust Fault Detection and Diagnosis (FDD) methods for complex industrial systems has increased steadily. The key aim is to ensure that these complex systems can be safer and more reliable in operation, in order to minimize unscheduled machine and/or process downtime [1]. Unexpected downtime due to machine failures has become a major issue in production plants, especially when the machines are expected to run continuously for extended hours [2]. Faults may occur in a system or a process, either independently or simultaneously. Simple faults can be detected by a single measurement. But, in complex systems, it is often difficult to measure the system or process states directly. As such, more efficient and automated measures are needed to facilitate FDD of complex systems.In general, FDD covers two main tasks [3]: (i) fault detection to determine whether a fault has occurred and (ii) fault diagnosis to determine which fault has occurred (i.e., the cause of the observed out-of-control status). Automated FDD systems can assist in reducing wastage caused by poorly maintained, degraded, and/or improperly controlled equipment [4]. As an example, FDD in the operation of chillers [4] has resulted in less expensive repairs, timely maintenance, and shorter downtimes. Other examples of FDD applications include a combination of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) models for detecting faults in robotic systems [5]. FDD systems have also been deployed to improve the safety, reliability, and availability of a nuclear power plant [6] and a steam turbine power plant [7]. All these demonstrate the importance of FDD in complex systems.One key component of many industrial systems is electric motors. Indeed, electric motors are used in many applications to transform electrical energy to mechanical energy [8]. Electric motors can be classified by the source of their power, i.e., either Alternating Current (AC) or Direct Current. Among different types of AC motors, Induction Motors (IMs) consume up to 50% of the total generated capacity of a country [9]. IMs are used worldwide, e.g. three-phase IMs make up 87% of the total AC motors used in Europe [10,11]. As reported in [9], IMs constitute an essential part of many complex systems, which include pumps, blowers, fans, and compressors. Because of heavy reliance of industries on these machines, catastrophic motor faults are very costly, especially in safety-critical operations [12]. Motor faults, which can occur in different parts of the motor, contribute to the degradation and eventual failure of the motor, if the faulty conditions are left undetected [13].While IMs are reliable, it is inevitable to have situations where these motors malfunction, owing to wear and tear as well as other causes in complex systems. Note that a failure of a motor could potentially shut down the entire production line [14]. In the daily usage, IMs are also subject to unavoidable stresses, such as electrical, environmental, mechanical, and thermal stresses, which can lead to faults in different parts of the motor [15]. It is thus imperative to avoid sudden breakdowns of these motors, which may lead to a direct influence on production, and may result in substantial financial losses. As explained earlier, an effective FDD method can reduce maintenance expenses by preventing unscheduled downtimes. As such, many investigations on detecting and diagnosing IM faults have been reported [16], and soft computing is a popular and useful method for developing intelligent FDD systems [17].Soft computing-based models have been investigated for undertaking FDD tasks, owing to their fast and robust implementation, their performance in learning arbitrary nonlinear mappings, and their ability for pattern recognition and association [6]. Back Propagation (BP) is a supervised learning method for feedforward ANNs. In [18], current signals were transformed to magnitudes using Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), and side-band frequency magnitudes were fed into a feedforward ANN trained with BP to detect broken rotor bars. Sadeghian et al. [19] also used stator current signals as a source for detecting broken rotor bars. Wavelet Packet Decomposition was applied to analyze the signals, and the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) network was used for fault classification. Ayhan et al. [20] used stator current signals as the inputs to a Multiple Discriminant Analysis model to detect broken rotor bars.In [21], stator current signals were used as the inputs to Park's Vector modulus, and the resulting output was fed into a fuzzy wavelet ANN for fault detection and classification of broken rotor bars. A fuzzy clustering algorithm was used for fault detection of stator windings in IM [22]. The fuzzy cluster centers were determined using the Kohonen neural network, while the Metropolis–Hastings algorithm was used to detect changing points. Ondel et al. [23] extracted the diagnostic features from current and voltage measurements, and the most relevant features were selected using the k-nearest neighbors rule. Then, fault classification of broken rotor bars with the Kalman algorithm, which allowed predicting the evolution of the partially known modes, was conducted.In this paper, we develop a hybrid soft computing-based model for detecting and classifying IM faults. Compared with other investigations that generally focus on offline environments, both offline and online environments are taken into account in our work. Indeed, one of the main contributions of this work is the use of a self-designed data acquisition board and a motor diagnostic software (which encompasses the FMM-CART model) for online FDD of various IM faults. The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, the hybrid model of FMM-CART is presented. The feature extraction process is explained in Section 3. Prior to the online experiments, a series of offline experiments is conducted, as presented in Section 4. Details of the data acquisition board, motor diagnostic software, and online experiments are presented in Section 5. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 6.The integration of different learning techniques has resulted in a variety of hybrid intelligent models. According to [24], when designinng a hybrid model, the focus should be placed on the integration and interacation of different techniques, rather than on the merging of different techniques to create ever-new techniques or models. In other words, the advantages of existing techniques that are well-established in solving some specific problem should be exploited, and their limitations should be eliminated by combining them with other complementary techniques. As examples, a hybrid fuzzy neural model that is composed of two sub-networks connected in cascade for electrocardiography beat recognition was presented in [25]. A hybrid neural network incorporating both supervised and unsupervised learning techniques to detect and classify different types of landmines was reported in [26].Based on the above rationale, a hybrid model combining the Fuzzy Min-Max (FMM) neural network and the Classification and Regression Tree (CART) is introduced for offline and online FDD applications. In order for FMM and CART to work efficiently as a hybrid model (i.e. FMM-CART), a number of modifications are implemented for both models. A block diagram of FMM-CART is shown in Fig. 1. Details of FMM and CART, and the modifications are explained in the following sub-sections.Fig. 2shows the FMM network structure. It has three layers, i.e., FA, FB, and Fcare the input, hidden, and output layers, respectively. The input and output layers contain nodes equal in number to the dimensions of the input pattern and the target classes, respectively. The hidden layer is called the hyperbox layer. Each FBnode encodes a hyperbox fuzzy set, and FAto FBconnections are the minimum and maximum points, denoted by matrices V and W, respectively.The connections between the FBand FCnodes are in the binary format, which are stored in matrix U. The connection from FBto FCis determined using:(1)ujk=1ifbjis a hyperbox for classCk0otherwise,where bjis the jth node and Ckis the kth node. Each FCnode represents one class. The output of the FCnode represents the degree to which input pattern Ahfits within class k. The transfer function of each FCnode performs fuzzy union of the appropriate hyperbox fuzzy membership functions, i.e.,(2)ck=maxj=1mbjujkThe output of the FCclass nodes can be utilized in two ways. When a soft decision is required, the outputs are deployed directly. When a hard decision is required, the FCnode with the highest value is located, and its node value is set to 1 to indicate that it is the closest pattern class, while the remaining FCnode values are set to 0, i.e., the principle of winner-takes-all [27].The key feature of FMM is its hyperbox fuzzy sets. The size of a hyperbox is controlled by θ, which varies between 0 and 1. When θ increases from a small to a large value, the number of hyperboxes created is reduced. The membership function is computed with respect to the minimum and maximum points of a hyperbox, and to the extent to which an input pattern fits in the hyperbox. For an n-dimension input pattern, a unit cube, In, is defined, and the membership value ranges between 0 and 1. The definition of each hyperbox fuzzy set Bjis:(3)Bj={X,Vj,Wj,f(X,Vj,Wj)}∀X∈In,where Vj=(vj1,vj2,…,vjn) is the minimum point for Bjand Wj=(wj1,wj2,…,wjn) is the maximum point for Bj. The combined fuzzy set that classifies the kth pattern class, Ck, is:(4)Ck=∪j∈KBj,where K is the set of hyperboxes associated with class k. The training process is concerned with finding and fine-tuning the available hyperboxes to form the boundaries of different target classes.In FMM, the learning algorithm allows the hyperboxes of the same class to overlap. However, the overlaps among different classes need to be eliminated. The membership function for the jth hyperbox, bj(Ah), 0≤bj(Ah)≤1, is used to measure the extent to which the hth input pattern, Ah, falls outside hyperbox Bj. In other words, the membership function serves as a measurement to the extent each component is larger (or smaller) than the maximum (or minimum) point along each dimension that falls outside the minimum and maximum boundary of the hyperbox. As bj(Ah) approaches 1, the point is said to be “more” contained by the hyperbox. The function that meets the membership function criteria is the sum of two complements, viz. average of the maximum point violation and average of the minimum point violation [28]. The resulting membership function is:(5)bj(Ah)=12n∑i=1n[max(0,1−max(0,γmin(1,ahi−wji)))+max(0,1−max(0,γmin(1,vji−ahi)))],where Ah=(ah1,ah2,…,ahn)∈Inis the hth input pattern, and γ is the sensitivity parameter that controls how quickly the membership values decrease when the distance between Ahand Bjincreases.To efficiently combine FMM with CART, two modifications are needed; i.e., the procedures for confidence measure and centroid computation of each hyperbox. These modifications are adopted from [29]. First, a confidence factor, CFj, for each hyperbox Bjin terms of its usage frequency and its predictive accuracy is calculated as follows [30]:(6)CFj=(1−λ)Uj+λAj,where Ujis the usage of hyperbox j, Ajis the accuracy of hyperbox j, and λ∈[0,1] is a weighting factor. The usage of a hyperbox, Uj, is defined as the number of prediction patterns classified by any hyperbox Bjdivided by the maximum number of prediction patterns classified by any hyperbox with the same class. The accuracy of a hyperbox, Aj, is defined as the number of correctly classified prediction patterns by any hyperbox Bjdivided by the maximum number of correctly classified patterns with the same class. The confidence factor identifies hyperboxes that are frequently used and that are generally accurate in prediction, as well as hyperboxes that are rarely used, but yet highly accurate.To empirically determine λ, a preliminary offline experiment using a data set with four noise-free IM conditions, i.e. fault-free, broken rotor bar, stator winding fault, and unbalanced supply (see Section 4 for details), was conducted. Fig. 3shows the weighting factor versus FMM-CART accuracy for the offline experiment. The results indicated that λ=0.2 gave the best accuracy rate. As such, this setting was used throughout the experiments in this paper.On the other hand, the hyperbox minimum and maximum points do not represent the centroid of data samples contained by the hyperbox. The centroid, which is the centre of the most populated data samples contained within the hyperbox, can be computed as:(7)Cjinew=Cji+|ahi−Cji|Nj,where Cjiis the centroid of the jth hyperbox in the ith dimension, ahiis the hth input pattern, and Njis the number of patterns included in the jth hyperbox.In general, a tree classifier can be built by analyzing the training set that contains the input samples and their associated class labels. The “greedy approach” is adopted by ID3, C4.5, and CART, where the decision tree is constructed in a top–down, recursive divide-and-conquer manner [31]. The majority of the algorithms for decision tree inductions follow a top–down approach. It starts with a training set of input samples and their associated class labels. The training set is recursively partitioned into smaller subsets as the tree is being built. Based on the decision matrix from the distribution of classes in the training set, each resulting node is assigned a predicted class. The details of tree building and tree pruning of CART are as follows.Tree building begins at the root node, where the entire training set is included. No further decision to the partition is made if all data samples belong to the same class. Otherwise, CART finds the best possible variable to split the node into two leaf nodes. This process is repeated for each new leaf node until a completely distinguishable tree is obtained [32]. The CART algorithm utilizes the Gini impurity index as a measure of how often a randomly chosen element from the set would be incorrectly labeled if it were randomly labeled according to the distribution of labels in the subset [33]. The Gini index measures the impurity of D, a data partition or set of training samples, as follows [34]:(8)Gini(D)=1−∑ip2(i),where p(i) is the observed fraction of classes with class i that reaches the node.Next, the goodness-of-split index is measured by an impurity function defined for each node. Ideally, each leaf node should be “pure”, i.e., only one class dominates. When a split at node t occurs, the goodness-of-split index is defined by:(9)Δi(s,t)=i(t)−pL[i(tL)]−pR[(i(tR)],where s is a particular split, pLis the proportion of the cases at node t that goes into the left child node (tL), pRis the proportion of cases at node t that goes into the right child node (tR), i(tL) is impurity of the left child node, and i(tR) is impurity of the right child node [35]. Based on a series of splits generated by a variable at each node, the rule is to select the split that results in the maximum reduction in the impurity measure of the parent node. The tree building process continues until it is no longer possible to proceed any further.When a decision tree is built, some branches may reflect anomalies in the training data due to noise or outliers. As such, tree pruning aims to generate a simpler tree. A large tree is commonly considered as a complex tree, as the complexity of a tree is measured by the number of terminal nodes in the tree. A pruned tree tends to be smaller and less complex, and thus, easier to comprehend.In a classification tree, an error is said to occur when a training sample takes the wrong branch while being classified by the decision tree, since, normally, limited training samples are used to produce the decision tree. This problem can be mitigated by providing each class of the decision tree with a confidence factor (known as weightage) based on the FMM hyperbox centroids, with values between 0 and 1.In Eq. (8), the sum of the Gini index is computed over m classes. With this modification, a new method for computing the Gini index is proposed, as follows:(10)Gini(D)=1−∑iw2(i),where w(i) is the normalized weights of classes with class i that reaches the node. This modification serves as a useful approach to improve the performance of FMM-CART, as shown in the experimental studies.Fig. 4(a) shows the FMM-CART flow chart. The overall FMM-CART algorithm is summarized in Fig. 4(b). Based on the FMM-CART algorithm, the input pattern consists of various harmonic values, which is fed into FMM, and the membership function is calculated, as in step 2. The learning process begins at step 3, whereby if the expansion criterion is satisfied, the hyperboxes are adjusted as in steps 4 and 5. The hyperboxes may overlap each other after expansion. As such, four test cases (as in steps 6–10) are used to check for overlapping hyperboxes. When the hyperboxes overlap, the contraction process (as in steps 11–16) is activated to eliminate the overlapped regions by minimally adjusting each of the hyperboxes. Centroid computation is conducted as in step 17 while confidence factor is computed using steps 18 and 19. With the centroids and confidence factor from FMM hyperboxes as the inputs to CART, the Gini impurity index for tree building is computed, as in step 20. The goodness-of-split is calculated, as in step 21, while the tree is pruned using the cost-complexity measure, as in step 22. The final output from CART is a decision tree depicting various learned IM conditions.In this study, the Motor Current Signature Analysis (MCSA) method is used to produce a set of input features for FDD with FMM-CART. The details are as follows.The MCSA relies on the spectral analysis of the stator currents, or more precisely the supply currents of a motor, to detect an incipient motor fault [36]. Specifically, the spectral density method is used to extract useful information from a signal and to describe the associated power distribution in the frequency domain. The power spectral density (PSD) is the Fourier transform of the auto-correlation function of a signal when the signal is stationary [37]. The PSD function is not restricted to just one specific harmonic. On the other hand, the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) allows a fast computation of the Fourier coefficients [38]. Hence, FFT is used in this work. The values of the Fourier transform are, in general, complex quantities, whereby they contain both real and imaginary components. As such, the PSD function is calculated by multiplying the FFT with its complex conjugates. It is then normalized by dividing it with the series length.Given various harmonics of the PSD function, it is important to select the representative harmonics for FDD of IMs. Based on the literature review (as explained hereafter), a number of harmonics are selected as the input features of FMM-CART. In an ideal IM, the rotor magnetic field has only one space harmonic. However, owing to rotor slotting in a squirrel-cage IM, the rotor magnetic field has additional harmonics on top of the fundamental component [39]. The harmonics induced in the stator windings are known as Rotor Slot Harmonics (RSHs). The RSH frequency is dependent on the number of rotor slots and machine pole pairs.For every k harmonic, there is a pair of harmonics such that the frequency between them is twice the supply frequency. According to Nandi and Toliyat [40], the RSH order can be determined by:(11)HRSH=kNrp±1,k=1,2,3,…where k is the harmonic order, Nris the number of rotor slots, p the number of pole-pairs, s the slip, and Fsthe supply frequency.With k=1, a 4-pole, 28-rotor slot IM, as used in this study, has integer harmonics of the order of 13 and 15. An IM with a similar configuration of poles and rotor slots was used in [39] for experiments with the RSHs. It was observed that the current spectrum magnitude of the third-order RSH increased when a short circuit in the stator winding occurred [39]. In addition, the 13th harmonic was taken into consideration in [39] as there was a significant magnitude change in the 13th harmonic among fault-free motors, motors with stator winding faults, and motors with unbalanced supply. Besides, the standard deviation of the 13th harmonic under stator winding faults was six times greater than that of a fault-free motor.On the other hand, the condition of unbalanced supply could be confused with stator winding faults as the rotor magnetic field has additional components in only one of the phases in addition to the fundamental harmonic. In this case, the three-phase motor currents must be used for analysis, as adopted in this work. In a fault-free IM, the windings are presumed to be “healthy”, whereby the three-phase currents are balanced, and the conductor distributions of the stator phases are as follows [39]:(12)na(θ)=∑knakδ(θ−θk)nb(θ)=∑knbkδθ−θk−2π3nc(θ)=∑knckδθ−θk+2π3where a is phase A, b is phase B, c is phases C, ak is slot index for phase A, bk is slot index for phase B, ck is slot index for phase C, n is the number of conductors in the stator slots, δ the impulse function, θ a particular angular position along the stator inner surface, and k the slot index. The numbers of conductors in the three-phase windings of a fault-free IM are equal, i.e., nak=nbk=nck. However, the occurrence of inter-turn shorts in stator winding causes the number of conductors in three-phase windings to be unequal, i.e., nak≠nbk≠nck[39].Amara and Barakat [41] noted that the RSHs appeared for all motor conditions, but the harmonic values differed in various conditions. The 3rd and 5th harmonics of the current spectrum of a fault-free motor were different from those with inter-turn stator winding faults. Faiz et al. [42] used the current spectrum analysis to show that both the 5th and 7th harmonic amplitudes with the RSH differed when comparing a fault-free motor with those having static eccentricity as well as both static eccentricity and broken rotor bars. Faiz and Ojaghi [43] showed that an unbalanced supply could be precisely distinguished from static and dynamic eccentricities using harmonic amplitudes. Cusidó et al. [44] noted that rotor eccentricity faults were visible specifically around the 5th harmonic. In addition, the harmonic values derived from the spectral analysis were used for detecting existing or incipient failure of broken rotor bars, eccentricity, and stator winding faults of a motor or drive system [45].By analyzing the reports in the literature, a preliminary offline experiment to analyze the harmonic patterns from the PSD of a 100% loaded IM was conducted. The PSD for phase A, ranging for the 1st to 19th harmonics is shown in Fig. 5. Similar graphs for phases B and C are presented in Appendix (Fig. A1(a) and (b)). The four main harmonics, i.e., 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 13th, are magnified in Fig. 5(ii)–(v), respectively. As can be observed from Fig. 5(ii)–(v), the combination of these harmonics (especially the 3rd, 5th, and 13th harmonics) representsdistinctive patterns for different IM faults. From this analysis as well as the reports in the literature, it is evidenced that the 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 13th harmonics are useful for FDD of IM faults. As such, in further experiments, the FMM-CART model received a total of 13 input features, 12 of them were grouped into 4 sub-features (each sub-feature comprised of the 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 13th harmonics from phases A, B, and C) and the standard deviation of the 13th harmonic as the remaining feature (as indicated in [39]).Three common IM fault conditions, i.e., broken rotor bars, stator winding faults, and unbalanced supply, were evaluated. In this study, unbalanced supply was considered as an incipient motor fault as it could degrade the performance and shorten the life of a three-phase motor, as indicated in [46]. The flow chart for the FDD process is presented in Fig. 6. The inputs, i.e. three-phase current signals, were measured using current clamps connected to an oscilloscope. The current signals were then transferred to a computer. The harmonic features were extracted based on the PSD function, and then normalized and stored as a database of 1200 samples (300 for each condition, i.e., fault-free, broken rotor bars, stator winding faults, and unbalanced supply). The data samples were supplied to the FMM-CART model for learning and classification. The resulting output was a trained decision tree to detect and classify various IM conditions.For performance comparison, the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) neural network, FMM, and CART were implemented in this study. Note that when a small data set was used, the prediction error estimate could vary from one run to another, and the presence of an outlier could change the prediction error estimate considerably [47]. In this case, the k-fold cross-validation method could provide a good estimate of the prediction error [47]. Hence, the cross-validation method (with k=5) was adopted. For each experiment, the motor was operated at 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% load conditions.To further ascertain the effectiveness of FMM-CART, the bootstrap method [48] was used to compute the performance statistics. The bootstrap method is a statistical method that does not rely on the assumption that data samples must be drawn from a normal distribution. Efron and Tibshirani [49] suggested that using 1000 bootstrap samples generally could provide accurate results. In a sampling variability study conducted in [50], the prediction error reduced from 0.0071 to 0.0014 when the number of samples was increased from 200 to 5000. In this study, the results (average accuracy) were computed using the bootstrap method with 5000 re-samplings. Using an Intel Core™2 Duo 2.80GHz processor with 4GB RAM and with MATLAB® R2010a, the computational time consumed by one run of the cross-validation experiment was also recorded. The details are as follows.Rotor bar breakage is the major fault in the rotor of a squirrel-cage IM. Two different types of cage rotors exist in IMs, viz. cast and fabricated. Cast cage rotors are used in motors up to 3000kW rating while fabricated cages are found in motors of higher ratings, and are used in special machines [51]. Cast rotors are almost impossible to get fixed once there are breakages or cracks in them, although they are more durable and rugged than fabricated cages [51]. During the operation of the IM, the rotor bars can be partially or completely cracked, due to stresses and/or improper rotor geometry design [52]. The condition of the neighboring bars deteriorates progressively due to increased stresses resulted from a borken rotor bar. In order to avoid a cumulative destructive process, the broken rotor problem should be detected as early as possible, when the bars begin to crack [53]. Broken rotor bars would not cause immediate failures of an IM. But, if there are many broken rotor bars, the motor may not be able to start once it is powered off. This is mainlyowing to an insufficient accelerating torque during the start-up process.In this study, the procedure used to create the broken rotor bar fault was as follows. Firstly, the rotor was separated from the motor. A drill was used to make a hole and break the rotor bar. The same procedure was used in [54], where a hole was drilled into the rotor bar of a three-phase IM. Experiments were conducted with one broken bar initially. Then, the same process was repeated to add another hole in the adjacent bar, thus creating two broken bars. Table 1shows the overall results.FMM-CART and CART produced stable results at 100% accuracy, with the least complex structures. MLP produced the most complex network structure with 25 hidden nodes. It took approximately 2 seconds to generate a result, and the overall accuracy rate was 93.87%. This was followed by FMM with 10 hyperboxes, CART with 4 leafs, and FMM-CART with only 3 leafs. The computational time of FMM was slightly more than one second, while CART and FMM-CART consumed nearly 1 second. By analyzing the tree structure of CART and FMM-CART, the most significant features detected were the 5th harmonic of phase A and the 7th harmonic of phase B. This finding was in line with that by Faiz et al. [42] i.e., the 5th harmonic and 7th harmonic amplitudes differed when comparing a healthy motor with one that had broken rotor bars. Bruzzese and Santini [55] also stated that the 5th harmonic was a good indicator for broken rotor bars.In other related works, Sadeghian et al. [19] used the stator current signals as an input source for detecting one and two broken rotor bars. The Wavelet Packet Decomposition (WPD) method was applied to analyze the signals. Multiple frequency resolutions together with the slip speed were fed into an MLP network for fault classification. On the other hand, Ayhan et al. [20] used the stator current signals as the inputs to a Multiple Discriminant Analysis (MDA) model for detecting and classifying broken rotor bars. A comparison of the results from this study and those from [19,20] is summarized in Table 2. It can be seen that FMM-CART has a stable (perfect) accuracy as compared with the results in [19,20]. In addition, FMM-CART has another advantage, i.e. revealing what it has learned through its tree structure.Stator faults can be broadly divided into two categories. The first is related to the lamination and frame, while the second (the most common fault) is related to the end winding portion, slot portion, and short circuits between a phase winding and the ground or between two phases [36]. The axial leakage flux from stator windings can be used to detect and locate stator inter-turns. The induced voltage in a search coil placed in the middle of the machine shaft is proportional to this flux component. The spectral constituents of this voltage are observed to detect a turn-to-turn fault [14]. During the stator short circuit conditions, there are flux density waves and magnetomotive forces (MMFs) at all numbers of pole pairs and in both directions of rotation [56]. Only a rise in the RSHs is expected while no new frequency components appear in the stator current spectrum. In the event of a short circuit, the phase winding has less impedance, less MMFs and fewer turns, which increases the possibility of detecting stator short circuit by monitoring the amplitude of the phase currents [56].In this study, the IM was operated with 10% turn shorts in one of the three phases of the stator winding. Table 3shows the results. Again, MLP produced the lowest accuracy rate, the most complex network structure, and the longest computational time. FMM yielded 97.59% accuracy with the shortest computational time. The results of CART and FMM-CART are similar. By analyzing the tree structure from CART and FMM-CART, the 5th harmonic of phase A constituted the main feature.In other related works, Ballal et al. [57] first used two inputs, i.e., rotor speed and current, and then added another three inputs, i.e., winding temperature, bearing temperature, and motor noise for detecting IM faults. FFT was applied to the current signals to process the fundamental and harmonic components. These harmonics, together with the remaining inputs, were then fed into the Adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) for detection of inter-turn insulation failure and bearing wear of IMs. Rodríguez and Arkkio [58] used the current signals and predictive filters to extract relevant features. The extracted features were fed to a fuzzy logic model to identify the motor state and to detect stator winding faults. The comparison of the test setup and results are given in Table 4. FMM-CART showed comparable results with those from [58], and better results than those from [57]. Similar to [58], FMM-CART used only one source, i.e., the stator currents of IMs, in its prediction. This showed the ability of FMM-CART in producing a high accuracy rate with minimal input information.In a three-phase system, an unbalanced supply occurs when the magnitudes of the phase or line voltages are different. When an unbalanced voltage occurs, the motor performance is degraded, and its life is shortened [46]. Indeed, an unbalanced voltage at the motor terminals cause an unbalanced current, which in turn leads to torque pulsations, increased vibrations and mechanical stresses, increased losses that results in lower efficiency, and motor overheating that reduces winding insulation life [46]. Based on the National Electrical Manufacturers Association [59], once an unbalanced supply reaches 5%, the temperature in the stator windings begins to rise, which eventually may cause the winding insulation to melt. Besides that, there are significant effects on the stator and rotor copper losses owing to an unbalanced supply on the terminal voltages, as the rotor currents have a larger deviation than the stator currents.In order to create an unbalanced voltage supply in each phase of the IM, a variable three-phase power supply was used to set a different voltage for each phase during the experiment. The experiment was conducted by inducing a 5% unbalanced supply, a considerable high percentage as in [59], in one of the three phases. Table 5shows the results.MLP and FMM produced 82.98% and 96.23% accuracy, respectively, while the CART and FMM-CART achieved stable results at 100% accuracy. Again, the structure of MLP was the most complex with 20 hidden nodes, while FMM had 7 hyperboxes. CART and FMM-CART created only 3 and 2 leafs, respectively. The computational time of FMM was the shortest, i.e. only 0.13 seconds. MLP consumed the longest time (nearly 2 seconds), while the CART and FMM-CART used almost 1 second. The most significant feature from CART and FMM-CART trees was the 13th harmonic of phase C. This finding was in line with that in Sharifi and Ebrahimi [39], i.e., a significant magnitude change exists in the 13th harmonic between a healthy motor and one with an unbalanced supply.In other related works, various inputs, i.e., voltage, current, speed, vibration, and temperature, were used for detecting unbalanced supply, over/under voltage, and bearing faults [60]. The inputs were processed with FFT, and then fed into an MLP network trained with BP for fault classification. An accuracy rate of 100% was achieved for the unbalanced supply condition. Singh et al. [61] monitored the unbalanced supply condition using the current signals. FFT was used to extract the features which were fed into an FMM network for fault classification. The comparison of the test setup and the results is given in Table 6. It can be seen that FMM-CART exhibits the benefits of having its input from only from one source (i.e., the IM stator currents) as compared with the work in [60], and of having a more accurate result as compared with the work in [61].To further evaluate the effectiveness of FMM-CART, the data samples from all motor conditions, i.e. fault-free, broken rotor bars, stator winding faults, and unbalanced supply, were combined for experimentation. Two sets of experiments were conducted, one with noise-free test samples, and another with noise-corrupted test samples. A good model should have high recognition rates that are robust to environmental changes, with noise tolerance being one of the most important requirements [62]. In this study, Gaussian white noise from 10% to 40% was added to the test samples, to order to evaluate the robustness of FMM-CART against noise. All noise-corrupted test samples were normalized between 0 and 1. Note that the standard deviations (StdDev) of the mean accuracy rates were also computed in order to assess the stability of the performance. Table 7shows the overall results of the noise-free and noise-corrupted experiments.As expected, the results from all models deteriorated in response to the increasing noise levels. Besides that, the model structure became more complex, and the computational time became longer. Comparatively, the performance of FMM-CART was relatively stable (more than 92% accuracy) with up to 20% noise in the test samples. When the noise level reached 40%, the performance of FMM-CART dropped to around 80%. Other networks exhibited higher degradation in performance with the increasing noise levels (from 0% to 40%), i.e., 24%, 29%, and 25% reduction in mean accuracy for MLP, FMM, and CART, respectively. On the other hand, the smaller standard deviations of FMM-CART indicated that its performance was more stable as compared with those from other networks.In terms of model complexity and computational time, all models became more complex and consumed more time in line with the increasing noise levels. When the noise level increased from 30% to 40%, the CART structure became more complicated than that of FMM-CART. In summary, FMM-CART was more tolerant to noise as compared with other models in this experiment.To conduct the online experiments, a dedicated Online Fault Detection and Diagnosis System (OFDDS) was developed. The OFDDS model comprised two main parts, i.e., a Data Acquisition Board (DAB) and a Motor Diagnostic Software (MDS). The DAB was designed specifically for acquiring data samples from two IMs simultaneously in a high-speed manner. The MDS, which contained the PSD and FMM-CART algorithms, was used to process the data online and provide instantaneous predictions with respect to the IM conditions.During the experiments, the online operation started by measuring the IM currents using current sensors. Specifically, the stator current signals were acquired using hall-effect sensors. The signals were converted into a digital form using an Analog-to-Digital Converter. The digital data samples were transferred to the MDS in a computer. Upon receiving the online data samples, the PSD module (in MATLAB®) in the MDS was triggered, and harmonic features from the data samples were extracted. Then, the FMM-CART module (also in MATLAB®) in the MDS was deployed to predict the IM conditions. Further details are as follows.In this section, the design and functionality of the DAB are described. Fig. 7shows a block diagram of the self-designed, fully assembled DAB. The complete schematic diagram of the DAB circuitry is presented in Appendix (Fig. B1a and b). The DAB has six input terminals for connection to two three-phase IMs. It can measure currents flow up to 20A. The output of the current sensor is connected to a high switching power relay. The relay can be switched on or off from a microcontroller. A 64-pin microcontroller (PIC24FJ256GB206), with a built-in USB 2.0 port, is used. A full speed USB 2.0 port is used for transferring data from the microcontroller to the computer, while providing power supply to the board.The voltage signals from the current sensors are in the analog form. They need to be converted into the digital form before being transferred to the computer. As such, a 14-bit, 6 channels, high speed Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) (LTC1408), with 600Ksps simultaneous sampling is used. The inputs to the ADC are the analog signals of the hall-effect current sensors. The hall-effect current sensor output is 1.5V, 2.5V, or 3.5V when the measured current is at −20A, 0A, or 20A, respectively. In a 14-bit ADC, there are 16,384 steps for a range of 2V (1.5–3.5V), which results in 2.4mA for each step. These inputs are converted to the digital form, before sending them to the microcontroller.The MDS is specifically designed to work with the DAB for FDD of IMs. It has two main components. The first component is a Graphical User Interface (GUI) for controlling the FDD operation and for displaying the IM status. The second component is the algorithms of PSD and FMM-CART in MATLAB®, which are used to extract harmonic features from the acquired data and to provide the prediction of the IM conditions. The data samples from two IMs are transferred to the computer simultaneously using the DAB. The GUI provides an interface between the DAB and the user. When the DAB is plugged into the computer USB port, a text box appears and displays the firmware revision of the DAB. The firmware, written in MPLAB IDE, is programmed into the microcontroller of the DAB. A continuous stream of data is transferred from the microcontroller to the computer. The transferred data samples are saved into a text file every 0.4 seconds.The saved text files contain the three-phase current signals from two IMs. These text files are read in MATLAB®. Initially, the PSD is applied to convert the raw current signals into its individual harmonics. Then, the harmonics (3rd, 5th, 7th, and 13th) signals are extracted, and normalized between 0 and 1. These harmonics signals constitute the input features representing the motor conditions. A set of training samples is used for FMM-CART learning. The subsequent online data samples from the DAB are used as the test samples, whereby FMM-CART provides predictions for the condition of the IMs in an online manner.A database containing training samples from four different load conditions (25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%) was first established. The current signals obtained were transformed using FFT to their associated PSD. The PSD outputs comprised a 1000Hz frequency spectrum, covering the fundamental to the 19th harmonics. Following the same feature extraction procedure in the offline experiment, the FMM-CART model received a total of 13 features, 12 of them were grouped into 4 sub-features and with the standard deviation of the 13th harmonic as the remaining feature. Each 4 sub-features comprised frequency information from the 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 13th harmonics from phases A, B, and C. All data samples from the PSD were normalized between 0 and 1 before being iused by FMM-CART for training. The trained FMM-CART model was then deployed to provide a prediction for subsequent incoming data samples from the DAB in an online manner.Similar to the offline experiments, an analysis of the harmonic features captured from the online experiments with fault-free, broken rotor bars, and unbalanced supply conditions was conducted. Fig. 8shows the PSD for phase A, ranging for the 1st to 19th harmonics from IMs with full load. Again, distinctive patterns for different IM faults can be seen from the four main harmonics. Similar graphs for phases B and C are presented in Appendix (Fig. A1(c) and (d)).A full evaluation of the effectiveness of the OFDDS for online FDD was performed. The test setup consisted of two IMs, adjustable power supply units, a computer, and the DAB. Both IMs had different initial conditions. The first one was a fault-free motor, while the second suffered from one broken bar. The overall event transitions of the online experiments are shown in Fig. 9. Prior to the experiment (i.e., power off state), the GUI showed that both condition boxes were set to blank, indicating no faults for both IMs. When both IMs started to operate simultaneously, the GUI was updated with IM #1 showing a “Fault-free” condition, and IM #2 showing a “Broken Rotor Bars” condition.To further evaluate the online capability of the OFDDS, IM #1 was supplied with a 5% unbalanced supply in phase A. This fault was immediately detected by the MDS. The GUI then displayed the updated prediction of IM #1, i.e. “Unbalanced Supply”, within one second after the fault condition was induced. In the meantime, the status of IM#2 remained unchanged, i.e., the fault of broken rotor bars was detected. In order not to damage the IMs, both IMs were remotely switched off by turning off the relays via the GUI. In the real environment, the faulty motors should be replaced with new motors. After installing the new motors, the relays could be turned on from the GUI, so that the motors could function as normal. Again, the OFDDS continued its operation to monitor and detect faults in both IMs simultaneously, with the predicted results updated every second on the GUI for domain users.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an intelligent FDD system, i.e., FMM-CART, for IMs has been developed. The MCSA method is first used for acquiring the stator current signals. The current signals are transformed into their frequency spectra. Analyses of the harmonic patterns for both offline and online experiments have been conducted. A total of four harmonics, which are the most useful representative features as described in the literature, are used by FMM-CART for FDD of various IM conditions, which include broken rotor bars, stator winding faults, unbalanced supply, and fault-free motors. For the offline experiments, FMM-CART performes better than the MLP, FMM, and CART models in both noise-free and noisy environments. Similar to the performances of other models reported in the literature, FMM-CART is able to achieve perfect accuracy in all the offline experiments. To futher evaluate the robustness of FMM-CART, data samples of all IM conditions were combined and induced with noise from 10% to 40%. As expected, the performances of FMM-CART, as well as MLP, FMM, and CART, deteriorate with increasing levels of noise. With the noise level increases to 40%, the accuracy rate of FMM-CART reduces by 18%, as compared with MLP, FMM, and CART with reduction in accuracy by 24%, 29%, 25%, respectively. The standard deviations of the FMM-CART accuracy rates are relatively stable, as comapred with those from other models.To realize online FDD operations, an OFDDS, which comprises a self-designed DAB and an MDS module (which include FMM-CART), has been designed, developed, and implemented. The DAB is capable of capturing online data from two IMs simultaneously, while the MDS module is useful for processing the acquired data, and providing the predicted conditions of the two IMs to domain users. From the experiment, it has been shown that the OFDDS is able to monitor IM faults online, and to provide warning signals to users when motor faults are detected. The users can then remotely turn off the faulty motor in order to avoid further damages to the motor. The experimental outcome has positively demonstrated that usefulness of the OFDDS in online FDD of IMs.For further work, other types of electric motors can be used to further ascertain the effectiveness of FMM-CART in real-world environments. In addition, wireless communication between the OFDDS and a computer to enable remote FDD can be established. The OFDDS can also be further improved by having a stand-alone operation without the need of a computer. These are the topics that are currently under investigations.Fig. A1Fig. B1