@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ensemble classification based on supervised clustering for credit scoring

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Supervised clustering is employed to generate a number of clusters.Clusters from different classes are pairwise combined to get a number of training subsets.The base classifiers constructed in the training subsets are diverse and locally accurate.Weighted voting mechanism is used to ensemble the base classifiers.The proposed approach improves the accuracy of credit scoring.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Credit scoring,Ensemble classification,Random sampling,Supervised clustering,Diversity of base classifiers,Weighted voting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Credit scoring aims to assess the risk associated with lending to individual consumers. Recently, ensemble classification methodology has become popular in this field. However, most researches utilize random sampling to generate training subsets for constructing the base classifiers. Therefore, their diversity is not guaranteed, which may lead to a degradation of overall classification performance. In this paper, we propose an ensemble classification approach based on supervised clustering for credit scoring. In the proposed approach, supervised clustering is employed to partition the data samples of each class into a number of clusters. Clusters from different classes are then pairwise combined to form a number of training subsets. In each training subset, a specific base classifier is constructed. For a sample whose class label needs to be predicted, the outputs of these base classifiers are combined by weighted voting. The weight associated with a base classifier is determined by its classification performance in the neighborhood of the sample. In the experimental study, two benchmark credit data sets are adopted for performance evaluation, and an industrial case study is conducted. The results show that compared to other ensemble classification methods, the proposed approach is able to generate base classifiers with higher diversity and local accuracy, and improve the accuracy of credit scoring.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Credit scoring aims to assess the risk associated with lending to individual consumers. With the market of credit products increasing enormously in recent years, accurate credit scoring models have aroused unprecedented attention of financial institutions since they could reduce the operational risk and cost, and increase the competitive ability in the market. Even 1% of improvement on the accuracy of recognizing applicants would greatly increase the profit of financial institutions [1].In this paper, we address the application scoring problem among the four kinds of credit scoring problems, as summarized in Paleologo et al. [2]. Application scoring refers to the assessment of credit worthiness of new applicants. It quantifies the risk of credit requests with respect to their characteristics such as age, income, and occupation. Essentially, this problem can be considered as a general population classification task [3]. In other words, a classification model (sometimes also called a classifier) is needed to classify the credit requests into good credit or bad credit, based on their characteristics. Therefore, various classification techniques have been applied, which can be divided into two broad categories: statistical techniques and artificial intelligence (AI) techniques [4].Among statistical techniques, the most popular methods are linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and logistic regression (Logit) [5,6]. LDA and Logit are relatively easy to implement and generate interpretable results. However, in real world applications, assumptions for the data such as being linear separable and following certain distributions are often violated. In recent years, it has been demonstrated that AI techniques are alternative and effective methods for credit scoring. AI techniques include k-nearest neighbors (KNN) [7], mathematical programming [8,9], artificial neural network (ANN) [10], artificial immune systems (AIS) [11,12], genetic algorithm (GA) [13], support vector machines (SVMs) [14–17], and their variations [18].In most of these researches, only one classification model (classifier) is constructed for credit scoring. It has been shown theoretically and experimentally that ensemble classification tends to be an effective methodology for improving the accuracy and stability of a single classifier [19,20]. For credit scoring, Lim and Sohn [21] argue that a single classification rule would be ineffective because it cannot catch the fine nuance of various individual consumers. Therefore, it is beneficial to introduce ensemble classification to credit scoring.In the framework of ensemble classification, a pool of different base classifiers, instead of a single one, is constructed and combined to predict the class label of unknown sample. The main idea of ensemble classification is to take advantage of the base classifiers and avoid their weakness. For effective ensemble classification, it is required that base classifiers in the ensemble are accurate and diverse [22–26]. With respect to credit scoring, diversity of base classifiers could not only improve the accuracy of ensemble classification, but also provide useful and insightful information of individual consumers’ behavioral patterns even when they are in the same class (either good credit or bad credit). Unfortunately, despite the fact that many researches on ensemble classification and their applications to credit scoring have been carried out, little attention has been paid to the diversity of base classifiers.In this paper, we propose an Ensemble Classification approach based on Supervised Clustering (ECSC) for credit scoring. We focus primarily on how to construct diverse base classifiers for improving the ensemble classification performance. In the proposed approach, supervised clustering is employed to partition the data samples of each class into a number of clusters. Clusters from different classes are then paired to form a number of training subsets for constructing base classifiers. The idea behind supervised clustering is that data samples from the same class may have different patterns or characteristics. Though supervised clustering, samples with similar patterns or characteristics are grouped into the same cluster. Therefore, the training subsets, obtained by pairwise combination of clusters from different classes, could better represent different patterns of samples, which is helpful to increase the accuracy and diversity of base classifiers. Another advantage of the propose ECSC is that we do not have to set the number of base classifiers in advance, which avoids the possible adverse impact of human intervention on ensemble classification performance. In supervised clustering, K-means clustering is adopted since it is effective for partitioning large data set. Besides, a validity index is developed to optimize the clustering result. For a sample whose class label needs to be predicted, the outputs of different base classifiers are combined by weighted voting. The weight associated with a base classifier is determined by its classification performance in the neighborhood of the sample. In the experimental study, two benchmark data sets and a real world mortgage loan data set are used to validate the proposed ECSC for credit scoring.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work on ensemble classification methodologies and their applications to credit scoring. In Section 3, the proposed ESCS approach is elaborated with analytical discussions. Section 4 reports the experimental study and results. In Section 5, an industrial case study is conducted. The paper ends with some concluding remarks in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
