@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Electroencephalogram-based emotion assessment system using ontology and data mining techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Soft computing techniques used: ontologies, statistical tests, and a classification algorithm.EEG- and emotion-related knowledge are represented in the form of semantic sentences.The system maps EEG features to arousal–valence space using decision tree algorithm.Significant correlations can be found between EEG features and arousal–valence space in the system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emotion assessment,Human–machine interaction,Electroencephalogram,Ontology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Currently, emotion is considered as a critical aspect of human behavior; thus it should be embedded within the reasoning module in an intelligent system where the aim is to anticipate or respond to human reactions. Therefore, current research in data mining shows an increasing interest in emotion assessment for improving human–machine interaction. Based on the analysis of electroencephalogram (EEG) which derives from automatic nervous system responses, computers can assess user emotions and find correlations between significant EEG features extracted from the raw data and the human emotional states. With the advent of modern signal processing techniques, the evaluative power of human emotion derived from EEG is increased exponentially due to the huge number of features that are typically extracted from the EEG signals. Notwithstanding that the expanded set of features could allow computers to evaluate emotions in an accurate way, it is too complex a task to manage in a structured way and, for the reasons stated, methods and approaches to enable both EEG information management and evaluation are necessary to support emotion assessment. Starting from this consideration, this paper proposes an enhanced EEG-based emotion assessment system exploiting a collection of ontological models representing EEG feature sets and arousal–valence space (two-dimensional emotion scale), statistical tests capable of evaluating the gender-specific correlations between EEG features and emotional states, and a classification methodology inferring arousal and valence levels. As will be shown in the experimental section where the proposed approach has been tested on a public dataset, the experimental results demonstrate that better performance in emotion assessment can be achieved using our framework as compared with other studies using the same dataset and with three other classification techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The capability to adapt machine feedback to users in the form of self-adaptation has become one of the most promising research directions within human–machine interaction (HCI) and data mining. For interactive machines to execute intended actions, however to achieve this aim it is often necessary to understand human affective behavior [1]. Affective computing (AC) is an emerging research field which aims to improve the interaction between human beings and machines, and further to improve task performance of machines and user satisfaction levels [2]. In aviation safety and repetitive work, a state of boredom and low vigilance with high levels of automation may increase the risk of accidents. In other areas such as tutoring, training and driving it is often necessary to maintain or prevent particular affective states (e.g., nervousness) to realize optimal performance levels and improved user experience. The core element that makes these applications successful is the assessment of human emotional states during HCI. In this regard, two important questions still need to be answered: (1) How can we effectively record emotional indicators without interference in real time (e.g., by physiological signals or questionnaire responses)? and (2) How can we measure and predict user emotional states in the interaction process? These two questions are often approached in the form of either a subjective route (psychology-oriented) by means of monitoring/observing questionnaire responses of a subject, or a more objective route (neurophysiology-oriented) by means of monitoring the subject's behavioral indicators and/or physiological signals [3,4]. Subjective approaches generally have some weaknesses, such as selective reporting biases by users, interference with data collection in real time, and further resistance to data analysis required in a vast number of HCI applications [3]. A large body of literature addressing psychological issues points toward the hypothesis that emotions result from a series of cognitive processes [5,6], and direct communication between human brain and external machines could lead to natural human machine interaction. Additionally, electroencephalogram (EEG) data can be acquired in a continuous manner consistent with the way people perceive affect and thus allow users’ affective states to be evaluated in real time.Furthermore, with the development of advanced signal processing methods such as wavelets and fast Fourier transform (FFT), the power of EEG data to infer human emotions is strongly increased due to the huge set of features extracted from EEG signals. This expanded set of features enhances the accuracy of emotion detection and evaluation. However, the manual management of this expanded set of features by researchers and the storage of unstructured data result in a very complex task. As a consequence of supporting systems in their interaction activities with human, automatic methods of representing and evaluating EEG data for emotion assessment are necessary. In this scenario, soft computing techniques provide several benefits both in terms of quality of assessment and knowledge representation.Starting from this consideration, this paper proposes an enhanced EEG-based emotion assessment system to evaluate gender-specific EEG features and arousal–valence levels by combining ontological modeling, statistical tests and a classification mechanism. In detail, our proposal of EEG-based emotion assessment system is based on the design of1.Complex ontologies representing raw data and EEG features, and other contents which are useful in the assessment of emotion, such as the date of data capture, the duration of an experiment and user gender, for a detailed representation see [7].An EEG-based emotion assessment system performing correlation analyses and evaluation of arousal–valence levels using analysis of objective EEG features.The integration of soft computing techniques (ontologies, statistical tests and a classification methodology) provides several benefits to our proposal of EEG-based emotion assessment system. Indeed, our system is able to:1.Improve the expressiveness and structure of affective computing related knowledge using a simple representation in the form of semantic sentences which may make it easier for computers to process information units.Provide valid support for emotion assessment based on correlation analyses and a classification mechanism capable of detecting emotions effectively during HCI.Achieve interoperability feature to implement the psycho-physiological application on different hardware platforms owing to ontology language providing a flexible and interoperable scheme.To prove the suitability and good performance provided by the proposed system, a test on the public dataset DEAP11http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/mmv/datasets/deap/index.html.has been led in the experimental section. In detail, our system is exploited to accomplish correlation analyses and classification tasks involving 32 healthy participants of which 50% are female. The accuracy of our approach and the F1-scores support the conclusion that our system provides good performance in the classification task.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes previous work related to the use of ontological methods in affective computing, statistics and classification mechanisms used on emotion assessment concerning EEG signals. Section 3 presents the basic concepts that underlie our proposal: the background knowledge related to EEG domain and the arousal–valence emotion space. Section 4 describes the proposed EEG-based emotion assessment system and all its components. Before concluding in Section 6, Section 5 sets out the experimentation with the results and a discussion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes an EEG-based emotion assessment system to analyze the gender-specific correlations between EEG features and two emotional dimensions, to infer the arousal–valence levels, and further to improve the performance of human machine interaction. The system is designed by combining soft computing methodologies: (1) the EEG-Emotion ontologies are designed to improve expressiveness and management of EEG- and emotion-related knowledge in a machine-readable and hardware-independent way. Fig. 6 shows the architecture of the EEG-Emotion ontologies. In the ontologies, Classes, Instances, and Attributes are organized in human and machine readable form to provide a basis upon which the represented knowledge can be understood as semantic relationships/sentences (some examples can be seen in Section 4.4), therefore EEG information can be automatically positioned by computers using semantic queries. This strength has improved the ability of our proposed system to capture information and reduced human intervention in the system. Researchers may reuse and extend our ontologies to represent all the domain knowledge related to affective computing as required. (2) Two statistical tests (Spearman correlation and ANOVA) are exploited to explore the correlation between EEG features and each emotional dimension, and to explore significant EEG differences between two arousal/valence levels. (3) Classification is performed on salient EEG features found by statistical tests to infer human emotions in two dimensions in a more accurate way.In this paper, we used a public dataset (32 subjects) from DEAP database to test and evaluate the proposed system. Our experimental results show 69.09% accuracy for arousal assessment and 67.89% accuracy for valence assessment when averaged across 32 subjects. In this experiment, we compared four classifiers and found that k-NN (obtaining accuracies of 65.00% for arousal assessment and 66.45% for valence assessment) performed slightly worse than C4.5 (obtaining accuracies of 69.09% for arousal assessment and 67.89% for valence assessment) and C4.5 classifier obtained the best assessment accuracies, therefore we have exploited C4.5 in our proposed system. In considering performance levels, we have shown that the posited system has demonstrated improved performance in the assessment of emotion as compared to other studies which were applied on the same database. During the statistical analyses, negative correlations have been found between female EEG and arousal/valence, and positive correlations have been found between male EEG and arousal/valence.The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach is feasible and has been shown to function effectively as anticipated. On the basis of the developed system, research efforts are currently devoted to: (1) investigating real-world applications; (2) the integration of new automated learning and fuzzy inference techniques; since EEG signals are non-linear and non-stationary and these techniques have exerted positive influences on other applications [64,65], these techniques may make some improvements on EEG-based emotion assessment; and (3) exploitation of multimodal fusion approaches; although many studies have confirmed that EEG outperforms other physiological signals in emotion recognition, multimodal physiological data may contain complementary or supplementary information that could improve assessment outcomes.