@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Energy-efficient routing based on vehicular consumption predictions of a mesoscopic learning model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introduction of a context-aware routing methodology.Ability to sense the environment and to perceive FEV's special characteristics.A rather unbiased (MPE=0.85%) and accurate (MAPE=10.56%) consumption model.Proposed consumption model vs. a reference model: MPE 20x better, MAPE 2x better.Energy efficient vs. fastest routes: save 21% energy, only 10% longer in time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Energy-efficient routing,Mesoscopic learning model,FEV,Context-aware routing,Consumption factor analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an alternative approach for determining the most energy efficient route towards a destination. An innovative mesoscopic vehicular consumption model that is based on machine learning functionality is introduced and its application in a case study involving Fully Electric Vehicles (FEVs) is examined. The integration of this model in a routing engine especially designed for FEVs is also analyzed and a software architecture for implementing the proposed routing methodology is defined. In order to verify the robustness and the energy efficiency of this methodology, a system prototype has been developed and a series of field tests have been performed. The results of these tests are reported and significant conclusions are derived regarding the generated energy efficient routes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Environmental impact and economic factors impose the need for reducing the amount of energy spent by a vehicle in order to travel from a source to a destination point. Minimizing the consumed fuel leads not only to financial savings but also to simultaneous reductions in the released emissions, as their volume is proportional to the vehicles consumption rate [1]. Even in the case of zero emission vehicles, like Fully Electric Vehicles (FEVs), reducing the energy consumption contributes into limiting both the travel cost as well as the environmental impact coming from the generation (in power stations) and transfer of the energy required for vehicle recharging.Considering the current progress in the development of energy-efficient vehicles, which achieve low consumption rates by means of aerodynamic shapes, energy-efficient engines or the use of alternative fuel resources (e.g. FEVs), further improvements can be enabled through the utilization of information and communication technologies (ICT). Eco-driving and eco-routing techniques implemented by intelligent transportation systems have been proposed for enhancing the vehicles energy efficiency. In particular, eco-driving systems [2,3] analyze the current status of the vehicle together with consumption-related parameters and provide valuable feedback to the user in order to modify his/her driving style and attitude in an energy-efficient manner. Thus, such systems are quite efficient in reducing a vehicles current energy consumption when following an energy-demanding route (e.g. a route characterized by steep upward slopes), but they do not inform the user beforehand to avoid (if possible) such routes and to follow better ones [4,5]. This latter task, due to its inherent uncertainty, is not as straightforward and is performed by the so-called eco-routing systems [6,7].Eco-routing systems [8] try to identify the most energy-efficient route towards the desired destination based on their estimation about the energy required to travel along each one of all the possible routes and prevent the driver from making a bad choice (i.e. selecting an energy demanding route). The effectiveness, however, of such systems is limited due to the incertainty of predictions that introduces an amount of error into the calculations. In addition to this limitation the existing systems cannot be used in case of FEVs as the FEVs’ peculiarities were not taken into consideration during their development. Existing eco-routing systems can be effectively applied only in case of vehicles powered by internal combustion engines. The proposed system aims at tackling both these limitations by implementing an innovative mesoscopic consumption model that minimizes prediction error and an advanced routing engine that is especially designed for FEVs.Such an eco-routing system is proposed in the present paper, enabling the discovery of the most energy-efficient route towards the destination based on more accurate energy cost predictions. In order to improve the estimation accuracy achieved by existing eco-routing techniques, the proposed system implements a context-aware learning model. Implementing a learning model involves defining an appropriate model that comprises a set of parameters and then optimizing these parameters using past experience [9,10]. A systematic description of the developed learning model and the introduced routing methodology is presented in the rest of this paper. In particular, Section 2 contains an overview of the existing eco-routing techniques and energy consumption models developed so far. Section 3 describes in detail the development process of the proposed routing methodology and elaborates thoroughly on the introduced learning model. A system architecture suitable for application in FEVs is presented in Section 4. Based on this architecture, a system prototype is implemented and installed in a FEV so as to perform a series of field trials. The prototype implementation as well as the field trials results are reported in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the work described in the present paper and emphasizes on the degree of energy efficiency achieved by the proposed methodology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
After providing an overview for the current status in the area of eco-friendly systems (i.e. eco-driving and eco-routing mechanisms), this paper proceeded with the development of an on-board energy-efficient routing system especially designed for FEVs. Instead of validating the efficiency of the proposed methodology through simulations, a prototype was developed and a series of field tests were performed after installing the developed prototype in a testing FEV.The results for these tests were quite promising for the proposed context-aware routing methodology. In particular, the introduced mesoscopic vehicular consumption model is quite accurate and unbiased as indicated by the MPE value of 0.85% that was measured during the conducted tests. The results concerning the functionality of the developed routing engine were also positive. Although the generated energy efficient routes were on average 1.45% longer in distance and 10.26% longer in travel time than the corresponding fastest path routes, we believe that the achieved average energy savings of 20.69% compensate adequately for this overhead in route distance and travel time. In order to further strengthen this argument, we present a numerical example. Firstly, we choose the median of the fastest path routes in our field tests, which is a route with a length of 5944m, travel time of 13min and required energy of 816Wh. Based on the average values reported before, the expected characteristics of the corresponding energy efficient route generated by the proposed methodology are: length of 6030m, travel time of 14.3min and required energy of 647.17Wh. This example reveals that the travel time loss (1.3min) and the distance overhead (86m) are less important compared to the realized energy savings (168.83Wh), which are adequate for moving a FEV (with an average consumption of 154Wh/km) for approximately 1096m more (i.e., the range of the testing FEV can be extended on average by 18%). Hence, we believe that these findings render the proposed energy routing methodology valuable for everyday use.Future studies include the investigation of other machine learning algorithms (e.g. Generalized Rregression Neural Networks) for estimating the vehicular consumption. The adoption of more complex algorithms such as GRNNs might improve the achieved estimation accuracy. However, the extra delay introduced due to their increased complexity might not allow their application in on-board navigation systems performing real-time calculations.