@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimized Gabor features for mass classification in mammography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Key idea is optimizing Gabor filters such that they respond stronger to features that best discriminate normal and abnormal tissues.Contribution is about a strategy based on PSO and incremental clustering for optimizing a Gabor filter bank for accurate detection.Optimized Gabor filter bank is applied on overlapping blocks of ROIs to collect moment-based features from the magnitudes of Gabor responses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast cancer detection,Gabor filter banks,Directional features,Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO),Incremental clustering,Digital mammography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gabor filter bank has been successfully used for false positive reduction problem and the discrimination of benign and malignant masses in breast cancer detection. However, a generic Gabor filter bank is not adapted to multi-orientation and multi-scale texture micro-patterns present in the regions of interest (ROIs) of mammograms. There are two main optimization concerns: how many filters should be in a Gabor filter band and what should be their parameters. Addressing these issues, this work focuses on finding optimizing Gabor filter banks based on an incremental clustering algorithm and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). We employ an SVM with Gaussian kernel as a fitness function for PSO. The effect of optimized Gabor filter bank was evaluated on 1024 ROIs extracted from a Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM) using four performance measures (i.e., accuracy, area under ROC curve, sensitivity and specificity) for the above mentioned mass classification problems. The results show that the proposed method enhances the performance and reduces the computational cost. Moreover, the Wilcoxon signed rank test over the significance level of 0.05 reveals that the performance difference between the optimized Gabor filter bank and non-optimized Gabor filter bank is statistically significant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer which affects women all over the world and stands next to lung cancer in mortality among women [1,2]. A computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system based on mammograms can assist the radiologists in detecting breast cancer. A CAD system for masses involves two main stages for mass extraction and processing: detection and segmentation, false positive reduction, and discrimination between benign and malignant masses. In the first stage, potential mass regions of interests (ROIs) are detected and segmented from the mammogram image. The detected ROIs represent not only masses but also dense breast parenchyma, which appear as white regions like masses in mammograms and result in false positives. The false positive reduction stage classifies the detected ROIs into mass and normal ROIs. The mass ROIs are further classified as benign and malignant.Different efforts have been made so far for reducing false positives and increasing benign-malignant classification accuracy. Texture descriptors have been shown to represent masses more accurately [3]. Since texture microstructures appear at different orientations and scales, they can be represented more effectively using Gabor filters. Gabor filters have been used for this purpose (e.g., see Refs. [2,6] and references therein) and give better performance for false positive reduction and benign-malignant discrimination [6]. However, a Gabor filter bank is not adopted to multi-orientation and multi-scale texture microstructures present in mammograms. To address this issue, we propose to tune and optimize the filters in a Gabor filter bank in order to extract the local texture descriptors that characterize texture micro-patterns (e.g., edges, lines, spots and flat areas) more effectively. There are two main optimization concerns; first, how many filters are appropriate to be used in the bank (filter selection problem) and second, what should be the parameter values of each Gabor filter included in the bank (filter design problem). Clearly, both of these problems are application oriented and a general setting of a Gabor filter bank (see e.g., Refs. [8,9]) does not perform well in different application scenarios. In this work, we proposed a systematic approach that unifies the filter selection and design processes using Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and an incremental clustering algorithm. In particular, PSO, a global optimization technique, is used to search for optimal parameters of Gabor filters to address the filter design problem. In addition, an incremental clustering algorithm removes redundant Gabor filters from the bank by combining similar filters (in parameter space), thus addressing the filter selection problem. Filters in the same cluster are represented with a single filter which is the centroid of the cluster. The strategy helps in two ways; first, the recognition accuracy is improved and second, the computational cost is reduced (discussed in Section 4). This idea was initially presented in Ref. [7].The key idea is optimizing the parameters of Gabor filters such that they respond stronger to features that best discriminate between normal and abnormal tissue, improving the performance of breast cancer recognition. The main contribution of this paper is a strategy based on PSO and incremental clustering for optimizing a Gabor filter bank that responds stronger to multi-scale and multi-orientation texture micro-patterns in a mammogram and enhances the classification rate. For the evaluation of the effect of the optimized Gabor filter bank on the mass classification problems, it is applied on overlapping blocks of the ROIs to collect moment-based features (i.e., mean, standard deviation, skewness) from the magnitudes of Gabor responses.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we review related research. In Section 3, we present the proposed methodology in detail. Subsequently, in Section 4, we present our experimental results and discuss the effectiveness of the proposed technique. Finally, Section 5 concludes our work and presents directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
