@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel learning based approach for a new integrated location-routing and scheduling problem within cross-docking considering direct shipment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Location-routing scheduling problem including cross docking and direct shipment is modeled.A novel bi-clustering method is proposed for decomposing the problem.By the use of the bi-clustering method, large-scale problems are solved by exact methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cross-docking,Vehicle routing scheduling,Bi-clustering,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the most important problem in supply chain management is the design of distribution systems which can reduce the transportation costs and meet the customer's demand at the minimum time. In recent years, cross-docking (CD) centers have been considered as the place that reduces the transportation and inventory costs. Meanwhile, neglecting the optimum location of the centers and the optimum routing and scheduling of the vehicles mislead the optimization process to local optima. Accordingly, in this research, the integrated vehicle routing and scheduling problem in cross-docking systems is modeled. In this new model, the direct shipment from the manufacturers to the customers is also included. Besides, the vehicles are assigned to the cross-dock doors with lower cost. Next, to solve the model, a novel machine-learning-based heuristic method (MLBM) is developed, in which the customers, manufacturers and locations of the cross-docking centers are grouped through a bi-clustering approach. In fact, the MLBM is a filter based learning method that has three stages including customer clustering through a modified bi-clustering method, sub-problems’ modeling and solving the whole model. In addition, for solving the scheduling problem of vehicles in cross-docking system, this paper proposes exact solution as well as genetic algorithm (GA). GA is also adapted for large-scale problems in which exact methods are not efficient. Furthermore, the parameters of the proposed GA are tuned via the Taguchi method. Finally, for validating the proposed model, several benchmark problems from literature are selected and modified according to new introduced assumptions in the base models. Different statistical analysis methods are implemented to assess the performance of the proposed algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many companies want to satisfy customer's demands, preferably, in minimum cost and minimum time. Thus, these companies are trying to design a flexible and reliable distribution system. Since a single company has many limitations in improving customer satisfaction, companies are tending to work closely with other sections in their supply chain.Apte and Viswanathan [1] mention that 30% of prices are incurred in the distribution process. Therefore, improving the distribution systems to satisfy the customer's demands is very important.In distribution systems, there are several techniques for developing transportation systems and reducing their costs. Cross-docking (CD) is relatively new technique that reduces transportation and inventory costs. This technique is very applicable for products that almost have constant demand. In cases with uncertain demands, cross-docking system, could not be successful as the cross-dock does not have any facility for stocking products [2].In the distribution systems, the transportation problem is a critical issue, and in the transportation problems, determining the best route for the vehicles is very important. There are several variants of VRP in supply chain problems. Zhang et al. [3] consider the open multi-depot heterogeneous vehicle routing problem with time windows in which vehicles may be replenished along trips. By using the modeling features in local solver, they construct a novel formulation considering a rich series of constraint conditions and objective functions. Their experimental results indicate that the mathematical model performs effectively in real-world applications.This problem has attracted great deal of attention in cross-docking centers, too. Routing of vehicles in cross-docking causes the vehicles visit their customers in the best rout in their tour to the cross-dock. Almost routing and scheduling of vehicles in the cross-docks are considered simultaneously. On the other hand, routing decisions without considering the location of the cross-docking centers is not consistent with the required systematic view. Thus, in this research, the mentioned components are considered together to make the model more realistic. Location problem is very important in real world and many people try to tackle it. One of the location problems is p-center problems. Nematian and Hesam Sadati [4] consider a p-center problem with uncertain demand-weighted distance in which the demands are considered as fuzzy random variables (FRVs) and the objective of the problem is to minimize the maximum distance between a node and its nearest facility.In the scheduling problem, minimizing the make-span has attracted a great deal of interest recently in every industry. These problems are usually NP-hard. For example, a heuristic approach called MCT (minimum completion time) is used to deal with the unrelated parallel-machines’ make-span minimization problem. Santos et al. [5] propose an ordered approach to the MCT heuristic. MOMCT (modified ordered minimum completion time) orders tasks in accordance to the MS index, which represents the mean difference of the completion time on each machine and the one on the minimum completion time machine. Their results demonstrate the improved performance of MOMCT over the MCT heuristic. Song and Chen [6] and Yu and Egbelu [4] focus on minimizing the make-span. Yu and Egbelu [7] propose a vehicle-scheduling model to minimize make-span at the cross-dock. Boloori Arabani et al. [8] state that because the time aspect of such activities is crucial, objective functions are formulated in terms of the total operational time (make-span). Liao et al. [9] study inbound and outbound truck sequencing for cross-docking operations to minimize total operation time. Li et al. [10] propose a scheduling model to minimize the earliness and tardiness penalty cost of containers processed at the cross-dock. Wen et al. [11] propose a model to determine the pick-up and delivery routing of vehicles along with the product consolidation decision. Lee et al. [2] are pioneers in studying the vehicle routing-scheduling problem. They try to obtain an optimal routing schedule for pickup and delivery processes during the planning horizon. The model minimizes the transportation costs and fixed costs of the vehicles. They use a tabu search (TS) algorithm to find near optimal solutions [2]. Liao et al. [12] introduce another TS algorithm to solve the vehicle routing-scheduling problem.Sometimes for some products, for example expensive ones or those with high demand, or cases in which the distance of the customer and manufacturer is close, direct shipment from manufacture to customer is allowed. In these situations, the cost of the vehicle is higher as compared to the shipment from the cross-dock. However, in some cases direct shipping is very critical as delays may cause many penalties. Thus, design of a flexible distribution system that encompasses both the direct and indirect shipments simultaneously is desired. In order to increase the efficiency of the delivery system, some researchers have studied the design and operation of direct and indirect shipping systems, simultaneously. However, a mixed delivery system has received less attention. Liu et al. [13] consider a mixed truck delivery system with both hub-and-spoke and direct shipment. They propose a heuristic algorithm for solving their model. Hosseini et al. [14] consider a cross-docking and milk run logistics in a consolidation network and for solving the model; they propose a hybrid of harmony search and simulated annealing approach.There exist several studies about temporary storage in cross docking system. Ghobadian et al. [15] propose a model that considers a special case of cross docking where there is temporary storage and uses GRASP (Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure) technique to solve some realistic test problems and the results indicate that the GRASP method performs better than alternative solution strategies.Here, in this paper, we focus on scheduling of vehicles for visiting the manufacturers and customers and allocating the vehicles to the cross-dock doors based on their arrival time and process time. Optimization of these problems is very important since the waiting time of vehicles is minimized in front of the door to unload the cargo. This problem is very critical for the products with a short lifetime. Thus, we assume a penalty cost for waiting time of the vehicles for unloading the cargo at the inbound door. This penalty costs are adjusted according to the type of the products which are perishable or non-perishable.Mousavi and Tavakkoli-Moghaddam [16] propose a hybrid simulated annealing algorithm for location and routing-scheduling problems with cross-docking in the supply chain. Mousavi et al. [17] consider the location of cross-docking centers and vehicle routing-scheduling under uncertainty using a fuzzy possibilistic–stochastic programming model. Agustina et al. [18] propose the vehicle scheduling and routing at a cross-docking center for food supply chain. They solve their model for some numerical examples. Govindan et al. [19] study the two-echelon multiple vehicle location-routing problem with time windows for optimizing the sustainable supply chain network of perishable food. They use a novel multi-objective hybrid approach.In recent years, several meta-heuristic algorithms are used for solving the vehicle routing-scheduling problem. In this research, the clustering approach is implemented for grouping customers and manufacturers. Clustering approach is used in location-routing problem simultaneously. Zare Mehrjerdi and Nadizadeh [20] consider the capacitated location-routing problem with fuzzy demand. They propose a greedy clustering method. Sahraeian and Nadizadeh [21] cluster customers according to the greedy search method and choose proper depots among candidates. After allocating clusters to depots, ant colony approach was used for routing among depots and customers. Nallusamy et al. [22] model multiple vehicle routing problem. To solve their model, they used clustering methodology for grouping cities based on the k-means clustering algorithm.Considering the literature's gap, in this research, a bi-clustering method is proposed for solving the location, routing-scheduling problem in cross-docking. Generally, in cross-docking field of research, there are three distinguished levels, including operational, tactical and strategic ones [23]. Our study includes scheduling and routing of vehicles and belongs to the operational level. Besides, this study allows direct shipment from manufacturer to customer. In literature, routing-scheduling problems along with the location of centers are considered in one model and it was a large-scale model with a lot of constraints which must be solved with meta-heuristic methods. These solutions are not accurate and reliable, because there is no exact solution to compare these solutions with it. In this research, by proposing a novel clustering algorithm, location, routing and scheduling, problem of cross-docking is decomposed to multiple segments and then each segment is solved by exact algorithm separately. In fact, this study proposes a filter learning approach that encompasses all the mentioned contributions, called hereafter machine learning based heuristic method (MLBM). It is also shown that the proposed algorithm can give satisfactory solutions in reasonable computing time.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the methodology for modeling and solving the problems are given. Section 3 indicates computational results according to the proposed algorithm. In addition, the statistical analysis and the Taguchi method can be seen in this section. In the final section, concluding remarks of the paper along with future research directions are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel technique for modeling and solving the location, routing and scheduling problem with cross-docking in the supply chain was proposed. This technique, called MLBM, is based on the filter learning method and has three stages that uses clustering method. In fact, location and allocation to cross-dock were done by a new clustering algorithm. Direct shipping from manufacturer to customer was performed by solving the mode selection model. For routing and scheduling the visiting nodes, a new TSP problem by a two-objective function was modeled. Finally, a dock door assignment problem for the scheduling of cross-dock's activities was modeled. For solving this model, a genetic algorithm was proposed. Using statistical analysis, the good performance and efficiency of the proposed method was illustrated. For future research, one can focus on improving the clustering method. Also, determining the optimum number of dock doors in order to minimize the penalty cost is of interest. Moreover, developing more efficient exact decomposition methods, such as Benders or Dantzig Wolfe, are also attractive.