@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Teaching and peer-learning particle swarm optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A PSO algorithm's variant, abbreviated as TPLPSO, is proposed.Teaching and peer-learning framework is proposed to improve PSO's performance.Stagnation prevention strategy is proposed to mitigate the premature convergence.TPLPSO has higher searching accuracy and convergence speed during the optimization.Results show that TPLPSO outperforms other state-of-the-art PSO variants.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Teaching and peer-learning particle swarm optimization (TPLPSO),Teaching–learning-based optimization (TLBO),Metaheuristic search,Global optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most of the recent proposed particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithms do not offer the alternative learning strategies when the particles fail to improve their fitness during the searching process. Motivated by this fact, we improve the cutting edge teaching–learning-based optimization (TLBO) algorithm and adapt the enhanced framework into the PSO, thereby develop a teaching and peer-learning PSO (TPLPSO) algorithm. To be specific, the TPLPSO adopts two learning phases, namely the teaching and peer-learning phases. The particle firstly enters into the teaching phase and updates its velocity based on its historical best and the global best information. Particle that fails to improve its fitness in the teaching phase then enters into the peer-learning phase, where an exemplar is selected as the guidance particle. Additionally, a stagnation prevention strategy (SPS) is employed to alleviate the premature convergence issue. The proposed TPLPSO is extensively evaluated on 20 benchmark problems with different features, as well as one real-world problem. Experimental results reveal that the TPLPSO exhibits competitive performances when compared with ten other PSO variants and seven state-of-the-art metaheuristic search algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm is initially introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 [1], to emulate the collaborative behavior of bird flocking and fish schooling in searching for foods [1–4]. In PSO, each individual (namely particle) represents the potential solution of the optimization problem, while the location of food source is the global optimum solution. Being a population-based metaheuristic search (MS) algorithm, PSO simultaneously evaluates many points in the search space. Besides searching for the food independently and stochastically, each particle collaborates and shares information with each other, to ensure all of them move toward the optimal solution of the problem and eventually leads to the convergence [2,3]. Since the introduction of the PSO, it becomes an overwhelming choice of optimization technique due to its simplistic implementation and excellent performance on various benchmark and engineering design problems [4–9].Despite having the competitive performance, PSO has some undesirable dynamical properties that degrade its searching ability. One of the most important issues is the premature convergence, where the particles tend to be trapped in the local optima solution, due to the rapid convergence and diversity loss of the swarm [10]. Another issue is regarding the ability of PSO to balance the exploration/exploitation search. Overemphasize of the exploration prevents the swarm convergence, while too much exploitation has high tendency to cause the premature convergence of swarm [11].Although extensive amounts of works [11–29] are reported to address the aforementioned issues, most of the current existing PSO variants do not provide the alternative learning strategies to particles when they fail to update their fitness during the searching process. This problem inevitably limits the algorithms’ searching capabilities. Recently, Rao et al. [30,31] proposed a teaching–learning-based optimization (TLBO) algorithm, inspired by the philosophy of teaching and learning. The process of TLBO is divided into two parts, namely the teacher phase and the learner phase, where the individuals can learn from the teacher and the interaction of other individuals, respectively. Motivated by these two facts, we propose a teaching and peer-learning PSO (TPLPSO). To be specific, we improve the current existing TLBO framework and adapt this enhanced framework into the PSO. Similar with TLBO, the TPLPSO adapts two learning phase, namely the teaching and peer-learning phases. Each particle first enters into the teaching phase and updates its velocity according to its historical best and the global best information. Particle that fails to improve its fitness in the teaching phases then enters into the peer-learning phase, where an exemplar particle is selected as the guide for the particle to search for a better solution. The roulette wheel selection technique is employed to ensure fitter particle has higher probability to be selected as the exemplar, thereby provide a more promising searching direction toward the global optimum. To resolve the premature convergence issue, we employ a stagnation prevention strategy (SPS) module that will be triggered when the PSO swarm fails to improve the global best fitness in m successive function evaluations (FEs).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly presents some related works. Section 3 details out the methodologies of the TPLPSO. Section 4 provides the experimental settings and results, respectively. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work done.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
