@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid intelligent methods for arrhythmia detection and geriatric depression diagnosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Examining physical fitness and mental health condition on multi-touch panel.Real-time heartbeat ECG detection system.Detecting the arrhythmia by fuzzy inference models.Using data mining technology to find the association rules from users’ responded questionnaire.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy inference model,Data mining,Principal component analysis,Arrhythmia,Depression,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to the pressure from work load and daily life, there is an increase in geriatric depression and arrhythmia population. However, some people may not notice or have no idea about the symptom of depression and arrhythmia. More research input is needed to diagnose severity of depression and arrhythmia at an early stage. To help users examine their physical fitness and mental health condition before outpatient service, we apply data mining strategy to discover association rules from responded questionnaire, including geriatric depression, BAI, ASRM, and PSQI. To obtain informative analytical results, multitudes of simulations are performed on 25,000 data stored in our database. We also propose an effective heartbeat monitoring ECG real-time detection system for homecare service, which uses the ECG sensors and a wireless sensor network technology to detect the subject's heartbeats and their variations. In addition, the MIT-BIH database is used to analyze arrhythmia. A fuzzy model is proposed to discriminate between normal heartbeats and arrhythmia. Experimental results show that an average accuracy of 95.42% is achieved by the proposed system. This evidence verifies that the hybrid intelligent model is effective in medical related applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It was more than half a century since the concept of elderly homecare was introduced. Both pre-diagnosis and continuing treatment/tracking of arrhythmia and depression are indispensable for elderly in health care. Elderly heart functions are degenerating with age. Normal heart functions and living with happiness are important for elderly to maintain a good life. With the continuing improvement of medical care, the average human life span extends but living longer does not imply living happy.According to a recent report by WHO (World Health Organization) three diseases that are in dire need of scientific breakthroughs by 2020 are cardiovascular disease, depression and AIDS. Depression is a serious and common but under estimated psychiatry. Another research report from Harvard University indicates that the second global burden of disease is depression. Depression has the symptoms of early occurrence, continuance, and re-occurrence. Even worse, 15% of depression patients committed suicide finally.Unfortunately, arrhythmia and depression are commonly found in elderly. A recent survey on 1500 elderly by Medical College of Kaohsiung Medical University and Medical College of National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan reported that about 21.1% of elderly has symptoms of depression [21]. For the past few years due to the changes in diet habits, patients with cardiovascular disease become progressively younger, and the rate of deaths caused by heart disease rises. Since there are no regular patterns to estimate when the abnormal heartbeats occur for the arrhythmia patients, conventional ECG (Electrocardiography) inspection methods may fail to diagnose sudden occurrence of palpitation and stethalgia. Besides, the process of judging and annotating arrhythmia waveforms is highly dependent on medical specialists. It not only takes time to judge arrhythmia waveforms but also has the risk of misjudgment that retards the proper medical treatment. To tackle these problems, it is indispensible to devise intelligent systems ever ready for patients to long-term monitor heartbeats, record ECG and provide supplementary data for further diagnosis by heart specialists in modern homecare service.In this study MIT-BIH arrhythmia database is used to find the features of arrhythmia and their corresponding heartbeat types. This allows us to devise an intelligent system that automatically highlights the abnormal heartbeats, reduces the erroneous possibility of human judgment, and improves the accuracy and efficiency of detection.In the past, questionnaire on depression examination was answered by pen on the papers before outpatient service. It requires extra time to process the statistical data. To simplify the data processing and to provide psychiatrists instant and valuable information before outpatient service a physical fitness and mental health evaluation system is developed for users to self evaluate their depression degree. This system provides geriatric depression, BAI (Beck Anxiety Inventory), ASRM (Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale) and PSQI (Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index) questionnaire for users to answer. Users can respond the questionnaire either from their smart phones or from the computers in the waiting room before outpatient service. The evaluation scores as well as the responded questionnaire are further analyzed by the proposed data mining technique.This paper is organized as follows. The related work to the proposed system is described in Section 2. Section 3 presents the system architecture to detect arrhythmia and Section 4 illustrates the procedures to find association rules from responded questionnaire. Section 5 gives the experimental results. Conclusions and future work are made in the final Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
