@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Website design, trust and culture: An eight country investigation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Website design elements, trust, and transaction security are examined across 8 countries.Cultural values such as uncertainty avoidance are important for user design perceptions.Country economic and technological conditions temper use perceptions.Clustering theory is extended to website design affording insights to website localization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Culture,Website design,Website trust,Transaction security,Theory of trust and social capital,Clustering theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
User perceptions of website design (for Information Content, Information Design, Navigation Design, Visual Design), Website Trust, and Transaction Security are examined for differences in an eight country sample. Motivation for the investigation includes: (1) to test and compare user reactions to website design in countries with different degrees of uncertainty avoidance, (2) to consider user reactions based on country economic and technological conditions related to the theory of institutional trust and social capital, and (3) to extend clustering theory and the GLOBE cultural cluster model to determine if culturally similar countries group regarding user perceptions of websites. Overall and as predicted, users in low uncertainty avoidance, high institutional trust and social capital countries such as Canada and the USA have the most favorable perceptions of website design. An interesting finding is that while country economic and technological conditions may temper user perceptions in some instances, overall culture is a stronger predictor. Clustering theory is a useful determinant of user perceptions, and there is strong support that users within a given cultural cluster have similar requirements regarding website design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the realm of e-business, vendors seek to provide positive online experiences for potential buyers. This includes the development of websites that are visually pleasing, easy to navigate, and rich in accessible information content. In addition, online vendors aim to induce a sense of security or trust in the user. In an increasingly global online market space, effective website design must appeal to users from diverse cultures (Barber and Badre 1998, Gefen and Heart 2006, Hu et al. 2004, Vyncke and Brengman 2010).Acceptance of website design features differs among countries and cultures (Barber and Badre 1998, Hu et al. 2004, Nielsen and del Galdo 1996, Simon 2001, Singh et al. 2003, Smith et al. 2004). Cyr (2008) found differences between countries regarding website design related to trust, satisfaction, and website loyalty. These previous studies indicate that users in different countries are likely to experience website design differently, including trust and security on the Web. More specifically, in countries where uncertainty is avoided (e.g. uncertainty avoidance) there is less trust in the IT artifact such as a website (Vance et al. 2008). While other studies have examined various cultural dimensions related to website design, there are few that focus on uncertainty avoidance as the predictor for user reactions in this context. Further, uncertainty avoidance has relevance in the current investigation since website trust and security will be investigated. According to Dinev et al. (2006) online users high in uncertainty avoidance will especially value website trust and security over users from lower uncertainty avoidance cultures.It is expected that country factors such as economic wealth and levels of technology (including the Internet) will also potentially influence user perceptions of website design and security. With respect to economic factors, Fukuyama’s (1995) theoretical framework for institutional trust and social capital suggests that in countries with economic prosperity, social capital as a form of good will on the part of individuals or groups toward the actions of organizations is more likely to be present. Evidence of social capital leads to trust (Fukuyama 1995). In the context of the current research, users in countries with greater prosperity would be more likely to have social capital and therefore trust institutions such as the Internet. Throughout this paper, this will be termed trust and social capital. Concerning technological variables, in countries where online connectivity and infrastructure are good and when digital legal safeguards are in place, then consumer and business electronic adoption is higher (Source: e-Readiness Rankings 2007). It would be expected that higher adoption rates are related to user perceptions of trust and security of the digital infrastructure.As noted above, some research has investigated user perceptions of websites in diverse national contexts. However, to our knowledge there is no research that systematically examines the influence of economic and technological elements on user perceptions of website design. Further, there is no research that examines national culture in conjunction with social capital and technological parameters with respect to website design. It is expected that studying these variables together will provide a more nuanced view as to how users in a given country respond to website design features, including levels of perceived trust and security.Of additional interest, and new to this investigation, is the degree to which different countries are clustered related to user perceptions of website design (i.e. Information Design, Information Content, Navigation Design, Visual Design), as well as Website Trust and Transaction Security. According to clustering theory (Hartigan 1975), members of a group will serve as predictors of expected behavior of the classified group. The application of clustering has previously been used concerning culture (e.g. House et al. 2002, Ronen and Shenkar 1985) wherein countries are grouped based on similarities and differences concerning values and beliefs. Given the expense of website development costs, there is practical value to determine if users in different countries “cluster” or exhibit similarity in website design perceptions. Should this be the case, then websites can be developed for country clusters as opposed to individual countries.Based on the preceding, the motivation for the current investigation includes to:(1)test and compare user reactions to website design in a range of countries with differing degrees of uncertainty avoidance;evaluate user reactions based on country economic and technological conditions related to the theory of trust and social capital, and to determine if this approach coupled with uncertainty avoidance is a better predictor of user perceptions of website design;extend clustering theory to determine if culturally similar countries group together regarding user perceptions of websites.To further elaborate the background and rationale driving this research, this paper begins with an introduction to culture including Hofstede’s dimension of uncertainty avoidance; country economic and technological factors; and clustering theory. This is followed by a discussion of culture and website design. Topics such as website trust and transaction security are then elaborated. The method, results, and discussion follow, with both theoretical and practical implications outlined.Although one definition of culture is not possible, various researchers have used nation state as a loose categorization for culture (Doney et al. 1998). Hofstede defines culture as “the collective programming of the mind which distinguishes the members of one group from another” (1980, p. 21). It is expected that within a given national culture there is a dominant set of shared values, attributes, beliefs and behaviors – although within that culture subtle differences may also occur due to individual, team or organizational differences (Erumban and de Jong 2006, Karahanna et al. 2005, Matsumoto 1994). Culture is “a system of values and norms that are shared among a group of people and that when taken together constitute a design for living” (Doney et al. 1998, p. 67).Researchers have often used Hofstede’s (1980) classifications to study social psychological phenomena (Dawar et al. 1996, Gefen and Heart 2006, Jarvenpaa et al. 1999, Mazaheri et al. 2011, Simon 2001). Although there have been questions regarding the validity of using Hofstede’s cultural dimensions, results of his work have been supported quantitatively and qualitatively by numerous studies in various disciplines (Sondergaard 1990, Straub 1994) including information systems. In alignment with Yoon (2002), in the current research Hofstede’s classification for uncertainty avoidance has been selected for its relevance to website design, as well as to trust and security issues related to e-commerce. According to Hofstede, uncertainty avoidance (at the country level) implies the degree to which members of a given culture are uncomfortable in unstructured, uncertain or ambiguous situations and thus prefer formal rules. Cultures high on uncertainty avoidance aim to minimize the possibility of uncertainty by ensuring safety and security. In a review of fifteen studies, in nine of them Leidner and Kayworth (2006) found evidence that uncertainty avoidance is risk based and related to trust. Considering uncertainty avoidance in an online environment, we might expect members of high uncertainty avoidance cultures to prefer full information (through information, navigation, or visual design elements1Throughout this paper design “element” refers to the four design categories investigated and represented as constructs in Appendix C for Information Design, Information Content, Navigation Design, and Visual Design.1) to minimize ambiguity when visiting a website. As previously mentioned, online users high in uncertainty avoidance will especially value website trust and security over users from lower uncertainty avoidance cultures (Dinev et al. 2006).Countries investigated in the current study vary on country parameters with respect to economic, Internet and other issues as outlined in Appendix A. As such, culture is determined not only by similarity among members of the collective based on psychologically based values and beliefs such as uncertainty avoidance, but also by “commonality of observed and reported practices of entities such as families, schools, work organizations, economic and legal systems, and political institutions” (House et al. 2002, p. 5). It would be expected that people living in the same country with the same economic and technological conditions would share similar values – which in turn may apply to perceptions of a website. As one example, in a study of perceived value of websites Steenkamp and Geyskens (2006) examined a country characteristic such as the “rule of law”, and found that in countries where the rule of law is weak the effect of privacy and security protection on the Internet is more valued by users.Tied to economic and technological country parameters as outlined above, an additional theoretical framework useful in this study is Fukuyama’s theory of institutional trust and social capital (Fukuyama 1995). Also used by Dinev et al. (2006) to examine privacy issues and trust in e-commerce, the underlying assumption is that social capital leading to institutional trust is developed when cooperative norms such as honesty, keeping commitments, and reliability prevail. In this instance, in countries where there is honesty and reliability on the part of institutions, then citizens in that country have goodwill in the form of social capital, which further leads to trust of that country’s institutions. According to Fukuyama, a country’s economic prosperity is tied to the amount of social capital and trust present in the country. He identifies groups of high-trust countries (e.g. US, Germany, and Japan) and low-trust countries (China, Italy, France, Korea, and Taiwan). Based on the logic proposed by Fukuyama, and related to e-commerce as in this research, we might expect that in countries with higher economic prosperity there is more likely to be a higher degree of technological competency and thus trust. In fact, in countries such as Canada, the USA, Germany, or Japan there is evidence of more connectivity and infrastructure resulting in higher levels of consumer and business electronic adoption. Refer to Appendix A.In sum, it would be expected that both the level of uncertainty avoidance, as well as country economic and technological factors will contribute to user perceptions of website design, as well as to trust and security. Including both sets of parameters (e.g. cultural and economic) is expected to contribute a more comprehensive and nuanced approach for how users experience e-commerce.In addition to an examination of users who differ by country for uncertainty avoidance, another approach is to investigate differences and similarities between countries based on Clustering Theory (Hartigan 1975). According to Clustering Theory, prediction occurs in two ways. First, if a group (country) is classified into a given cluster (country cluster) then information about behaviors or values of other members of that cluster would serve as predictors of expected behavior of the classified group. Second, measures (such as those related to website design) that demonstrate a cultural affinity would be predictive of other members of another given group as long as they belong to the same cluster (i.e. user perceptions of website design in Canada would be aligned to the USA since they are within the same cultural cluster). In other work, clustering has been applied to international compensation practices (Townsend et al. 1990) and to leadership and organizational effectiveness (House et al. 2002). This approach is also consistent with cultural researchers (i.e. Ronen and Shenkar 1985) who adhere to a “culture cluster” model. However, such a model has not previously been applied to website design.Of particular relevance to the current research, House et al. (2002) conducted an extensive investigation in 61 nations called the GLOBE project.2The results of the GLOBE project appear in a series of papers in the Journal of World Business (2002).2Country clustering was determined based on similarities and differences concerning societal values and beliefs. Ten cultural clusters are identified in the GLOBE research, of which five are represented in the current study: North America (Canada, the USA), South Asia (India), Germanic Europe (Germany), Confucian Asia (Japan, China), and Latin America (Mexico, Chile). While the GLOBE project focused on leadership rather than on website design, the clustering of countries as noted above is useful for forming comparisons in the current investigation. More specifically, it is expected that users from countries within a given cluster will be more similar regarding their perceptions of website design compared to users outside the country cluster.Some investigations have examined website design across cultures and countries with differences detected between country samples. For example, Cyr and Trevor-Smith (2004) assessed eight elements of website design for 30 websites in each of the USA, Germany, and Japan (90 websites total) and found significant differences between country differences in all but one category. In another study, Cyr et al. (2005) evaluated website characteristics related to information design, visual design, and navigation design and trust in Canada, the USA, Germany and Japan and uncovered differences in preferences by country for design elements between a local and foreign version of the same website. Extending these studies, the current research examines Information Content, Information Design, Navigation Design, and Visual Design in an eight country sample differing in uncertainty avoidance and in which multiple parameters such as the inclusion of social capital are considered.As defined in this study, Information Content refers to information that is of high quality and assessed by the user to be complete, sufficient, and effective (Egger 2001, Marcus and Gould 2000). Alternately, Information Design refers to the organization and logical representation of information (Egger 2001, Marcus and Gould 2000). In one cross-cultural study (Cyr et al. 2005), user design preferences including perceived access and presentation of product information were compared for Canada, the USA, Germany and Japan. Results indicated few significant differences between the USA, Canada, and Germany but significant differences between these countries and Japan. Japanese users had a less favorable impression of the local website related to these select information components.It is expected that Information Content and Information Design enable users to access information regarding online products or services. Further, and based on Hofstede’s (1980) research with reference to uncertainty avoidance, it is anticipated that users from higher uncertainty avoidance cultures would find these two design elements more important as they seek to reduce uncertainty and ambiguity in the process of gathering information about prospective electronic purchases. Consequently, it would also be expected that the higher the uncertainty avoidance of users, it is less likely the demand for Information Design and Information Content will satisfactorily be met. This then results in higher uncertainty avoidance users who have a less favorable assessment of each design element.In addition, and based on Fukuyama’s (1995) theory of trust and social capital, users will be more receptive to website design elements in higher trust countries such as in the USA, Germany, Japan, and Canada where there are higher levels of social capital and enhanced connectivity and infrastructure over countries where this is not the case such as in India, Mexico, Chile, and China. Alternately, when countries have moderate levels of uncertainty avoidance, or mixed levels of uncertainty avoidance with country conditions then user perceptions are expected to be mid-range. For instance, Japan has the highest level of uncertainty avoidance but also a high level of trust and social capital based on advanced technology and infrastructure. Therefore, it is unlikely that user perceptions will be either high or low for website design features. India has a low level of uncertainty avoidance, but also a low level of institutionalized trust and social capital which is expected to place user perceptions mid-range. Finally, both Germany and China are moderate for uncertainty avoidance, with Germany high in institutionalized trust and social capital and China low for trust and social capital. Although exploratory, it is expected that they will both score mid-range as well.This leads to the first set of hypotheses:H1Low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries (e.g. Canada and the USA) will provide highest ratings for Information Content over high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries (e.g. Chile and Mexico); with countries that are mixed in uncertainty avoidance and high/low trust scoring in the middle (e.g. India, Germany, China, and Japan).Low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries (e.g. Canada and the USA) will provide highest ratings for Information Design over high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries (e.g. Chile and Mexico); with countries that are mixed in uncertainty avoidance and high/low trust scoring in the middle (e.g. India, Germany, China, and Japan).Navigation Design refers to the navigational scheme used to help or hinder users as they access different sections of a website (De Wulf et al. 2006). For example, this could include whether text is horizontal or vertical, and the number of drop down menus or submenus. Preferences for the form of navigational scheme are expected to vary by culture (Marcus and Gould 2000). Europeans and North Americans prefer navigation that facilitates easy search and makes the site simple to use. Asian/Latin and South Americans desire navigation aids to change the appearance of the site without particular concern for movement (Simon 2001). While, the preference for navigation differs between cultures, it is speculated that users from high uncertainty avoidance countries are more concerned with clarity in how to navigate to find out about products or services than users from lower uncertainty avoidance countries.If this is the case, then users from high uncertainty avoidance cultures will have a less positive assessment of Navigation Design than low uncertainty avoidance users. Further, as with Information Content and Information Design, it is expected that trust and social capital will temper user perceptions – with users in high trust countries providing higher ratings for Navigation design over users in low trust or mixed countries (for uncertainty avoidance with trust and social capital).H3Low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries (e.g. Canada and the USA) will provide highest ratings for Navigation Design over high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries (e.g. Chile and Mexico); with countries that are mixed in uncertainty avoidance and high/low trust scoring in the middle (e.g. India, Germany, China, and Japan).Visual Design encompasses design elements such as balance, emotional appeal, aesthetics, and uniformity of a website’s overall graphical look. This may include colors, photographs, shapes, images, or font type (Bonnardel et al. 2011, Garrett 2003, Salinas 2002). More specifically, a user may gain knowledge or an appreciation of a product through the image conveyed. Users from countries such as China have a strong preference for visuals (Sun 2001). Hedonic elements of websites are important to Chinese, while Canadians prefer utilitarian design elements (Mazaheri et al. 2011). Cultural differences were found concerning use of images (Cyr et al. 2009) and use of color (Cyr et al. 2010) in website design. In a study that compares Canadian, American, German and Japanese users, Japanese favor a visual approach which they said appeals to the user’s “emotion” (Cyr et al. 2005). Once again, while the preceding supports the idea that users from different countries have difference website preferences for visual design, it is expected that users from high uncertainty avoidance countries will use visual design features to obtain additional information and to reduce ambiguity about electronics products. As in the previously stated hypotheses, it is proposed that high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries will have the least positive reaction to Visual Design, while low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries will have the most positive perceptions concerning Visual Design.H4Low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries (e.g. Canada and the USA) will provide highest ratings for Visual Design over high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries (e.g. Chile and Mexico); with countries that are mixed in uncertainty avoidance and high/low trust scoring in the middle (e.g. India, Germany, China, and Japan).Based on the GLOBE studies, it is expected that in certain countries (e.g. Canada and the USA; Japan and China; Mexico and Chile) user perceptions will be similar concerning the four website design elements as outlined above. Of note, this proposal is in alignment with country expectations based on trust and social capital as outlined by Fukuyama (1995). This leads to the following hypothesis:H5Countries within the same GLOBE cluster will exhibit similar responses to website design elements (e.g. Information Content, Information Design, Navigation Design, and Visual Design) compared to users outside the cluster.According to Jarvenpaa et al. (1999) online trust refers to consumer confidence in the website and “willingness to rely on the seller and take actions in circumstances where such action makes the consumer vulnerable to the seller” (p. 4). Building on this definition, in the current research online trust refers to general trust of the website, and that the user can trust the transaction process as well as information presented. In an e-commerce setting, when there is no physical presence of a salesperson, exchange relationships are more comfortable and likely when institutional safeguards such as security symbols are present. Further, online business environments can result in “problems associated with insecurity and privacy among transaction counterparts, which put pressure on Internet marketers to create a trust that is much stronger and more persistent than what is normally demanded offline” (Yoon 2002, p. 51). Consumer trust in the website is fundamental to loyalty including online purchase intentions (Belanche et al. 2012, Flavián et al. 2006, Gefen 2000, McKnight et al. 2004), usage intentions (Kim et al. 2009), and willingness by consumers to buy from an online vendor (Flavián et al. 2006, Laurn and Lin 2003, Ou and Sia 2010, Pavlou 2003). Website quality is known to result in website trust (Corbitt et al. 2003).Trust is influenced by culture (Jarvenpaa et al. 1999, Weber and Hsee 1998). Cyr et al. (2005) conducted a study to investigate whether or not local websites engender higher levels of trust for Web users than a foreign website of the same online vendor (when language is not an issue). The findings indicate large differences in ability to trust between Japanese and Americans and between Canadians or Germans. Japanese users trust their local website least while Germans trust their local site most. Based on interview data, all four cultural groups identified vendor familiarity and visibility of security signs as important factors influencing trust in online purchasing. In further work (Cyr 2008), Information Design, Navigation Design, and Visual Design were modeled to trust for users in Canada, Germany and China with differing outcomes. Navigation Design results in trust for Canada and China, Visual Design results in trust for China only, and Information Design resulted in trust for Canada only.In other research, it was expected and confirmed that individuals from high uncertainty avoidance cultures would place less trust in the IT artifact (a mobile device) than individuals from low uncertainty avoidance culture (Vance et al. 2008). Based on this and the previous findings, it is established that high uncertainty avoidance users will be less comfortable shopping online than users lower in uncertainty avoidance. As a result, users who are higher in uncertainty avoidance will also rate the website lower, even when it is the same website vendor. However, new to the current investigation we now examine whether these results apply in a larger number of countries and when the institutional context such as online infrastructure and connectivity (e.g. related to trust and social capital) are also considered.H6Low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries (e.g. Canada and the USA) will provide highest ratings for Website Trust over high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries (e.g. Chile and Mexico); with countries that are mixed in uncertainty avoidance and high/low trust scoring in the middle (e.g. India, Germany, China, and Japan).Closely related to online trust, shopping online is influenced by transaction security and as such users are deterred by absence of payment security, payment-clearing structures, or privacy policies (Becerra and Korgaonkar 2011, Jarvenpaa et al. 1999). Use of trusted third parties as intermediaries such as VeriSign (Palmer et al. 2000) help to reduce buyer’s perceived risk, as do websites that are authentic (Featherman et al. 2006). In a study of online consumer behavior in which American, Brazilian, and Latin American consumers are compared, Latin Americans and Brazilians (both from high uncertainty avoidance cultures) indicate the presence of credit card symbols on websites is more important than indicated by Americans who are low on uncertainty avoidance (Cheskin 2000).In other research on website design across cultures (for Canada, USA, Germany and Japan), Germans, Americans and Canadians are less concerned with security when buying online than Japanese users (Cyr 2011). In that research, Canadians noted they are aware of security problems when using the Internet, but felt the benefits outweigh the risks. In contrast, Japanese were extremely concerned about online risk and using credit cards for online purchasing. Related to the preceding, and with the vendor held constant, it is expected users from high uncertainty avoidance countries will perceive greater risk and less certainty in conducting transactions online than users from lower uncertainty avoidance countries. Subsequently the higher uncertainty avoidance users will also rate the website lower. This established finding is now coupled with the institutional perspective as prescribed by the theory of trust and social capital (Fukuyama 1995).H7Low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries (e.g. Canada and the USA) will provide highest ratings for Transaction Security over high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries (e.g. Chile and Mexico); with countries that are mixed in uncertainty avoidance and high/low trust scoring in the middle (e.g. India, Germany, China, and Japan).Finally, and with reference to the GLOBE project, it is expected user perceptions in certain countries (e.g. Canada and the USA; Japan and China; Mexico and Chile) will be similar concerning Trust and Transaction Security. This results in the final two hypotheses.H8Countries within the same GLOBE cluster will exhibit similar responses for Website Trust and Transaction Security compared to users outside the cluster.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The current investigation offers a comprehensive insight into website perceptions of 1156 participants located in eight countries. Wide sampling of users in a number of countries offers an opportunity to derive insights about cultural similarities and differences as they relate to website design. In addition, we learn more about how institutional perspectives and country clustering operate related to user perceptions of websites.As outlined in this paper, the goals for this project are achieved including:(1)Hypothesized comparisons for eight countries were based on levels of uncertainty avoidance (Hofstede 1980), and overall the prediction that lower uncertainty avoidance cultures score higher for perceptions of website design is supported. Alternately, in higher uncertainty avoidance cultures such as in Japan, there is a tendency to score lower on trust. The large number of comparisons as graphically depicted in Tables 5 and 6 can be utilized by other researchers as a baseline for how users react in each of the countries studied concerning website design elements and outcomes.In addition, the research is aimed to consider how country economic and technological variables might potentially affect user perceptions of an e-commerce website, including website trust and security. It would appear that this is a useful addition to understanding user website perceptions. Low uncertainty avoidance users in high trust countries do have the highest scores, although high uncertainty avoidance users in low trust countries did not systematically have the lowest scores as predicted. Of interest are the results of countries mixed in uncertainty avoidance and high/low trust (e.g. India, Japan, Germany, and China). As one example, Germany and China are both moderate in uncertainty avoidance but differ substantially on social capital and technology-related infrastructure. However, overall they score similarly on most constructs. This would indicate that while the country conditions are very different, overall cultural values tend to determine user perceptions of website design.This research contributes to understanding how country clustering occurs in the unique context of website design, and the relevance of this for website localization practices. The results are quite remarkable in terms of how countries fall with others in their cultural cluster, given the large number of comparisons.In recent years, researchers have explored website design in a single country context (Flavián et al. 2006, Garrett 2003, Palmer 2002). In some cases user perceptions of website elements have been investigated across cultures (Barber and Badre 1998, Cyr et al. 2005, Cyr 2008, Gefen and Heart 2006, Hu et al. 2004, Jarvenpaa et al. 1999), although not with a focus on website design and uncertainty avoidance as in the current research. With respect to the four design elements studied in the current investigation, lower uncertainty avoidance countries such as Canada and the USA score highest for Information Content, Information Design, Navigation Design, and Visual Design. This signifies that users in these countries are more favorable toward each design element for their country website. Hence, users who find website visits less risky and who are less concerned with ambiguity tend to rate website design elements higher. Overall, results for Canada and the USA are significantly different from Germany and China (moderate in uncertainty avoidance) and Japan (high in uncertainty avoidance). As such, Germany, Japan and China are more concerned about the various design elements as presented. An unexpected result of this research is that no differences in user perceptions were detected between Canada (low uncertainty avoidance, high trust and social capital) with Mexico (high uncertainty avoidance, low trust and social capital) and this finding merits further investigation.Considering both uncertainty avoidance and levels of country institutional trust and social capital, there is considerable variation of user perceptions for design elements across countries, thus supporting the notion that websites require localization of design content for unique cultural groups (Cyr and Trevor-Smith 2004). These results represent an extension of Cyr et al. (2005) in which design elements were studied and comparisons made between a localized and foreign website of the same vendor. If websites are congruent with user expectations, then they are also judged to be more effective (Vyncke and Brengman 2010).With respect to institutionalized trust and social capital (Fukuyama 1995), as well as related to economic barriers concerning technology and infrastructure (Kshetri 2007), it would appear these parameters are useful to consider, but may not be as strong a predictor of user perceptions as is culture. To elaborate, in countries that are mixed such as India with low uncertainty avoidance but low connectivity and infrastructure (2.9/10), overall the results are similar to Canada or the USA which are also low in uncertainty avoidance. However, levels of connectivity and infrastructure are higher for these countries (Canada 7.9/10; USA 8.1/10). This suggests that even though the economics and technological infrastructure are very different in India from Canada or the USA, this is not enough to instill lower perceptions of website design for users in India. Further, Japan is the country with the highest score for uncertainty avoidance and is high in connectivity and infrastructure (7.5/10). However, for all four design constructs Japan scores lower than Mexico and Chile who are also high in uncertainty avoidance, but lower in connectivity and infrastructure (Mexico 3.6/10; Chile 4.6/10). Despite the higher levels of technology in Japan, this is not sufficient to elevate user design perceptions, and we may therefore deduce this is related to the high level of uncertainty avoidance in that country.Users were also evaluated for their perceptions of Website Trust and Transaction Security, and overall the results are parallel to expectations for both constructs. That is, Canadians and Americans had the highest user perceptions for Website Trust and Transaction Security. Japan has the lowest score for Website Trust which is in alignment with expectations of a country high on uncertainty avoidance, and supports earlier research by Cyr et al. (2005) who found Japanese to be least trusting over Canadians, Americans or Germans. However, one unexpected outcome is that Japanese users score highest for Transaction Security. In this particular instance, it may be that although users do not trust the website, the higher level of connectivity and infrastructure is a signal to users in Japan that website transactions are relatively secure.While the cultural classifications from Hofstede (1980) have been used by a variety of researchers including those who study website design, a fruitful addition to the current research is the evaluation of country responses based on Clustering Theory and the GLOBE study. Based on the GLOBE cultural clusters predicted results were obtained – now in a new context of website design. That is, across all six constructs investigated, for the North American and Latin American clusters there are no significant differences. These are remarkable findings, given the number of cross-country comparisons involved. In the Confusion Asian cluster, Japan and China are likewise similar although there are differences for Transaction Security and Navigation Design. These differences may be related to the variances in country connectivity, infrastructure and the digital environment as speculated earlier. Based on these results, it would appear the GLOBE clusters afford a useful conceptual classification system for use in future research for assessing between country differences related to website design or other topics.To summarize, to my knowledge this is the first research study to investigate user perceptions of website design in the context of both cultural differences for uncertainty avoidance, as well as related to institutional parameters such as institutional trust and social capital stemming from rankings that include country connectivity and infrastructure. One important theoretical implication that emanates from this research is that culture is a more important predictor of user perceptions than institutionalized parameters (i.e. connectivity and infrastructure). More specifically, if we consider the cultural clusters as introduced by House et al. (2002), of 60 comparisons, 58 conform to cultural predictions. Likewise, referring to mean scores for each construct, Canada and the USA (both highest in uncertainty avoidance) have the highest scores for all constructs across all countries with only two exceptions (Japan for Security and Chile for trust) as outlined in Table 5. Alternately, for the two countries both moderate in uncertainty avoidance (Germany and China) but with widely different institutional parameters – they score similarly – indicating culture to be the stronger predictor of user perceptions.Regardless of the preceding, it is also possible these institutionalized parameters do have some impact such as is the case with transaction security. This notion is supported by Steenkamp and Geyskens (2006) who implied that country characteristics can affect perceived website value. So while there are some indications that social capital and institutionalized country characteristics may affect user perceptions of website design – there is much scope for other researchers to investigate this further – not only in the context of website design, but in other areas as well. A second important development from this research is the strong clustering of countries with respect to website design. This has important implications for companies who wish to provide users with culturally appropriate Web content based on country clusters, as opposed to individual country specifications.The current research reinforces that attention is paid by Web designers and strategists to different user perceptions in different countries (as per Barber and Badre 1998, Singh et al. 2003, Vyncke and Brengman 2010) – especially in higher uncertainty avoidance countries where perceptions of website design are lower than in lower uncertainty avoidance cultures. Concerning the design features investigated in this research, for Information Content and Information Design, online product information should be accurate, complete, detailed, and logically presented and organized. More specifically, in high uncertainty avoidance cultures, local terminology, customer testimonials, company information, and toll-free numbers to access additional information are important (Singh et al. 2003). In addition, using headers and sub-headers on webpages to break up text and product information assists the user to find relevant information.Regarding Navigation Design, consistency of page layout and quick access to navigational features are universally desirable. In the current study, Japanese users had the lowest perceptions for Navigation Design, indicating effective and efficient navigation would be very important for this group. Navigation is highly related to trust for Chinese (Cyr 2008), which suggests users from this country expect websites that are transparent and clear. In China, links to local websites and guided navigation are desirable (Singh et al. 2003). To encourage ease of navigation the search bar should be obvious. In addition, browsing refinements can be offered by category or subcategory. For instance, filters of a product line will allow the user to compare products, and quickly generate pages of relevant items. More specifically, if an online vendor is selling shoes, then navigation can lead to attribute refinements such as color, shoe size, etc.Visual Design preferences likewise vary across countries, and visual components and aesthetics of the website are especially important for Chinese and Japanese (Cyr et al. 2005, Cyr 2008). Hence in higher uncertainty avoidance countries, website designers should pay particular attention to colors, images, shapes and overall graphical look of websites. Color is important and conveys meaning to users. For example, on banking websites in India colors often used are red and saffron (Smith et al. 2004). The State Bank of India uses Gandhi’s image and the map of India to elicit patriotic feeling and to signify that the bank serves all Indians whether in India or abroad (Smith et al. 2004). High quality images are important, and for products it is useful to include product shots from multiple angles. Provide photos with different color combinations. Show clothing on models to create image appeal.Website localization carries a substantial cost to companies, particularly those companies which operate in multiple locations (i.e. in 2012 Coca-Cola had as many as 157 websites). Based on the current data, and with respect to the GLOBE clusters, there are certain countries where user perceptions are the same as within the North American or the Latin American clusters. Coca Cola segments its markets into six geographical regions with multiple websites in each: North America (4), Latin America (22), Europe (35), Eurasia (32), Africa (52), and Asia Pacific (12). While some adaptation within a cluster is necessary such as language, other elements may be common such as color preferences and only require minimal modification. Hence, “cluster localization” serves the purpose of providing some degree of cultural adaptation to user groups, but with a substantial cost savings to online vendors over deep localization procedures.A large and diverse sample population is a positive feature of this investigation. Data was collected in eight countries with a total of 1156 participants. While data might have been collected on espoused cultural values of each respondent, the countries in this sample are chosen for their diversity. Further, the methodology of using pre-determined countries as a proxy for culture is consistent with previous research, including research on website design (e.g. Gefen and Heart 2006, Jarvenpaa et al. 1999, Simon 2001). As outlined in Appendix A, countries included in this research are representative of both higher and lower levels of connectivity and infrastructure as well as e-business adoption. Rather than a student only population, participants are from a variety of sources including companies, universities, and institutes which offers generalizability of the findings. However, a limitation of the sample is that some of the countries had relatively small sample sizes with the smallest number of participants being 48 in Chile. Additionally, the sample is not truly random since an online survey was circulated through various avenues with no possibility to determine the number of respondents compared to the number of non-respondents. Finally, a single-method survey was used to collect data, rather than a multiple methods approach. In the future, similar research would benefit from the use of multiple methodologies including questionnaires, eye-tracking, and interviews.In terms of limitations to the research, a single vendor website (SonyStyle) was used. In addition, a single task was used (i.e. searching for a cell phone for hypothetical purchase on a product-based website). No actual purchase was required. While this procedure is consistent with other e-commerce research, this may limit transferability of the findings to actual e-commerce situations. In the future, similar research could be expanded to include a greater variety of tasks on both service and product websites, and a larger sample of websites.Based on the successful use of the GLOBE clusters for country comparisons in this study, it is recommended that additional studies concerned with culture likewise adopt this framework. Further, it would be interesting to utilize the country indicators (in Appendix A) to further explore similarities and differences between countries score highly on Internet use, connectivity and infrastructure, digital legal environment, and consumer and business electronic adoption with those countries with less favorable scores. Since this is the first study to examine Hofstede’s cultural dimensions in conjunction with institutionalized country conditions, it is suggested that future research examine additional topics using this dual framework.