@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Security optimal power flow considering loading margin stability using hybrid FFA–PS assisted with brainstorming rules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A planning strategy based hybrid method using FFA and PS algorithm is proposed.A dynamic process search inspired from brainstorming process associated to FFA and PS is proposed.Three objective functions are considered: fuel cost, power loss, voltage deviation and system loadability.Robustness of the proposed strategy (FFA–PS) is tested and validated on IEEE 14-Bus and IEEE 30-Bus.An efficient strategy for installation of SVC compensator based voltage stability is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal power flow,Firefly algorithm,Pattern search,Brainstorming process,Objective functions,SVC,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new power system planning strategy which combines firefly algorithm (FFA) with pattern search algorithm (PS). The purpose is minimizing total fuel cost, total power loss and reducing total voltage deviation, with the objective of enhancing the loading margin stability and consequently the power system security. A new interactive and simple mechanism, inspired in brainstorming process, is proposed that allows FFA and PS algorithms to explore new regions of the search space. In this study the Static VAR compensator (SVC) is modeled and integrated in an efficient location which is chosen considering the voltage stability index. The proposed algorithm is interactive and tries to optimize a set of control variables at the same time, namely, active power generations, voltage of generators, tap transformers, and the reactive power of shunt compensators to optimize three objective functions such as: fuel cost, total power loss and total voltage deviation. These variables are optimized using a flexible interactive and competitive search mechanism. The proposed planning strategy has been examined and applied to two practical test systems IEEE 14-Bus and IEEE 30-Bus. Simulation results confirm the effectiveness of this hybrid strategy for solving the security optimal power flow.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The security optimal power flow (OPF) is the most important tool for power system planning, operation and control. The main objective of OPF tool which considered as an important sub problem of power system planning is to determine the optimal operation state of multi dispersed units by optimizing multi control variables related to a specified objective function considering multi practical constraints. Active power loss, voltage deviation and voltage stability are three important tasks which interest expert specialized in power system planning operation and control. The optimization of these objective functions affect directly and indirectly the dynamic performances of practical power system [1]. Many research results confirmed that optimization of these objective functions is a complex multi objective problem which require robust and flexible strategy to enhance the performance of practical power systems under normal and at critical situations. The standard OPF problem has been widely solved using several classical mathematical optimization techniques such as linear and non linear programming (LP, NLP) [2], gradient based method [3], quadratic programming (QP) [4], Newton-based method [5,6], and interior point methods [7]. A recent survey of the major contributions related to this category based mathematical methods is presented in [8]. Based on a large number of papers proposed to solving various problems related to power system planning, operation and control, we can conclude that the deterministic optimization methods converge to local optimal solution and can not guarantee global solution when considering practical generator constraints (Prohibited zones, valve point effect, and multi-fuel options) due to sensibility to initial conditions and to the form of the objective function. These major drawbacks have contributed to the development of new stochastic based optimization techniques such as, evolutionary programming [9], improved evolutionary programming [10], enhanced genetic algorithm (EGA) [11], improved genetic algorithms (IGA) [12], adapted genetic algorithm (AGA) [13], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [14,15], differential evolution (DA) [16–19], improved harmony search algorithm [20], Imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA) [21], gravitational search algorithm (GSA) [22], artificial bee colony algorithm (ABC) [23,24], firefly algorithm (FFA) [25,26], brain storm optimization algorithm (BSA) [27], Application of brainstorming strategy for enhancement dynamic teaching based LMD education system [28]. In general view, we can conclude that the main difference between these methods is related to the robustness of their mechanism search determined by the number of parameters to be adjusted, an optimization method with simple and interactive mechanism search and with less parameter to control is preferred.Recently, many research results clearly confirmed that each global optimization method has its advantages and drawbacks. Hybrid methods considered as an alternative and robust solution to combine different methods. In the recent literature various hybrid methods have been proposed and applied with success for solving many complex and combined problems related to power system planning, operation and control, some of these techniques are, Evolving ant direction differential evolution [29], A modified teaching–learning based optimization [30], hybrid differential evolution (DE) with particle swarm optimization (PSO) [31], hybrid fuzzy particle swarm optimization and Nedler–Mead algorithm (HFPSO-NM) [32], chaotic improved PSO [33], hybrid imperialist competitive-sequential quadratic programming (HIC-SQP) algorithm [34], A modified shuffle frog leaping algorithm [35], new modified and hybrid modified imperialist competitive algorithms [36], adaptive biogeography based predator–prey optimization technique [37], self-evolving brain-storming inclusive teaching–learning-based algorithm [38], A hybrid GA–PS–SQP [39] and hierarchical adaptive PSO [40]. As well described in the literature review, the structure of these methods is based on how adjusting dynamically their parameters and on combination between various methods to exploit efficiently the best performances of each method to achieve the global solution at a reduced time. The main idea introduced in the mechanism search of these methods is to provide an intelligent adaptive and flexible communication process to guide efficiently the processes search during exploration and exploitation stages.Flexible AC transmission Systems (FACTS) first introduced by Hingorani and Gyugyi [41], is relatively considered as one of recent technology installed in many practical electrical networks. FACTS technology is an alternative solution to ensure balance between source production and power demand particularly at loading margin stability. In recent years many types of controllers based FACTS devices such as: shunt Controllers (SVC, STATCOM), series Controllers (TCSC, SSSC) and hybrid Controllers (UPFC) integrated in the electricity market to improve the performances of the practical power system [42]. In the literature many techniques and strategies have been proposed to enhance the security optimal power flow considering the integration of FACTS devices [43]. An efficient multi objective strategy based differential evolution considering multi FACTS technology is presented in [44]. Venkateswara Rao and Nagesh Kumar [45] proposed a BAT search algorithm based optimal power flow for generation reallocation with unified power flow controller, in [46] a multi-objective adaptive clonal selection algorithm is proposed for the solving optimal power flow considering multi-type FACTS devices and load uncertainty, in [47] a hybrid bacterial foraging and Nelder–Mead algorithm is adapted and applied for optimal location of series FACTS devices for congestion management, and in [48] a strategy based PSO is proposed for dynamic control of UPFC to enhance power system security.Firefly algorithm is one of the recent metaheuristic optimization methods proposed by author in [25], this method adapted and applied by researchers to solve many complex problems related to power system planning operation and control. In this work FFA is preferred for its simplicity to adapt and program and has a few parameters to adjust. Pattern search algorithm is also an efficient evolutionary technique, adapted and applied with success to solving many practical problems related to power system operation and control. The brainstorming concept first introduced by Osborn [49], the rules proposed by Osborn demonstrated that brainstorming process was more effective in generating new ideas than individuals working. The adaptation of brainstorming principle and rules is firstly developed and formulated as an optimization problem by Shi in 2011 [27]. To date, the BSO algorithm has not been applied intensively to solving the complex problems related to power system planning and control, very recently in [50], Rezaee Jordehi proposed an efficient algorithm based brain storm optimization algorithm (BSOA) for optimal location and control of FACTS devices to improve various objective functions such as power loss and voltage deviation and overload minimization, the results achieved are important and competitive.In this work and to enhance the performances of the two standard optimization methods (FFA and PS), the brainstorming rules are adapted and used to assist FFA and PS during search process, to exploit with efficiently the search space. In this study, FFA is considered as a global optimization technique and the PS is adapted to accomplish the task of local search, the main particularity of the proposed combined optimization method is related to the flexible communication rules inspired from brainstorming process. The proposed interactive hybrid approach applied to optimize three important objective functions: reduce the total fuel cost, the total power loss and voltage deviations by considering the integration of one SVC compensator at efficient location, The performances of the proposed planning strategy in term of solution quality and convergence characteristic have been tested on the two practical test systems, IEEE 14-Bus and IEEE 30-Bus at normal condition and considering loading margin stability.Security optimal power flow is a fundamental sub-problem of power system planning, the main objective of this strategy is to find the optimal settings of control variables in terms of one or more objective function while satisfying operating equality and inequality constraints [1]. Fig. 1shows the strategy of security OPF, the basic structure of security OPF may be presented and described as follows:•Optimization method: represent the core of the optimization strategy, it depends on the complexity of the problem to be solved, the final results achieved depend on the particularity of the algorithm used such as standard algorithms (GA, PSO, ABC), or hybrid method, how the initial parameters are chosen and adjusted during search process, how the control variables are organized, and how the global method is hybridized with other methods.Power flow (PF) based Newton–Raphson algorithm: this second task works in coordination with the optimization method, the main role of power flow is to determine the state variables and violation of constraints. The equality constraints are verified using PF algorithm.Objective functions: in general, the well known objective functions to be optimized are: fuel cost, emission, power losses, voltage deviation, and voltage stability, these objective functions are optimized individually or simultaneously.Communication process: is related to the interaction between global and local optimization methods to enhance the solution quality and convergence characteristics. The communication process depends on the global and local optimization methods used.In this work, we have used two simple optimization methods, the FFA considered as a global optimization method adapted to achieve the exploration phase and the PS considered as a local search mechanism coordinated to enhance the exploitation search, these two methods are coordinated using flexible practical rules inspired from brainstorming process.In general the basic mathematical formulation of security OPF considering one or more objective function may be represented using the following generalized expressions:(1)MinimizeJi(x,u)i=1,…,NobjSubject to:(2)g(x,u)=0(3)h(x,u)≤0where J is the ith objective function, and Nobjis the number of objectives. g is the equality constraints, h is the system operation and security inequality constraints. x represents the vector of state variables, u represents the vector of control variables. In general, the state vector includes bus voltage angles δ, load bus voltage magnitudes VL, slack bus real power generation Pgsand generator reactive power Qg.(4)x=[δ(1,…,NL),VL(1,…,NL),Pgs,Qg(1,…,NG)]TThe control variable vector consists of real power generation Pg, generator terminal voltage Vg, shunt capacitors/reactors Bsh, shunt dynamic compensators (SVC)Bsvcand transformers tap ratio t.(5)u=[Pg(1,…,NG−1),Vg(1,…,NG),Bsh(1,…,Nsh),Bsvc(1,…,Nsvc),t(1,…,Nt)]TMinimization of fuel cost is an important task for expert and considered as an important index for power system planning and operation. The simplified objective function f is the total generation cost expressed as a quadratic function, mathematically formulated as follows:(6)J1(x,u)=minfi=min∑i=1NG(ai+biPgi+ciPgi2)where NG is the number of thermal units, Pgiis the active power generation at unit i and ai, biand ciare the cost coefficients of the ith generator.The objective function associated to the minimization of the total voltage deviation at all load buses is described by the following equation:(7)J2(x,u)=minVD=min∑i∈NL|Vi−Vref|where Vrefis the desired voltage at all load buses.The objective function associated to the total active power loss to be optimized is formulated by the following equation:(8)J3(x,u)=minPloss=min∑k=1NLgk[(tkVi)2+Vj2−2tkViVjcosδij]The equality constraints g(x) of the OPF reflect the physical equilibrium of active and reactive power between production and demand at all buses. In other term, the principle of energy conservation must be verified at each bus. The following two generalized equations reflect the equilibrium and conservation of active and reactive power at all buses:(9)Pgi−Pdi−Vi∑j=1NVj(gijcosδij+bijsinδij)=0(10)Qgi−Qdi−Vi∑j=1NVj(gijsinδij−bijcosδij)=0where N is the number of buses, Pgi, Qgiare the active and the reactive power generation at bus i; Pdi, Qdiare the real and the reactive power demand at bus i; Vi, Vj, the voltage magnitude at bus i, j, respectively; δijis the phase angle difference between buses i and j respectively, gijand bijare the real and imaginary part of the admittance (Yij).These are the sets of physical constraints associated to all operational power system elements (generator, transformer, lines, and compensators), from production source to load bus. Generally, these constraints are organized and mathematically expressed as follows:•Limits on the generator bus voltage magnitude:(11)Vgimin≤Vgi≤Vgimax,i=1,2,…,NPVLimits on the output of active power generation:(12)Pgimin≤Pgi≤Pgimax,i=1,2,…,NPVLimits on the output of reactive power generation:(13)Qgimin≤Qgi≤Qgimax,i=1,2,…,NPV•Limits on the tap ratio (t) of transformer.(14)timin≤ti≤timax,i=1,2,...,NT•Parameters of shunt FACTS controllers must be restricted within their limits.(15)Xmin≤XFACTS≤XmaxEnergy produced must be delivered to consumer instantaneously and within the admissible security values. To achieve this task, the constraints on voltage at loading buses (PQ buses) and transmission line loadings are considered. These security constraints are expressed as follows:(16)Sli≤Slimax,i=1,2,…,NBR(17)VLimin≤VLi≤VLimax,i=1,2,…,NPQwhere NBR and NPQ are the number of branches and the number of loading buses respectively.In order to take in consideration the violation of security constraints, a modified fitness function is adapted using the penalty function. The inequality constraints are immerged within the objective function. The mathematical formulation of the proposed augmented objective function can be expressed by the following expression:(18)Jmod(x,u)=J(x,u)+Penalty(19)Penalty=λv∑i=1NL(VLi−VLilim)2+λQ∑i=1NG(QGi−QGilim)2+λP(PGs−PGslim)2+λbr∑i=1NBR(Sbri−Sbrilim)2whereλv, λQ, λPand λbrare penalty factor terms, if limits violation are occurred at dependent variables such as: load bus voltage magnitudes, real power generation at slack bus, reactive power generation output and transmission loading, they are fixed to their admissible limits (max or min). The following expressions illustrate the handling of constraints violations:(20)VLilim=VLiminifVLi<VLiminVLimaxifVLi>VLimax(21)QGilim=QGiminifQGi<QGiminQGimaxifGGi>QGimax(22)PGslim=PGsminifPGs<PGsminPGsmaxifPGs>PGsmax(23)Sbrilim=SbrimaxifSbri>SbrimaxThe loading margin stability is an important index which reflects the ability of the system to deliver dynamically power to consumer under critical situations. In this study loading margin stability is used to find the best location of SVC controller and also optimized in coordination with other objective functions such as power loss and voltage deviation.The loading margin stability is determined by pushing the system to point of collapse by load increase at all load bus. Based on representation shown in Fig. 2, the following equation describes the relation between load increase and loading margin stability.(24)Pnew=λ⋅Pbase(25)Qnew=λ⋅QbasewherePnew,Pbase: the new and basic active power demandsQnew,Qbase: the new and basic reactive power demandsλ: loading margin stabilityDue to economical and environment constraints, practical power system must to operate close to their admissible limits. Operator can estimate the reliability of a power system by its ability to conserve constantly acceptable voltage delivered to consumer under normal condition and also at critical situations (load increase, disturbances) [51]. L-index is one of the efficient voltage stability index proposed by Kessel and Glavitch [52]. L-index of a specified bus indicates the proximity of voltage collapse condition of that bus; L-index varies between two extreme values, 0 and 1 corresponding to no load and voltage collapse situation. The following equations describe the mathematical formulation of L-index voltage stability.First, the buses are separated into two parts: PV buses and PQ buses expressed as follows(26)ILIG=Ybus.VLVG=YLLYLGYGLYGG.VLVGwhere YLL, YLG, YGLand YGGare sub matrix of Ybus.Second, the following transformation can be written:(27)VLIG=H.ILVG=HLLHLGHGLHGG.ILVGwhere H matrix is generated by the partial inversion of Ybus, HLL, HLG, HGLand HGGare sub matrix of H, are voltage and current vector of PV buses and PQ buses, respectively.The H matrix is given as follows:(28)H=ZLL−ZLLYLGYGLZLLYGG−YGL.ZLLYLGFinally, the L-index corresponding to each bus is expressed as follows:(29)Lj=1−∑i=1NGHLGji⋅ViVjj=1,2,…,NLFor stable situations the value of Ljat each bus must be in the stable zone Lj<1.The static VAR controller (SVC) [1,57] is one of the shunt FACTS devices largely exploited and installed in the world. As well shown in Fig. 3, the basic structure of SVC consists of connected anti-parallel Thyristors to provide controllability. Air core reactors and high voltage AC capacitors are the reactive power elements used together with the Thyristor valves. The SVC has the ability to control dynamically the voltage at critical buses by exchanging dynamically capacitive or inductive reactive power with the network. Fig. 4shows the SVC steady-state model representation and basic principle of SVC.The SVC model used in this study is based on representing the shunt controller as variable susceptance; the following simplified equations describe the susceptance SVC model.(30)ISVC=jBSVCVThe reactive powerQiSVCexchanged with the bus i can be expressed as:(31)QiSVC=BiSVC⋅Vi2In the literature various techniques were proposed for optimal location, sizing and control of multi type of FACTS devices [1,57]. In this study a simple and flexible location strategy is proposed to exploit efficiently the integration of SVC controller to maximize the reduction of power losses and voltage deviation under normal and considering loading margin stability.The following steps summarize in brief the methodology of the proposed location strategy.1.Identification of critical buses based on voltage stability index.1.1Run continuation power flow to determine loading margin stabilitySort the buses based on their minimal voltage stability index value. The buses with low voltage stability index value are considered as the first best candidate for SVC location.Select the weak bus with low voltage stability index from all buses NB, based on Fig. 5, k is the candidate bus.Identify all branches associated to the first candidate bus: for example i-j-m as well shown in Fig. 6.Locate the branch associated to the related weak bus.Locate the SVC compensator in the middle of the selected branch, bus C is the best location. The flowchart for optimal location of SVC is shown in Fig. 7.Firefly research algorithm is one of the new Biology inspired metaheuristic algorithms which have recently introduced by Xin-She Yang at Cambridge University in 2007 [25]. FFA has been adapted and applied with success to solving many complex combinatorial optimization problems FFA [26]. The main advantages of the firefly algorithm is its ability to divide initial population into subgroups, this pertinent propriety is exploited in this study to enhance the robustness of the mechanism search in coordination with another local search algorithm. The basic steps of the standard FFA are presented in the schematic diagram shown in Fig. 8. The mechanism search of FFA has three particular idealized interactive rules which are inspired from flashing characteristics of real fireflies [26,53,54], the particularity of these rules described as follows:1.All fireflies are unisex, the sex of fireflies has no effect on their movement in the environment, they will move only toward more attractive and brighter ones.The degree of attractiveness of a firefly is proportional to its brightness which decreases as the distance from the other firefly increases due to the fact that the air absorbs light. If there is not a brighter or more attractive firefly than a particular one, it will then move randomly [26,53].The level of light intensity of a firefly is determined by the value of the objective function related to a specified problem.AttractivenessThe basic mathematical formulation of the attractiveness function between fireflies is expressed by the following equation:(32)β(r)=β0exp(−γrm),withm≥1,where r is the distance between any two fireflies, β0 is the initial attractiveness at r=0, and γ is an absorption coefficient which controls the decrease of the light intensity.DistanceIn the search space, the distance between two fireflies i and j at positions xi and xj can be defined by the following relation:(33)rij=||xi−xj||=∑k=1d(xi,k−xj,k)2where xi,kis the ith component of the spatial coordinate xi, xjand d is the number of dimension.MovementThe movement of a firefly i which is attracted by a more attractive firefly j is given by the following equation [53,54].(34)xit+1=xit+β0.exp(−γrij2)⋅(xj−xi)+α⋅(rand−0.5),where the first term is the current position of a firefly, the second term is used for considering a firefly's attractiveness to light intensity seen by adjacent fireflies, and the third term is for the random movement of a firefly in case there are not any brighter ones. Ii and Ij are two variables which reflect the light intensity that is associated with a specified fitness function of particles to be evaluated. The pseudo code depicted in Fig. 9gives a brief description about the standard firefly algorithm.Parameters settingsLike many metaheuristic optimization methods, choosing the initial values of parameters is an important task which affects greatly the efficiency of results and convergence behaviors of the algorithm. These parameters depend on the nature and particularity of the problem to be solved.α∈[0, 1]: is a randomization parameter determined based on the complexity of the problem to be solved.β0=1;The attractiveness or absorption coefficient γ=1.The pattern search (PS) is an evolutionary algorithm applied with success for solving a variety of optimization problems related to many constrained complex research areas. Compared to many global optimization methods, pattern search (PS) method has the advantage of being very simple in concept, easy to implement, computationally competitive, the drawback of this algorithm is related to the initial conditions, for this reason this method is very suitable to be used as a local search routine in coordination with a global optimization method [39,57].As well illustrated in Fig. 10b, the algorithm starts by establishing a set of points called mesh, around the initial point X0. [10], [01], [−10], [0−1], the determination of the next position represented by direction and step size is based on the evaluation of fitness function. Details description and graphic representation of PS and others direct search methods for unconstrained optimization may be found in [36,57].The basic research steps of PS algorithm are shown in Fig. 10a. In this study, the mesh size and the mesh expansion and contraction factors are selected as 1, 2 and 0.5 respectively; the maximum number of generation is taken between 50 and 150 based on the complexity of the problem. The vector of initial points X0 is selected and dynamically updated based on communication process during search process.The main task of this proposed hybrid method is to avoid trapping into a local optimum by dynamically balancing the exploration and exploitation capability of the two standard FFA and PS algorithms. Initially only active power of generating units are considered and optimized using FFA to explore the best sub optimal regions by identifying critical units considering three objective functions (fuel cost, power loss and voltage deviation). At a specified stage the partial solution found are communicated to PS to find new solution by optimizing two control variables associated to generating voltages, tap transformers and reactive power of fixed shunt compensators and SVC Controllers. The search processes is repeated until a number of minimum specified trails are reached.As well illustrated in Fig. 11, the following points describe briefly the methodology of the proposed combined algorithm.1.Identification of critical buses.Specify the objective function to be optimized: F1 (fuel cost), F2 (power loss) or F3 (voltage deviation). Generate initial sub-optimal solution, this task achieved using FFA12.1Active power generation is considered as the first control variable to be optimized to minimize individually F1, F2 and F3Save the sub-optimal solution corresponding to each objective function.The optimal active power generation is fixed: Run PS, the following control variables are to be optimized:3.1Voltage of generation unitsSave the new best solutionRemark: the main advantage of the proposed flexible strategy is that expert can choose the sequence of control variables associated to each optimization stage, the following description are a sample of basic and possible combination.–FFA1, FFA2, FFA3 or FFA2, FFA3, FFA1 or FFA3, FFA1, FFA2The optimal active power generation and voltage of generators are fixed: Run FFA2: the following control variables are to be optimized:4.1Tap transformer,Save the new best solutionThe optimal active power generation and voltage of generators, tap transformer are fixed: Run FFA3: the following control variables are to be optimized:5.1Reactive power of SVC compensator.Save the new best solution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
