@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Applying particle swarm optimization-based decision tree classifier for cancer classification on gene expression data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study proposes a new method for gene selection utilizing PSO combined with a decision tree.Experiment on 11 gene expression cancer datasets from Taiwan Cancer Registry and GEMS is done.We investigate a variety of cancers: bladder, blood, bone marrow, brain, breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung.The proposed method outperforms SVM, SOM, ANN, and C4.5 decision tree by two-way ANOVA analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cancer classification,Gene expression,Particle swarm optimization,C4.5,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe application of microarray data for cancer classification is important. Researchers have tried to analyze gene expression data using various computational intelligence methods.PurposeWe propose a novel method for gene selection utilizing particle swarm optimization combined with a decision tree as the classifier to select a small number of informative genes from the thousands of genes in the data that can contribute in identifying cancers.ConclusionStatistical analysis reveals that our proposed method outperforms other popular classifiers, i.e., support vector machine, self-organizing map, back propagation neural network, and C4.5 decision tree, by conducting experiments on 11 gene expression cancer datasets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid development of microarray technology enables researchers to analyze thousands of genes simultaneously and obtain important information about the cell's function. This particular information can be used in cancer diagnosis and prognosis. However, given the characteristics of gene expression data (i.e., high dimension, high noise, and small sample size), the gene selection process remains challenging. A method for choosing the important subset of genes with high classification accuracy is needed to overcome this challenge. Such method would not only save computational costs, but will also enable doctors to identify a small subset of biologically relevant genes with certain cancers and target only a small number of genes in designing less expensive experiments [25]. Moreover, a highly accurate method can also assist in early diagnosis and drug discovery for cancer patients [2].The method of gene selection generally falls into one of the following three categories: the filter, wrapper, and embedded approaches. The filter approach collects the intrinsic characteristics of genes in discriminating the targeted phenotype class and usually employs statistical methods, such as mutual information, statistical tests (-test, -test), and Wilcoxon's rank test, to directly select feature genes [47]. This approach is easily implemented, but ignores the complex interaction between genes. The “wrapper” approach [41] aims at selecting a subset of feature genes, typically with an induction algorithm to search for an initial gene subset which can then be used for further evaluating new feature gene subsets. The wrapper method is usually superior to the filter one since it involves inter-correlation of individual genes in a multivariate manner. The wrapper method can automatically determine the optimal number of feature genes for a particular classifier. The embedded method is similar to the wrapper method, while multiple algorithms can be combined in the embedded method to perform feature subset selection (Kahavi and John, 1997; [26]). In the embedded method, genetic algorithms (GAs) [58] are generally used as the search engine for feature subset, while other classification methods, such as KNN/GA (K nearest neighbors/genetic algorithms) [23], GA-SVM (genetic algorithms-support vector machine) [24], and so forth, are used to select feature subset. Estimation of distribution algorithm (EDA) [42] is a general framework of GA. Compared to traditional GA that employs crossover and mutation operators to create new population, EDA creates new populations by using a statistical approach to estimate the probability distribution of all promising individual solutions for the previous generation. EDA can also explicitly take into account specific interactions among the variables. When EDA is used to search for feature subsets, classification methods, such as Support vector machine (SVM) [6,36,18,59,13], which can deal with the high-dimension data in a limited sample space, can be used to select feature subsets.Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is a popular meta-heuristic algorithm developed by [19]. PSO has been widely applied in many fields to solve various optimization problems, including gene selection [25,2,8,45,30]. In PSO, a swarm of particles with randomly initialized positions would move toward the optimal position along the search path that is iteratively updated based on the best particle position and velocity. The position of a particle can be used to represent a candidate solution for the problem. Among them, C4.5 is a decision tree-based classifier listed in the top 10 most influential data-mining algorithms in the research community [55]. Decision trees were a linear method as simple to understand and interpret.This study proposes a method using the PSO algorithm to optimize the classification accuracy achieved using the C4.5 classifier (denoted as PSOC4.5). This study combines PSO for its excellent search capabilities and C4.5 for its knowledge interpretation advantage. This proposed hybrid technique combining PSO with C4.5 classifier has not been previously investigated by previous researchers. The performance of our proposed method is evaluated by testing the proposed method on 11 micro array datasets, which consist of 1 dataset from cancer patients of the National Health Insurance Research Database in Taiwan [34] and 10 from the Gene Expression Model Selector [15]. Moreover, we compare the performance of our proposed method with other well-known classifier algorithms, i.e., SVM, self-organizing map (SOM), back propagation neural network (BPNN), and C4.5. A statistical test is used to show that the proposed method outperforms other well-known classifiers in terms of classification accuracy.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the gene selection classification problem and related studies. Section 3 introduces the PSO algorithm and C4.5 classifier as the proposed approach. In Section 4, we present our experimental results and its comparison with those of other methods. Finally, we conclude the study in Section 5.DNA microarray is a technology that allows researchers to measure the expression levels of thousands of genes simultaneously in a single experiment. The method is usually used to compare the gene expression levels in tissues under different conditions, such as wild type versus mutant, or healthy versus diseased [12]. Ref. [33] propose a method for gene microarray classification that combines different feature reduction approaches for improving classification performance using a support vector machine (SVM) as our classifier. Their experiments were performed using several different datasets, and our results (expressed as both accuracy and area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve) show the goodness of the proposed approach with respect to the state of the art. Park [38] proposes a new approach for inferring combinatorial Boolean rules of gene sets for a better understanding of cancer transcriptome and cancer classification. To reduce the search space of the possible Boolean rules, we identify small groups of gene sets that synergistically contribute to the classification of samples into their corresponding phenotypic groups (such as normal and cancer).In gene selection, we select the most informative genes, which are most predictive of its related class for classification. The gene selection process includes gene filtering, gene clustering, gene ranking, and gene extraction. Some basic numerical or statistical analysis, such as t-test, F-score, and standard deviation (Std.), are applied in filtering genes at the pre-procedure. Gene selection leads to reduced dimensions and improves classification performance.Given the quantity and complexity of the gene expression data, an expert is unlikely to compute and compare the n×m gene expression matrix manually. Thus, machine learning and other artificial intelligence techniques have been widely used to classify or characterize gene expression data [5,6].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
