@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Construction projects selection and risk assessment by fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS methodologies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The key risk criteria of construction projects at King Abdulaziz University (KAU) were studied.The relative importance index (RII) was applied to prioritize the project risks.Fuzzy AHP method created favorable weights for fuzzy linguistic terms of construction project risk.The integrated hybrid methodology is fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS for risk assessment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy modeling,Fuzzy AHP and TOPSIS,Risk management,Construction project management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Construction projects are initiated in dynamic environment which result in circumstances of high uncertainty and risks due to accumulation of many interrelated parameters. The purpose of this study is to use novel analytic tools to evaluate the construction projects and their overall risks under incomplete and uncertain situations. It was also aimed to place the risk in a proper category and predict the level of it in advance to develop strategies and counteract the high-risk factors. The study covers identifying the key risk criteria of construction projects at King Abdulaziz University (KAU), and assessing the criteria by the integrated hybrid methodologies.The proposed hybrid methodologies were initiated with a survey for data collection. The relative importance index (RII) method was applied to prioritize the project risks based on the data obtained. The construction projects were then categorized by fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS methodologies. Fuzzy AHP (FAHP) was used to create favorable weights for fuzzy linguistic variable of construction projects overall risk. The fuzzy TOPSIS method is very suitable for solving group decision making problems under the fuzzy environment. It attempted to incorporate vital qualitative attributes in performance analysis of construction projects and transformed the qualitative data into equivalent quantitative measures. Thirty construction projects were studied with respect to five main criteria that are the time, cost, quality, safety and environment sustainability. The results showed that these novel methodologies are able to assess the overall risks of construction projects, select the project that has the lowest risk with the contribution of relative importance index. This approach will have potential applications in the future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Problems arising in construction projects are complicated and are usually involving massive uncertainties and subjectivities. Compared with many other industries, the construction industry is subject to more risks due to the unique features of construction activities, such as being long period projects including complicated processes, abominable environment, financial intensity and dynamic organization structures [1]. Previous researches have mainly focused on examining the impacts of risks on one aspect of project strategies with respect to cost [2], time [3] and/or safety studies [4]. Some researchers investigated risk management for construction projects in the context of a particular project phase, such as conceptual/feasibility phase [5], design phase [6], construction phase [7], rather than from the perspective of a project life cycle. Construction projects are perceived to have more inherent risks due to the involvement of many contracting parties such as owners, designers, contractors, subcontractors, suppliers, etc., in addition to the economic, political, social and cultural conditions where the project is to be undertaken [8,9]. Project risk can be defined as an uncertain event or condition. Occurrence of project risk may have positive or negative effects on one of the following project objective, such as time, cost, safety, quality or sustainability. On the other hand, risks are threats to project success [10], failure to adequately dealing with risks has been shown to cause higher costs and time overruns in construction projects [11]. Eliminating all risks in construction projects is impossible. Thus, there is a need for a formal risk assessment and control process to manage all types of risks in the projects. Risk management is a formal and orderly process of systematically classifying, identifying, assessing and responding to risks throughout the life cycle of a project to obtain the optimum degree of risk elimination, mitigation and/or control [12]. Perry and Hayes [13] presented a list of factors extracted from several sources which were divided in terms of risks retainable by contractors, consultants and clients.For classifying and managing risks effectively, many approaches have been suggested in the literature. Chapman [6] grouped risks into different subclasses which are environment, industry, client and project. Shen [3] categorized risks into six groups in accordance with the nature of the risks, i.e. financial, legal, management, market, policy and political, as well as technical risks. He stated eight major risks for project delay and ranked them based on survey questionnaires with industrial practitioners, and proposed risk management actions to cope with risks and to validate their effectiveness through individual interview surveys. Risk assessment has also numerous ways. Chen et al. [2] identified fifteen risk factors about project cost and divided them into three groups such as resources factors, management factors and parent factors. There are a number of researches on construction risks in several countries such as USA [14], Kuwait [15], China [16], and India [17].Tam et al. [4] conducted a survey to examine the elements of poor construction safety management. Patrick et al. [18] presented eighty-eight risk factors associated with construction projects objectives in terms of cost, time, quality, environment, and safety. Tah and Carr [19] proposed the application of fuzzy logic for risk assessment of construction projects. Similarly, fuzzy inference system is a very useful technique in tackling the complex problems of construction risk assessment. On the other hand, Kuchta [20] applied fuzzy numbers in risk evaluation of construction projects. Zeng et al. [21] applied fuzzy set theory to evaluate the performance of cost and time in management of construction projects’ risk management and utilization. Ebrat and Ghodsi [22] designed an adaptive neuro-fuzzy system for evaluation of project risks. Meredith and Mantle [23] discussed various qualitative and quantitative project selection models. Danila [24] surveyed some of the project selection methodologies in which various articles were discussed for the application of operation research tools in project selection. Hence, a large literature survey was carried out by Zeydan et al. [25] claiming that Multi-Criteria Decision Making techniques such as TOPSIS/fuzzy TOPSIS, AHP/fuzzy AHP and DEA do not have variety of applications in the literature.The aim of this study is to determine the key risk factors of construction projects at King Abdulaziz University (KAU), and evaluate the projects for their risks using an integrated fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS method. KAU construction projects are divided into four categories such as academic buildings, staff members housing, streets and roads of KAU campus, and all the infrastructure projects. The aim of administration is to complete all the on-hand construction projects on time with minimum cost and high quality. On the other hand, KAU construction projects are initiated in a dynamic that carry high uncertainty, and budget constraints. Therefore, managing risks in KAU construction projects is considered a very important issue to achieve the project objectives. Time, cost, quality, safety and environmental sustainability are the basic parameters for assessment of construction projects. The General administration of construction projects at the vice presidency of KAU for projects, conducted a survey to identify the elements of risks in the construction projects at KAU and identified the main factors affecting safety performance. It was determined that ‘poor safety awareness of top management, lack of training, poor safety awareness of project managers, reluctance to input resources of safety and reckless operations’ are the most important risk parameters [8]. In this study, an integrated hybrid methodology of fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS was employed for construction project risk assessment. Fuzzy AHP method was used to create favorable weights for fuzzy linguistic variable of construction project risk assessment. Fuzzy AHP method is a systematic approach to the alternative selection and justification problem by using the concepts of fuzzy set theory and hierarchical structure analysis [26]. The decision maker can specify preferences in the form of natural language or numerical value about the importance of each performance criteria. The system combines these preferences using FAHP with existing data. In the FAHP method, the pair-wise comparisons in the judgment matrix are fuzzy numbers. It uses fuzzy arithmetic and fuzzy aggregation operators, then the procedure calculates a sequence of weight vectors is used to choose the main attributes [27]. These methodologies were usually studied and applied individually in real life problems, its hybrid applications with fuzzy TOPSIS and data envelopment analysis (DEA) are seldom in literature.Construction projects overall risk assessment is a multi criteria decision making (MCDM) problem. In multi criteria decision making problems, the attribute values and the relative weights are usually characterized by fuzzy numbers [28]. A fuzzy number is a convex fuzzy set, characterized by a given interval of real numbers, each with a grade of membership between 0 and 1. The most commonly used fuzzy numbers are triangular and trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. The membership or non-membership to a fuzzy set is smooth and gradual. The membership degree of set is characterized by membership functions that give fuzzy sets flexibility in modeling with commonly used linguistic expressions, such as ‘the project risk is high’ or ‘the time duration of project is short,’ and ‘the quality of construction project is poor’ or ‘the cost of project is high’, etc. Membership function of a fuzzy set maps fuzziness of each construction project's element and range space which, in most cases, is a set to the unit interval. As it is presented in Table 1, fuzzy linguistic values are usually presented by terms in the real life, but they can also be represented by fuzzy numbers. It is usually suitable to represent the degree of subjective judgment in qualitative aspect than in crisp value [29]. The word risk is a qualitative and vague concept that can be defined by fuzzy linguistic terms rather than numerical values.The TOPSIS method can also be used to deal with fuzzy MCDM problems. Several extensions of this method have been suggested. The simplest extension is to change a fuzzy MCDM problem into a crisp one by applying the defuzzification method [29]. However, this approach can cause some information lost and gives only a crisp point estimate for the relative closeness of each criteria. Although the extension gives a fuzzy relative closeness for each criteria, it was determined that the supports of the derived fuzzy relative closeness are over exaggerated [26]. The extension principle is therefore not advisable either. To overcome these shortcomings, the TOPSIS method and the extension principle were combined to solve fuzzy MCDM problems. Zeydan, and Colpan [30] carried out a large literature survey on AHP/fuzzy AHP, TOPSIS and fuzzy TOPSIS. They have stated that there were some advantages and disadvantages when these techniques were compared with each other. It was claimed that the advantages of combined fuzzy TOPSIS and fuzzy AHP were far more than comparing the performance of these techniques. In the combined methodology, the qualitative and quantitative data relating to the criteria were collected and used as inputs into fuzzy TOPSIS approach. This approach transforms the qualitative data into some equivalent quantitative measures. The quantitative measures are used in the DEA as one of the outputs along with other quantitative data (inputs and outputs) for final evaluation and measurement [30]. In this regard, the qualitative and quantitative data related to the construction project parameters are collected and used for assessing the overall construction project risk quantitatively.The rest of paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the construction projects risk assessment methodology. This section covers fuzzy AHP analysis and the application for determination of project criteria weights. Fuzzy TOPSIS Analysis of construction projects is addressed in Section 3 which also introduces and discusses fuzzy TOPSIS and the outcomes of calculations. Section 4 presents the results of research, and the assessment outcomes of integrated fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS for construction projects overall risk assessment. Conclusion is given in Section 6. The paper ends with a list of references.In order to manage risks effectively, many approaches have been suggested in the literature for classifying risks. Shen et al. [3] developed the risk significant index which was used in this study. Wang and Liu [22] identified the level of risk by linguistic terms such as ‘low, medium and high’. They used ‘low’ for problem frequency which was considered to be of 0.1, medium means ‘medium problem frequency’ which is 0.5, and ‘high level of risk’ means ‘high problem frequency’ was considered to be 1.0. In a report prepared by KAU Vice-Presidency [8], a significant index was identified and used to quantify the rank of the risk factors, the rank of the problems related to these risk factors, and the rank of the problems that may occur between KAU projects parties. El-Sayegh [9] stated that the relative importance index (RII) might be computed and used for each survey question and should be used as the basis for its relative rank with other questions. The RII index is used to prioritize risks as well as problem areas for response analysis purposes. Eq. (1) was employed to calculate RII:(1)Relativeimportanceindex,RII=∑i=1SSiXi∑i=1SXiwhere Si: significant index assigned to ith response; Si=0.1, or 0.5, and 1 for i=1, 2, and 3, respectively, Xi: frequency of the ith response, i: response category index=1, 2, and 3 for low, medium, and high respectively [8].The higher value of RII presents an overall risk significance in the project parameters. Table 1 presents KAU top ranked relative importance index of construction projects’ risks and the linguistic terms set in certain areas and impact of them on the five main project parameters such as the time, cost, quality, safety and environment sustainability. The parameters were presented by three risk levels which are the minimum, average and maximum. A high risk or deviation in the project parameters will hinder the achievement of project objectives thoroughly. The causes of deviations and high risk can yield the followings on a project: (1) too tight project schedule due to loose planning, (2) delay due to lack of coordination between project participating parties, (3) client requests for excessive quality expectations and standards, (4) inaccurate and ineffective progress reported by other participating parties, (5) excessive bureaucratic procedures and (6) nonexistence of professional planning and feasibility studies [8]. The realization of any of the above problems leads to delay in the project schedule, causes higher costs, and low quality due to limitations in technical and financial resources. It is clear that they carry high level of risk, and the more likely it is that the implementation effort and the chance of success will fail. High level of risk exists in projects when a greater loss is possible and a project's financial impact is not significant. Project risks are evaluated by qualitative techniques rather than by quantitative approaches. The emotions and personal judgment of decision makers involve more in project assessments. Hence, these add high risk for decision making. Effective risk management method can help to realize not only the type of risks faced, but also how to manage these risks at different phases of a construction project. Risk is present in a project when key project performance indicators may not be achieved because of uncertainties and unexpected variations in the quality of project inputs [31]. Risk is considered as a negative factor in projects assessment because of its downside exposure to cost overruns, time slippage, technical performance shortfalls, and unrealized benefits [32]. Risks are the threats to project success [33]. Failure to adequately deal with risks has been shown to cause cost and time overruns in construction projects [5]. Hence, fuzzy set and systems is a very convenient method for project risk assessment and for dealing with uncertainty and fuzziness in human decision making. Baker and Reid [34] stated that fuzziness was concerned with the terms of incomplete and imprecise knowledge about the possible results of different action of courses. In this study, a hybrid fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS model were developed to assess the overall risks of construction project in which descriptions of activities and observations are imprecise, vague, and uncertain.Table 1 also shows the linguistic values defined for the rating of construction project risks and the weights of linguistic variables. It illustrates the relative importance weights of five criteria using the linguistic terms such as ‘poor, average, low, medium, high, long, etc.’ KAU administration desired to select construction projects among thirty candidates to reduce the risks of investments and make decision which is the best among many. A set of 30 projects, P={P1, P2,…,P30}, were evaluated by a committee of seven decision makers (DMs). The DMs are ‘general managers, project managers, planning and control personnel, site engineers, site managers, design engineers, and administrative personnel,’ who evaluated the projects against five criteria, i.e. time (C1), cost (C2), quality (C3), safety (C4) and environmental sustainability (C5). The hierarchical structure of decision-making process was presented in Fig. 1.Table 2illustrates the linguistic variable and their numerical intervals that present their relative importance of construction projects. The decision makers (DMs) have to use the rating system in presented in Table 2, state their judgment based on comparison of each criteria and express the ratings independently.KAU administration defines the criteria as; for instance, the ‘cost’ of a construction project means the allocated budget for the project. The project cost can be determined in ‘price escalation of material, overhead cost, inflation, excessive approval procedures, etc.’ Project completion ‘time’ is the delay in the project schedule, hence it carries high risk. A construction project may be accomplished on due date or exceed the time duration of it. The project time can be found in ‘changing design from time to time, poor project management, design variations, etc.’ ‘Safety’ is related to project implementation. The project implementation may be run with poor safety equipment, lack of labor training, reckless operations, absence of security instructions, etc. Safety can be identified by poor, good, or adequate, in the fuzzy linguistic terms. ‘Quality’ is related to project performance. The project can be accomplished with different quality levels such as exceed expectation, meet expectation, or under expectation. The project quality can be affected by tight project schedule, inaccurate cost estimation, low management competency of contactor and subcontractors, etc. ‘Environment sustainability’ is related to project information. The project completion time, quality, cost, and safety can be affected by the information available before starting. One or more of the project parties may have insufficient information, or there may even lack of information about the scope of work, project site, cost reliability, etc.Fuzzy AHP, and a fuzzy extension of AHP are used to solve the hierarchical rating of fuzzy MCDM problems. AHP itself involves the principles of decomposition, pairwise comparisons, and priority vector generation and synthesis. In this study, fuzzy triangular numbers were determined for the construction projects risk criteria and used as weights for qualitative assessment of fuzzy TOPSIS methodology. Hence, let X={x1, x2, x3,…,xn} be a decision set, according to the method of Weerabathiran and Srinath's [35] extent analysis, each criteria in the set is taken and the extension analysis was performed respectively. Therefore, m number of extent analysis value for each object can be obtained by the application of Eq. (2).(2)Mi1,Mi2,…,Mim,i=1,2,…,n,whereMij(j=1, 2,…,M) are triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs). The steps of Weerabathiran and Srinath's [35] extent analysis can be given as in the following equations. Hence, the value of fuzzy synthetic extent with respect to the ith object is defined by Eq. (3).(3)Si=∑j=1mMij⊗∑i=1n∑j=1mMij−1=W=[w1,w2,…,wn]∑j=1mMijcan be calculated by fuzzy addition operation of m extent analysis values for a particular matrix. The matrix is given in Eq. (4), then the inverse of the vector is computed, and the Sivalues is obtained.(4)∑j=1mMij=∑j=1mlj,∑j=1mmj,∑j=1mujLet M1=(l1, m1, u1) and M2=(l2, m2, u2) be two triangular fuzzy numbers, the degree of possibility of M2=(l2, m2, u2)≥M1=(l1, m1, u1) can be defined as follows:V(M2≥M1)=supy≥x[min(μM1(x),μM2(y))], and the membership degree of possibility can be expressed as it is given in Eq. (5).(5)V(M2≥M1)=hgt(M1∩M2)=μM2(d)=1ifm2≥m10ifl1≥u2l1−u2(m2−u2)−(m1−l1)otherwiseHence, as it appears in Fig. 2, if ‘Cost’ is a fuzzy criteria, it can be represented by a fuzzy linguistic set such as {low, average, high, very_high}. For instance, the membership degree of fuzzy term ‘High’ can be constructed as follows.μHigh(d)=0,m2≤0.7(m2−0.7)/0.04,0.7≤m2≤0.74(0.74−m2)/0.04,0.74≤m2≤0.780,0.78≤m2The MFs of the other fuzzy sets can also be established in the same way to define the membership degrees of construction projects criteria. For instance, if the cost is 0.72$, then the degree of membership will be 0.5 (μhigh(0.72)=0.5), if the cost is 0.74$, then the degree of membership will be 1 (μhigh(0.74)=1), and so on.Fig. 2 depicts the presentation of Eq. (5) where ‘d’ is the ordinate of the highest intersection point between the membership degreesμM1andμM2of construction project parameters. To compare M1 and M2, both the values of V(M1≥M2) and V(M2≥M1) are needed.The possibility degree for a convex fuzzy number greater than k convex fuzzy Mi(i=1, 2,…,k) numbers is defined by the following equations.V(M≥M1,M2,…,Mk)=V[(M≥M1)]and(M≥M2)and…and(M≥Mk)]=minV(M≥Mi),i=1,2,…,kAssume that d(Ai)=minV(Si≥Sk) for k=1, 2,…,n; k≠i, then the weight vector is given by W′=(d′(C1), d′(C2),…,d′(Cn))T, where Ci(i=1, 2,….,n) are the weight of each criteria for construction projects. After normalization, the normalized weight vectors of each criteria can be defined as follows:W=(d(C1),d(C2),…,d(Cn))TThe DMs ‘general managers, project managers, planning and control personnel, site engineers, site managers, design engineers, and administrative personnel,’ evaluated the projects against five criteria. As it is given in Table 3, the pair-wise comparison matrix for the main attributes was established. The hierarchical structure of this decision problem was shown in Fig. 1, the DMs used the linguistic weights to assess the importance of the criteria. In order to build the pair-wise comparison matrix, the FAHP methodology for the determination of criteria weights was applied according to the AHP analysis [36,37]. The last step of fuzzy AHP is the pair-wise comparison matrix for the criteria weights as fuzzy triangular number was established in Table 2. The values of fuzzy synthetic extents with respect to the criteria weights were determined by Eq. (2) and the assessments of DMs were presented in Table 3. It shows the original assessment information provided by the seven DMs, where the aggregated fuzzy numbers are obtained by averaging the opinions of the DMs.Eqs. (2)–(4) were employed for calculations of fuzzy synthetic extents with respect to the main attributes. The outcome SC1, was calculated in details and presented below. The other extents can also be calculated in the same way.∑j=15M15=1+1+3+5+5=15,∑j=15M25=1+3+5+7+7=23,∑j=15M35=1+5+7+9+9=31∑i=1n∑j=1mMij−1=[15+11+⋯+3.53+2.73,23+16.33+⋯+3.68+1.99,31+22.2+⋯+4.45+1.70]−1∑i=1n∑j=1mMij−1=[72.69,54.53,38.59]−1=[1/72.69,1/54.53,1/38.59]SC1=∑j=1mMij⊗∑i=1n∑j=1mMij−1=(15,23,31)⊗(1/72.69,1/54.53,1/38.59)=(0.2,0.42,0.80)The following outcomes of fuzzy synthetic extents were obtained as the results of fuzzy extents analysis. These synthesis extents are fuzzy criteria weights of construction projects. They were determined for the construction projects risk and used for qualitative assessment of fuzzy TOPSIS methodologySC1=(15, 23, 31)⊗(1/72.69, 1/54.53, 1/38.59)=(0.2, 0.42, 0.80)SC2=(11, 16.33, 22.20)⊗(1/72.69, 1/54.53, 1/38.59)=(0.15, 0.30, 0.56)SC3=(6.33, 9.53, 13.34)⊗(1/72.69, 1/54.53, 1/38.59)=(0.09, 0.17, 0.35)SC4=(3.53, 3.68, 4.45)⊗(1/72.69, 1/54.53, 1/38.59)=(0.05, 0.07, 0.12)SC5=(2.73, 1.99, 1.70)⊗(1/72.69, 1/54.53, 1/38.59)=(0.04, 0.04, 0.05)As it is presented in Table 4, triangular fuzzy numbers were determined and they will be used as the weight of qualitative criteria for fuzzy TOPSIS methodology.The TOPSIS method was proposed by Hwang and Yoon [38] as a multi criteria decision making method to identify a solution from a finite set of points. The chosen points are the ‘shortest’ points in distance from the positive ideal and the ‘farthest’ points in distance from the negative ideal solution. A wide variety of studies on TOPSIS method might be found in the literature [39]. However, the aim of this study is to focus on the fuzzy TOPSIS method as the continuation of Fuzzy AHP method. Fuzzy TOPSIS method is very suitable for solving the group decision making problem under the fuzzy environment. On the other hand, an integrated hybrid multi objective methodology [40] was developed based on qualitative and quantitative data of characteristics. The multi-objective approach place it in a better position compared to other systems. A computational algorithm [41] was studied by for the simulation of hierarchical graph using the minimum spanning tree and theory of percolation for structural cost minimization. This approach can also be used to evaluate the project's risk assessment. Good quality low cost initial solutions were obtained by the developed algorithm. The objective is to minimize the total cost of the path built from the minimum spanning tree. The importance of this method is to find an initial solution of percolation by links problem using the algorithm for minimum spanning tree into a disordered environment. Experimental tests are required for this approach. Design of experiment (DOE) methods is an active statistical method for the improvement and optimization of processes. In this approach, a series of tests are performed on the process, making changes in the inputs and observing the corresponding changes in the outputs. DOE involves activities in which process engineers try to reduce the variability in the output of a process by setting controllable factors to levels that minimize the variability transmitted into the responses of interest by other factors that are difficult to control during routine operation.Construction risk assessment is often conducted to determine the priority or the optimal scheme of building structures. A construction risk can be expressed as an event or hazard that could hinder the achievement of business goal or the delivery of expectations. It is defined as the product of the likelihood and consequences of an event occurring [8]. The assessment of construction risks is associated with construction structures which can be identified by linguistic terms. As it is shown in Table 1, each of the factors was broken down further into risk events chain by fuzzy linguistic terms. For each risk event, its likelihood and consequences were assessed on the basis of evidence and engineering judgment. In many real world problems, it is not easy that the DMs can provide precise numerical judgments about the likelihood and consequences of each risk event. Therefore, fuzzy linguistic variables and their term set were employed in this study.Academic buildings, staff members housing, streets and roads in KAU campus, and all the infrastructure construction projects are carrying risk event, and are the main construction projects evaluated in this study. The DMs have to come a conclusion for their decisions using importance level of criteria ratings. The consequences ratings as well as the weights of each criteria were assessed independently, and the decision matrix was presented in Tables 3 and 4. The aggregated opinion of decision makers was considered to be equally important and considered as a multi criteria decision (MCDM) problem. As it was stated, the consequences of MCDM problem with m alternatives (P1, P2,…,Pm) was evaluated by seven DMs, based on five criteria (C1, C2,…,Cn), was assessed by matrix given in Eq. (6). The elements xijof the matrix indicate the performance rating of the ith alternative project, Pi, with respect to the nth DM, the Cn.(6)D=C1C2…CnP1P2⋮Pmx11x12…x1nx21xn…x2n⋮⋮⋱⋮xm1xm2…xmnThe method of Hwang and Yoon [38] was presented briefly in this study as a series of successive steps. In the first step, the normalized ratings were calculated by using Eq. (7) which was used for vector normalization and for computing rij. The results of calculations were presented in Table 6.(7)rij=xij∑i=1mxij2i=1,2,…,m;j=1,2,…,nIn Table 7, the weighted normalized ratings were determined. The weighted normalized value (vij) was calculated by vij=wj·rijwhere i=1, 2,…,m; j=1, 2,…,n and wjare the weight of the jth attribute. Then, the positive ideal and negative ideal solutions were determined. The positive ideal solution (A+) and the negative ideal solution (A−) were determined in terms of weighted normalized values:A+=[MAXI(VI1),maxI(VI2),…,maxi(VIN)](v1+,v2+,…,vn+)A−=[MINI(VI1),minI(VI2),…,minI(VIN)](v1−,v2−,…,vn−)Separation measures were calculated after this step. The distance between alternatives was measured by their Euclidean distance. The separation of each alternative from the positive ideal solution A+ was determined by Eq. (8). The outcomes of fuzzy positive ideal solution were presented in Table 8.(8)di+=∑j=1n(vij−vj+)2i=1,2,…,mSimilarly, separation from the negative ideal solution A− is calculated by Eq. (9).(9)di−=∑j=1n(vij−vj−)2i=1,2,…,mThen, the closeness coefficient was calculated for each alternative project by Eq. (10).(10)Ci*=di−di++di−i=1,2,…,mNormally, the larger the index, the better the performance of the alternative is. However, the alternatives were ranked in descending order in this study. As far as the risk is concern, high closeness coefficient means high risk. Hence, selection of low risk project becomes easy among the alternatives.In this study triangular fuzzy numbers were employed for evaluation of alternative ratings and criteria weights. The relative importance and the ratings of criteria were considered as linguistic values. As it shown in Tables 5 and 6, the linguistic values’ importance weights and ratings were expressed by positive triangular fuzzy numbers. Table 5 presents the linguistic values for each criteria allocated by each of the decision makers. The aim of this step is to transform the qualitative variables into a single quantitative variable as an output parameter.As it is presented in Table 5, the decision makers use fuzzy linguistic term sets and ratings to evaluate alternatives with respect to each criteria. The DMs are ‘general manager (A1), project managers (A2), planning and control personnel (A3), site engineers (A4), site managers (A5), design engineers (A6), and administrative personnel (A7).’ They evaluated the projects against five criteria, i.e. time (C1), cost (C2), quality (C3), safety (C4) and environmental sustainability (C5). For instance, if general manager (A1) makes a decision of ‘high (H)’ for decision criteria (C3), the membership function is defined by (7, 9, 10) which is a set of fuzzy triangular numbers. Similarly, the other DMs can make their own decision in a similar manner for all the decision criteria.Fuzzy relations map constraints of one universe to another universe, through the Cartesian product of the two universes [42]. However, the strength of the relation between ordered pairs of the universes is not measured with the characteristic function, but rather with a membership function expressing various degrees of strength of the relations. Hence, a fuzzy relation R is mapping from the Cartesian space, for five criteria (C1, C2,…,C5) by seven DMs to the fuzzy interval of [0,1], where the strength of the mapping is expressed by the membership function for ordered pairs from the universes, or μR(C1,…,C5). We employed max–min compositional rule of inference to develop fuzzy decision matrix in this study.The compositional rule of inference was proposed by Zadeh [43] and was used to derive conclusions from the fuzzy rule sets. In fuzzy relations, different decision trees can be combined through a compositional rule of operations. The best known compositional inference system is the max–min compositional rule approach which is employed in this study. Hence, letμ(Pi)={μC1,…,μC5i}, be the triangular membership degree of construction project risk decided by the decision makers. Eq. (11) presents the fuzzy relations map of one universe to another universe, through the Cartesian product of the two universes. The triangular membership function of construction project risk is a multi input single output (MISO) process. The term sets determined for construction project risk for overall fuzzy linguistic criteria are different and given in Table 5. The outcomes of max–min fuzzy compositional inference derived by employing Eq. (11) may be expressed as a unification of the individual conclusions of fuzzy control rules [44]. Table 7presents the relation of decision matrix of criteria for alternative construction projects.(11)R:μCi=∨i=17[μDM11∧μDM7]R=max(min(μDM1ΛμDM2ΛμDM3ΛμDM4ΛμDM5ΛμDM6ΛμDM7)μ(Pi)={μC1,…,μC5i}The outcomes of max–min compositional rule of inference for project#1 can be calculated by employing Eq. (11). The outcomes of calculations obtained were presented in Table 7.R(P1)=max(min((7,9,10)Λ(5,7,9)Λ(7,9,10)Λ(7,9,10)Λ(9,10,10)Λ(7,9,10)Λ(5,7,9)))=(5,7,9)The weighted and normalized membership degrees of fuzzy decision alternatives for construction projects were determined as follows. The results were presented in Table 8.μ(Pi)=μC1,…,μC5iμ(P1)=(0.10,0.29,0.77),(0.11,0.27,0.56),(0.03,0.09,0.25),(0.03,0.05,0.11),(0.01,0.02,0.03)The fuzzy decision matrix has to be reconstructed with the aggregated weights of fuzzy AHP methodology of each decision criteria. The triangular fuzzy weights were used at this step and they are accepted the weight of qualitative criteria for fuzzy TOPSIS methodology. Table 8 presents the outcomes of fuzzy weighted criteria of each construction project risk at KAU.Hence, the fuzzy ideal positive solution (FPIS) and fuzzy ideal negative solution (FNIS) can be determined as follows, respectively.P+={(1, 1, 1), (1, 1, 1), (1, 1, 1), (1, 1, 1), (1, 1, 1)}P−={(0,0,0),(0,0,0),(0,0,0),(0,0,0),(0,0,0)}The calculation of the distance of each candidate project from fuzzy positive ideal solution was presented in Table 9. Eq. (8) was employed to determine the distance between ideal solution and FPIS.Eq. (9) was employed to determine the distance between ideal solution and fuzzy negative ideal solution. The calculations of the distance of each candidate project from ideal solution and fuzzy negative ideal solution were presented in Table 10.An integrated hybrid (fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS) methodology was employed for comparing the construction projects risk and determines the projects that have the highest risk. Table 11presents the Euclidean distances of each alternative construction projects to the ideal solution. The outcomes of FPIS and FNIS were defuzzified and presented as crisp values in Table 10. This table also provides detailed calculations of construction projects risk from the reference set of points and presents the efficiency rating of the projects. This is called closeness coefficient (CC) and is calculated for each candidate projects. Eq. (10) was employed for the calculation of closeness coefficient. The outcomes of these calculations were presented as an index for decision making in Table 11. Hence, construction project # 3 (P3) was found from the weighted average of best-practice in the efficiency and got the highest weight; its closeness coefficient (CC3) is equal to 0.1765. Similarly, project # 30 (P30) got the weight of 0.1742, the project # 1 got the closeness coefficient (CC1) of 0.1679 and so on. These weights are fuzzy numbers and needs to be defuzzified in order to evaluate the efficiency rate of each alternative projects. Hence, the project accumulated the highest weight was considered to be the one which has the highest risk. It seems that project # 3 accumulated the closeness coefficient of 0.1765, hence the efficiency rate of project # 3 was considered to be 100. Similarly, the efficiency rate of project # 30 was calculated by dividing the closeness coefficient of this project (0.1742) to the reference number (closeness coefficient of project # 3). This will help the analyzer to understand and express the risk level of construction projects and the logic of comparison between projects’ risk.Fuzzy multi criteria decision making (MCDM) has wide applications in the solution of real world decision making problems. In this study, seven DMs: {general managers, project managers, planning and control personnel, site engineers, site managers, design engineers, and administrative personnel}, evaluated the construction projects against five criteria; risk of time, risk of cost, risk of quality, risk of environmental sustainability and risk of safety. As it was given in Table 1, fuzzy linguistic values were employed for identification of the risk criteria. For instance, the criteria ‘risk of time’ was defined by fuzzy terms of {short, average, long, very long}. Similarly, the criteria ‘risk of cost’ was identified by {low, average, high, very high} and the criteria ‘risk of environmental sustainability’ was defined by the fuzzy terms as {unsustainable, little-sustainable, sustainable, highly sustainable} and so on. The DMs used linguistic weights to assess the importance of the criteria. In the case that a risk event has multiple consequences, the most likely one was preferred to be used based on the DMs judgments. In this study, based on the arguments made and survey outcomes, an integrated hybrid methodology of fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS was developed for construction project risk assessment and project selection. Fuzzy AHP method was employed to create favorable weights for fuzzy linguistic variables. Fuzzy triangular numbers were used for the construction projects risk identification. These numbers were used as the weights for the qualitative assessment of fuzzy TOPSIS methodology. The fuzzy synthetic extents with respect to the criteria weights were then determined by Eq. (2) and the assessment information provided by the seven DMs were presented in Table 3 where the aggregated fuzzy numbers were obtained by averaging the opinions of the DMs. However, fuzzy TOPSIS method produced fuzzy outcomes rather than crisp point estimates. It has also been shown that the max–min compositional rule of inference method could be used with fuzzy TOPSIS method to make the best choice between the alternative judgments of DMs. This is a significant difference between the proposed fuzzy AHP and TOPSIS methods and the other applications of fuzzy AHP and TOPSIS methodologies.As it is given in Table 11, the weights obtained for each project were fuzzy numbers and they were defuzzified. The defuzzification process helped us to evaluate the efficiency rate of each alternative project. The project accumulated the highest closeness coefficient was considered to be the one which has the highest risk. The calculations reveal that project # 3 accumulated the closeness coefficient of 0.1765 which is highest and was considered as a reference number for the calculation of efficiency rate of the other projects. Hence the efficiency rate of the project # 3 was considered to be 100. This project is the highest risk category project. Similarly, the efficiency rate of project # 30 was calculated by dividing the closeness coefficient of this project (0.1742) to the reference number (closeness coefficient of project # 3). Hence, the efficiency rate of the project # 30 was determined to be 98.70. It was found that this project carried second order high risk level. The efficiency rate of project # 4 was calculated in the same way, which is 96.03, this project carried the third order high risk level. The efficiency rates of the other projects were calculated in the same way and the results of their ranking were presented in Table 11.Table 12presents the top ranked (highest RII index) risks areas and their recognized impact on five main project objectives; time, cost, quality, environmental sustainability and safety. This table depicts the relationship between the risks and the project objectives.Many of the risks and problem areas impact all the five project objectives, and they shall hinder the achievement of any of these objectives. The realization of a risk clearly leads to delays and time wastes, higher costs, and low quality due to limitations in technical and financial resources. On the other hand, the results presented in Table 12 disclose the important facts between the category of risks and their impact on project objectives. The distribution of ticks in Table 12 presents the risks influencing all five project objectives; however the major influence is on the cost, time, and environmental sustainability of the projects. These risks are always complained about by clients and contractors in Saudi Arabia. Due to cultural issues, and long decision making periods, some officers arbitrarily delays the approvals and they do not have a right attitude toward the services to the other project participants. The government can play an important role in alleviating these risks by minimizing bureaucracy and creating a very favorable environment for construction project development and hence shorten the project completion time.Similarly, Table 12 describes the risks associated with construction projects in KAU. The risks related to clients, contractors, and subcontractors/suppliers were presented. The analysis of key risks highlighted the importance of project stakeholder's roles in management of project time, cost, quality, safety and environmental sustainability in the KAU construction projects. These risks may arise at different phases of a project life cycle, and some of them are possibly concerned with more than one phase. In order to manage these risks effectively, strategies should be sought from the perspectives of project stakeholders and project life cycle.For instance, ‘Too tight project schedule due to loose planning practices’ is a risk perceived to extensively influence all project objectives, which infers that formulating an appropriate schedule at the conceptual phase is more constructive to project delivery. This risk is related to the customers. Due to the time value of money, the customers are likely to expect to complete the project as quickly as possible without considering the order of nature and construction activities.‘Schedule delay due to delays in payments’ is a project funding risk/problem. The clients should prepare a project forecast and strategic plan as practically as possible and the project designer should develop the design within the financial capabilities. A clear and appropriate plan must be envisaged, a contingency fund, and secure standby cash flow plan must be ready to schedule cost.‘Unnecessary or excessive changes in design’ has two sources of risks; variations by defective design and variations demanded by the clients. The risk and responsibility for variations resulting from the clients’ change should be taken by the clients. In order to minimize defective designs, the project designer should fully understand what the clients want, arrange comprehensive site investigation to obtain reliable design data, and establish an efficient communication plan among the designers.‘Client special requests, excessive quality expectations and standards’ can result changes in the planning, and design of construction projects. There are two main reasons of clients’ requests. The changes of mind by clients or the misinterpretations of the clients’ should endure the responsibility. Hence, a knowledgeable initial project team should be established as early as possible to define the scope of project and its functions precisely.‘High costs due to unfair or unprofessional bidding practices’ is a risk directly related to the designers’ knowledge. Selection of qualified and experienced designers, early involvement of contractors and subcontractors may help to envisage the risks and improve the accuracy of construction projects.‘Frequency of appointments between parties and unqualified project participants’ is a risk related time, cost, quality and safety which is the result of insufficient skilled labors and utilities on sites. On the other hand, communication frequency between the participants may result in quality, and safety problems in the construction projects. These risks have influence on the project completion time. Incompetent staff and labors employment and inappropriate utilities may enable contractors to catch up with the project progress but at the same time result in project quality and safety at the venture and risk. The contractors should map the construction progress all the time to secure sufficient professional engineers, managers and highly qualified labors ready to work.On the other hand, based on the survey outcomes, the relative importance index (RII) was calculated for each risk category. These risks/problems were then ranked according to their respective relative importance index (RII). The risks and their related problem areas were ranked in different manners based on the respondents’ point of view. The respondents are contractors, consultants and owners. Table 13presents the key risk problems between KAU construction projects parties. The risks explored in the survey include a large number of factors, selecting the ten ranked risk factors of them, were assumed as an appropriate way to represent the key risks. These risks were ranked in accordance with their significance index (RII) in association with each project objective. The construction projects committed in KAU includes academic buildings, staff members housing, streets and roads of KAU campus, and all the infrastructure projects. More details of responded profiles are presented in Table 13. The respondent's long work experience, educational background and multifaceted involvement in diverse construction projects infer that the respondents have adequate knowledge of construction project management and the associated risks. Table 13 reveals that the bureaucracy and excessive approval procedures (overall RII is the highest and is equal to 0.82) in the KAU and possibly in the other governmental bodies, is the main risk category. This risk is related to bureaucracy and stakeholder. However, the project team including the contractors, consultant, and the owners should contribute to the management of this issue.Similarly, Fig. 3shows the relative importance index of ten top ranked risks between KAU construction project parties. If these risks were handled from a perspective of a project life cycle, the risks would be managed in a more effective way. Therefore, identifying the possible occurrence of risks in each stage and making appropriate arrangements to cope with them are very significant. As it appears in Fig. 3, ten important risks were allocated into different project phases. For instance, ‘high costs due to unfair and unprofessional bidding’ may result from inappropriate project forecasting and planning activities at the feasibility stage, or change in material prices and high inflation.Construction projects risk assessment is often conducted to determine the priority or the optimal scheme of projects. Hence, Fig. 4depicts the 10 top construction project risks’ relative importance index of KAU. For instance; D1 shows the risks of delays due to excessive approval procedures for each of the project parameter. The risks’ relative importance index (RII) is 0.82 for cost, 0.82 for time related delay, 0.75 for quality related issues, 0.82 for environmental risks, and 0.82 for safety problems of construction projects. Similarly, D15 refers the risks of absence of professional pre-planning studies for projects by other participants, C26 refers the risks of absence of accurate feasibility studies for the projects, C19 refers the risk of unnecessary or excessive changes in design of construction projects, D2 is the risk of too tight project schedule due to loose planning practices. C25 is the occurrence of inaccurate initial time and resources estimation risk, D7 is the risk of the scheduling delays in payments, D3 refers the risk of delays due to lack of coordination between project participants, C18 refers the risk of wasted time due to improper and excessive intervention by client, D11 is the risk of excessive delays due to the late decisions made by other project participants.The consequences of risk factors were assessed on the basis of evidence and engineering judgments. This is usually done by a team of construction project experts (DMs). The consequences assessed by DMs are not always possibly providing precise numerical judgments about the likelihood of each risk event. So, fuzzy linguistic variables are adopted in this study based on a comprehensive assessment of the likelihood of risk occurrence, intervals and impacts on the construction project objectives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
