@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A bi-objective vehicle routing problem with time windows: A real case in Tenerife

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This work considers a bi-objective VRPTW to minimize both total distance and time-balance of the routes.We propose a mathematical formulation alternative to the classical models that do not consider time balancing.We develop two alternative versions of the population-based algorithm based on scatter search.An extensive computational experience has been carried out with several purposes.The solution corresponding to a real instance provided by a company in Tenerife, Spain, is compared to the solutions obtained by the two proposed algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
VRP with time windows,Metaheuristics,Bi-objective problem,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work is motivated by a real problem posed to the authors by a company in Tenerife, Spain. Given a fleet of vehicles, daily routes have to be designed in order to minimize the total traveled distance while balancing the workload of drivers. This balance has been defined in relation to the length of the routes, regarding to the required time. A bi-objective mixed-integer linear model for the problem is proposed and a solution approach, based on the scatter search metaheuristic, is developed. An extensive computational experience is carried out, using benchmark instances with 25, 50 and 100 customers, to test several components of the proposed method. Comparisons with the exact Pareto fronts for instances up to 25 customers show that the proposed methods obtain good approximations. For comparison purposes, an NSGA-II algorithm has also been implemented. Results obtained on a real case instance are also discussed. In this case, the solution provided by the method proposed in this paper improves the solution implemented by the company.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem tackled in this paper involves the design of daily routes from a central depot to a set of several geographically dispersed customers with known demands and predefined time windows, using a fleet of identical vehicles of known capacity. The service-time windows indicate the earliest and latest times for starting the service at each customer, and constitute “hard” constraints. In order to be feasible, each route must satisfy three types of constraints:–The total load on a route cannot exceed the capacity of the vehicle servicing the route.Vehicles must arrive at each customer within its time window. They may arrive earlier, but in this case they have to wait, triggering a waiting time on the route.Each route starts and ends at the central depot and must be completely serviced within its time window.This study has been motivated from a real problem in Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, in which the company intends not only to minimize the total distance traveled by its vehicles, but also to balance the working shifts of the drivers. The problem is approached by a node routing model with two objectives that arise from conflicting viewpoints. From the point of view of cost (economic objective), it is desirable to minimize the total traveled distance. From the point of view of fairness (social objective), it is desirable to minimize the difference between the maximum and minimum route lengths regarding time. That is, we are dealing with a bi-objective vehicle routing problem with time windows. Previously published works considering balance of routes refer to the tour length [30,3,23]. To the best of our knowledge, the objective of balancing routes regarding time in conjunction with time windows in a multi-objective context has not been previously considered in the scientific literature.We develop an integer bi-objective linear program to model the problem. However, only small instances could be solved. It is not surprising considering that the vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW), in its mono-objective version, is an NP-hard problem. Moreover, even finding a feasible solution to the VRPTW with a fixed fleet size is itself an NP-complete problem [11]. Therefore, we propose an algorithm based on the scatter search metaheuristic [17], which is an evolutionary algorithm, to solve the problem. In order to corroborate the rationale behind choosing scatter search for solving the problem at hand, we have implemented a modified version of the multiobjective evolutionary algorithm NSGA-II proposed by Deb et al. [13]. Computational results show that the proposed method based on scatter search produces good approximations of the Pareto fronts and yields significantly better results than those obtained by the tools currently applied by the company that posed the problem, both in quality and in the expended time for obtaining them. Our work includes a novel way to select subsets for combination and a composite improvement method with features borrowed from the SSPMO algorithm proposed in [26].The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:•This work considers a bi-objective VRPTW, in which the goals are to balance the time between routes and to minimize the total traveled distance.Despite the fact that mathematical models for the VRPTW may be found in the literature, they generally focus on minimizing the total traveled distance or the number of required routes. However, since we are interested in balancing the routes, classical time-windows constraints do not guarantee that service starts as soon as possible, artificially lengthening routes to achieve a better balance. Therefore, we propose a mathematical formulation, which includes more constraints and auxiliary variables to completely describe the problem addressed in this paper.Two alternative versions of a scatter search based algorithm (BioSS1 and BioSS2) have been designed and implemented to solve the bi-objective VRPTW. One of the main differences among them relies upon the fact that the combination component of scatter search is different. In the first version, all pairs of solutions in the reference set of solutions are considered for combination. However, in the second version, only pairs of solutions that are next to each other in the objective function space are combined.An extensive computational experience has been carried out with several purposes. First of all, the contribution of each component included into the scatter search based algorithms has been evaluated, corroborating that the whole procedures outperform their components. Moreover, the approximations of the Pareto fronts obtained by the proposed algorithms are compared with the exact Pareto fronts reached using the mathematical model for instances up to 25 customers. Finally, BioSS1, BioSS2 and NSGA-II are compared and well-known measures to assess the quality of the outputs produced by multi-objective procedures are considered.The solution corresponding to a real instance provided by a company in Tenerife, Spain, is compared to the solutions obtained by both BioSS1 and BioSS2. From this comparison, we conclude that the solutions reached by the heuristic are better than the solution implemented by the company when considering both the total distance and the time-balance objectives.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the state of the art, while Section 3 is devoted to formally describe the problem and formulate the mathematical model. The proposed solution approach based on the scatter search metaheuristic is presented in Section 4. Our computational experience is described in Section 5 and finally, in Section 6, our concluding remarks are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper relies upon the resolution of the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW), in which two objective functions are considered to carry out the optimization process required by a company in Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain. Therefore, a bi-objective VRPTW, in which the goals are to minimize the total traveled distance and to balance the time between routes is tackled. The traveled distance is the most common objective considered in the scientific literature related to VRPTW. However, to the best of our knowledge, the objective of balancing routes regarding time in conjunction with time windows in a multi-objective context has not been previously studied.The first contribution of this paper is the development of a mixed linear integer model for solving the bi-objective VRPTW. Although several mathematical models for solving the VRPTW can be found in the literature, they are mainly focused on either minimizing the total traveled distance or the number of required routes. However, we are additionally interested in balancing the routes regarding time. In this case, classical time-windows constraints do not guarantee that service begins as soon as possible, artificially lengthening routes to achieve a better balance. Therefore, more constraints and auxiliary variables have been added to previously published models to completely describe the problem addressed in this paper.Two alternative versions of a scatter search-based algorithm (BioSS1 and BioSS2) have been designed and implemented to solve the bi-objective VRPTW. The main difference among them relies upon the fact that the combination component of the scatter search metaheuristic is different in both versions. BioSS1 uses all pairs of solutions in the reference set of solutions for combination, whereas BioSS2 uses only pairs of solutions that are close to each other in the objective function space.Regarding the computational experience carried out in the paper, several purposes were taken into consideration. First of all, the contribution of each component included into BioSS1 and BioSS2 has been evaluated, corroborating that the whole procedures outperform their components. Furthermore, the approximations of the Pareto fronts reached by the proposed algorithms are compared with the Pareto fronts obtained with the mathematical model for instances up to 25 customers. This let us confirm that both proposed algorithm are effective when solving the problem at hand. Then, BioSS1 and BioSS2 are compared using well-known measures to assess the quality of the outputs produced by multi-objective procedures. An NSGA-II algorithm is implemented for comparison purposes. The experiments corroborate that BioSS1 and BioSS2 outperform NSGA-II.Finally, the real instance provided by the company was solved using both procedures, whose results were compared with the solution implemented by the company. From this computational experience, we conclude that both heuristics outperforms the company implementation.