@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Particle swarm optimization with adaptive time-varying topology connectivity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A PSO variant, abbreviated as PSO-ATVTC is developed.An ATVTC module is developed to achieve better balance of global/local searches.A new learning framework is proposed to improve algorithm's searching performance.PSO-ATVTC has competitive searching accuracy and convergence speed in optimization.Results show that PSO-ATVTC outperforms other PSO variants and MS algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Particle swarm optimization (PSO),Adaptive time-varying topology connectivity (ATVTC),Metaheuristic search (MS),Neighborhood search (NS) operator,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) has shown its competitive performance for solving benchmark and real-world optimization problems. Nevertheless, it requires better control of exploration/exploitation searches to prevent the premature convergence of swarms. Thus, this paper proposes a new PSO variant called PSO with adaptive time-varying topology connectivity (PSO-ATVTC) that employs an ATVTC module and a new learning framework. The proposed ATVTC module specifically aims to balance the algorithm's exploration/exploitation searches by varying the particle's topology connectivity with time according to its searching performance. The proposed learning framework consists of a new velocity update mechanism and a new neighborhood search operator to improve the algorithm's performance. A comprehensive study was conducted on 24 benchmark functions and one real-world problem. Compared with nine well-established PSO variants and six other cutting-edge metaheuristic search algorithms, the searching performance of PSO-ATVTC was proven to be more prominent in majority of the tested problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimization techniques play a crucial role in achieving the optimum solution in different fields such as engineering design, computer science, artificial intelligence, and operations research [1,2]. In the past decade, the complexities of global optimization problems have increased tremendously, from differentiable unimodal functions to non-differentiable rotated shifted multimodal and hybrid composition functions [3]. Classical analytical approaches tend to produce unreliable solutions in the latter problems because of their dependency on the differentiability of the fitness function. A growing trend in utilizing metaheuristic search (MS) algorithms to solve these complex functions has been observed as they have shown considerable success in locating the global optimum solution backed by their heuristic and random natures [4]. Most of these MS algorithms are nature-inspired, and several of the prominent algorithms proposed in literature include genetic algorithm (GA) [5,6], differential evolution (DE) [7,8], and particle swarm optimization (PSO) [2,9–12].Particle swarm optimization (PSO) was initially proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart [9] to emulate the social behavior of a swarm of bees, fishes, or birds searching for food [2,9,10,12]. As a population-based MS algorithm, each individual in the PSO (i.e., particle) represents a possible solution of the optimization problem, whereas the location of food sources reveals the global optimum solution of the corresponding problem. While each particle searches for food independently and stochastically in the search space, these particles also collaborate and share information with each other. Such collaborative behavior ensures that all particles in the population move toward the food source from different directions, thereby leading to the swarm convergence [2,9,11]. Owing to its simple concept and high efficiency, PSO has been actively applied to many real-world problems with promising results [2,13–18].Despite having competitive performance, some undesirable dynamic characteristics still remain as challenging tasks for PSO. Many experiments have revealed that basic PSO has a premature convergence issue, mainly caused by the rapid convergence characteristic and the diversity loss of the PSO swarm during the early stage of optimization [19,20]. Most of the time, premature convergence traps the PSO particles in the local optima, thereby leading to poor quality solutions. Another challenging task for PSO has to do with the algorithm's ability to balance exploration/exploitation searches. Neither exploration nor exploitation should be overemphasized as the former inhibits the swarm convergence, whereas the latter tends to cause the PSO swarm to hastily congregate within the non-optimal region that leads to premature convergence [21].A substantial amount of work [2,10–12,15] have been reported to address the aforementioned issues. Nevertheless, we noticed that a limited number of studies have been reported in current literature to tackle the issue of balancing the PSO's exploration/exploitation searches by adaptively varying the particle's topology connectivity with time. We also noticed that majority of the current existing PSO variants do not provide an alternative learning strategy to particles when they fail to update their fitness during the searching process. This limitation has inevitably restricted the algorithm's searching performance. Motivated by these facts, we propose a new PSO variant called PSO with adaptive time-varying topology connectivity (PSO-ATVTC). The key benefit of PSO-ATVTC is the synergy of a novel ATVTC module and a new learning framework into the PSO in offering a better searching performance to the PSO. The two major contributions proposed in the PSO-ATCTV are explained as follows:(1)The proposed ATVTC module adaptively increases, decreases, or randomly shuffles the particle's topology connectivity with time according to the particle's searching performance and its location in different sub-regions of the search space. This mechanism intends to achieve better balance of the exploration/exploitation searches as the lower topology connectivity favors exploration, whereas the higher topology connectivity encourages exploitation [22,23].A new learning framework, which consists of a new velocity update mechanism and a new neighborhood search (NS) operator, aims to further enhance the searching performance of PSO-ATVTC. Notably, the NS operator acts as the alternative learning strategy for PSO-ATVTC. It is only triggered to further evolve the particle if the latter fails to improve its personal best fitness through the new velocity update mechanism.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly presents some related work. Section 3 details the methodologies of the PSO-ATVTC. Section 4 provides the experimental settings and simulation results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work done.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, new PSO variant called PSO-ATVTC is developed. PSO-ATVTC is able to adaptively adjust the particle's topology connectivity based on the particle's search status, in order to achieve better control of the algorithm's exploration/exploitation searches. By capitalizing the unique topology information assigned to each particle, a new learning framework is also proposed into the PSO-ATVTC to generate different exemplars to guide the searches of different particles. Simulation results reveal that PSO-ATVTC dominates its peers in terms of the searching accuracy, searching reliability, and computation cost, implying that the proposed strategies in this paper are indeed useful to enhance the algorithm's performance.