@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid metaheuristic approach for the capacitated p-median problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new cutting-plane neighbourhood structure to solve the CPMP problems is presented.In the neighbourhood structure, a new effective strategy is proposed to select an open median for closing.A matheuristic by combining the neighbourhood structure with a tabu search algorithm is suggested.In order to find the optimal values of the matheuristic parameters, the DOE approach is used.The proposed matheuristic is tested on several sets of benchmark instances.The results indicate the efficiency and effectiveness of the matheuristic.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid metaheuristic,Cutting-plane neighborhood structure,Tabu search algorithm,Capacitated p-median problem,Design of experiments,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The capacitated p-median problem (CPMP) seeks to obtain the optimal location of p medians considering distances and capacities for the services to be given by each median. This paper presents an efficient hybrid metaheuristic algorithm by combining a proposed cutting-plane neighborhood structure and a tabu search metaheuristic for the CPMP. In the proposed neighborhood structure to move from the current solution to a neighbor solution, an open median is selected and closed. Then, a linear programming (LP) model is generated by relaxing binary constraints and adding new constraints. The generated LP solution is improved using cutting-plane inequalities. The solution of this strong LP is considered as a new neighbor solution. In order to select an open median to be closed, several strategies are proposed. The neighborhood structure is combined with a tabu search algorithm in the proposed approach. The parameters of the proposed hybrid algorithm are tuned using design of experiments approach. The proposed algorithm is tested on several sets of benchmark instances. The statistical analysis shows efficiency and effectiveness of the hybrid algorithm in comparison with the best approach found in the literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The capacitated p-median problem (CPMP) is NP-hard and has wide-ranging applications in clustering, designing transportation and telecommunication networks [1]. The CPMP is one of the location-allocation problems, which insist on optimally specifying the location of p facilities (or medians) to serve a set of n demand points while observing capacity limit of the medians. The objective of this problem is to minimize the total cost of servicing.The mathematical model of the CPMP can be stated as follows. Suppose that graph G=(V, A) is a non-directional complete graph in which V={1,2,…,n} and A={n×n} are the vertices and edges of the graph, respectively. The goal is to determine a set of medians with cardinality p to attribute each of the remaining (n−p) nodes to one of the chosen medians so that all demand points are satisfied and the capacity of each median is not violated. According to the above explanations, the CPMP can be modeled as follows:(1)v(p)=Min∑i∈N∑j∈MdijxijSubject to:(2)∑j∈Mxij=1∀i∈N(3)∑j∈Myj=p(4)∑i∈Nqixij≤Qjyj∀j∈M(5)xij∈{0,1}∀i∈N,j∈M(6)yj∈{0,1}∀j∈Mwhere N is a set of demand points and M×N is the set of candidate points where medians can be located. dij≥0 is the cost (usually a function of distance) of allocating demand i∈N to a median located in site j∈M. Binary variables xijindicate assigning conditions; xij=1 if demand i is assigned (or served by) a median located in site j. Binary variables yjcorrespond to median selection decision with yj=1 if site j hosts a median. An integer qjrepresents the demand of each costumer i∈N, and the capacity of a median built in site j∈M represented by an integer number Qj.The objective function (1) is to minimize the weighted distance between demand points and median points. Set partitioning constraints (2) and integrality conditions (5) impose that each customer is assigned to exactly one median. In order to satisfy constraint (3), there must be p active medians. Constraint (4) has a double effect: to ensure that the sum of the demands of the users assigned to each median does not exceed its capacity, and to prevent the assignment of users to inactive medians. Finally, constraint (6) provides the binary condition.In the CPMP, the cost of allocating demand i∈N to a median located in site j∈M (dij), number of median (p), demand of each costumer i∈N (qj), and the capacity of a median built in the site j∈M (Qj) are considered as input data.In the real world, there are large-scale problems that are intractable in the worst case in which the commercial solvers are not capable to handle. Although a large set of presented methods are available in the literature they do not suffice to solve large size problems with more than one thousand assigning variables. This paper tries to propose a new efficient approach for solving the CPMP.The main contributions of this paper are as follows.•We propose a cutting-plane neighborhood structure for solving the CPMP problems. In this neighborhood structure, an open median in the current solution is selected to close. A linear programming (LP) model is generated by relaxing binary constraints and adding new constraints. The generated weak LP solution is improved using cutting-plane inequalities. The solution of this strong LP is considered as a new neighborhood solution.To select an open median for closing, a new effective strategy is proposed. In this strategy an open median with maximum value of unused capacity utilization multiplied by total distance of the allocated demand points is selected.The neighborhood structure can be implemented in various metaheuristics. In this paper, we propose a hybrid metaheuristic by combining the proposed neighborhood structure with a tabu search algorithm. The goal of the algorithm for solving the CPMP problem is to calculate a set of medians that all demand points are satisfied and the capacity of each median is not violated. This type of hybrid algorithm is called “matheuristic”. Matheuristics are heuristic algorithms made by the interoperation of metaheuristics and mathematic programming techniques. This approach has begun to appear regularly in the metaheuristics literature [2–4].In order to find the optimal values of the proposed hybrid algorithm parameters, we use design of experiments approach.The proposed hybrid metaheuristic algorithm is tested on several sets of benchmark instances. The statistical analysis has been conducted and the results indicate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in comparison with the best approach found in the literature [5].The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the related works. Section 3 describes the proposed cutting-plane neighborhood structure. Section 4 presents a hybrid metaheuristic algorithm based on the proposed neighborhood structure and parameter tuning by using design of experiments. In Section 5, the experimental results and statistical analysis of the proposed algorithm are discussed. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a cutting-plane neighborhood structure to solve the capacitated p-median problem, and suggests a hybrid metaheuristic algorithm by combining the tabu search algorithm and the proposed neighborhood structure. The validity and efficiency of the proposed method are put into test over a series of computational experiments on standard test problems. To adjust the best parameter values in the proposed algorithm, DOE method is used. The proposed algorithm solutions are compared with the best solutions in the literature. The outcome is that the proposed hybrid algorithm clearly outperforms the best-known method in the literature with a short computational time.Two main future researches can be considered for this study. Firstly, other metaheuristic algorithms such as ant colony optimization, simulated annealing, and genetic algorithm can be used with the proposed neighborhood structure. Another possibility for further work is implementing the proposed neighborhood structure by using Lagrangian relaxation and column generation algorithm instead of linear programming relaxation to improve the performance of the algorithm.Symbols and notation used in the paper are listed as below:G=(V,A)a non-directional complete graphthe vertices of the graphthe edges of the graphthe cost of allocating demand i to a median located in site jthe demand of each costumer ithe capacity of a median located in site jthe binary variables that indicate assigning conditions; xij=1 if demand i is assigned (or served by) a median located in site j, xij=0, otherwisethe binary variables that correspond to median selection decision with yj=1 if site j hosts a median, yj=0, otherwisethe open medians in the current solutionneighborhood objective valueincumbent objective valuea short-term tabu memory to record the closed medians to avoid cycling backthe size of TabuListOnea subset of A that exists in TabuListOnea short-term tabu memory to record the open medians to avoid cycling backthe maximum number of the neighborhood solutions checked for each current solutionbest neighborhood objective valuethe number of neighborhood solutions with no improvements on incumbent solutionthe number of the neighborhood solutions checked for the current solutionthe maximum number of iterations without improvement on incumbent solutionthe maximum running time of the algorithm