@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An analysis of decomposition approaches in multi-objectivization via segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Contrary to prior evidence when studying the TSP, spatial decompositions can be as competitive as adaptive approaches.Decomposition methods that isolate cities within and between neighborhoods are most successful at guiding the search procedure.New decompositions of the TSP are analyzed and some are shown to perform better than the previous best methods.A progressive multi-objectivization method is proposed and shown to provide competitive performance regardless of computational budget.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-objectivization Via Decomposition (MVD),Multi-Objectivization via Segmentation (MOS),Multi-Objectivization via Progressive Segmentation (MOPS),Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi-objectivization via Segmentation (MOS) has been shown to give improved results over other previous multi-objectivization approaches. This paper explores the mechanisms that make different segmentations in MOS successful in the context of the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). A variety of new segmentation methods are analyzed and theories regarding their performance are presented. Spatial segmentation methods are compared with other adaptive and static decomposition methods. Insight into why previous adaptive methods performed well is provided. New decomposition methods are proposed and several of these methods are shown to attain better performance than previously known methods of decomposition. The convergence of various degrees of multi-objectivization is examined leading to a new, more general segmentation algorithm, Multi-Objectivization via Progressive Segmentation (MOPS). MOPS combines the single-objective genetic algorithm with multi-objectivization in a general form. In a given run MOPS can progress from a more traditional single objective method to a strong multi-objectivization method. MOPS attempts to improve the ratio of fitness improvements to fitness decrements, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), over the course of an evolutionary optimization based on the principle that often fitness improvements are generally easier to find early in the run rather than late in the run. It is shown that MOPS provides robust performance across a variety of problem instances and different computational budgets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-objectivization is a technique for solving single objective optimization problems. The technique reformulates the single objective problem into a multiple objective problem and then solves the reformulated problem using an Evolutionary Multi-objective Optimization (EMO) method [1]. Multi-objectivization is a relatively new optimization technique due in part to two reasons. Firstly, EMO methods are relatively recent and prior to the introduction of EMO methods in the late 1980s few efficient techniques existed to simultaneously find many solutions on the Pareto frontier. Secondly, and perhaps just as importantly, the size of optimization problems studied has increased to a point where multi-objectivization methods can be competitive. Small problems are generally not complex enough to require multi-objectivization techniques. Some research to date has provided weak evidence that larger problems benefit from more aggressive forms of multi-objectivization [2–4]. Additional stronger evidence is required.Multi-objectivization techniques fall into two major categories [5]. The addition of novel objectives is one major approach. Novel objectives approaches have shown improved results over single objective optimization with the addition of objectives such as solution age [6], frame bar width [7], and the first derivative of the objective function [8]. The second major category of multi-objectivization is Multi-objectivization Via Decomposition (MVD). MVD divides the objective function into component objectives and then uses those objectives in the optimization process. MVD has been most commonly used on fitness functions that have a sum-of-parts property but has also been theorized as being useful in sum-of-product fitness functions [2].Previous works on MVD have used two major approaches. The first approach, helper-objectives, utilizes the main objective in conjunction with additional decomposed objectives [2–4]. The second approach, pure decomposition, does not use the original problem's main objective but instead only works on the decomposed objectives [1,5,9,10]. Lochtefeld and Ciarallo [4] outlined several principles governing multi-objectivization via helper-objectives. Several of these principles are general and likely apply to multi-objectivization via pure decomposition. This paper studies the general principles that govern helper-objectives using a pure-decomposition method in order to determine the applicability of the principles governing helper-objectives on pure-decomposition approaches. These principles are studied in the context of the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP).The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The background section focuses on multi-objectivization research to date. General principles of multi-objectivization are summarized. Further the TSP is described and prior research studying the TSP using multi-objectivization techniques is examined. The experiment section contains three distinct experiments. The first two experiments focus on finding and improving possible decompositions for the TSP by analysis of existing decompositions, proposed new decompositions, and empirical study of the performance of promising decompositions. The third experiment introduces MOPS and evaluates its performance against methods with a static degree of decomposition such as MOS. Finally, concluding remarks are provided that both summarize the work and recommend avenues for further research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
