@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid ANFIS–PSO approach for predicting optimum parameters of a protective spur dike

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A protective spur dike is used to reduce scour depth around main spur dikes.A new hybrid approach, combining particle swarm optimization and adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS–PSO) was used.Optimized parameters of the protective spur dike are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scour,Swarm optimization,Prediction,Neuro-fuzzy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study a new approach was proposed to determine optimum parameters of a protective spur dike to mitigate scouring depth amount around existing main spur dikes. The studied parameters were angle of the protective spur dike relative to the flume wall, its length, and its distance from the main spur dikes, flow intensity, and the diameters of the sediment particles that were explored to find the optimum amounts. In prediction phase, a novel hybrid approach was developed, combining adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system and particle swarm optimization (ANFIS–PSO) to predict protective spur dike's parameters in order to control scouring around a series of spur dikes. The results indicated that the accuracy of the proposed method is increased significantly compared to other approaches. In addition, the effectiveness of the developed method was confirmed using the available data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Spur dikes are hydraulic structures that are constructed for protecting canals and rivers against scour and erosion. Spur dikes are generally chosen to be built in groups and they may be constructed at a specified angle relative to the bank. These structures lead to a considerable reduction of the flow velocity near banks, creating an area in the water in which there is less motion, which influences deposition, resulting in a reduction in the width thereby creating a defined channel.Constructing spur dikes against approaching flow stream, results in hydrostatic pressure's change upstream and downstream of the structure, and this causes a complicated vortex area. These complicated vortex areas, which produce large vortices at the head of the spur dikes, provide the principle local scour mechanism. The mentioned local scour may jeopardize the safety of the structure and eventually lead structural failure [1–3]. Fig. 1illustrates a two dimensional view of the flow characteristics and scour pattern around a spur dike.For the reasons described above, the local scour around spur dikes has been one of the fundamental concerns of researchers for years. The scour hole around spur dikes can be destructive at times, so developing a method to reduce the amount of scour around the spur dikes has become an important and persistent challenge for scientists [2–10].Generally, the techniques used by researchers to reduce scour depth around spur dikes, are divided into two main groups, i.e., direct and indirect methods. In the direct method, the structures are protected directly against flow attack by usually using construction materials, i.e., revetments and riprap placed on spill slopes to resist erosion. In the indirect method, the flow pattern is modified by using a number of special structures, such as a protective spur dike, a guide bank, or a collar, which cause local scour to decrease [11].Using a protective spur dike as an indirect method has been considered recently. Since spur dikes are commonly built consecutively, the spur dike that is the farthest upstream (henceforth called ‘the first spur dike’) should be built stronger because it will be subjected to the most destructive influence of flow [12]. Therefore, any attempt to reduce local scour depth around the first spur dike is crucial. The use of a protective spur dike upstream from a set of parallel spur dikes changes the direction of flow and lead to considerable reduction in scour depth around the main spur dikes, especially the first spur dike, which is directly subjected to the flow as it approaches.Since the protective spur dike is often shorter than the main spur dikes, it is not exposed to significant scour. The main parameters of a protective spur dike that have significant effects on the scour pattern around the main spur dikes are its length, its distance from the protected spur dikes and its angle with respect to the bank [2,13].Recently, new approaches working based on artificial intelligence have taken serious consideration of researchers. The effectiveness and accuracy of available methods related to artificial intelligence is challenging task which needs more data collection and simulations. Going through the available literature proves that improving forecasting accuracy and reducing the uncertainty rate requires novel methods. This is not an exception for predicting the optimum parameters of a protective spur dike using for scour mitigation around a series of spur dikes. In this study, a new hybrid approach is proposed to predict the optimum parameters of a protective spur dike.In this approach, the particle swarm optimization (PSO) is combined with adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS). In continue, the proposed method is compared with other soft computing hybrid approaches like, ANFIS–ACO (ANFIS–ant colony computation), ANFIS–DE (ANFIS–differential evolutionary) and support vector regression (SVR) [14–16] to describe its predicting accuracy, effectiveness, and computation time.Reviewing the literature surveys shows that other soft computing methods, e.g., artificial neural networks have been used to predict scouring depth [17–20]. These studies’ explorations showed that using the neural network approach may result in better outcomes than empirical relations [21].Algorithms using neural network models always need applying learning parameters such as learning rater, optimum number of nodes in the hidden layer, and numbers of hidden layers.The neural network-based models and their capability of prediction may be affected by high numbers of training iterations and leads the model to over-train.The presence of local minima is another problem when using a back-propagation neural network. Recent studies propose usefulness of neuro-fuzzy, in finding a neural network's optimal architecture to maintain the maximal output power of predicting optimum parameters in simulations [22]. Akib et al. [23] used adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) as a modeling tool to predict scouring depth in bridges. The results from ANFIS were compared with the classical linear regression (LR). ANFIS's results were highly accurate, precise, and satisfactory. Also Keshavarzi et al. [24], used a neuro-fuzzy model to predict scouring around an arch-shaped bed sill, and their results showed well reliability.All experiments were conducted in the Porous Media Laboratory, Amirkabir University of Technology in, Tehran, Iran. The flume section was rectangular with 14m length, 1m width, and 1m depth. The bed and the sides of the flume were built using glass material. A metal frame was used to support the glass flume. Three spur dikes made of Plexiglas were installed in the flume, and they were, 25cm long (Lf=25cm), impermeable, non-submerged, and perpendicular to the flow alignment. The installation location of the first spur dike was 6.16m in distance with the entrance of the flume. The spaces between the spur dikes were twice their length (2Lf=50cm). These values were chosen according to the recommendations of Zhang [26] and Gissoni et al. [25]. In order to collect transported sediments, a small tank was installed at the downstream end of the flume. The discharge of flow was regulated by an inlet valve. A rectangular weir was placed in the flume to measure the discharged water. The approach flow depth (Y) was adjusted as 15cm in all experiments. The flume bed was filled using uniform bed sediments (σg<1.4), with a thickness of 0.35m, and specific gravity (Ss) of 2.65, and geometric standard deviation (σg) of 1.38. In this study three different sizes of diameters were used to investigate the effect of changing the diameter. The discharge was changed to change the flow velocity (U) in order to achieve different amounts of flow intensity (U/Ucr).Protective spur dike with different lengths, angles and distances with the first spur dike also were installing upstream of the main spur dikes. Fig. 2shows the parameters of the protective spur dikes.Table 1provides the value of the variables in the experiments.Bed profile variations around the spur dikes for all tests were scanned using a laser bed profiler (LBP). The accuracy of the LBP was ±1mm in channel's width and ±0.1mm in its depth. The experimental phase included two levels with 84 experiments. In the first phase, the experiments were conducted with no protective spur dike, and, in the second phase, the experiments were conducted using a protective spur dike to evaluate the extent of the protection against scouring it provided for the main spur dikes. Fig. 3illustrates plan view of the flume, protective spur dike, and main spur dikes in the laboratory. In this figure, a 90° protective spur dike is displayed.Since in some spur dikes, the first spur dike is mostly exposed to failure [3], in this study the protective effect of the experimental protective spur dike on reducing scour around the first spur dike is investigated. The efficiency of a protective spur dike and its effect on the amount of scour reduction at the first spur dike mostly depends on channel geometry (width, and bed slop), the first spur dike's properties (length, shape, angle, space between them), characteristics of the bed sediment (size of the sediment particles, threshold movement of the particles), flow conditions (density, water level, and velocity), and the protective spur dike properties (length, angle, and its distance with the first spur dike). Therefore, the most important parameters of scour reduction around the first spur dike can be written as follows:(1)RSD1=f(B,S0,Ssh,Lf,D50,Ucr,ρ,Y,U,Lp,Xp,g)where B stands for width of channel, S0 is the bed slope, Lf is the length of first spur dike, Lp is the protective spur dike length, SSh is the symbol of shape of first spur dike, θ is the angle between protective spur dike and flow direction, Xp is the space between the first and protective spur dike, Y is the water flow depth, U is the velocity of approaching flow, Ucr is the critical velocity for incipient motion for bed sediment movement, D50 is the median grain size, ρ is the density of fluid, μ is the viscosity of fluid and g is the gravitational acceleration.After neglecting the constant parameters in experiments (B, S0, Ssh, Y, ρ, g) and dimensional analysis, Eq. (2) was achieved. Eq. (2) shows the most influential parameters of the protective spur dike in terms of reducing scour depth around the first spur dike:(2)RSD1(%)=fLpLf,XpLf,θ,UUcr,Fdwhere RSD1(%)=reduction percentage of scour at the first spur dike; Lp=actual length of the protective spur dike; Lf=actual length of the main spur dikes; Xp=distance between the protective spur dike and the first spur dike; θ=angle between protective spur dike and flow direction; U/Ucr=flow intensity; Fd=densimetric Froude number (Fd=U/ΔgD50).According to the experiments, the above mentioned parameters were assigned as input parameters for the learning process. In the computations, 70% of the experimental data was used to train the samples and the other 30% utilized to verify the samples’ accuracy. Table 2provides the statistical properties of the protective spur dikes’ parameters.In this study, an approach benefitting from combination of adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) is proposed to predict the optimum parameters of a protective spur dike [27,28]. In this approach, the PSO is applied to enhance the performance of ANFIS by tuning the membership functions and subsequently minimize the error.The ANFIS forecasts permits reconstructing of the future behavior of the flexure strengths of the bricks and therefore to predict ground stability.PSO, as an initiated method, was proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart [29]. This method is considered as an evolutionary computational method optimizing continues and discontinues decision making functions. Furthermore, PSO algorithm may be considered as biological and sociological behavior of animals. e.g., flocks of birds looking for their food [30].Additionally, PSO is considered as a population-based search method where each potential solution, known as a swarm, represents a particle of a population. In this approach, the particle's position is changed continuously zir in a multidimensional search space, until reaching the optimal response and/or computational limitations.Previous empirical studies have shown the effectiveness and usefulness of this approach for optimization purposes [31]. PSO approach has been used in several optimization studies to explore its efficiency [32].For an optimization issue with D variables, a swarm of N particles is instated so that every particle is dispensed an arbitrary position in the hyperspace with D measurements. For this situation, each particle's position is related to a hopeful answer for the optimization issue. x and v are considered as a particle's position (direction) and the particle's flight speed over an solution space, separately. Every individual x in the swarm is scored by a scoring capacity which attains a wellness worth demonstrating that how far it is competent to take care of the issuesPbest is the best previous position of a particle. Also, Gbest represents the index of the best particle among all particles in the swarm. Every particle has the capability to record its own personal best position (Pbest) and find the most suitable positions recognized by all particles in the swarm (Gbest). Afterwards all particles which fly over the D-dimensional solution space are subjected to updated rules for new positions, till the time that the global optimum position is achieved. The following stochastic and deterministic update rules indicate how the velocity and position of a particle are updated (Eq. (3)):(3)vi(t)=ωvi(t−1)+ρ1(XPbesti−xi(t))+ρ2(XGbesti−xi(t))(1)xi(t)=xi(t−1)+vi(t)where x is an inertia weight, q1 and q2 are random variables.The random variables are defined as q1=r1c1 and q2=r2c2, with r1, r2, U(0, 1), and C1 and C2 are positive acceleration constants. The weights of the stochastic increasing speed terms which push a particle to Pbest and Gbest are spoken to by the speeding up constants of C1 and C2, individually. When the qualities are little, a particle has the capacity wander a long way from the target locales. Then again, huge qualities bring about the sudden development of particles to target locales. In this study, as per the average practice in [33] both constants C1 and C2 are viewed as equivalent to 2.0. The best possible amendment of dormancy x in Eq. (3) offers a harmony between the worldwide and nearby investigations which brings about diminishing the quantity of emphases needed to discover an enough ideal arrangement. In this exploration work, a latency rectification capacity named “idleness weight approach (IWA)” is used [33,34]. Amid the IWA, the latency weight x is altered based upon the accompanying relationship:(4)ω=ωmax−ωmax−ωminItrmaxItrIn Eq. (4), ωmax and ωmin represent the initial and final inertia weights, respectively. Also, Itrmax is the maximum number of iteration while Itr is the current number of iteration.In this study, three bell-shaped membership functions are taken for each input with maximum and minimum amount of 1 and 0 respectively. Fig. 4shows the ANFIS structure with four inputs.To perform the predictions the first-order Sugeno model including four inputs, fuzzy IF–THEN rules of Takagi, as well as Sugeno's type was used as follows:(5)ifiisAandjisCandkisEandlisGthenf1=p1i+q1j+r1k+s1k+tThe first layer includes the input variables membership functions (MFs). The first layer provides the next layer's input values. In the first layer, each node is an adaptive node with a node functionO=μ(1),where μ(i)iare MFs.Eq. (6) provides the bell-shaped MFs (2) for which the highest and lowest amounts are 1 and 0, respectively.(6)f(x;a,b,c)=11+((x−c)/a)abBased on Eq. (6), the function depends on three parameters of a, b and c. Fig. 5shows a bell-shaped membership function in which parameter c is located in the center of the curve. Furthermore, it is common that parameter b is a positive value.The weight of MFs is deliberated in the second layer which is called membership layer as well. The input values for the second layer are obtained from the first layer. The nodes in the second layer are non-adaptive. The incoming signals in this layer are multiplied, and the layer sends out the product as follows,(7)wi=μ(i)i⋅μ(i)i+1Each node output denotes the firing strength of a rule or weight.The third layer is the rule layer. In this layer, the pre-condition matching of the fuzzy rules is performed by each node, i.e. they compute the activation level of each rule, and it calculates the normalized weights. This layer is also non-adaptive, and each node calculates the ratio of the rule's firing strength to the sum of all rules’ firing strengths as follows(8)wi*=wiw1+w2i=1, 2.The third layer's outputs are named normalized firing strenghts or normalized weights.The fourth layer (defuzzification layer), which all of its nodes are adaptive nodes with node function. This layer preapares the output values resulted from the inference of rules.(9)Oi4=wi*⋅f=wi*p1i+q1j+r1k+s1k+twhere {pi, qi, ri, si, t} is consequent parameters set in this layer.In continue, the fifth layer is the output layer that is used for summing up the inputs released by the fourth layer. It is also used to transform the fuzzy classification results into a crisp (binary). In this layer, the single node is not adaptive. This node computes the overall output as the summation of all incoming signals as follows,(10)Oi5∑iwi*⋅f=∑iwi⋅f∑iwiIn this paper, the PSO method is used to assist ANFIS for adjusting the parameters of the membership functions [34]. The PSO technique's main advantage is its friendly manner for computations in a given size network topology. In this study, the membership functions are triangular-shaped.The flow chart of the sequential combination of ANFIS and PSO is shown in Fig. 6[35]. The swarm in PSO is initialized with a population of random solutions. Every potential solution is named a particle. The particle's position is presented bySi⇀. Also, a swarm of particles moves through the problem space which the particle's velocity is expressed byvi⇀. At each time step, a function f is assessed based upon theSi⇀as an input. Each particle keeps track of its own best position associated with the best fitness that it has obtained so far, in a vectorpi⇀. The most suitable position recognized by any member of the neighborhood is tracked inpig⇀. For a global version of PSO, the most suitable position in the total population is represented bypig⇀.Depending upon the velocities, the position of each particle is changed based upon the following relation [35]:(11)Si⇀(t+1)=Si⇀(t)+vi⇀(t+1)The utilization of the PSO to design an FS or in other words the optimization of all free parameters in an FS, is defined as follows [35],(12)Ri:ifx1(k)isAi1And…Andxn(k)isAin,Thenu(k)isaiwhere k is the time step, x1(k), …, xn(k) are the input variables, u(k) is the system output variable, Aijis a fuzzy set, and aiis a crisp value.After the rule generation and initialization process, the initial antecedent part parameters can be identified.PSO searches the optimal antecedent part parameters. Population size in the PSO is equal to Ps. The performance of each particle is assessed based upon the FS it represents. The evaluation function f is defined as the error index E(t) described above. According to f, the individual best positionpi⇀of each particle and the global best particlepig⇀in the whole population can be found. The speed and position of every particle are overhauled by Eqs. (10) and (11), separately. The entire learning procedure is done once a predefined paradigm is met [35].The main PSO parameters are given in Table 3. These parameters represent population size of the domain, maximum number of iterations, inertia weight, and inertia weight damping ratio, personal learning coefficient and global learning coefficient. These parameters are determined by trial and error procedure and presents optimum values for this case study.To evaluate the accuracy of the ANFIS–PSO approach different criterions are used:(1)Root-mean-square error (RMSE)(13)RMSE=∑i=1n(Oi−Pi)2n,Coefficient of determination (R2)(14)R2=∑i=1n(Oi−Oi¯)⋅(Pi−Pi¯)2∑i=1n(Oi−Oi¯)⋅∑i=1n(Pi−Pi¯)where Oi=predicted values of protective spur dike, Pi=measurement values of protective spur dike, and n=the total number of test data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study a new hybrid method was proposed for predicting of the optimum parameters of a protective spur dike. This approach works based on the combination of ANFIS and PSO. The application of the proposed approach is both novel and effective.The results showed that the ANFIS–PSO accuracy is well enough to predict the optimum parameters of a protective spur dike.The ANFIS–PSO as a soft computing method showed acceptable learning and prediction capabilities. Furthermore, the results showed the method's capability to overcome the main shortcoming of the artificial neural network without defining network structure and trapping in the local optimum.The performance of the ANFIS–PSO approach against the results provided by ANFIS–ACO, ANFIS–DE and SVR confirms acceptable improvements in prediction methods.