@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Neural network based texture analysis of CT images for fatty and cirrhosis liver classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Medical image analysis.Provides additional information for the doctors apart from visual interpretation.Proposed system classifies fatty and cirrhosis liver with 95% accuracy using PNN classifier.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Probabilistic Neural Network,Linear Vector Quantization Neural Network,Back Propagation Neural Network,Biorthogonal wavelet transform,Medical diagnosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Computational methods are useful for medical diagnosis because they provide additional information that cannot be obtained by simple visual interpretation of clinical presentations and radiologic imaging. As a result an enormous amount of research effort has been targeted at achieving automated medical image analysis. This work reports the texture analysis of Computed Tomography (CT) images and development of Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN), Linear Vector Quantization (LVQ) Neural Network and Back Propagation Neural Network (BPN) for classification of fatty and cirrhosis liver from CT abdominal images. Neural networks are supported by more conventional image processing operations in order to achieve the objective set. To evaluate the classifiers, Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis is done and the results are also evaluated by the radiologists. Experimental results show that PNN is a good classifier, giving an accuracy of 95% for classifying fatty and cirrhosis liver using wavelet based statistical texture features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual interpretations of medical images are used for the early detection and diagnosis of diseases. The decision based on visual interpretations depends on the ability of the physicians to distinguish certain patterns or shape of the image. Diagnostic accuracy can be improved by providing additional information, generated by computational methods that cannot be obtained by simple visual interpretations. As a result, Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) has become one of the major research subjects in medical imaging and diagnostic radiology.Since non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a clinicopathological entity that could be the main cause of chronic liver disease, this work focuses the study and development of Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN), Linear Vector Quantization (LVQ) Neural Network and Back Propagation Neural Network (BPN) for classification of fatty and cirrhosis liver from Computerized Tomography (CT) abdominal images. Neural networks are chosen for recognizing diseases from the features extracted from the liver images as there is no need to provide a specific explicit technique on how to identify the diseases. The neurons and networks supposed to learn from examples and store this knowledge in a distributed way among the connection weights for recognizing diseases. Preprocessing of liver images, the region of interest identification, segmentation, feature extraction and feature selection are done using image processing techniques.Organ segmentation is often the first step in computer aided diagnosis. Segmentation of abdominal organs such as the liver, kidneys and spleen from CT scan images has been attracting a fair amount of research recently. Many artifacts can arise in CT scans, among these are beam-hardening artifacts, which are noticeable as focal areas of low attenuation adjacent to bones, partial volume artifacts resulting from spatial averaging of disparatic tissues in close proximity and resulting in blurred edges and streak artifacts, the result of peristalsis, respiratory, cardiac and patient motion [27].So far, the various approaches used for segmentation are histogram analyzer, gray level threshold, region growing, edge detection techniques, neural network based methods, texture transforms, mathematical morphology operations and pixel classification methods. Lee and Chung [6] used a segmentation method that is based on shape analysis, image contextual constraint and between slice relationship. Koss et al. [18] perform segmentation by exploiting small variations in textures of the soft tissue. The results achieved were quite poor. The major fault lies in the fact that organs have substructures that have different textures, as well as the fact that texture is not well defined. It is envisioned that this is the first step to automate segmentation. But the texture based segmentation result in a coarse and block wise contour, leading to poor boundary accuracy.Lee et al. [4] proposed a method combining a multi module contextual neural network and spatial fuzzy rules and fuzzy descriptors for automatically identifying abdominal organs from a series of CT image slices. Ninety Nine percent of organ regions in the test images are correctly identified as its belonging organ, implying the high promise of the proposed method. However, training needs a large data set. In general, artificial neural networks designed for segmentation have many drawbacks. One of these is requirement of a large training set; another being that even if successful, it is unknown how to improve the network due to its opacity. Bal et al. [3] propose a method that uses some a priori information about organ morphology and digital image processing techniques. Extracted boundaries of the liver are smoothed using mathematical morphology techniques and B-splines. Hoffmann et al. [12] investigated the automatic extraction of the liver. However, about fifty percent of the data needed manual correction after being extracted. They used region growing technique based on the intensity. They studied the segmentation of hepatic vessels and metastates excluding the recognition of a disease. Rule based recognition of abdominal organs is a step that generally follows segmentation. Conceptually, it is based on exploiting organ invariants. Unfortunately, with CT scans of abdominal organs, there are few invariants. Kobashi and Shapiro [16] have used eight different characteristics as classification criteria. This approach is very algorithmic and produces moderately good results. Among these techniques for segmentation, gray level threshold based on histogram analyzer followed by morphological operations are giving promising results. Much work has been done, but more work is necessary until the abdominal organ segmentation problem can be considered largely solved.It is difficult to classify human body organ tissues using shape or gray level because the shape of each organ is not consistent throughout all 2D slices of a medical image and the gray level intensities overlap considerably over soft tissues. However, tissues are expected to have consistent and homogeneous structures, described as texture, within liver images makes use of image texture analysis suitable for computer assisted characterization. The most commonly used texture features that have been applied successfully to real world textures are the Spatial Gray Level Dependence Matrix (SGLDM) [10], Gray Level Run Length Statistics [9,29], Gray Level Difference (GLD) statistics [28], Laws Texture Energy Measures [22] and Fractal features [25]. A weakness shared by these texture analysis schemes is that the image is analyzed at one single scale, a limitation that can be lifted by employing multi scale representations. In a nutshell, Mallet [23] identified the important concept of multiresolution analysis which is the corner stone of modern wavelet theory, while Daubechies [7] constructed the first orthogonal wavelet bases that were compactly supported.Kadah et al. [30] extracted the first order gray level parameters like mean and first percentile of the gray level distribution and second order gray level parameters like contrast, angular second moment, entropy and correlation and trained the functional neural network for automatic diagnosis of diffused liver diseases like fatty and cirrhosis using ultrasonic liver images and showed that very good diagnostic rates can be obtained using unconventional classifiers trained on actual patient data. Mojsilovic et al. [1] investigated the application and advantages of the non-separable quincunx wavelet transform and used energies of the transformed regions to characterize liver tissues using ultrasonic liver images. A comparison between the quincunx and the traditional wavelet decomposition suggests that the quincunx transform is more appropriate for characterization of noisy data. Also, they compared with other texture measures like SGLDM, Fourier measures and Fractal texture measures. The classification accuracy was 87 percent for the SGLDM, 82 percent for the Fourier measures, 69 percent for Fractal measures and 90 percent for wavelet approach indicating the superiority of the wavelet approach.Gletsos et al. [24] presented a system with two basic modules: the feature extraction module and classifier module. In their work, Region Of Interest (ROI) were extracted manually by the experienced radiologist from CT images of normal liver, hepatic cysts, hemangiomas and hepato cellular carcinomas and fed to the feature extraction module. Extracted features were fed to the three hierarchically placed feed forward neural network. In their work, liver and suspicious region were extracted manually. This needs human intervention.Huang et al. [31] manually selected the suspicious tumor region in the digitized CT image, extracted autocovariance texture features of subimage and identified the tumor as benign or malignant using support vector machine classifier. Matake et al. [20] showed that the artificial neural network can provide useful output which can be used as a second opinion to improve radiologist diagnostic performance in the differential diagnosis of hepatic masses seen on a contrast enhanced CT.Quantifying the amount and characterizing the severity of liver fibrosis has direct clinical implications for patient diagnosis and treatment [21]. Monteiro et al. [15] studied the degree of morphological feature and fibrosis grade. Krishnan [26] extracted GLCM and fractal features from segmented ultrasound images and classifies ten types of diffused and focal liver diseases using support vector machine with a classification rate of 92%.Literature survey shows that identifying abdominal organs from CT abdominal images is one of the essential steps in visualizing organ structure to assist in diagnosis. Texture analysis techniques for liver tissue characterization have been used in the past with very promising results. Wavelet approach enables us to analyze the image in multi scale representation. Texture classification experiments have been performed by Mojsilovic et al. [2] using Haar filters, Daubechies filters and eight different biorthogonal filter pairs. They reported that biorthogonal filters are more suitable for texture analysis.In this work, the liver region is extracted by using the anatomic knowledge of the liver, adaptive threshold decision based on histogram analyzer and morphological operations from CT abdominal images. Then biorthogonal wavelet based statistical texture features are extracted from the liver region. The extracted features are optimized by Sequential Forward Floating Search (SFFS) and Genetic Algorithm [14,19]. Optimized features are fed to the neural network classifier to classify the disease as fatty or cirrhosis liver.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
