@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of artificial neural network for predicting crack growth direction in multiple cracks geometry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The crack growth under multiple cracks is highly influenced by neighbouring cracks.No mathematical relation is available to predict the crack initiation direction.ANN has been used to predict crack growth direction in multiple crack geometry.The effect of degree of input variables and hybrid combination of activation functions is studied.Nonlinear and linear activation functions are used through the one and two-hidden layer ANN.The experimental dataset as first or second degree were used.Higher order input variables are found to be more suitable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artificial neural network,Multiple cracks,Crack inclination,Crack offset distance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this study is to design an efficient artificial neural network (ANN) architecture in order to predict the crack growth direction in multiple crack geometry. Nonlinear logistic (sigmoid and tangent hyperbolic) and linear activation functions have been used through the one- and two-hidden layer ANN. 85 tests were conducted on aluminium alloys under different crack positions, defined by crack tip distance, crack offset distance, crack size, and crack inclination with loading axis. The experimental data set as first degree or second degree were used to train 22 proposed ANN models to predict the output for new data sets (not included in the training sets). The model results were then compared with the experimental data. It was observed that ANN model with combinations of activation functions and two hidden layers predict the crack initiation direction with good accuracy when higher order input variables are presented to the network.crack lengthcorrelation coefficientstudent t distributioncrack offset distancecrack tip distancefirst non-singular stress term, T stressmode I stress intensity factormode II stress intensity factorcrack inclination anglelearning parametercrack initiation anglePoisson's ratio

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Various fracture criteria for cracks subjected to mixed mode loading have been introduced for the determination of crack initiation direction and critical stress. Griffith [1] introduced a criterion to determine the conditions to initiate the propagation of a crack. The maximum energy release rate criterion (MERR) [2,3] followed the Griffith condition and stated that crack growth follows the orientation of maximum energy release rate. Erdogan and Sih [4] developed the maximum tangential stress criterion (MTS-criterion) which was one of the first conditions that predicted critical stress and crack growth orientation. MTS-criterion stated that the crack growth would occur in the direction of the maximum tangential stress and would take place when the maximum tangential stress reaches a critical value which only contains the first mode strength toughness. Due to its simple formulation, MTS-criterion became one of the most popular criteria in fracture mechanics. Palaniswamy and Knauss [5] introduced the G-criterion which dealt with a criterion of maximum energy release rate to determine both the initial crack propagation direction as well as the conditions of crack instability in terms of fracture stress, crack orientation angle and crack length. Sih [6] proposed the minimum elastic strain energy density factor criterion (SED-criterion) which was based directly on the total strain energy density, i.e. the sum of its distortional and dilation components. The strain energy density approach has been found to be a powerful tool to assess the static and fatigue behaviour of notched and unnotched components in structural engineering [7]. Different SED-based approaches were formulated by many researchers [8–10]. Labeas et al. [11] presented a methodology to predict mixed-mode crack growth and orientation using the strain energy density theory. Zuo et al. [12] developed a fatigue crack growth model to predict the lifetime of fatigue crack growth for single and mixed mode cracks. In Ref. [13], the S-theory is applied to determine crack initiation and direction of cracked T-beams and circumferentially cracked pipes under combined loading conditions. The strain energy density factor approach was also used by Balasubramanian and Guha [14] to analyze the effect of weld size of fatigue crack growth behaviour of shielded metal arc welded cruciform joints failing from root region.Recent studies have shown that the coefficients of higher order terms can also play an important role in the fracture process in notched or cracked structures. In addition to the singular term, the higher order terms, in particular, the first non-singular stress term (known as the T stress) have significant effects on the near notch tip stress field. The T-stress is considered in some studies as an auxiliary parameter for increasing the accuracy of the results for KI. Kim and Cho [15], for instance, showed that this non-singular term has noticeable effects on the size and shape of plastic zone near the notch tip. Ayatollahi and colleagues demonstrated that the first non-singular term have considerable contributions to the stress components around the notch tip and also on the fracture resistance of notched components under mode I loading [16–18]. Furthermore, recent studies on cracks show that the first non-singular stress term in the Williams expansion (n=2) could significantly influence the stress field around the crack tip. These effects have been investigated experimentally by the technique of photoelasticity in both mode I and mode II loading conditions. Ayatollahi and Sedighiani [19] studied the effect of T-stress on the critical mode I stress intensity factor of brittle and quasi-brittle materials. The minimum strain energy density criterion was revisited to take the effect of T-stress into account. In Ref. [20] the strain energy density criterion was applied to determine the direction of crack initiation for various biaxial load factors and material combinations. All these criteria have found applications for predicting the fatigue crack growth direction in structures with a single crack. However, use of these criteria with caution for multiple cracks, which, in general, have less accuracies than a single crack and generally inadequate for the analysis of multiple cracks.The interaction between multiple cracks has a major influence on crack growth behaviour. This influence is particularly significant in stress corrosion cracking (SCC) [21], welding [22,23], lifetime estimation of plant components, etc. as relatively large number of cracks are initiated due to environmental effects. The interaction between the multiple cracks can be studied either analytically or experimentally. One can find number of studies in the literature using various analytical and numerical methods to treat multiple crack problems. Reviews of various methods are given in Burton and Phoenix [24] and TerMaath [25]. Development of analytical methods to calculate the stresses around multiple interacting cracks in elastic solids has been an important but difficult research problem for many decades. Such crack interaction effects are an important aspect in the ageing of such structures as aircraft fuselages and marine hulls, as well as in tracking damage evolution in poly-crystalline and multiphase materials in general. In an array of cracks, the strengths of the interactions are strongly dependent on their local geometry, placement, and orientation and especially on the proximity of crack tips relative to the crack lengths. Interactions that do not adversely affect stiffness may greatly reduce the strength and fatigue life of a structure, and vice versa. In analytical studies on multiple crack geometry, the stress intensity factors are either evaluated from the governing equations available for mixed mode cracks [21] or by finite element analysis [26–29]. The presence of neighbouring cracks in multiple crack system affects the growth direction. This growth direction depends upon the relative crack positions. As there is no standard relation to compute the crack growth direction based on the relative crack positions, the growth direction is computed either by using strain energy density (SED) criterion [8–10] or maximum tangential stress (MTS) criterion [4,26]. In many studies the crack growth direction is assumed to possess a self similar manner throughout the growth simulation [27]. As the experimental assessments of crack growth direction and propagation in multiple crack have limited literature, the prediction made by any of the available criterion differs significantly from the actual crack growth direction and hence on the component's life. In case of multiple crack, the major challenge is finding a local parameter which controls the growth of an individual crack due to mechanically applied loads. Multiple crack problems are composed of cracks that have disparate characteristics and therefore are not intuitively predictable. The level of uncertainty can be high; in some cases, high enough to defy common sense. The second challenge is finding the global parameter which controls the interrelationship between the growth of the various cracks. Every physical problem in fracture mechanics is a multiple cracks problem, or a problem involving both major and minor cracks. A common approach in the literature is to treat a multiple crack effect as a single crack problem which is not true and away from the reality.Multiple cracks can interact and coalesce in different ways, depending on their spatial resolution, applied stresses, and the component geometry. Kamaya [27] and Liu et al. [30] have suggested that this phenomenon may influence the fatigue life of a component due to the potential of cracks to interact and accelerate the growth rate compared to cracks that grew individually and independently. The trend of operating aircraft up to or even exceeding their design lives has raised concerns on the airframe structural integrity due to fatigue failures, which often involve multiple cracks [31–34]. Experiments and numerical studies conducted by Iida [35], Iida and Kawahara [36], Wang et al. [37], Frise and Bell [38], Leek and Howard [39], and Kamaya [40], which were mainly on long crack coalescence showed that the effects of interaction amongst closely spaced cracks can significantly influence the rate of coalescence, and hence, accelerating the crack growth rates. This will in turn potentially affect the overall fatigue life of engineering structures. Multiple interacting crack problems have also been treated in Helsing [41] and Helsing and Jonsson [42] for rectangular plates, the former using fast multi pole techniques and the later using special 1/2-power weight functions reflecting the singular stress fields at crack tips. Neither paper deals specifically with crack kinks or branches and the former does not compute stress intensity factors for crack tips, but focuses rather on overall stiffness reduction in the plate. Kachanov [43] presented a useful review of various approaches and the formidable difficulties that arise in attempting to deal with closely interacting cracks and their coalescence.ANN is a new class of computational intelligence system and is useful to handle various complex problems with a capacity to learn by examples. ANN has proved to be a powerful and versatile computational tool in the application of a number of engineering fields [44–49]. In recent years, ANN has also been introduced in the field of fracture mechanics in order to predict fatigue life [50–56] of metals and composite. Artymaik et al. [50] expressed that, with the use of ANN method, fatigue life can be estimated on the basis of material and stress parameters. Genel [51] used ANN method to predict strain-life fatigue properties of steels on the basis of tensile tests. He has shown that the fatigue strength coefficient and fatigue ductility coefficient can be predicted using ANN with high accuracy of approximately 99% and 98%, respectively. Bucar et al. used ANN approach to describe the scatter of S–N curves. Venkatesh and Rack [52] trained a feed-forward ANN to predict the elevated temperature creep-fatigue behaviour of Ni-based alloy. Pleune and Chopra [53] also trained a feed forward ANN to predict the fatigue life of carbon and low alloy steels for specified sets of loading and environmental conditions. Recently Pujol et al. [54] studied the fatigue life prediction under step-stress conditions, where the cumulative distribution function for the failure of components was implemented by means of a neural network. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was applied to compare the results of the new approach to those obtained with the lognormal distribution function. Bucar et al. [55] used neural network approach to describe the scatter of S–N curves. Mohanty et al. [57] have predicted the fatigue crack propagation life of 7020 T7 and 2024 T3 aluminium alloys under the influence of load ratio by using artificial neural network. Zarrabi and Tsang [58] presented a new and relatively simple criterion for the mixed-modes I and II fracture that uses an artificial neural network database to obtain the pertinent fracture toughness.The crack growth under multiple cracks is no longer in mode I condition. The crack growth rate is highly influenced by the presence of neighbouring cracks and the crack also grows in a non-self similar manner as seen in mixed mode cracks. Although there are a number of criteria for the mixed-mode fracture, none of them are universally accepted and applied to the practical problems. These criteria are not suitable for multiple crack configurations. No empirical or mathematical relations is available to predict the crack initiation and growth direction for multiple crack configuration from the crack offset distance, crack tip distance, crack sizes, ratio of plate thickness to crack size, etc. Hence, other alternate methods such as artificial neural network and finite element method seem to be the best alternatives for such studies. However, to the best of authors’ knowledge, no literature related to prediction of growth direction using ANN technique under multiple crack geometry is available till date. It is very important to find the growth direction under the influence of multiple cracks to predict the life of a component.In this study, ANN has been used to predict crack growth direction in multiple crack geometry under static loading. The novelty of the current method is its direct applicability to multiple cracks since the ANN is tested and validated for the problem. An original and crucial feature of the work is the evaluation of 22 ANN models with different ANN architectures to evaluate the crack growth direction, the area where no single analytical methods proposed so far is suitable for the prediction of the crack growth direction under the influence of second or more cracks. The current paper shows the suitability of ANN method to incorporate the challenges on the predictive capabilities involving interactions between two cracks at different offset distances, crack tip distance and crack size ratio. For the most challenging cases, the presented problem is solved in a short time in MATLAB with a notebook PC. In this study the effect of degree of input variables, number of hidden layers, homogeneous and hybrid combination of activation functions on the performance of the network to predict the crack initiation angle has been studied. The predicted results have been compared with the experimental data. It is observed that the results are in good agreement with the experimental findings.In the present investigation the commercially available aluminium alloy is used. The sheet thickness of aluminium alloy is 1.0mm. The mechanical properties are given in Table 1. Rectangular pieces of required size were cut from 1.0mm thin aluminium sheet. Length of each specimen was kept 200mm. The width of edge crack specimen was taken as 60mm while the width of the central crack geometry specimens was selected so as to obtain the distance from the outer crack tip to the edge of the specimen equal to or slightly more than the crack tip distance. Mechanical slits were made at the required position (Fig. 1) by means of a jewellery saw of 0.1mm thick blade. For central cracks, at the marked positions on the plate, two holes of diameter 2.0mm were made by drilling and then a crack was formed by cutting with the jewellery saw. All inclined cracks were made at an angle of 60° to the loading axis (vertical axis, which is also the rolling direction of the plate used in this investigation). The mechanical cracks so obtained are pre-cracked under fatigue loading with very low constant amplitude loading. The lengths of the fatigue pre-cracks were kept below 0.5mm. The study of crack growth direction under static loading was conducted with two edge cracks on one side (A1), single edge crack on both sides (A2), two central cracks (C1), and two central inclined cracks (C2). The specimen details for above type of crack configurations are shown in Fig. 1.It has already been discussed in Section 1 that the intensity of the crack interaction and the effect on the crack growth and crack initiation direction depends on several specimen geometry parameters such as crack tip distance S, crack offset distance H, and relative crack size a2/a1. The simulation work of Kamaya et al. [59] by using S-version of finite element method revealed that when the ratio of crack offset distance to crack length H/a is small and a2/a1 is large, the interaction between the two cracks is significant, whereas, it had no effect in the opposite case. The combination of H, S and crack length a1 and a2 considered by Kamaya et al. [59] were 2.5≤S≤20mm, 2.5≤H≤20mm and 1≤a2/a1≤0.2. It was also reported in their study that there was no interaction between the two cracks for a2<0.6a1. Thus, when the difference in the crack size is large enough, it is not necessary to account the interaction in the growth prediction, and the single crack can be used for analysis. The growth, interaction and coalescence of two coplanar short cracks of varying lengths in AA7050-T7451 aluminium alloy were studied under low amplitude cyclic loading by Tan and Chen [60]. It was reported that as the ratio of the minor crack to major crack length a2/a1 approached unity, the influence of interaction on the overall crack shape development increased to a maximum value and interaction was insignificant when the crack length ratio a2/a1≤0.25. The interaction of multiple cracks in a finite plate studied by Yan and Miao [61] by using the hybrid displacement discontinuity method indicates that the crack interaction is insignificant beyond H/a=4 for all investigated cases of H/a between 0.1 and 7. In the previous work of Gope and Thakur [62] on the multiple crack interaction, it was shown that the crack initiation angle remains less than 10° for 0<S≤12mm and H<2mm and it exceeds 30° for H>12mm. The crack initiation angle remains between 10° and 30° for 2mm≤H≤12mm. As mentioned in [59–62] the significant crack interaction effect is seen for H/a<1 and 0≤S/a<1 or H/a≥1 and S/a≥1 for equal crack size. Thus, in the present investigation the magnitude of S and H are selected appropriately such that 14<H/a≤0 and 14<S/a≤0. Thus 85 sets of test data are designed to include all the combination of H/a and S/a to investigate the significant and insignificant crack interaction zone. The number of test samples considered in different zones of H/a and S/a for different specimen geometry A1, A2, C1, and C2 along with the crack initiation angles are presented in Tables 2 and 3.The specimen was fixed in the 100kN servo hydraulic universal testing machine (ADMET, USA) in static mode and load was applied monotonically at 0.01mm/s crosshead speed. The crack initiation and the stable crack growth during static loading was monitored by a travelling microscope (model RTM-500) and CCD camera (Model Sony Cyber Shot 8M.P. DH-7) attached to another computer. The loading was continued till the specimen fractured. The crack initiation angle θ0 was then measured from the fractured specimen and used in training validation and testing of ANN architecture. The procedure of measurement of the θ0 using the CAD software is illustrated in Fig. 2. The results are presented in Tables 2 and 3.It is well established that a crack under mode I loading propagates in self similar manner where as under mixed mode loading it propagates in non-self similar manner. Recently, it was studied by the authors [62] that a crack changes its growth direction when there is a neighbouring crack. It was shown that the growth direction is highly influenced by the crack position parameters defined as crack offset distance, crack tip distance and relative crack size. From the wide range of crack statistics considered in this study few photographs of the fractured specimens are shown in Figs. 3–7. The initial condition of S and H are mentioned on the photographs. The fractured specimen with two edge cracks on one side of the plate for crack sizes a1=a2=3.0mm and H/a<1 are shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 4 shows the photographs for H/a≥1 and S/a=0. The effect of the presence of neighbourhood crack on growth behaviour and fractured pattern is different for H/a<1 and H/a≥1. It is seen that when the cracks are separated with a very small distance (H<a) both the cracks propagate at an angle so as to meet each other at a distance equal to or less than the crack length. Thereafter, it propagates almost perpendicular to the loading axis as a single crack. When the crack offset distance H is further increased and H/a≥1, it is seen that only one crack propagates in self similar manner and other crack becomes dormant. The crack growth direction for two edge cracks on one side with initial conditions a1/a2=1, H/a≥1 and S/a=0 is found to be less than 10°. According to MTS [4,19], SED [15–18], DET [36] criterion, the crack extension angle θ0 remains less than 10° for KI/KII>10. This indicates that crack grows mostly under the influence of mode I and the effect of mode II stress intensity factor is about 1/10th of mode I and hence the effect of mode II is negligible as compared to mode I. Hence, it can be said that for H/a≥1 and S/a=0, there is a little effect of the presence of neighbourhood crack on the growth direction as the crack grows almost perpendicular to the loading axis, similar to mode I crack growth. However, when two edge cracks are very close to each other and H/a<1, the crack growth direction is highly influenced by the neighbourhood cracks. It is seen that both the cracks bend towards each other and hence, the growth direction is increased with respect to the previous case of H/a≥1. Under such condition it is found that the crack initiation direction remained more than 10°. This indicates that when two cracks are very close to each other the state of stress produced by one crack is affected by the state of stress of neighbourhood crack. Hence, the resultant state of stress is under mixed mode condition and crack grows under the influence of mixed mode condition.Fig. 5 shows photographs of the fractured specimen having two central cracks with different crack configurations H/a≥1 and S/a>1. The crack deviation of adjacent crack tips before coalescence is seen in these figures. In addition to this effect, the propagation of the crack from outer tips is almost perpendicular to the loading direction or the crack propagation direction is less than 10°. It is also seen that the progress of the crack from the outer tips is more as compared to the two inner crack tips. The above behaviour is seen in all cases when the crack offset distance H/a≥1 and S/H≤1. No such deviation of adjacent crack tip is seen for other cases as shown in Fig. 6 for H/a>1 and S/H=1. Under such crack statistics H/a>1 and S/H>1, the crack tips of the two facing cracks change their progress direction so that they approach each other and finally crack coalescence occurs. It is seen that the fracture of the specimen occurred from the outer edge. This indicates that the growth rate of outer and inner crack tips is also different and depends upon the H and S values. Fractured photographs show that the crack coalescence phenomena occurred when 1.25≤H/a≤2.5 and S/a>1 are satisfied whereas failure occurs because of the progress of the crack from outer tips for H/a>2.5. This illustrates that S and H as well as the edge distance from the outer crack tip plays a major role in the fracture process in multiple crack geometry. Only the ratio of S/H is not sufficient to characterize the fracture process or crack interaction in multiple central cracks. The results shown in Fig. 5 for two central mode I crack indicates that the crack growth from the inner crack tips is restricted by the stress shielding effect. The figure indicates that the growth from the outer crack tip is more as compared to inner tip. This is because of crack shielding. From the appearance of the crack configuration, it can be said that the acceleration effect seems to exceed the shielding effect. This highlights that while making any simulation studies for such crack statistics entire crack growth process should be considered.It is seen that the crack initiation direction remained between 10° and 20° for H/a≥1 and 1≤S/H≤4. The crack initiation direction became more than 20° when S/H<1.Fig. 7(a and b) shows the photographs of two inclined crack, α=30° and 60°. It shows that growth is under the influence of mode I and mode II stress condition and hence, it deviates from the initial crack direction. Fig. 7(c) shows two inclined central cracks for α=60° and S/H≥4. Under the crack statistics S/H≥4 it is seen that failure is due to meeting of the two inner crack tips and crack grows almost in the direction of crack i.e. about 30° to the loading axis. However, when the crack offset distance H is increased and S/H<4 in Fig. 7(d), the outer crack tip is deflected and the growth direction of the farther tip turned towards the loading direction. The crack growth behaviour for S≤H is shown in Fig. 7(e and f). It is seen that outer crack tip progresses in a non-self similar manner and there is no growth from the inner crack tips.The results shown for two inclined cracks indicates that with smaller value of H<10mm and S/H≥4, the growth is along the crack direction both from inner and outer crack tip. This may be because of the line joining between inner crack tips makes an angle almost greater than 70° with the loading direction. It is experimentally shown [MTS, etc. criterion] that an inclined crack with about 70° crack angle propagates at an angle less than 15°. It means the effect of mode II stress intensity factor is negligible. The same mechanism may exist under such crack statistics and growth direction is less affected. When value of H is increased and S/H is kept less than 4, the deflected crack growth seen from the outer crack tips may be due to the existence of mixed mode condition.Fig. 7(e and f) shows the stress shielding effect for the case H=12mm, S=6mm, α=60° and S=11mm, H=12mm, α=60°. Fig. 7(e and f) shows that the outer tip of the cracks progress and the progress of the inner crack tips becomes dormant due to the stress shielding effect caused by the presence of a second crack. This kind of crack behaviour is seen for S<12mm or S/H<1.0. The progress of crack tip for (a) H=12mm, S=12mm, α=60° and (b) H=12mm, S=14mm, α=60° are shown in Fig. 7(g and h), respectively. It is observed from Fig. 7(g and h) that inner crack tips of two facing cracks progress in a direction so as to approach each other. The outer crack tip progresses perpendicular to the loading direction. This type of crack behaviour is seen for all inclined cracks with S/H≥1.The variations of the crack initiation direction with the crack statistics and stress intensity factors or mode mixity are shown in Figs. 8 and 9. The crack initiation angle is determined from the fractured specimens. Fig. 8 demonstrates the intensity of the crack interaction in terms of crack deviation and crack geometry parameters. Fig. 8 reveals that it is difficult to establish any correlation between the crack initiation angle and crack geometry parameters. The predictive uncertainty that exists with one of the mostly used fracture criterion (MTS criterion) is shown in Fig. 8. Particle filled or fibre reinforced composite material is one of the example where multiple crack sites exist and crack grows from multiple sites during mechanical loading. The crack initiation angle as a function of mode mixity Mefor composite material containing 20wt% walnut shell particle and 10wt% coconut fibre filled in epoxy matrix is shown in Fig. 9. The mode mixity is defined as:(1)Me=2πarctanKIKIIThe predicted results included in Figs. 8 and 9 are briefly described here. According to maximum tangential stress (MTS) criterion [4], the crack extension angle in terms of stress intensity factors is given as(2)θ0=2tan−114KIKII+KIKII2+8According to strain energy density (SED) criterion [8–10], the growth direction is obtained from the solution of Eq. (3).(3)KIKII(−4κ1,2sinθ0+sin2θ0)+KIIKI(4κ1,2sinθ0−3sin2θ0)+(−4κ1,2cosθ0+4cos2θ0)=0where κ1=3−4ν for plane strain case and κ2=(3−ν)/(1+ν) for plane stress case.According to generalized maximum tangential stress (GMTS) criterion [63] the crack initiation direction can be obtained by solving Eq. (4).(4)[KIsinθ0+KII(3cosθ0−1)]−16T32πrccosθ0sinθ02=0where rcis considered equal to the crack tip damage zone. It is given by Taylor [64] as(5)rc=12πKICσu2σuis the ultimate tensile strength. KIC is the critical mode I stress intensity factor or material fracture toughness.Eqs. (2)–(4) show that θ0 depends upon stress intensity factors KI and KII. Figs. 8 and 9 show that none of the existing criteria is suitable to predict the crack initiation direction within a reasonable accuracy. The accurate prediction of crack initiation direction is important to study the growth rate under multiple crack geometry and to estimate the components’ life. The difference between experimental and predicted results shown in Figs. 8 and 9 is due to the dependence of stress intensity factors on the crack geometry parameters. In multiple crack geometry, it was demonstrated in the earlier studies [62,64] that both KI and KII and hence, the crack initiation direction depend on the crack position parameters S and H (known as crack spacing parameters) and orientation. Fig. 8 shows that crack initiation angle θ0 decreases as S/H increases and beyond S/H>3, θ0 became less than 10°. In terms of stress intensity factors KI and KII, θ0 becomes less than 10° when KI/KII>10. This indicates that for a given crack offset distance H as the crack tip distance S increases (i.e. cracks are away from each other) the interaction effect diminishes and crack grows under the influence of mode I with negligible effect of mode II. In case of central crack when H and S are relatively small, both the crack behaves like a coalesced crack and the progress direction is less affected due to the presence of other cracks or neighbourhood crack. It is also seen that for larger value of offset distance H (i.e. distance between two cracks is higher) the interaction also minimizes. It means when cracks are separated through a larger distance the state of stress produced ahead of the crack tip remains unaffected and thus diminishing nature of crack initiation angle is seen. This shows that the interaction of multiple crack geometry can be well related through the crack initiation angle, crack tip distance and crack offset distance. This has its own importance also because crack tip factors during the crack growth test are easy to compute as compared to stress intensity factors. Similar results are revealed in the work of Pook [65]. Pook [65] demonstrated that the stress intensity factors of closely spaced regular arrays of edge cracks depend primarily on the crack spacing and are approximately proportional to the square root of crack spacing for crack length to spacing ratios down to 0.16. For smaller spacing ratios the stress intensity factor depends on crack length rather than crack spacing. The general features associated with crack interaction and coalescence and the conditions for coalescence in various forms are reviewed by Wang et al. [66]. To the best of authors’ knowledge, the study focusing to the prediction of crack initiation direction under multiple crack configurations is very limited and hence, it is difficult to predict the crack growth direction using the above mentioned criterion with respect to crack geometry parameters S and H. Hence, in many studies with multiple crack geometry configurations, the growth direction in the simulation has been assumed as θ0=0 [27]. To overcome this difficulty, the aim of the present investigation is focused on the development of ANN model to predict the crack growth direction under multiple crack geometry.Artificial neural network (ANN) is an intelligent tool with parallel computational capability. It can perform nonlinear mapping in short duration. Once neural network is trained, it provides acceptable recommendations in a short time. The concept of an artificial neural network is inspired from the working of the human brain. Human brain is made of hundreds of billions of processing elements, known as neurons. The brain acts as a highly complex nonlinear parallel computer. Similarly an artificial neural network is a massive parallel distributed processor with neurons as processing units. An artificial neural network acquires the knowledge during the training process by correcting the corresponding weights so as to minimize an error function. One of the main advantages of this technique is that there is no need to make a prior assumption about the concerned material behaviour, making it superior to other conventional prediction techniques.Back-propagation networks are in fact the powerful networks which refer to a multi-layered, feed-forward perceptions trained with an error back-propagation algorithm (error minimization technique). The architecture of a simple back propagation ANN is a collection of nodes distributed over a layer of input nodes, one or more layers of hidden neurons, and a layer of output neurons. Neurons in each layer are interconnected to subsequent layer neurons with links, each of which carries a weight that describes the strength of that connection. In this investigation, both the homogeneous and the hybrid combinations of sigmoid, tangent hyperbolic, and linear activation functions were used with one or two hidden layer network architecture to model the neuron activity. Twenty-two such combinations have been used; Table 4. Inputs are propagated forward through each layer of the network to emerge as outputs. The errors between those outputs and the target (desired output) are then propagated backward through the network and then connection weights are adjusted so as to minimize the sum square error. It is calculated as:(6)E=12∑i=1P∑k=1K(Dpk−Opk)2where Dpkis the desired output and Opkis the predicted output for the pth pattern and kth output. During training, an ANN is presented with data for several times, which is referred to as training cycles. After each cycle, the error between the ANN output (predicted) and the desired values are propagated backward so as to adjust the weight in a manner mathematically guaranteed to converge [30]. The learning algorithm used here for the weights is(7)wij(t+1)=wij(t)+Δwij(t)with its correction(8)Δwij(t+1)=−α∂E∂wij+βΔwij(t)where α is the learning rate, β is the momentum coefficient, and t is the current step. In the present investigation, it is found that for β=1, the oscillation and convergence is appreciable. Detailed derivation of the back propagation algorithm has been covered in literature extensively [30,31].Fig. 10illustrated one of the ANN structure out of 22 ANN architectures presented in Table 4 with one input layer of six nodes, one hidden layer of nine nodes and one output layer of one node. Each layer has different number of neurons. The functional relationship between input and output variables can be established by considering enough neurons in the hidden layers. However, too many neurons in the hidden layer may cause over fitting. Because of over fitting, network yields larger error for the new data even if the error is very small for training data. Also, larger the network, more complex it is. There are several methods for improving the network to provide an adequate fit. Maghami and Sparks [67] have proposed ANN method for rapid and efficient controls, dynamic design and analysis for flexible space systems. The proposed method of Maghami and Sparks [67] is suitable for applications wherein an arbitrary large source of training data can be generated. However, in the present investigation, the data has been generated by performing a set of experiments on a real system. As the limited data set in the present investigation is available, the method proposed by Maghami and Sparks can be tested in this application in a future work, once a huge set of data is generated. The authors of [68] have also presented an effective method for modular neural network. The relationship in our data is easily trainable in the form of the proposed networks as shown in the results with various structures of the networks. However, the proposed method can also be tested while using modular neural network for this application as a future work. Wilson and Tuffs [69] have suggested an efficient algorithm for the applications where selection of a proper structure is difficult and the inherent order of nonlinearity in the dataset is high and therefore requires a large structure. Moreover, if the dimensionality and number of samples required for efficient training are also high, the trial-and-error method requires significant wastage of computational efforts. In our application, trial-and-error method is suitable as the training time and flops required for each structure are not very high. Therefore, the network structure and their operational parameters in the present investigation have been selected mostly by using trial-and-error method. The experimentation has been performed in a sufficiently wide range. The comparison among various structures has been made and presented in the paper in the form of tables and graphs. Fig. 11compares the predicted crack initiation angle with the experimental values (normalized) for training data set, validation data set and testing data set. In Fig. 11 out of 22 ANN architecture used in this investigation, the detailed results of [10-9-1] ANN architecture with learning rate 0.8 and sigmoid activation function have been used. The training was stopped after 200 training cycles. However, in Fig. 11(a) the variation of error is shown up to 500 training cycles to show its effect on the MSE. The correlation coefficient obtained for validation and testing data set are 0.9687 and 0.9721 respectively. Similar runs are made for other ANN architectures shown in Table 4 and results are presented and analyzed in subsequent sections.For crack growth analysis with multiple cracks, there is a wide range of crack position parameters that could be used as inputs. These parameters include crack size, crack tip distances, crack offset distance, crack inclination with the loading axis, material properties such as yield strength and modulus of elasticity and specimen geometry such as crack length to plate width ratio or crack length to plate thickness ratio etc. Properly selected inputs can be of great help to reach a satisfactory predictive quantity with a relatively small training data set. Table 5shows the root mean square error (RMSE) and correlation coefficient obtained for each set of input both for training, validation and testing for the combination number 19 (s-s-2). It is very clear from the table that all six input parameters (left and right crack size, a1 and a2, vertical offset distance (H), crack tip distance (S), and crack inclination angles α1 and α2 are implicitly or explicitly needed to obtain acceptable crack initiation direction. When these parameters are used in non-dimensional form (a1/a2, S/H, α1/α2), the RMS error is quite high and is about 4 times than that with six inputs taken as a1, a2, H, S, α1 and α2. The networks used had one hidden layer with 9 neurons (combination no 19, s-s-2). Learning rate parameter was taken as 0.9). All data were normalized between 0 and 1. A probable justification could be that, that for zero value of the parameter which is in numerator, the ratio is taken as zero irrespective of the magnitude of denominator. The other reason may be that only three values were supplied when ratio in non-dimensional form was used instead of six values for each output. Hence, in this investigation different order of input variables (xin,i=1,2,…,6and n=1 or 2 or 3) have been used and the predictive quality is compared with first order, second order and third order input parameters. The results show that inclusion of second order input variables improve the predictive quality by 20–30% as compared to first order, but third or higher order input data sets yield poor results.Number of training cycle plays an important role for over fitting. Early stopping or over training may cause higher error. The stopping criterion for the training process is based upon the root-mean-square-error (RMSE) for the validation data set which was entirely different from training data set (used for computing the gradients, Jacobian Matrix, and Hessian Matrix during optimization process for weight refinement) as well as testing dataset (used to test the trained network after completion of the training process). However, the results for the validation data set were not depicted graphically in order to avoid ambiguity as this data set has the only role of stopping the training process at appropriate time and thus reducing the chances of memorization. However, the various forms of results for the validation data set are shown, wherever feasible and felt necessary.Fig. 12shows the variation of root-mean-square-error (RMSE) with number of iterations for the ANN architecture with one and two hidden layers. It can be seen from the results that most of the ANN architecture with 100–200 training cycles yield reasonable accuracies and about 70–80% of the predicted results are within 5% error. However, with higher training cycles, in some cases the RMSE is found to be lower, but the predictive quality measured with PRED (ɛ) is found to be less than 70%. The prediction capability (PRED) is calculated from the relative error. It is defined as the ratio of data points with error less than or equal to ɛ to the total number of data points. ɛ used in this investigation is 5%.The quality of prediction also depends on the learning rate parameter, as it influences the output. Higher learning rate parameter indicates an ANN with better output approximation capabilities. Learning rate parameter has been selected for each structure by starting with a low value and increasing it in small steps till the speed of convergence is increased without entering the process into an oscillatory mode. Effect of momentum parameter was not observed in a significant manner as there might be no local minima in most of the situations. The variation of RMSE and correlation coefficient with learning rate coefficient corresponding to 200 iterations, one hidden layer (s-s-1), and nine neurons in hidden layer is shown in Fig. 13. Figure shows that with learning rate for 0.6–0.8, high predictive quality can be achieved with RMSE less than 0.015.As per universal function approximate theorem, if less number of neurons are required in the hidden layer for better approximation then only one hidden layer can be used. Multi-layer feed-forward neural networks are believed to be capable of representing any functional relationship between input and output, if there are enough neurons in the hidden layers. However, too many neurons in the hidden layers may cause over-fitting. The error on the training set is driven to a very small value due to the powerful ANN learning process, but when new data is presented to the network, the error is large. The network has memorized the training examples, but it has not learned to generalize to new situations. Clearly, when over-fitting occurs, the network will not generalize well. The ideal method for improving network generalization is to use a network that is just large enough to provide an adequate fit. The larger a network is, more complex are the functions the network can represent. In the present investigation one and two hidden layered ANN structure were evaluated. For the one hidden layered network structure, combination of eleven different activation functions were tested, and the performance of each network for validation and test data were evaluated on the basis of root-mean square-error, correlation coefficient, and prediction capability. It is seen that though the correlation coefficient and RMSE are reasonably good for first and second order input data but less than only 50% of the test data were predicted within 5% error for first order and second order input variables with single hidden layer. For the two hidden layer network structures, eleven combinations of different activation functions were trained and tested. On the basis of their test performance indices, more than 70% data were predicted within an error of 5% by all eleven-combination models with two hidden layers except from linear activation function. This concludes that, in case of single hidden layered structure, second order input variables yield better network performance, whereas, for double hidden layers ANN architecture, use of first or second order input variables are equally good.The performance of all 22 networks were checked by changing the neurons in the hidden layer for single hidden layered structure and number of neurons in first and second hidden layer for two hidden layered architecture. In order to decide the optimum hidden neurons, different ANN architecture were trained and tested for number of neurons ranging from 6 to 14. On the basis of high generalization capability and best prediction accuracy, in testing, Fig. 14is drawn. It is found that most of the two hidden layered combinations yield better results for [8-10-1] or [10-8-1]. The number in the square bracket shows the number of hidden neurons in the hidden layers and output layer. Best performance was seen from single hidden layered network with [8-1] hidden neurons. The stability of all 22 networks was analyzed by repeating the same network ten times with randomly initialized weight and biased parameters. From the best results among the ten runs of each network, Fig. 15shows the performance results of all 22 networks for [10-8-1] and [8-1] neurons in hidden layers with 200 epochs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present study shows that ANN can be used to predict the crack initiation direction from the multiple crack geometry parameters. The best prediction quality of neural network is observed with sigmoid activation function with two hidden layer and second order input parameters. A network with the tangent hyperbolic function in the hidden layer and the sigmoid function in the output layer or vice versa may also be one of the good choices among other homogeneous networks. The combinations of sigmoid or tan hyperbolic with linear activation functions gave poor accuracy and hence, are not suitable. For the single or two-hidden layered networks, second order input variables shows reasonable improvement in the predictive quality of the network as compared to first order input variables.