@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Keyword advertising is not what you think: Clicking and eye movement behaviors on keyword advertising

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Searchers are inclined to click organic results rather than sponsored results.The observation count on organic results is higher than on keyword advertising.The observation length on organic results is longer than on keyword advertising.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Advertising avoidance,Empirical research,Eye tracking,Keyword advertising,Organic search,Search engine results pages (SERPs),Sponsored search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examined the behavior of online searchers in relation to keyword advertising according to the theory of advertising avoidance. A total of 451 volunteers were recruited for an experiment. A computer program and an eye-tracking device were used to measure the number of clicks and eye movements. The findings show that the number of clicks for to obtain organic search results is higher than that for keyword advertising. There is no difference in observation count between the area of keyword advertising placed above the organic search results and the area of the organic search results themselves. However, observation counts for the organic search results and keyword advertising placed above the organic search results are higher than for the keyword advertising placed at the right-hand side of the page. Searchers seem to spend the longest observation time on the organic search results, then on the keyword advertising placed above the organic search results, and finally on the keyword advertising placed at the right-hand side of the page.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapidly evolving Internet technologies, people rely on the Internet to search for and find information. About 70% of Internet users use a search engine each day (Jansen 2010). Along with the growing use of search engines, keyword advertising has become popular among advertisers and is now one of the fast growing types of online marketing (Search Engine Marketing Professional Organization 2009).Keyword advertising is a premium service offered by such search engines as Google, Yahoo! and MSN. The service assists advertisers in choosing specific keywords to include in their advertising text. When online searchers use these keywords to search for information, related advertising appears on the search engine results pages (SERPs). This type of advertising, which is also called sponsored advertising, paid results (Gauzente and Roy 2012), sponsored links (Naldi et al. 2010) or paid placement (Chen and He 2011), usually appears at the top, bottom, or in the column to the right of the organic search results area. Because keyword advertising can satisfy a searcher’s information needs, it often generates higher advertising effectiveness (Yoo 2009, Kim et al. 2012) than do non-targeted banners.Although many studies have discussed what type of advertising creates better advertising effectiveness, some researchers have proposed that people avoid looking at advertising. Especially in the online world, the Internet provides users with environments such as social networking sites, online games, news, and search engines that users generally enter with specific goals in mind (Duff and Faber 2011). When online advertising appears in high goal-oriented environments, it obstructs the user’s task, interrupts their focus, and even terminates their viewing of the content, thus causing a negative attitude toward ads (Speck and Elliott, 1997, Cho and Cheon 2004). To decrease the interference from so much ad content and to eliminate their exposure to ads, online users adopt behaviors such as ignoring or skipping the ads. This type of behavior is called advertising avoidance (Speck and Elliott 1997, Duff and Faber 2011).Because the behavior of searching online is a highly goal-oriented task, advertising avoidance may appear obvious. When searchers enter the search engine results pages, they may purposefully focus on information that appears in organic search results to avoid keyword advertising interference. Hence, the purpose of the present study is to verify that consumers ignore keyword advertising when searching online. We observe two modes of advertising avoidance – physical ad avoidance and cognitive ad avoidance – in both the sponsored search results and the organic search results on the search engine results pages. We propose that searchers are more inclined to click on organic search results than sponsored search results as physical ad avoidance, and that they will take no notice of sponsored search results as cognitive ad avoidance. Thus, the observation counts and observation lengths of viewing keyword advertising are expected to be lower than those for the organic search results.This study conducted a laboratory experimental method to understand the behavior of clicking and eye movement on keyword advertising. After recruiting participants for the experiment, we instructed them to search for information using a mimic Yahoo! search engine for the assigned task. Participants’ click-through behaviors were recorded by the computer program, and the browsing route over the search engine results page was recorded using an eye-tracking device.Differing from previous keyword advertising related research, the following are the unique findings of this study. First, many previous studies on keyword advertising effectiveness compared keyword ads with only other types of online ads. This study focuses on the media context of the search engine results pages in which keyword advertising is embedded and compares the difference between sponsored search results and organic search results. Within the context of the search engine results pages, we can precisely understand consumers’ true response to keyword advertising. Second, previous studies have argued that the click-through rate on keyword advertising is high. However, advertising avoidance behavior causes the keyword advertising click-through rate to be lower than that of organic search results. Finally, advertising avoidance is usually measured by self-reporting, which easily lends itself to bias and distortion as the advertising avoidance behavior is a subconscious process. This study provides more precise and complete results by objectively recording the searchers’ clicking behaviors and the paths of their eye movements while browsing with system programming and an eye-tracking device.Keyword advertising is one mode of search engine marketing, which is a form of Web advertising that companies use to promote their products and services on search engine results pages (Jansen and Schuster 2011). Search engine websites provide slots to advertisers who are willing to purchase space for placing keyword advertising. Advertisers can bid on key phrases for the product or service they provide. When searchers enter a query containing the specific key phrase, ads related to the key phrase will display on the search engine results pages (Jansen and Schuster 2011, Naldi et al. 2010).There are two types of results on the search engine results pages, organic search results and sponsored search results (Battelle 2005, Naldi et al. 2010, Gauzente and Roy 2012). Organic search results, also referred to as editorial results, are generated through the search engine’s basic searching and indexing activities. Sponsored search results, where keyword advertising is placed, appear because the advertiser has a paid agreement with the search engine company priced according to the number of previously defined keywords used (Gauzente and Roy 2012). Sponsored search results generally appear at the top, bottom, or to the right-hand side of the organic search results and are labeled “sponsored results” in the header.Keyword advertising results are based on the search phrases that consumers enter in the search engines to find what they want. Accordingly, keyword advertising is understandably more precise in exposing product information to potential customers than are other types of advertising. Furthermore, the payment mechanism of keyword advertising has better measurability (e.g., pay-per-click), as advertisers pay only when a user clicks on an ad. Thus, it is not surprising that keyword advertising has come to dominate online advertising (Gopal et al. 2011).Advertisers can buy keyword advertising through the search engine system at Google AdWords, Microsoft AdCenter, and Yahoo! Search Marketing. Advertisers bid on keywords or keyword phrases and then pay the accepted bidding price to the search engine for each click that brings an online user to their landing page. This payment mechanism is called pay-per-click and also cost-per-click (Jansen and Schuster 2011). The main advantage of pay-per-click is that advertisers can easily track the input and output, namely, every payment that the advertiser inputs should reflect on advertising performance. However, it comes with an inherent disadvantage – to increase the advertiser’s payment, automated agents of competitors may click the ad incessantly. In spite of this malicious behavior, the PPC mechanism is still popular among advertisers and commonly used on search engines (e.g., Google and Yahoo!) (Naldi et al. 2010).With respect to advertisement ranking, bid price and quality score are the two factors that influence slot position. The search engine system provides the advertisers who bid the highest price the most attractive sponsored advertising slots at the top of the web page. Accordingly, click-through rates and slot position have a positive relationship. That is, the higher the slot position, the higher the click-through rates and the better the revenue (Naldi et al. 2010, Huang and Kauffman 2011). Thus, if advertisers want their advertising to be positioned at the top and above the organic search results, the bid price must be enhanced (Naldi et al. 2010). Quality score also influences slot position. This score is used to measure how relevant the keyword is to the ad text and to the user’s search query (Jansen and Schuster 2011). The higher the quality score, the stronger the advertising relativity and the better the performance of the search engine. Thus, to maintain and improve the quality of ads listed on their sites, search engines place keyword advertising with high quality scores at the top of the web page yet charge a lower fee as a reward.Keyword advertising is receiving increasing attention from academic researchers. Of the previous studies on online keyword-based ads, some have focused on slot context and the bidding mechanism (Vorobeychik and Reeves 2008, Naldi et al. 2010, Huang and Kauffman 2011). Others have discussed how the format of the content of keyword advertising influences the click-through rates (Ghose and Yang 2008, Gauzente and Roy 2012). Still others have probed into the influence of consumer characteristics and their behaviors toward keyword advertising on campaign performance (e.g., Brooks 2006, Yoo 2009, Gauzente and Roy 2012, Kim et al. 2012). The majority of these studies have focused on the many varied aspects that can enhance the effectiveness of advertising. Although it is important to understand how keyword advertising influences consumer click-through behavior, understanding whether keyword advertising is negatively affected by advertising avoidance, as for other Internet ads, is also an important issue. Hence, this study focuses on advertising avoidance and discusses its influence on keyword ads.People are exposed to thousands of advertising messages in their daily lives: on the street, on television, in magazines, and on the Internet. However, these ads are not always welcome by the general population; they tend to interrupt or interfere with an individual’s general activities (Krattenmaker and Powe 1994) or disrupt the individual as he is engaged in a specific activity (Speck and Elliott 1997). Such interferences and disruptions cause consumers to resist or avoid contact with any marketing message. In the advertising-related literature, this condition is called advertising avoidance, which is defined as all of the actions that media users employ to reduce exposure to ad content (Speck and Elliott 1997).Previous research has addressed four reasons as to why people avoid viewing advertising. The first is to decrease one’s loss in terms of opportunity cost. Consumers may feel they can use the time spent watching advertising to engage in other more worthwhile things, such as communicating with other people or watching other programs (Tse and Lee 2001, Prasad et al. 2003). The second reason is that it is perceived as ad clutter. When the amount of advertising in a medium is excessive, consumers perceive the advertising as clutter (Elliott and Speck 1998). This perceived ad clutter leads to negative attitudes and subsequent ad avoidance (Cho and Cheon 2004). The third reason is that ads disturb or terminate the process of achieving one’s goal. In other words, if advertising disturbs or interrupts non-advertising content, these ads diffuse the browser’s attention, which results in less focus on the intended targeted information.This concept is what Cho and Cheon (2004) labeled perceived goal impediment, suggesting that Internet advertising can interrupt users’ web page viewing and intrude on their search for the targeted information. Some ads completely suspend the user’s activity by preventing the user from reading, viewing or listening to the desired content (Speck and Elliott 1997). The fourth reason for avoidance is prior negative experience. When making decisions, consumers tend to rely on conclusions drawn from their personal experiences (Hoch and Deighton 1989). Online consumers who have been disturbed by advertising may develop negative attitudes and, in turn, resort to advertising avoidance (Cho and Cheon 2004).People can remove advertising information from their attention by ignoring, flipping, skipping, or deleting it. Different media environments generate different types of advertising avoidance (Duff and Faber 2011). To understand avoidance behavior, prior studies have attempted to categorize it. For example, Speck and Elliott (1997) argued that avoidance behavior can be divided into three types: cognitive, behavioral, and mechanical. Abernethy’s (1991) study identified physical and mechanical methods as the two types of advertising avoidance, while Cho and Cheon (2004) presented three types of avoidance strategies: cognitive, affective, and behavioral.Chatterjee (2008) and Burke and Srull (1988) divided advertising avoidance into cognitive ad avoidance and physical ad avoidance. Although different researchers have devised different categories and labels, this study carefully plumbed the depths to explain, define, and observe real avoidance behavior as adopted by the scholars and determined that these different labels actually have much in common. We also found that these category labels cannot be put together into one all-inclusive system. Accordingly, this study asserts that the behavioral ad avoidance of Speck and Elliott (1997) is the same as the physical ad avoidance of Abernethy (1991) and the behavioral ad avoidance of Cho and Cheon (2004). In addition, the mechanical ad avoidance of Speck and Elliott (1997) is the same as the mechanical ad avoidance of Abernethy (1991) and the affective ad avoidance of Cho and Cheon (2004). However, the behavioral ad avoidance and the mechanical ad avoidance of Speck and Elliott (1997) are combined in the definition of physical ad avoidance by Chatterjee (2008) and Burke and Srull (1988).In relation to traditional media, the Internet has a higher degree of information richness. Additionally, because of the evolution of program technology, the Internet has been viewed as a media conglomerate as it can provide a variety of information similar to that of traditional media (television, radio, newspapers, magazines, billboards, and direct mail) (Cho and Cheon 2004). Advertising on the Internet has variety and is novel. Furthermore, Internet ads also have more activity and invite more interaction than do traditional ads. Therefore, it may appear that avoidance behavior of online advertising includes more than the two ways that prior research has identified. For example, when the consumer scrolls down the web page to avoid viewing the advertising, should this behavior be categorized as mechanical ad avoidance or as behavioral ad avoidance? Categorizing it as physical ad avoidance, which employs the broader range of the definition of Chatterjee (2008) and Burke and Srull (1988), eliminates the vagueness with respect to the various categories. Hence, this study has opted physical ad avoidance and cognitive ad avoidance from Chatterjee (2008) and Burke and Srull (1988) to interpret advertising avoidance of online advertising.Physical ad avoidance means that consumers consciously employ actions or mechanical devices such as switching channels, closing pop-up ads, or throwing away direct mail advertisements to avoid advertising exposure (Chatterjee 2008). Physical ad avoidance involves a conscious decision to take action to avoid advertising, and accordingly, it generally induces a different level of resistance response (Brehm and Brehm 1981). Cognitive ad avoidance means that consumers subconsciously avoid fixating on the visual range of advertising (Chatterjee 2008). Cognitive ad avoidance is an automatic procedure in that consumers may be blind to advertising that has been inserted in the media and, thus, see no need to make a conscious decision or take action. That is, apart from ignoring the advertisement, there is no other conscious behavior.As previously mentioned, any information that can be recognized as advertising would lead to advertising avoidance, and of course, keyword advertising is no exception.The main objective when developing keyword advertising is to enhance the click-through and look-through rate by giving advertising information that is related to the browser’s search goal. When searchers enter a key phrase, the search engine will generate two results on the search engine results pages — organic search results, which appear because of their actual relevance to the search terms, and sponsored search results, which are paid by a business based on keywords that are relevant to that business and appear with an advertising link (Battelle 2005, Naldi et al. 2010, Gauzente and Roy 2012).Based on the norms of advertising management policies of governments throughout the world though, the keyword advertising area must use a different background color to differentiate it from the organic search results. According to gestalt theory, when a similarity of visual elements between two blocks is lacking (e.g., different background color), browsers tend to disregard these blocks as a whole (Wagemans et al. 2012), and immediately determine that the keyword advertising area is independent of the organic search results. The areas of sponsored search results are then easily noticed and are known as commercial information. Furthermore, advertisers must label the keyword advertising area accordingly. For example, Yahoo! labels it “sponsored search results” and Google labels it “Ads related to. Browsers can also easily gauge that organic search results and sponsored search results are two different areas. Therefore, when searchers are browsing through their search results, they can readily perceive the sponsored search results as being in a commercial advertising area in their pre-attentive processing.According to the literature previously discussed herein, there are four reasons for advertising avoidance. These reasons also apply to keyword advertising. First, based on the principle of decreasing loss in terms of opportunity cost, people are more inclined to do other things deemed more worthwhile than looking at advertising (Tse and Lee 2001, Prasad et al. 2003). In the case of an online search, the purpose of entering a search engine results page is to search for specific information. To be more efficient, searchers focus on organic search results instead of spending time browsing keyword advertising.Second, keyword advertising generally appears at the top, bottom, or to the right-hand side of the organic search results. It may cause perceived ad clutter when searchers enter the search engine results page, which, in turn, produces negative attitudes toward keyword advertising (Cho and Cheon 2004). The third reason for advertising avoidance is perceived goal impediment (Cho and Cheon 2004). When keyword advertising floods the search engine results page, it may disturb or break off the user’s process of searching for the target information. Prior negative experience is the fourth reason. For online consumers who have been disturbed by keyword advertising, the past unpleasant experiences may have led to their current negative attitudes and advertising avoidance (Cho and Cheon 2004). Thus, keyword advertising is the same as other forms of advertising in that its proliferation and location can cause people to avoid taking note of it.The two methods of advertising avoidance are physical ad avoidance and cognitive ad avoidance (Chatterjee 2008, Burke and Srull 1988). Physical ad avoidance is the performance of a conscious action to avoid advertising (Chatterjee 2008). Because sponsored search results are part of the search engine results page, searchers cannot avoid keyword adverting by closing the web page. Thus, the only way to physically avoid advertising is to click on organic search results rather than sponsored search results. Thus, we propose Hypothesis 1.Hypothesis 1Click TendencyOn the search engine results pages, searchers tend to click on the organic search results rather than on the sponsored search results.Cognitive ad avoidance is a subconscious avoidance action (Chatterjee 2008) wherein searchers do not take notice of sponsored search results. We suspect that the observation counts and observation lengths of viewing keyword advertising will be less than that observed for organic search results. Thus, we propose Hypothesis 2.Hypothesis 2Browsing BehaviorOn the search engine results pages, organic search results generate more browsing behavior than do sponsored search results.On the search engine results pages, the observation count of views of organic search results is higher than the count for views of keyword advertising.On the search engine results pages, the observation length of viewing organic search results is longer than the length of time spent viewing keyword advertising.The purpose of this study is to understand whether people prefer to click and view keyword advertising or organic search results when they are conducting keyword searches. To verify the hypotheses, we conducted our experiment using a laboratory experimental method to imitate real search conditions. Participants were recruited and randomly assigned to one of three specific search tasks. They were instructed to search for information using our mimic search engine website by keying in the assigned word: iPhone, Google Glass, or Lytro Camera. In experiments, we utilized eye-tracking technology to track the eye movement of participants as they viewed the search engine results page, and we used a computer program to record actual clicking behavior. Upon completion of the experiment, the participants were given a small gift as appreciation for their time and effortA total of 451 volunteers who have website searching experience were recruited and were invited to enter the laboratory. In the iPhone search task, the participant group was comprised of 85 men and 76 women with an average age of 23.14 (std. dev.=5.12). The average Internet use experience of the participants was 11.34years (std. dev.=4.69). In the Google Glass search task, the participant group was comprised of 56 men and 79 women with an average age of 23.97 (std. dev.=4.65). The average Internet use experience of participants was 10.21years (std. dev.=4.10). In the Lytro Camera search task, the participant group was comprised of 75 men and 80 women with an average age of 24.32 (std. dev.=5.92). The average Internet use experience of participants was 9.47years (std. dev.=5.55).To observe and record participants’ clicking behavior and eye movement on organic search results and sponsored search results in the search engine results page, this study divided the results page into three areas of interest (AOI). Fig. 1indicates that AOI 1 and AOI 3 have been defined as keyword advertising zones, and AOI 2 has been defined as the organic search results zone.If participants had searched for iPhone, Google Glass, or Lytro Camera information before the experiment, a different behavioral reaction from their original search behavior would have ensued as they would have tried to imitate their original search. This would have introduced an unnatural search motivation into the task. To avoid this, we built motivation into the search task. That is, we used writing a product research report as our specified task to engage participants in the task and enhance their motivation to search for the iPhone, Google Glass, or Lytro Camera information. The following is the task description:You have to finish an “iPhone” (“Google Glass,” or “Lytro Camera”) product research report. Therefore, you must retrieve some information about the standards and functions of an iPhone (“Google Glass,” or “Lytro Camera”). You will enter an online search engine and key in the phrase “iPhone” (“Google Glass,” or “Lytro Camera”) in the search box and then click on the one link you want to browse.The search engine of the experiment website imitates the interface of Yahoo! because it is the most popular search engine in the research area (71.7% of users use Yahoo! as the portal site to search for information in this market). (The interested reader should visit www.insightxplorer.com/news/news_02_23_10.html.) To avoid having an unfamiliar results page cause a reaction that might affect the results (Kerlinger and Lee 2000), the typesetting and product-related information content of the keyword advertising similarly imitated the search engine results pages of Yahoo! We chose iPhone, Google Glass, and Lytro Camera as the three specific search targets because it is easy to obtain related material such as photos, product overviews, features, and specs for such products. Each participant was randomly assigned one of these three search tasks.When participants entered the keyword in the search box and hit enter, the search engine results page appeared with its three unmarked AOIs (AOI 1 and AOI 3 are the keyword advertising zones, and AOI 2 is the organic search results zone). To avoid a difference in product information content in each zone (e.g., text color, text length, font size, description) that could influence one’s intention for clicking, all three AOIs provided congruent information. Furthermore, we also imitated Yahoo’s design in using red to mark any keywords that appear in the search engine results page. Similarly, to assist participants in easily recognizing the zones of keyword advertising, we highlighted these zones and labeled them “sponsored results” on the upper right corner in a specific color.The actual clicking behavior of participants in the search engine results pages was recorded by a computer program. Participants were given only one chance to click on the hyperlink of the site they wanted to visit. The total number of clicks on each AOI was viewed as the dependent variable of the Click Tendency Hypothesis (H1).The eye-tracking device cast an infrared light into the participant’s eyes, and a high-powered camera created an image of the pupils. A computer program then analyzed the shape of the pupils and the position of the cornea borders to infer the participant’s gaze plot and the movement of the gaze between fixations. Because count and duration are the two most important aspects of gazing behavior, we adopted observation count and observation length as the measurement variables. Observation count refers to the total number of gazes on each AOI. A higher number indicates more gazes. Observation length refers to the duration of the gazes on each AOI. A higher number indicates that the tally of the gaze durations is longer. The unit of measurement used was the millisecond (ms).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
