@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm with genetic algorithm crossover for solving economic load dispatch problem with valve-point effect

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Problem: economic load dispatch with valve point effect.Solution method: modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm (MSFLA) with genetic algorithm (GA) cross-over.Validated the proposed method with four test case system.The results are quite promising and effective compared with several benchmark methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Economic load dispatch,Genetic algorithm,Modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm,Valve point effect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses a hybrid solution methodology involving modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm (MSFLA) with genetic algorithm (GA) crossover for the economic load dispatch problem of generating units considering the valve-point effects. The MSFLA uses a more dynamic and less stochastic approach to problem solving than classical non-traditional algorithms, such as genetic algorithm, and evolutionary programming. The potentiality of MSFLA includes its simple structure, ease of use, convergence property, quality of solution, and robustness. In order to overcome the defects of shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA), such as slow searching speed in the late evolution and getting trapped easily into local iteration, MSFLA with GA cross-over is put forward in this paper. MSFLA with GA cross-over produces better possibilities of getting the best result in much less global as well as local iteration as one has strong local search capability while the other is good at global search. This paper proposes a new approach for solving economic load dispatch problems with valve-point effect where the cost function of the generating units exhibits non-convex characteristics, as the valve-point effects are modeled and imposed as rectified sinusoid components. The combined methodology and its variants are validated for the following four test systems: IEEE standard 30 bus test system, a practical Eastern Indian power grid system of 203 buses, 264 lines, and 23 generators, and 13 and 40 thermal units systems whose incremental fuel cost function take into account the valve-point loading effects. The results are quite promising and effective compared with several benchmark methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Economic load dispatch (ELD) is a familiar problem pertaining to the allocation of the amount of power to be generated by different units in the system on an optimum economic basis. The generated power has to meet the load demand and transmission losses. This implies that the dispatch at the true minimum cost requires that we take the network losses into account. Also for the secure operation of the power system, the generators must dispatch in such a way so that the transmission capacity limits are not exceeded.Many researchers are involved in tackling the ELD problem for significant economical benefit. Conventional methods such as lambda iteration method, and gradient based method [1] are used to solve the ELD problem by changing the fuel cost curve in a piecewise linear function or monotonically increasing function. These methods ignore the portions of incremental cost curve that are not continuous or monotonically increasing. But input–output characteristics of modern units are inherently non-linear because of ramp rate limits, valve point loadings, etc. So in the classical method, the fuel cost curve is approximated according to their requirement but use of such approximation may lead to huge loss of revenue over the time. Dynamic programming, proposed in [2], is a method to solve non-linear and discontinuous ELD problem but simulation time increases rapidly with respect to system size in this method.Other than classical methods, different artificial intelligence based methods have been successfully utilized to compute ELD problems. These methods are evolutionary programming [3,4], particle swarm optimization [5], tabu search [6], differential evolution [7], biography based optimization [8], genetic algorithm [9,10], artificial neural network [11], intelligent water drop algorithm [12], etc. However the cost curve of a generator containing discontinuities like valve point loading is more realistically denoted as segmented piecewise non-linear function [13] rather than a single quadratic function. Some studies have been done for this type of ELD problem with valve point effect such as novel niche quantum genetic algorithm [14], hybrid quantum mechanics inspired particle swarm optimization [15], combining of chaotic differential evolution and quadratic programming [16], biogeography based optimization [17], hybrid solution methodology integrating particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm [18–20], enhanced bee swarm optimization method [21], enhanced adaptive particle swarm optimization (EAPSO) algorithm [22], the sequential quadratic programming (SQP) method [23] and artificial bee colony algorithm [24]. A new soft computing technique like [25] proposed a Modified Honey Bee Mating Optimization (MHBMO) to solve the dynamic optimal power flow (DOPF) problem considering the valve-point effects. Another new approach called Taguchi method [26] that involves the use of orthogonal arrays in estimating the gradient of the cost function is employed to solve the economic dispatch problem with non-smooth cost functions. Each and every method has its own limitations. Neural network suffers from excessive iterations, resulting in huge calculations as well as more processing time. Genetic algorithm has a disadvantage of premature convergence, and due to that its performance degrades and its search capability is reduced. In PSO, the algorithm progresses slowly and due to its inability to adjust the velocity step size it may be difficult to continue the search at a finer grain. For multi modal function PSO sometimes fails to reach global optimal point. However, regulation of the control parameters of these hybrid methods is a challenging and complicated task and enhancement is done using a mutation operator. DE has been found to yield better and faster solution, satisfying all the constraints, both for uni-modal and multi-modal systems by using its different crossover strategies. However with increase in system complexity and size, the DE method is unable to map its entire array of unknown variables together in an efficient way. A new technique of a θ-multi-objective-teaching–learning-based optimization algorithm [27] and modified teaching–learning algorithm [28] are employed to solve the dynamic economic emission dispatch problem where problem formulation is much more complicated. In [29] a new self-adaptive modified firefly algorithm is suggested to solve the ELD problem. Although this algorithm is completely suitable for tuning off its parameters, it suffers from the difficulties of trapping in local optima.Recently, a new meta-heuristic algorithm called shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) is introduced [30,31]. It aims to model and mimic the behavior of frogs searching for food laid on stones randomly located in a pond. It combines the advantages of the gene based memetic algorithm (MA) and the social behavior-based particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm and has found applications in areas such as optimizing bridge-deck repairs [32], materialized views selection [33], bi-criteria permutation flow shop scheduling problem [34], reservoir flood control operation [35], and a mixed-model assembly line sequencing problem [36]. In the field of electrical research the SFLA technique is extensively used in optimal reactive power flow [37,38], combined economic emission dispatch [39], and unit commitment [40]. The simple SFLA technique is improved using GA crossover in local iteration as modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm (MSFLA) and is used in ELD problems without non-convex characteristic [41]. Another type of MSFLA is used in the ELD problem with valve-point effects as a non-smooth optimization problem having complex and non-convex characteristics with heavy equality and inequality constraints [42] where modification is done only by shuffling the frog in local iteration.This paper contributes a new hybrid algorithm in an evolutionary algorithm family to solve the ELD problem with valve-point effects. The proposed hybrid algorithm combines shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) and genetic algorithm (GA) that chooses genes (features) related to classification. It is named as modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm (MSFLA) with GA crossover which is used to solve a non-smooth optimization problem having complex and non-convex characteristics with heavy equality and inequality constraints. This makes the challenge of finding the global optimum difficult. The motivation behind choosing GA crossover in SFLA is to get a better solution using crossover between two frogs (taking the best one and the worst one according to the fitness value), getting two new offsprings with their different fitness values. As the operation is performed between the best and the worst frog, two offsprings with obviously better fitness values compared to the worst frog (parent frog) are produced. Hence the range of fitness values is obviously decreasing with iterations, helping to find the optimum result with the minimum number of iterations, in minimum time. In the case of SFLA the frogs are shuffled within the different memeplexes but no new frogs with better fitness values are generated. Moreover this hybrid approach presents an accurate result with the minimum number of iterations compared to other algorithms because in MSFLA there are two types of search involved – local and global search, while in the case of other algorithms (GA, PSO, ACO), there is only one type of search or iteration (i.e. global search). As two types of search techniques are involved in MSFLA, it works as a divide and conquer method. Thus it gives a better outcome compared to other optimization methods. In order to check the applicability of the proposed method, four power systems are considered, including the IEEE 30-bus standard test system, the 203-bus, 264-line, 23-generator Eastern Indian power grid system, and systems of 13 and 40 generating units. The results obtained through the combined approach are analyzed and compared with those reported in recent literature.A brief description and mathematical formulation of the ELD problem is discussed in Section 2. The concept of SFLA is discussed in Section 3 and modification of respective algorithm is done in Section 4 while the implementation is represented in Section 5. Simulation studies are discussed in Section 6 and conclusion is drawn in Section 7.The objective of ELD operation is to minimize the generation cost(Fctotal)which mainly comprises fuel cost at thermal power plants subjected to the operating constraints of a power system. The fuel cost function is represented in Eq. (1) where α, β, γ are respective cost co-efficients andPGiis the generated power of unit i. This study considers the valve-point effects as a complementary component of objective function. Therefore the objective function is described as the superposition of sinusoidal functions and a quadratic function. The cost function curve is shown in Fig. 1.The quadratic fuel cost function (approximated by bold line in Fig. 1) can be shown as(1)Fctotal=∑i=1NGFci=∑i=1NGαi(PGi)2+βiPGi+γiunitofcost/hThe dotted-line in Fig. 1 is the cost function variation considering the valve-point effects. This cost function is obtained based on the ripple curve for more accurate modeling. This curve contains higher order non-linearity and discontinuity due to the valve point effect and in order to incorporate such effects, sinusoidal functions are added to the fuel cost function. Therefore instead of using (1), the modified cost function is used, which is(2)F′ctotal=Fctotal+eisin(fi(Pimin−Pi))or(3)F′ctotal=∑i=1NGαi(PGi)2+βiPGi+γi+eisin(fi(Pimin−Pi))where eiand fiare constants of the valve point effect of generators. Hence, the total fuel cost must be minimized according to (4).(4)minf=∑i=1NGF′ciThe objective of the ELD problem is subjected to the following equality and inequality constraints.The sum of the generated powers of all units must be equal to sum of the power demanded by the load and the total transmission loss. Mathematically this constraint can be defined as:(5)ε=∑i=1nPGi−PD−PLwhere ɛ must be equal to zero, as according to power balance criterion, generated power (PG) should be equal to total load demand (PD) plus total line losses (PL).The system transmission network loss is computed by the Kron's loss formula, which represents loss as a function of the output level of the system-generating units. The matrix formulation is shown in (6) where Bijis respective B-coefficient of the system.(6)PL=∑i=1n∑j=1mPGiBijPGj=B00+∑i=1nBi0PGi+∑i=1n∑j=1mPGiBijPGjTo calculate transmission losses, apart from Kron's formula other methods such as Newton's approaches using polar coordinates and rectangular coordinates and several non-linear techniques are also being used. Nowadays transmission losses are simultaneously determined in conjunction with optimal power flow calculation. In this paper, loss coefficients are calculated using optimal power flow solution along with the load flow method.The power output of each unit (i) must be greater than or equal to the minimum power(PGimin)permitted and also be less than or equal to maximum power(PGimax)permitted on that specified unit. Thus the inequality constraint is expressed as:(7)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimaxComplication of the ELD problem with valve point effect considering both equality and inequality constraints has to be overcome by evolving the new optimization algorithm (MSFLA with GA crossover) discussed hereunder.SFLA is a kind of post-heuristic computing technique based on swarm intelligence put forward by Eusuff and Lansey [30,31]. SFLA mimics the memetic evolution of a group of frogs. It is based on evolution of memes and a global exchange of information among the frog population. It combines the benefits of gene based memetic algorithm and social behavior based particle swarm optimization algorithm with such characteristics as simple concept, fewer parameters, prompt formation, great capability in global search and easy implementation. In addition it overcomes the limitations of PSO like suffering from the partial optimism, and inability to work out the problems of non-coordinate systems, such as the solution to the energy field and the moving rules of the particles in the energy field.Shuffled frog leaping algorithm involves a population of frogs (every frog represents a feasible solution) with the same structure but different adaptation. The population is partitioned into a number of groups referred to as a memeplex. The algorithm performs an independent local search within each memeplex; and after certain number of local iterations, the whole population of frogs are shuffled and reorganized into new memeplexes to ensure global optimization [43].The SFLA process contains elements of global and local search and shuffling process; the details of SFLA are described as follows. For the SFLA conceptual model, the notations are defined as follows as used in this paper:F: representation of a frogp: population size i.e. number of total frogsd: number of variables in each frogM: number of memeplexesN: number of frogs in each memeplexiterloc: number of local iterations within each memeplexiterglo: number of global iterations in the programXb: best frog according to the fitness valueXw: worst frog according to the fitness valueOff1 and Off2: off-springs created after crossing over between Xband Xw.In a d-dimension target searching space, generate randomly p frogs (solution set) to compose initial population. The ith frog represents the solution of the problem Xi(xi1, xi2, …, xid). Frogs are arranged from good to bad according to fitness to divide the whole population into M sub-populations (memeplexes) such that each memeplex holds N no. of frogs (M*N=p). Amongst them, the frog ranking 1st is divided into 1st memeplex, one ranking 2nd into 2nd memeplex, one ranking Mth into Mth memeplex, one ranking (M+1) into 1st memeplex, one ranking (M+2) into 2nd memeplex, analogize in sequence until all frogs have been divided. Fig. 2shows the detail frog division.Every memeplex is used for local area deep-searching. In each iteration the worst individual Xw, and the best one Xbare determined first. The update operation is just done to the current worst individual Xw(same technique is done in PSO), but the update strategy is different, and is discussed below:Frog leaping step update:(8)Di=rand()(Xb−Xw)(−Dmax≤Di≤Dmax)Location update:(9)Xwnew=Xw+Diwhere rand() represents a random number uniformly distributed between 0 and 1; Dmax represents the maximum number of update steps allowed. If the fitness value of newXwis good enough, Xwwill be replaced. If it is not improved, then a new Xwwill be generated randomly. This update operation is repeated until the update number is satisfied. After the local area deep-searching of all memeplexes have been finished, all frogs in all memeplexes are mixed and reordered into M memeplexes.The proposed modified shuffled frog leaping algorithm (MSFLA) with genetic algorithm (GA) crossover is designed based on the same framework of shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA). Fig. 3outlines the flow chart of the proposed algorithm.This paper proposes the improved MSFLA with GA crossover to solve the ELD problem with non-convex valve point effect. The stages of the proposed algorithm and further procedures particularizing the modified SFLA (MSFLA) with genetic algorithm (GA) based crossover operation, including the design of global as well as local exploration strategies within each memeplex and crossover operation implementation, are explained here under.In SFLA, a potential solution to a specific problem may be represented as memotype like chromosome, containing a series of memes similar to genes. So, each frog is referred to as a memotype and a set of memotypes make up the whole population of frogs. In the ELD problem, each meme in a frog (memotype) represents the value of each variable. The length of memotype equals d with index range from 1 to d and the population size equals p (number of frogs) with index range from 1 to p.(10)F1={M1M2M3M4………Md}F2={M1M2M3M4………Md}F3={M1M2M3M4………Md}...Fp={M1M2M3M4………Md}For case I and case II, 13 and 40 generator units are considered to be variable. They are implemented as (p*13 and p*40) matrices in the programming where p is the population size.A fitness function must be devised to determine the quality of a given memotype instance. The minimum fuel cost for both the units, denoted as fitness function (Eq. (3)), is determined using the proposed algorithm considering valve point effect and simultaneously maintaining equality and inequality constraints (Eqs. (5)–(7)).The position vector of each individual frog represents a feasible solution of the ELD problem. Essentially, in SFLA local search is accomplished by improving the position of Xwwithin default local iteration for each memeplex. Because the local searches of SFLA only modify the performance of Xwand Xbto determine the leaping step of Xw, these may lead the individuals of each memeplex to not share the enough ideas, and at the same time, affect the convergence of SFLA. In view of this, this paper proposes one modification as follows:Because SFLA only improves Xw, which is likely to lead the Xbto wander in its old state for a long time, the memeplex can get trapped in local search, leading the population into a local optimization. So, in this paper we have introduced the GA crossover operator in each memeplex to generate new frogs (offsprings) which have better ideas to share with other memeplexes.The cross-over operation is applied between Xband Xwto generate two new offsprings Off1 and Off2. From the four frogs, the better two frogs according to fitness values replace the Xband Xw. Clearly, as we have taken Xband Xwas parent frogs, so after crossing over the new two offsprings, will produce obviously better fitness values than Xw. So, Xwwill be replaced by either Off1 or Off2. Therefore, a new memotype (frog) with better ideas is generated through crossover.In the MATLAB (Math Works) program implementation of this ELD problem we have taken multiple crossing over points for this crossover operation. The multiple point (r) is generated randomly through the randi() function in Matlab.In Fig. 4, crossover between Xband Xwis shown using 3 crossing over points. Number of crossing over points is also generated randomly. r1, r2, r3 are random numbers between 1 and d (number of memes in each frog or number of variables present in the ELD problem); simultaneously, they must satisfy 1<r1<r2<r3<d.In this paper, we have also implemented crossover operation between best frog and worst frog globally to minimize the range of the fitness value. In the global iteration process the sort operation is performed and Xband Xware selected globally from the whole population of frogs. Crossover is executed between Xband Xwto generate two new offsprings with better fitness values. Thus from the four frogs, two frogs having comparatively best fitness value are selected. So, the worst frog is replaced by its child frog with better fitness value. Thereby decreasing the range of fitness values is for every generation (global iteration). The result obtained using this proposed method is found better compared to other benchmark methods. Analysis of results is discussed in Section 6.This section employs four examples to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed MSFLA with GA crossover with respect to the quality of the solution obtained. The following test cases are studied, analyzed and compared with other ELD methods.Case I: generators number 13; with valve point effect.Case II: generators number 40; with valve point effect.Case III: generators number 6; IEEE 30 bus standard test system; without valve point effect.Case IV: generators number 23; 203-bus 264-line 23-generator Eastern Indian power grid practical system; without valve point effect.In all the cases transmission losses are considered.The program is developed in MATLAB (Math Works) with Intel Pentium 4 processor of 1.8GHz clock speed and 1GB RAM. The parameter settings of the operations like population size (p), number of memeplex (M), maximum generation (iterloc*iterglo) are shown in Table 1.In each case study, 50 independent runs were made for each of the optimization methods, involving 50 different initial trial solutions.To address the accurate cost curve of each generating unit the valve point effects must be incorporated into the cost model. The first test system consisted of 13 units taking account of valve point loading. The accurate cost model using (Eq. (3)) considers valve point effect; the sinusoidal function is included in the quadratic cost function and the system data are given in [4]. In this case the load demand expected to be determined was PD=1800MW.The results obtained for case study I with solution quality and comparison with other methods are shown in Table 2, which shows that the MSFLA with GA crossover succeeded in finding the best solution for the tested method. The proposed method is capable of producing a higher quality solution than most of the evolutionary methods considering all three cost measurements (maximum, mean and minimum).The best generation value of each unit obtained in 50 trials is tabulated in Table 3. It can be inferred from the results that the solution obtained from the proposed MSFLA method is better than other techniques. The mean cost achieved by the MSFLA method is found to be the least. This implies that, on average, the quality of solutions obtained by MSFLA method is better than other methods. Moreover, the average execution time for this algorithm suggests that MSFLA is capable of reaching the solution at a very high speed.Table 2 reveals that FEP performed worst in terms of generation cost and MFEP took maximum computational time. ICA-PSO converged faster than other methods but it computes higher generation cost compare to MSFLA. MSFLA possessed higher solution time compared to ICA-PSO, DEC-SQP and BBO, as it runs global as well as local iteration simultaneously to get a better solution. It has been observed that MSFLA can obtain all theoretical optimal solutions with good algorithm stability. It has better global search capability compared to other benchmark methods mentioned in Table 2. It appears to be the best amongst the methods in this test case in terms of convergence rate, solution time, probability of attaining better solutions, mean cost, and minimum cost achieved. The best result and lowest transmission loss obtained for solution vector Pi, where i=1,2,…,13 with proposed approach with minimum cost of 17,915.64$/h is given in Table 3.Test case II consisted of 40 generating units, adapted from [4], with modifications to incorporate the valve-point loading. The load demand is 10,500MW. Table 4shows the best solution time, maximum cost, mean cost, and minimum cost achieved by the proposed method, compared with other benchmark methods. MFEP was the slowest amongst the 11. The minimum generation cost obtained by MSFLA is 121,263.48$/h is least among the remaining cases. The best result and lowest transmission loss obtained for solution vector Pi, where i=1,2,…,40 with proposed approach with minimum cost of 121,263.48$/h is given in Table 5. It is observed that improved mechanism of MSFLA owns stronger global search ability, higher precision, faster velocity of convergence and better robustness.In this case, IEEE 30 bus standard test system is considered. It has 6 generators, 30 buses, 43 branches and 6 tie lines. Total load demand is 283MW. Table 6shows different parameters of ELD scheduling of the IEEE 30 bus test system with three computational techniques. It has been shown that compared to GA and classical methods, MSFLA with GA crossover technique in respect to cost and power scheduling is better than the other two methods, though the computational time is more in MSFLA than in GA. In MSFLA, crossover operation is performed in local as well as global iteration time whereas in GA there is only one crossover operation. With respect to transmission loss, MSFLA computation yields lower loss compared to classical methods and GA. It has been observed that compared to the other two methods, the proposed method saves at least 10$/h for same load demand.A practical power network of 203 buses, 264 lines and 23 machines like the Eastern power grid of India has been considered in this case to simulate using the proposed algorithm. The result of proposed MSFLA model is compared with the GA based ELD results and classical iteration methods. A reasonable B-loss coefficient matrix of the system has been employed to calculate transmission loss. Total power demand is considered as 5000MW. It is observed from Table 7that in a large system MSFLA based ELD scheduling still shows a better result compared to GA and classical method. The total power generated using MSFLA is lesser in comparison to computed power by the other two methods, and in cost comparison, it saves around 30$/h and 70$/h compared to GA and conventional classical method, respectively. It is most logical that the MSFLA technique provides a tool for reduction in total cost of generated power.From Tables 2, 4, 6 and 7, it is clear that the minimum costs achieved by MSFLA are 17,915.64$/h, 121,263.4$/h, 3339.94$/h and 51,469$/h for test cases I and II, III and IV, respectively. Those are best and less than reported in other benchmark methods. For the first two cases maximum, mean and minimum cost are least using the proposed method emphasizing its better solution quality. For test case III and IV, the average cost is least compared to GA and classical methods. In test case I, the solution obtained by MSFLA is very close to results obtained by DEC-SQP whereas in test case II the mean cost (121,422.37$/h) found by the proposed method is near the results obtained with methods like HQPSO and ICA-PSO. Moreover the proposed method proves its efficiency in the standard IEEE test system and a large practical power system in test cases III and IV. So it can be said that performance of the MSFLA with GA crossover method is consistent for large convex type systems also. The average cost of generation in this method is better for both convex and non-convex ELD problems, indicating its ability to reach global minima in a consistent manner and its better convergence characteristic.The MSFLA with GA crossover approach is also efficient as far as computational time is concerned. Time requirement is significantly less and either comparable or better than other mentioned methods. In case study I, it possesses less time compared to CEP, FEP, MFEP, IFEP, and QPSO. Only BBO, DEC-SQP, and ICA-PSO took less time than the proposed method whereas in case study II only DEC-SQP provides more convergence speed than MSFLA. For test cases III and IV, average processing time is less than the classical method and almost same as GA. So as a whole, it can be said that the MSFLA with GA crossover method is more computationally efficient than previously mentioned methods.Since initialization of frog is performed using random numbers in the case of stochastic simulation techniques, so randomness is an inherent property of these techniques. Hence the performances of stochastic search algorithms are judged out of a number of trials. Many trials with different initial habitats have been carried out to test the consistency of the MSFLA. For each case study, 50 different initial trial solutions are made. Fig. 5shows general converging characteristic nature for the case studies discussed before. From the observation it can be concluded that after a certain number of iterations the range of the fitness value between worst and best fitness is almost fixed for all initial value trials. It has been seen that performance of the proposed algorithm in complex multi-modal, non-convex type problems is much better than other optimization techniques mentioned in this paper. The good performance of MSFLA with GA crossover on the ELD problems with valve-point loading provides some evidence that MSFLA with GA crossover theory can be successfully applied to various practical power system optimization problems in the near future.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
