@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prototypes construction from partial rankings to characterize the attractiveness of companies in Belgium

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new methodology for constructing fuzzy prototypes from partial rakings is proposed.Obtained prototypes allow to characterize the attractiveness of companies in Belgium.The proposed methodology comprises two contributions related to the fuzzy clustering of partial rankings and the fuzzy aggregation of orderings having similar features.Simulations have shown the superiority of the new fuzzy clustering algorithm and the capability of the fuzzy aggregation method to produce high-quality prototypes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Partial rankings,Fuzzy clustering,Fuzzy aggregation,Prototypes construction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
What are the most relevant factors to be considered by employees when searching for an employer? The answer to this question poses valuable knowledge from the Business Intelligence viewpoint since it allows companies to retain personnel and attract competent employees. It leads to an increase in sales of their products or services, therefore remaining competitive across similar companies in the market. In this paper we assess the attractiveness of companies in Belgium by using a new two-stage methodology based on Artificial Intelligence techniques. The proposed method allows constructing high-quality prototypes from partial rankings indicating experts’ preferences. Being more explicit, in the first step we propose a fuzzy clustering algorithm for partial rankings called fuzzy c-aggregation. This algorithm is based on the well-known fuzzy c-means procedure and uses the Hausdorff distance as dissimilarity functional and a counting strategy for updating the center of each cluster. However, we cannot ensure the optimality of such prototypes, and therefore more accurate prototypes must be derived. That is why the second step is focused on solving the extended Kemeny ranking problem for each discovered cluster taking into account the estimated membership matrix. To accomplish that, we adopt an optimization method based on Swarm Intelligence that exploits a colony of artificial ants. Several simulations show the effectiveness of the proposal for the real-world problem under investigation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Job satisfaction results from employees’ positive and negative feelings regarding their environment at work and involves not only employees but also the employer. There is no conclusive way to measure or ascertain job satisfaction. In point of fact, job satisfaction is related to several aspects, depending on what each individual considers as important [1,2]. As an example, the financial soundness factor frequently reflects the employee's overall satisfaction, although it is supported by a positive working environment, high morale and resources available to the employees in order to perform the tasks that have been delegated onto them. Hence, employees’ job satisfaction goes beyond solely considering financial-type factors, mainly in those countries with high average incomes.For example, Hong et al. [3] measured the level of satisfaction of the non-administrative employees in a company and correlated it with four demographic factors that affect the employees’ perception such as work environment, remuneration, promotion and fairness criteria. The data were tested using the SPSS software and results indicated that the first three criteria significantly influenced the employees’ job satisfaction level. Qasim et al. [4] examined which of these four factors were contributing to the highest job satisfaction level of a multinational company's employees in Pakistan, using descriptive and causal techniques (regression, correlation tests, etc.). Likewise, factors associated to the relative importance of job satisfaction in different pharmaceutical companies were evaluated by Parvin and Kabir [1]. Results have shown that the most significant aspects contributing to job satisfaction are salary, work, fringe supervision and co-worker relationships. Nevertheless, the reader can notice that such factors may change according to sectors, country or even political situations.In several telecom companies in Pakistan, the job satisfaction is influenced by different factors such as employee relationships, salary, fringe supervision and efficiency[5]. In this study 200 employees were consulted and the SPSS software was used to analyze the acquired data through correlation tests and multiple regression. Also, Sageer et al. [2] examined employees’ preferences in areas of customer service and sales, determining which factors need to be improved, that is: organization development factors, career development, work task factors, policies of compensation, promotion and job security. As a final example, Sanera and Eyupoglu [6] evaluated the job satisfaction in financial sector, where 723 bank employees in North Cyprus were consulted. The computed results have shown that participants were quite satisfied with their job. The authors also determined key factors to be improved: responsibility, independence, policies and practices, advancement, compensation and variety.It can be observed that the above studies are mainly based on a descriptive analysis of the collected data, but in complex analysis scenarios these approaches are not enough. Furthermore, defining the suitable correlation between job satisfaction and job performance is very difficult since employees may be pressed by the negative consequences of their responses.In this paper we evaluate the attractiveness of several companies based on human reasoning. The term attractiveness refers to factors that prompted the employees to choose a suitable employer [7,8]. Such features implicitly reflect the job satisfaction of employees and the company visibility. In the business world, a chain of events is created based on job satisfaction. For example, if an employee is satisfied with their job, then (a) the performance will notably be increased, (b) the products and services will be improved, and therefore (c) the company will be more profitable, being more competitive in the global market. On the other hand, more candidates will apply for a position in that company, thus the Human Resources department can choose those candidates having better qualifications that are deemed to fit into the company culture. Such business strategies help improve the company brand name, the global visibility, and of course, to step up the sales and services.In this study, 17 global factors were evaluated only based on knowledge of 14,585 participants (to be considered as experts in the given domain) who filled out a survey including two scenarios. In the first scenario, respondents selected the top-5 factors, and next they arranged these items according to their preference; in the second scenario, participants were free to select the number of relevant factors they wanted. In both scenarios we obtained a population of partial rankings (tied factors are allowed) to be analyzed. Detecting tendencies in the data could be difficult due to the large number of responses and the features of partial rankings (e.g. a single instance cannot denote a population, otherwise the model resultant from the aggregation will be dictatorial and ill-defined).In order to characterize the responses, in this paper we propose a two-stage methodology for building prototypes from partial rankings. The prototypes construction process allows defining a population of objects (i.e. respondents) from well-defined tendencies observed in data. It involves two central steps: (i) the identification of similar tendencies by granulating the example space, and (ii) the aggregation of objects with similar features. When building artificial prototypes, the granulation of information can be performed using different strategies, however, the most broadly adopted approaches include rough sets and fuzzy clustering [9–11]. On the other hand, the aggregation of similar responses often requires an operator or procedure that depends on the collected data. In the case of prototypes construction from partial rankings, such steps become serious challenges to be addressed, and their solutions comprise the main theoretical motivations of the present research.Being more explicit, to tackle the challenge of building artificial prototypes we introduce a two-stage methodology that involves two main contributions. In the first step we present a new fuzzy clustering method based on the fuzzy c-means procedure for gathering partial rankings having similar features. The new clustering method, called fuzzy c-aggregations, uses the Hausdorff distance as dissimilarity functional and a fuzzy score based on the Borda's index to compute the center of each cluster (also called prototype). It should be stated that, as far as we know, only the method described by Jacques and Biernacki [12] is capable of clustering partial ranking data.The proposed fuzzy clustering algorithm produces a prototype for each cluster, however, there is no guarantee about the optimality of these temporal prototypes due to the fact that the Borda's index is likely to produce non-optimal aggregations. In order to compute more accurate prototypes, we solve the extended Kemeny problem for each fuzzy cluster. With this goal in mind, we adopt the heuristic procedure proposed by Nápoles et al. [13]. It exploits a colony of artificial ants to solve the Kemeny ranking problem by using a probabilistic decision model, which is based on the pheromone trails of the artificial ants and a suitable estimation of the heuristic information. It should be highlighted that this procedure cannot directly be used in fuzzy aggregation environments since it considers that all objects have the same membership degree. Therefore, the inclusion of the fuzzy component into its learning scheme comprises the second theoretical contribution of this research.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section describes the real-world problem to be addressed and the main theoretical challenges. Section 3 describes the proposed clustering algorithm for partial rankings, called fuzzy c-aggregations, which allows gathering those objects having similar features. Section 4 presents a fuzzy aggregation method that enables building high-quality prototypes from discovered clusters by solving the related Kemeny ranking problem. Section 5 defines a novel measure to examine the relative distance between two consecutive factors (i.e. objects to be ranked). In Section 6 we discuss the numerical results for both study cases, whereas in Section 7, concluding remarks about the real-world research study are provided.Before introducing the main theoretical challenges, we describe two scenarios that allow assessing the attractiveness of companies in Belgium. Here the prototypes construction becomes a suitable analysis tool in Business Intelligence environments, especially in matters related with Human Resources (HR) consultancy. During the data acquisition, 14585 Belgian respondents (aged between 18 and 65 years old) were consulted regarding two scenarios. Both surveys were conducted by experts from Randstad (http://www.randstad.com), the second largest HR provider in the world. It expanded its operations to 39 countries, representing more than 90 percent of the global HR services market.In the first study respondents selected the K=5 most important factors (from M=17 global factors elaborated by a heterogeneous panel of marketing experts) to be considered when they are looking for an employer. From this first survey we obtained 14,585 partial rankings where only the top-K factors are ordered, whereas the other (M−K) factors are tied at (K+1) position. In the second study each expert is free of selecting the most relevant Kifactors, therefore we obtained 14,585 partial rankings where the number of non-tied elements is not necessarily homogenous in all cases. For example, in the ith ranking the top- factors are ordered, while the remaining (M−Ki) factors are ranked at the (Ki+1) ranking position. If Ki>K then the partial ranking will probably comprise more information since it involves lower number of tied factors.The goal of this study is to construct fuzzy prototypes to characterize the attractiveness of companies resident in Belgium. In this research, prototypes are complete orderings that comprise key tendencies in the population (i.e. responses acquired from participants). The granulation of information becomes the tool for discovering tendencies in collected responses. It suggests that fuzzy granules emerge after applying a fuzzy clustering algorithm. On the other hand, the fuzzy aggregation of these information granules allows to construct high-quality prototypes with minimal deviation to the abstract (regularly unknown) consensus. As far as we know, this paper is the first attempt to construct fuzzy prototypes from a population of partial rankings, where tied factors could be observed.The obtained prototypes allow to characterize the attractiveness of companies in Belgium, that is, the ability of companies for attracting highly-competent and productive employees. If workers consider a specific factor (e.g. comfort) when they are looking for an employer, and the evaluated company does not involve such feature, then it is expected that more competent employees reject working with that company. With this knowledge at hand, the company board may improve its factors and enhance its visibility which frequently result in better incomes. Before introducing the technical roadmap of our research study and the theoretical changes arising from the real-problem described above, we detail the mathematical notation (see Table 1) adopted in this proposal.In this section we describe a methodology to cope with the problem of building fuzzy prototypes from a population of partial rankings. Without losing generality, the proposed solution could be compactly summarized in two main stages, which are described as follows.First step. In the first stage input objects are clustered, therefore those partial rankings having similar features will be gathered in the same group. Sometimes such groups are obtained by gathering partial rankings according to some fixed feature (e.g. age, occupation, education). However, resultant groups do not necessarily comprise objects with the same tendency. In this stage we propose a soft clustering algorithm, called fuzzy c-aggregations, for gathering partial (or complete) rankings. This method uses the Hausdorff distance as dissimilarity functional, and a fuzzy score based on the Borda's counting to update the center of each cluster (also called prototype). Fig. 1shows the blueprint of the first stage of the proposed methodology for clustering partial rankings.Second step. In the second stage partial rankings (i.e. input objects) belonging to the same cluster are aggregated to obtain a single representation. The model is based on the well-known Kemeny ranking problem, which attempts to find a full permutation (with non-tied factors) with the closest distance to the consensus. If we informally assume that a prototype is a concise representation from a sample of objects, then we could select the prototypes from clusters discovered in the above step (i.e. the object with closest distance to objects that belong to the same cluster). It implies that the aggregation step is not required. However, such prototypes will be dictatorship since they were obtained by only taking account the knowledge of a single individual, and this outcome must be avoided. On the other hand, the aggregation operator/method must include the membership degree of each object to discovered clusters into the optimization scheme. Fig. 2shows the blueprint of the second stage for building the prototypes from the clusters discovered in the previous stage.As mentioned before, our research comprises two different studies (i.e. a first scenario when experts selected the top-5 relevant factors, and a second scenario where each respondent is free of selecting the most relevant factors from 17 possible factors). Therefore, we must perform the same procedure described above for each study, leading to different sets of prototypes. It can also be noticed that the Step-1 and Step-2 must be executed in a sequential fashion since the output computed during the first stage is comprised of the input for the second step. However, the prototypes construction method for each cluster could be performed in parallel since there are no critic resources.From the theoretical viewpoint, building artificial prototypes from such partial rankings involves two main challenges. The first challenge refers to clustering those partial rankings having similar features in order to detect tendencies into the acquired data. As far as we know, only the procedure proposed by Jacques and Biernacki [12] is capable of clustering partial ranking data. The reader could observe that ranking data involve an ordinal relation among discrete items and therefore some modifications to standard clustering algorithms are required. For example, a central issue refers to the dissimilarity functional to be used since it must consider the ordering semantic. On the other hand, if we assume a prototype-based clustering model, then the strategy for updating the center of each cluster involves a non-trivial problem. Formally, the problem of clustering partial rakings is stated as follows.Let X be the set of N partial rankings {X1, …, Xi, …, XN} to be clustered, where Xiis described by M distinct categorical attributes {A1, …, Ak, …, AM}. This suggests that the object Xicomprises a partial ordering of M factors where ties are allowed (i.e. non-selected elements are placed at the last ranking position). The domain of the attribute Akis given by Dom(Ak)∈{F1, …, Fl, …, FM} where Fldenotes the lth factor to be evaluated in the online survey. Without losing generality we can describe a partial ranking Xias a vector{Xi1,…,Xik,…,XiM}whereXik≼Xik+1denotes the precedence relation between factors andXik∈Dom(Ak). Note that each factor Flwill be observed exactly once, so partial rankings are really permutations of M factors where tied items are allowed.The second challenge when building new prototypes from partial rankings refers to the aggregation of similar orderings. The aggregation of many preferences (partial or complete) has been widely studied by economists under social choice theory. Formally the aggregation problem could be summarized as follows: given N orderings {X1, …, Xi, …, XN} over M factors {F1, …, Fl, …, FM} where the lth ranking denotes the preference of a single expert, then the goal is to construct a consensus ranking taking into account all input rankings. Borda [14] and Condorcet [15] proposed some approaches for aggregating the preferences of the multiple voters, and argued over which approach is the right one (i.e. a model satisfying some fairness criteria). Unfortunately, Arrow [16] proved that there is no right approach, since there exists no aggregation method concurrently satisfying three simple fairness criteria: non-dictatorship, Pareto efficiency and independence of irrelevant alternatives.Despite this negative result, it is possible to compute an aggregated ranking having minimal distance to the global consensus, although it involves a NP-hard problem even for a few experts. This is known as the Kemeny ranking problem and involves a search space comprised of M! possible states. In order to deal with the computational intractability of this aggregation problem, Nápoles et al. [13] proposed a novel procedure based on Swarm Intelligence that exploits a colony of artificial ants. However, this algorithm is unable to handle partial rankings with different membership degrees since it assumes that each ranking only belongs to a single cluster. Therefore, the inclusion of the fuzzy approach becomes indispensable to address the Business Intelligence problem described before.In this section we addressed the first theoretical challenge, namely, clustering partial rankings having similar features. As a result, we introduce a novel fuzzy prototype-based algorithm which is inspired on the well-known fuzzy c-means. With this goal in mind we first review the basic principles of the fuzzy c-means, and next we detail the features of the new clustering method.Clustering of objects could be informally defined as a partitioning of objects into smaller subsets such that objects belonging to the same cluster have similar semantic meaning. The resultant partitions can be crisp or fuzzy. Contrary to hard cluster approaches [17–19], the fuzzy models [20–22] assume that each object belongs to all discovered clusters with a membership degree. Perhaps the most widely applied algorithm for clustering numerical data are the c-means algorithm [17] and the fuzzy c-means variation [20]. Since we are only interested on the fuzzy approach, the second method will be revised in the present section. The following equation shows the error function to be minimized at each cycle of the standard fuzzy c-means in order to achieve the best cluster structure.(1)J(U,Z)=∑j=1c∑i=1N(uji)ϕD(Xi,Zj)2where X={X1, …, Xi, …, XN} is the dataset (Xi∈ℝMfor 1≤i≤N), Z={Z1, …, Zj, …, Zc} is the set of cluster centers or prototypes, (Zj∈ℝMfor 1≤j≤c), Uc×Ndenotes the partition matrix such that uji∈[0, 1] is interpreted as the grade of membership on which the object Xibelongs to the jth cluster, whereasD(Xi,Zj)denotes the Euclidean distance from Xito the jth center Zj.In the above equation the exponent ϕ>1 determines the fuzziness degree (for ϕ→1 the clustering becomes crisp, whereas for ϕ→∞ the values ujitend to the value 1/c). The minimization of J(U, Z) will produce the best cluster structure and the optimal cluster results [21,23]. This can be achieved by using the well-known Lagrange multiplier method [24]. Eqs. (2) and (3) display how to update the partition matrix U and the prototypes vector Z, respectively. This updating strategy is iteratively repeated until no changes on the clusters structure is observed, which means that the fuzzy c-means algorithm found a soft partition of input patterns with optimal structure.(2)uji=1∑q=1cD(Xi,Zj)2D(Xi,Zq)21/(ϕ−1)(3)Zj=∑i=1N(uji)ϕXi∑q=1N(ujq)ϕ−1It could be perceived that the standard fuzzy c-means algorithm cannot be directly used for clustering categorical data. In the first place the Euclidean distance cannot be used for comparing non-numerical objects, so further alternatives are required. Secondly, a discrete prototype cannot be expressed as the weighted sum of numerical values. To address these issues, several methods for clustering categorical (or mixed) objects have been proposed in the literature [19,25–28]. For instance, the well-known k-modes procedure [19] uses a simple dissimilarity measure to deal with categorical objects, replaces the standard means of clusters with modes, and uses a frequency-based method to update modes in the clustering process to minimize the clustering cost function.Inspired on the above observations, in the next sub-section we introduce a new method for clustering partial rankings data, called fuzzy c-aggregations, which combines some ideas of fuzzy c-means and k-modes. The new algorithm is focused on replacing the distance function by a suitable dissimilarity functional, and introducing a sound strategy for updating the center of each cluster. Such variations comprise the main differences regarding the standard fuzzy c-means model.The first issue to be considered when clustering ranking data is related with the distance function to be used for comparing the dissimilarity between ranking objects. The most widely used distance function for comparing complete rankings if the Kendall-tau distance [29] which is defined as the number of item pairs over which they disagree. However, this function assumes that all factors are well-ranked where ties are not allowed, therefore the Kendall-tau distance is not a suitable alternative when we want to face the aggregation (or clustering) of partial rankings. Instead, we could adopt an extended dissimilarity measure such as the Hausdorff distance [30], the Spearman footrule distance [31] or the Goodman and Kruskal's approach [32]. Having several metrics for partial rankings is convenient, but exactly which one should a practitioner use to compare partial rankings? Moreover, which one is best suited for formulating a clustering algorithm for partial rankings?A serious disadvantage of Goodman and Kruskal's approach is that it is not always defined and thus could be scenarios where this approach could fail. On the other hand, Fagin et al. [33] mathematically proved that the Hausdorff versions of the Kendall-tau distance and the Spearman footrule distance are equivalent. This was inspired by the Diaconis–Graham inequality [34], which asserts that the Kendall-tau distance and the Spearman footrule distance are within a factor of two of each other. In this paper we adopted the Hausdorff version of the Kendall-tau as dissimilarity functional of the new clustering method. The Hausdorff distance has been extensively studied and shown to have particularly flexible mathematical and algorithmic properties [33]. Next equation shows this distance, where Xirepresents the ith partial ranking, Zjis the jth cluster center to be computed by the algorithm,K(Xi,Zj)denotes all item pairs that appear in different order,R1(Xi,Zj)is the set of all item pairs which are tied in Xibut not tied in the cluster center Zj, whereasR2(Xi,Zj)is the set of item pairs which are tied in the cluster center Zjbut not tied in the ith partial ranking.(4)H(Xi,Zj)=K(Xi,Zj)+max{R1(Xi,Zj),R2(Xi,Zj)}.The reader could observe that Eq. (4) can also be adopted for comparing complete rankings without ties, soR1(Xi,Zj)=R2(Xi,Zj)=0which leads to the Kendall-tau distance. The inclusion of the Hausdorff distanceH(Xi,Zj)in Eq. (2) allows computing the dissimilarity degree among the ith input ranking Xiand the jth cluster center Zj. In point of fact, this measure will be assumed in the remaining paper as the standard dissimilarity functional. This variation comprises the first change to the fuzzy c-means algorithm and is motivated by the underlying nature of data, namely, orderings of discrete factors where ties are allowed (i.e. partial rankings).Another aspect to be considered is how to determine the cluster center Zjat each cycle since clearly Eq. (3) is no longer useful. In order to solve this issue we could use a median-based approach where the cluster center is taken as the object having minimal Hausdorff distance to other rankings belonging to the same cluster. The reader may notice that a cluster center Zjactually represents the aggregation of all partial rankings belonging to the jth cluster, and hence it must fulfill the Arrow's fairness criteria [16]. However, since Zj∈X we can suppose that this first approach will produce a dictatorship cluster center, breaking the first fairness principle. More importantly, this strategy will produce a partial ranking as prototype having tied factors, which is regularly an undesirable feature when decision-makers face complex decision-making problems.The second strategy is based on the k-modes algorithm [19] which replaces the means by modes, and uses a frequency-based method to update such modes. This method could be adopted in the clustering process to minimize the clustering cost function, although some changes are required. More precisely, in the cluster center Zjeach factor Flmust appear exactly once, and this premise cannot be ensured if we use the standard frequency-based method. To address this problem we used an approach based on the Borda's index [14] which is a democratic approach. The main idea is to compute a score for each factor Flacross rakings grouped in the jth cluster, and afterward the M factors are sorted according to their normalized scores, which result in the updated cluster center Zj. The following equation shows the normalized score function Sj(Fl) presented in this proposal.(5)Sj(Fl)=1−∑Xi∈Pj(uji)ϕM∑k=1Mk,Xik=Fl0,Xik≠Fl∑i(uji)ϕ−1The proposed modifications (i.e. the adopted dissimilarity functional and the strategy for updating the cluster center) allow gathering partial rankings with similar features. However, we cannot ensure that the prototype Zjis optimal since the Borda's procedure only produces asymptotically optimal results when data are generated from a Mallows model [35] and in general, it cannot be ensured in real-world problems. To guarantee the optimality of temporal prototypes, the function J(U, Z) must be minimal and this is only possible if Zjis a solution for the jth Kemeny ranking problem. This implies to solve c different Kemeny problems for each iteration, thus the clustering method becomes computationally demanding. In the next section we describe an optimization method based on Swarm Intelligence for aggregating partial rankings that belong to the same cluster. This aggregation algorithm will produce an enhanced prototypeZ˜jhaving closer distance to the overall consensus.The fuzzy c-aggregations algorithm explained above induces a fuzzy partition P={P1, …, Pj, …, Pc} over the dataset X, where Pjdenotes the jth cluster with center Zj. In this scheme we suppose that an object Xiwill be contained in the set Pjif its membership degree uji>0, otherwise we will suppose that Xiis not related with those objects belonging to Pj. Since fuzzy partition P comprises c different patterns, multiple tendencies in respondents’ reasoning are captured. This methodology is frequently required in scenarios where experts provide quite dissimilar responses, leading to different solutions for the same problem. Afterward we describe a method for aggregating partial rankings gathered in the same fuzzy cluster, that is, those Xi∈Pjsuch that uji>0. This algorithm is based on the model proposed by Nápoles at al. [13] for crisp environments. From the aggregation model we obtain a set of improved prototypesZ˜={Z˜1,…,Z˜j,…,Z˜c}which comprises the desired knowledge.In this research the aggregation method for partial ranking data is performed by solving the extended Kemeny ranking problem. Formally, the Kemeny problem for partial rankings implies to estimate a complete rankingZ˜jminimizing Eq. (6). In this equationH(Xi,Y)represents the Hausdorff distance, Xiis the ith partial ranking having membership degree uji>0, whereas Y is the complete ranking generated by a discrete optimizer (e.g. Evolutionary Algorithms). Minimizing the objective functionFj(Y)is equivalent to find a full ranking with minimal distance to those rankings gathered in the jth fuzzy cluster, so the prototypeZ˜jdenotes the complete ranking consensus.(6)min→Fj(Y)=∑Xi∈PjujiH(Xi,Y)∑iuji−1A relevant aspect concerning the computational complexity when computing the Hausdorff distance is related to the features of the improved prototypeZ˜j. As was mentioned, the selected optimizer must generate complete orderings, so tied elements are not allowed. It suggests that the Hausdorff distance could be computed asH(Xi,Y)=K(Xi,Y)+R1(πi,π*)andR2(Xi,Y)=0since the candidate solution Y does not involve tied factors. It could be noticed thatR1(πi,π*)=M−Ki2where Kiis the number of relevant factors, according to the ith expert. The following equation shows the normalized objective function to be minimized. Note that we assume partial rankings with non-homogeneous tied factors, since each respondent is free of selecting different number of relevant factors.(7)min→Fj(Y)=∑Xi∈Pj2ujiK(Xi,Y)+M−Ki2M(M−1)∑iuji−1Notice that we need to minimize the objective functionFj(Y)associated to each cluster Pj, so a vector of prototypesZ˜={argminYF1(Y),…,argminYFj(Y),…,argminYFc(Y)}is obtained. This solution scheme seems computational demanding but in practice only a few fuzzy clusters are expected due to the relative consensus on the experts’ responses. On the other hand, in order to improve the search we could suppose that each cluster center Zjis an estimation of the solution that we are looking for (this aspect will be explained next). The reader could observe that a parallel implementation of this model can be designed without effort since the input resources remain without changes, and in view of that each aggregation instance could be triggered in an independent thread.Another relevant aspect is related with the discrete optimizer to be adopted in order to produce high-quality prototypes (i.e. complete rankings). Ali et al. [36] designed an extensive comparative study including different search methods (e.g. Branch and Bound, heuristic algorithms) for computing the Kemeny ranking. It was concluded that heuristic approaches are recommended in contexts having weak or no consensus. More recently, Aledo at al. [37] proposed a method based on evolutionary computation, which clearly outperformed the remaining tested algorithms.Inspired on these results Nápoles et al. [13] proposed a novel method for aggregating partial rankings which uses Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) as optimizer. The central reason behind this decision is encouraged by the strong ability of ACO for solving combinatorial problems [38] and its scheme for generating the new states. In a few words, the ACO metaheuristic exploits the heuristic information for improving the search, and this knowledge could be computed from input data. In the next section we discuss this heuristic search model, and the modifications required for building fuzzy prototypes having minimal Hausdorff distance to the overall consensus.The ACO metaheuristic is a search method for solving combinatorial problems, which is inspired on colonies of ants [39]. Likewise to other Swarm Intelligence algorithms, each ant denotes a candidate solution for the optimization problem. Such solutions are constructed step-by-step since ACO-based algorithms are fully constructive models where ants explore a construction graph. During the search process each artificial ant moves from one state (which are commonly considered as nodes of the graph) to another by using two values associated to each connection:•The learned information τklis based on the pheromone trails. The pheromone matrix is iteratively updated by ants according to the quality of candidate solutions.The heuristic information ηklis the static preference of accepting the next state from the current one. The estimation of the heuristic matrix depends on the features of the target problem and could be determinant to find high-quality solutions.Eq. (8) displays the transition rule used by ACO-based models, i.e. the probability of accepting the lth state (to be considered a factor) at the kth ranking position. In this equation, α>0 and β>0 are two user-specified parameters which are used for controlling the strength of pheromone trails and the heuristic information, respectively. Another component to be considered is the setNkvof feasible (i.e. unvisited) states for the vth artificial ant, whereNkv∈{F1,…,Fl,…,FM}. Formally this domain set is given by the expressionNkv={F1,…,Fl,…,FM}−{Yv1,Yv2,…,Yvk−1}, where Yvrepresents the complete ranking to be produced by the vth artificial ant.(8)pklv(t+1)=[τkl(t)]α[ηkl]β∑r∈Nkv[τkr(t)]α[ηkr]β,l∈NkvAfter the construction stage is done, it is necessary to update all pheromone trails using the solutions found by agents [40]. First, the pheromone evaporation takes place uniformly reducing all pheromone trails, and after that one or more solutions are used to increase the value of paths included in selected solutions. The pheromone updating rules play a central role in ACO-based methods, actually, exiting ACO variants mainly differ in the way that pheromone trails are updated.The Ant System (AS) was the first ACO implementation [41]. In AS the pheromone trails is updated once all ants have completed their tours. As a first step all pheromone trails are uniformly evaporated using an evaporation factor 0<ρ<1, and next each agent deposits a quantity of pheromone Δτklon those graph arcs that belong to its solution. Eq. (9) displays both procedures, where ρ represents the evaporation rate and, while S is the number of agents. It should be mentioned that arcs which are not regularly chosen by agents will eventually have lower pheromone values since their strength will decrease exponentially with the number of iterations, while arcs often chosen by agents will receive more pheromone, and thus they are more likely to be selected in future cycles.(9)τkl(t+1)=(1−ρ)τkl(t)+∑v=1SΔτklvThe Ant Colony System (ACS) improves the AS method by exploiting global-best solutions found by ants during the search stage [42]. This algorithm enhances the exploitation features of ants when they build a solution, instead of exploring new areas of the search space. Such improvements are achieved by introducing three variations: (i) a strong elitist strategy for updating pheromone trails, (ii) a rule for updating pheromone trails during the search phase, and (iii) a pseudo-random rule when selecting new states. Eq. (10) shows the strategy when updating the pheromone trails, whereτkl*represents the pheromone quantity associated to the best agent. It means that the evaporation step takes place in all arcs, but the updating process only occurs in the path selected by the best ant.(10)τkl(t+1)=(1−ρ)τkl(t)+ρτkl*(t)In order to exploit the best knowledge discovered by artificial ants, the ACS method also introduces a pseudo-random proportional rule (see next equation). More explicitly, if a random number q∼U(0, 1) falls below q0 then the agent will move to the state maximizing the product between pheromone trail and heuristic information, otherwise ACS will use the transition rule (8). It should be highlighted that the parameter q0 regulates the exploitation ability (e.g. when it is close to 1, exploitation is favored over exploration) and its value should be fixed by the expert.(11)l=argmaxr∈Nkv{[τkl(t)]α[ηkl]β},q≤q0As a final point, in the ACS model ants use a further rule for updating the pheromone trails when they are building the new solution (see next equation). This approach has the same effect of decreasing the probability of selecting the same path for all artificial ants, as a way of introducing a balance between exploitation and exploration, since the above rules are in favor of exploitation.(12)τkl(t+1)=(1−ρ)τkl(t)+ρτkl(0)The MAX–MIN Ant System (MMAS) was specifically developed to achieve stronger exploitation of solutions and to avoid stagnation states [43]. The stagnation state could be informally defined as the situation where ants construct the same solution over and over again and the exploration of the search space stops. Similarly to the ACS model, a strong elitist strategy regulates the agent which is allowed to update the pheromone trails. It could be the agent having better evaluation so far (global-best ant), or the agent with the best tour in the current iteration (iteration-best ant). Second, all pheromone trails are limited in the range [τMIN, τMAX]. If τMIN>0 for all components, then the probability of choosing a state will never be zero, avoiding stagnation states. As a final point, pheromone trails are initialized with τMAX to guarantee further exploration at the beginning of the search.In the above section we revise the main approaches to update the pheromone matrix during the search process. However, another important aspect when solving combinatorial problems using ACO-based algorithms is the estimation of the heuristic matrix. This information is used by artificial ants to guide their movements in the construction graph (i.e. selection of new states) and will not be updated during the algorithm progress. The accurate estimation of the heuristic component often leads to high-quality solutions, otherwise the solutions for the fuzzy Kemeny ranking problem (i.e. fuzzy prototypes) will probably be sub-optimal. In the following section we propose two strategies to estimate the heuristic matrix from input data, assuming two partial rankings aggregation scenarios.The first scenario takes place when each respondent selects the top-K factors. It means that each input rankings will be partial in the sense that only the top-K factors are ordered, whereas the other (M−K) factors are tied at the K+1 position. It can be perceived that estimating the pheromone values for the M factors across the first K positions is equivalent of computing the number of observations on which the lth factor was observed at the kth position (k={1, …, K}). For the remaining (M−K) places this heuristic cannot be directly used since these factors are tied, however, we could count the number of observations on which the factor was not included into the top-K.The following equation formalizes the above reasoning, where1≤i≤Pjindexes those respondents gathered in the jth fuzzy cluster (i.e. uji>0), ϑk(Fl) denotes the number of patterns on which the lth factor was ranked at the kth position, while ∼ϑk(Fl) computes the total number of patterns on which the lth factor was not included into the top-K positions, such that K<k≤M. Besides, for k>K we must divide the expression by (M−K) since each factor has probability (M−K)/M to be observed at the last (M−K) positions, assuming an uniform distribution.(13)ηkl(j)=ϑk(Fl)∑iuji−1,k≤Kand∼ϑk(Fl)(M−K)∑iuji−1,k>KIt should be stated that functions ϑk(Fl) and ∼ϑk(Fl) must consider the fact that Xibelongs to the jth cluster with some membership degree. It suggests that functions ϑk(Fl) and ∼ϑk(Fl) actually return a weighted sum, that is, the membership sum of those objects on which the factor was ranked at the kth position. Next equation shows, as an example, how to compute the function ϑk(Fl), but it could easily be extended for ∼ϑk(Fl). On the other hand, in the above equation∑iuji≤Nis used for normalizing the heuristic values computed at the beginning. If∑iuji=Pjfor all j then the clustering becomes crisp (e.g. the exponent ϕ→1), otherwise the partition is fuzzy.(14)ϑk(Fl)=∑Xi∈Pjuji,Xik=Fl0,Xik≠FlExample 1Let us consider a partial ranking aggregation problem having M=5 possible factors andPj=5rankings, where each expert selected the K=3 most relevant factors. In order to reduce our explanation we assume that all objects (respondents) have maximal membership degree to its cluster. Table 2displays this scenario, where each row involves a partial ranking where factors are linked to specific positions. According to Eq. (13) the heuristic value of accepting the factor F2 at the first ranking position is given byη12(j)=ϑ1(F2)/5=2/5. Following an analogous reasoning we can compute all components of the jth heuristic matrix used by the jth optimizer.The reader could notice that by using (13) some heuristic values could be zero (e.g.η25(j)=0since F2 was always included into the top-3) and therefore the probabilitypklvof selecting these states will be zero! Nonetheless, normally the probabilitypklvshould not be zero since it is possible to find a good solution having F2 at the last position. In order to overcome this issue we replace all zero-values byηMIN(j)=min{ηkl(j)}such thatηkl(j)≠0, so we guarantee that all states have probability to be visited by artificial ants, although they have less chance to be produced.This scenario is more complex (but also more informative) since each respondent is free of selecting Kifactors such that 2≤Ki≤M. Since the number of relevant factors could change from an expert to another, we cannot simply count the number of observations of each factor, instead we must quantify the number of times on which a factor could be observed at each position. It allows computing a more realistic heuristic matrix. Next equation formalizes this strategy, where the function ϑk(Fl) computes the observations on which the lth factor was ranked at the kth position,QKi(Fl)comprises all input rankings where the lth factor was not included into the top-Kipositions, whileψXi(Fl)is the set of feasible positions for the lth factor. Finally, the functionθXi(Fl,k)∈{0,1}responds the question: could the factor Flbe assigned to the kth position without inducing further ties?(15)ηkl(j)=ϑk(Fl)+∑Xi∈QKi(Fl)ujiθXi(Fl,k)ψXi(Fl)∑iuji−1Example 2Let us consider a partial ranking aggregation problem having M=5 possible factors andPj=5rankings, where the ith expert selected the top-Kifactors (see Table 3). In the same way to the scenario shown above we suppose that all objects have maximal membership degree to its cluster. The heuristic value of accepting F2 at the first positionη12(j)is given by 1/5(2+0/2+0/3)=2/5 because ϑ1(F2)=2,QKi(F2)={X1,X4},ψX1={4,5},ψX4={3,4,5}. Moreover, the binary functionθXi(F2,1)=0,∀Xi∈QKi(F2)sincek∉(ψX1∪ψX4). It suggests that F2 cannot be assigned to the first ranking position without introducing new tied pairs in the ordering.Similarly to the first scenario (i.e. experts homogenously select the most relevant K factors), we must avoid zero-values in the heuristic matrix, although this situation is possible (i.e. the factor was never observed in a position and according to data there is no chance to be observed without inducing tied pairs). Nonetheless, it is still possible to build a candidate solution with this feature having minimal distance to the consensus, therefore it must be considered as well. In such scenarios the probability should not be zero but small (e.g.ηMIN(j)=min{ηkl(j)}whereηkl(j)≠0).As a final point, which is common for both scenarios, in order to improve the search we could use the original cluster centers Zjas approximation of the solution that we are looking for. It can be achieved by initializing the global best solution (to be updated by artificial ants during the search progress) as the corresponding cluster center Zj, or alternatively increasing the initial pheromone values of those graph components11In our scheme the information are associated to graph nodes.belonging the solution Zj. In this research we adopted the first strategy, although they seem equivalent since paths matching with the global best solution will eventually receive more pheromone and therefore they are more likely to be produced. However, we expect best exploitation around the Borda's solution if the first approach is assumed, which could notably improve the search performance when building the set of improved prototypes.As discussed, the goal of the extended Kemeny ranking problem is to find a complete ordering from a set of input rankings, having minimal Hausdorff distance to the consensus where input rankings could be either partial or complete. The aggregated ranking is a suitable tool when we want to face decision-making problems based on permutations, but sometimes this knowledge is not enough, and therefore further analysis is often required. For instance, a central question when experts interpret a consensus ordering is: which is the distance between two consecutive factors? Next we describe a new measure based on the objective function (7) to address this question. This distance measure is not related with the construction of the fuzzy prototypes, but their interpretation and analysis.Let us consider a consensus orderingZ˜j={Z˜j1,…,Z˜jk,Z˜jk+1,…,Z˜jM}resulting from the optimization stage, whereZ˜jk≼Z˜jk+1is the precedence relation between two consecutive factors. It means that the complete rankingZ˜jcomprises a solution for the extended Kemeny ranking problem, therefore it has closer Hausdorff distance to the consensus. The following equation shows the new distance measure, called induced deviation, which computes the relative distance between two consecutive factors on the prototypeZ˜jestimated by some ACO-based search method. HereFj(.)represents the objective function (7) used for solving the Kemeny ranking problem,Z˜jkis the factor sited at the kth ranking position, whereas the functionΛ(Z˜jk,Z˜jk+1)Z˜jcomputes a new ranking obtained from the improved prototypeZ˜jwhere factorsZ˜jkandZ˜jk+1have been exchanged.(16)δ(Z˜jk+1,Z˜jk)=Fj(Z˜j)−Fj(Λ(Z˜jk,Z˜jk+1)Z˜j)∑kFj(Z˜j)−Fj(Λ(Z˜jk,Z˜jk+1)Z˜j)The central idea behind this measure could be summarized as follows: which is the induced deviation to the consensus if factorsZ˜jkandZ˜jk+1are exchanged? If such factors can be freely exchanged then the differenceFj(Z˜j)−Fj(Λ(Z˜jk,Z˜jk+1)Z˜j)will be zero, which means that both factors are equally important. Otherwise, the proposed measureδ(Z˜jk+1,Z˜jk)will be equal to the relative deviation to the experts’ consensus. It should be highlighted that our model attempts to compute a complete ordering from partial rankings. Despite this fact, it is possible to obtain a Kemeny solution having implicit tied factors, as was stated before. Even it is possible that∑kFj(Z˜j)−Fj(Λ(Z˜jk,Z˜jk+1)Z˜j)=0,∀k,so we must assume thatδ(Z˜jk+1,Z˜jk)=0for all pairs of factors. In general terms this novel measure allows decision-makers exploiting the knowledge comprised in the optimized prototypes, so further relevant patterns in input data could be discovered without effort.What are the most significant factors to be considered by employees when searching for an employer? Researchers have studied the attractiveness of a company but survey after survey, reveals that there is always room for improvements. In the present section we discuss this challenge through the proposed methodology, therefore the human reasoning is investigated in order to evaluate the attractiveness of companies resident in Belgium. As mentioned, in our study 14,585 respondents (aged between 18 and 65 years old) from Belgium where consulted. Two different scenarios were envisioned:(a)Each respondent selects the top-5 factors out of M=17 possible factors.Each respondent selects the most significant 2≤Ki≤M factors.Table 4displays the 17 global factors evaluated by respondents (experts) that came up after a panel discussion of marketing experts. In this study, respondents across different sectors, educational, sex and occupational groups were consulted. Tables 5–9show the distribution of respondents according to the categories, the percentage of the number of experts N=14,585, and the percentage regarding the number of valid instances. We assume that an instance (partial ranking) is valid if the object can be associated with the related category. For example, 38.8% of the respondents consulted during the survey are invalid for the category sector, since this information is missing.An important feature that should be considered during the first stage concerns the suitable selection of the number of artificial prototypes to be constructed. It could be either determined by decision-makers or automatically estimated from data by using a fuzzy cluster validity measure. Eq. (17) displays the Partition Entropy [44] measure where b denotes the logarithmic base, andN=Pjis the number of objects having membership degree uji>0. This fuzzy validity measure reaches its minimal value when the clustering structure is optimal and allows to assess the quality of the fuzzy partition. On the other hand, in this study we observed the minimal value for c=2, even using different values for the fuzzifier ϕ, which suggests that two different response tendencies were detected.(17)PE=−1N∑j∑iujilogbujiIn our simulations we adopt ϕ={1.10, 1.15, 1.20} with the intention of studying the variations of the membership value of each object to discovered clusters. For ϕ=1.10 the clustering method becomes more crisp whereas for ϕ=1.20 the model becomes more fuzzy (see Fig. 3). The fuzzifier is often set to 2, however, the partial rankings to be clustered involve a large rate of tied factors and therefore more sensitive configurations are required. On the other hand, in the real-world problem addressed in this paper, users tend to select a small subset of common factors at the main positions. It suggests that the ranking population (i.e. objects to be clustered) shares important features, and hence there exists a non-trivial mixture among such entities. Finding the proper configuration for the fuzzifier parameter is a sensible issue due to the underlying implications for the methodology described in this research. More explicitly, small values could lead to the misallocation of the ranking objects (i.e. a ranking will not be included into other groups since its maximal membership degree will be close to one). On the other hand, large values imply that the proposed clustering algorithm will produce similar structures (i.e. the membership degree of a ranking will be close to 1/c). Using the trial-and-error approach we detected that ϕ=1.20 is the best configuration when granulating the permutation space.In order to validate the cluster structure, we compare c-aggregation against the algorithm proposed by Jacques and Biernacki [12]. Rankcluster is an R package [45] for gathering multivariate partial ranking data by using the Insertion Sorting Rank (ISR) model. A conditional independence assumption allows to consider multivariate rankings, and clustering is performed by the mean of mixtures of multivariate ISR models [46]. To measure the quality of the fuzzy partition, we compute the deviation of temporal prototypes from the global consensus for each discovered cluster. The lower the deviation, the better the compactness of the fuzzy clustering scheme. In the case of the Rankcluster procedure, we assume that the membership degrees are given by the conditional probabilities for rankings to belong to each cluster. Table 10displays the normalized deviationFj(see Eq. (7)) associated to the jth cluster averaged after 10 independent simulations and the Partition Entropy measure.From the above results it can be concluded that the fuzzy c-aggregations method is able of producing a partition that yields better prototypes, although Rankcluster exhibits a lower entropy. This suggests that Rankcluster produces more compact clusters, therefore the membership degrees (i.e. conditional probabilities) for rankings that belong to detected cluster tend to be crisp. Producing well-separated clusters is regularly desirable in clustering algorithms, but sometimes it causes the misallocation of objects. Notice that we performed this comparison before applying the optimization stage since the ACO-based algorithm could correct the differences between both algorithms.The second stage is related with the construction of the enhanced prototypes by using the ACO-based model discussed before. By doing so, we adopt the following parameters: the number of ants is taken as the number of factors, α=3 and β=2 since the knowledge learned by artificial ants is often more confident, the evaporation factor ρ=0.6, while the pheromone matrix is initialized to τkl(0)=0.5. In the case of the ACS algorithm, the parameter q0=0.7, whereas for MMAS the pheromone limits λMIN and λMAX are computed as suggested in [43]. As a final point, in all cases the search procedure will finish when a maximal number of iterations T=120 is reached. Fig. 4portrays the relative heuristic value achieved for all optimizers regarding the heuristic value associated with the original prototypes resulting from the proposed fuzzy c-aggregations method.It should be mentioned that these values (with the exception of the cluster centers) were averaged over 10 independent trials due to the stochastic nature of the ACO-based models. From such results we can conclude that prototypes resulting from ACO models are closer to the overall consensus regarding the cluster centers (only the AS method performs comparably). It confirms, in some sense, the reliability of our proposal for building high-quality prototypes. Next we discuss the prototypes achieved by the ACS optimizer since it reported a lower disagreement value (heuristic value).For the first cluster we obtain the improved prototypeZ˜1(1)=F3≺F1≺F9≺F8≺F7≺F5≺F10≺F11≺F16≺F2≺F4≺F13≺F6≺F12≺F14≺F17≺F15.This prototype comprises experts mainly interested on financial-type factors (e.g. financially sound works with a competitive salary package), but however, the most important factor is the long-term job security. In the same way, results showed that people in Belgium appreciate interesting jobs with a pleasant work environment, because these factors were placed into the top-5. Fig. 5(a) displays the induced deviation for consecutive factors where the horizontal axis denotes the ranking positions and the vertical axis shows the measure value. It can be observed that the top ranked factor (long-term job security) is more relevant with respect to the second one (financially sound) when respondents are looking for an employer.For the second cluster we achieve the improved prototypeZ˜2(1)=F3≺F7≺F8≺F9≺F10≺F11≺F1≺F5≺F16≺F2≺F13≺F14≺F17≺F4≺F12≺F6≺F15. This prototype includes respondents primarily focused on comfort-type factors since they prefer long-term job security and interesting jobs with a pleasant work environment rather than financially sound positions. Equally, results suggest that experts prefer well located jobs providing good balance between life and work, with flexible working conditions. Fig. 5(b) shows the distance between consecutive factors for this prototype. Notice that factors included into the top-5 are well-separated, i.e. the distance measure between two factors is greater than or equal to the threshold ϱ=1/M. As a matter of fact, the proposed distance measure is inversely proportional to the uncertainty degree on data, so it certainly involves a valuable analysis tool which allows companies to improve their overall attractiveness.After a deeper analysis it can be concluded that people in Belgium prefer long-term job security rather than financial-type factors, since this factor was ranked first in both prototypes. This result is certainly interesting but unsurprising due to effects of the economic crisis, or perhaps because Belgian people generally have high-income jobs, therefore they are more focused on finding jobs with safe contract terms. Using an analogous reasoning, we could explain the relevance of factors related to quality of life and comfort as it was summarized in the second prototype.In this section we perform the same simulations described above, only we have to remember that each respondent is free of selecting the most relevant 2≤Ki≤M factors. In these simulations we assumed two different tendencies (c=2) since the Partition Entropy [34] achieved its minimum value for this configuration. It suggests that the cluster structure is optimal for different values of ϕ adopted during empirical experiments (i.e. ϕ={1.10, 1.15, 1.20}). Fig. 6displays the membership degree ujiof selected instances to each cluster, with the horizontal axis indexing the samples and the vertical axis representing the corresponding membership degree. For ϕ=1.10, the proposed fuzzy c-aggregations algorithm becomes more crisp while for ϕ=1.20 the model becomes more flexible in the sense that membership degrees are more similar. That is why we prefer to assume ϕ=1.20 when building the enhanced prototypes which characterize the respondents’ thinking.To validate the cluster structure, we compare c-aggregation against the approach proposed by Jacques and Biernacki [12]. Since the compactness of the partition is not enough to validate the quality of the clustering algorithm when building new prototypes, we compute the deviation of temporal prototypes from the global consensus for each discovered cluster. Table 11summarizes the normalized deviation associated with the jth cluster averaged over 10 independent trials and the Partition Entropy measure. From this simulation it can be concluded that the fuzzy c-aggregations model is capable to spit out a fuzzy partition leading to better solutions. Observe that, although Rankcluster shows a lower partition entropy, the differences between both algorithms were reduced. The reason for this behavior could be the availability of further knowledge. Thus, the increasing number of non-tied elements in the second scenario leads to more accurate partitions with well-defined membership degrees.Aiming at building the set of enhanced prototypes, we resort to the same parametric settings discussed above for ACO-based optimizers, with the exception of the stopping criterion. In this case we increase the maximal number of iterations T to 150, since now partial rankings involve more information to be arranged. Fig. 7displays the disagreement value for all optimizers regarding the cluster centers resulting from the proposed fuzzy c-aggregations algorithm. It should be mentioned that these values (with the exception of the cluster centers) were averaged over 10 independent simulations. From this simulation we can observe that the ACS method computes the best results whereas the AS algorithm exhibits the worst performance since it is unable to improve the original prototypes. This fact suggests that ACS must be studied when solving the extended Kemeny ranking problem, although the selection of the optimizer itself certainly leads yet another research endeavor.For the first cluster we achieve the improved prototypeZ˜1(2)=F3≺F1≺F9≺F7≺F8≺F5≺F2≺F10≺F11≺F16≺F6≺F4≺F13≺F14≺F15≺F12≺F17. In this first prototype, the most relevant factor is long-term job security, but the other factors are primarily related with financial aspects such as a financially sound job or a competitive salary package. Moreover, further factors like interesting jobs or pleasant work environment are equally appreciated by respondents. This prototype is similar to the complete rankingZ˜1(1)in the sense that they share the same top-5 factors, but in different order. This result is actually expected since experts often pick a set of factors comprising the top 5 factors previously chosen in the first scenario. Fig. 8(a) displays the distance measure (induced deviation) between consecutive factors for this first artificial prototype.For the second cluster we achieve the improved prototypeZ˜2(2)=F9≺F3≺F7≺F8≺F10≺F11≺F1≺F5≺F16≺F2≺F13≺F14≺F6≺F12≺F17≺F15≺F4. This prototype includes respondents regularly concerned with comfort-type factors since they prefer long-term job security and interesting jobs with a pleasant work environment rather than financially sound jobs. Likewise, results advocate that respondents prefer well located jobs providing good balance between life and work, although the most desirable jobs are those having a competitive salary package.The above results show the reliability of the optimization approach to build high-quality prototypes in Business Intelligence scenarios. It should be mentioned that the prototypes construction scheme could be performed by using another search method (e.g. Evolutionary Computation or more sophisticated ACO-based approaches). In this research we adopted Ant Colony Optimization since it naturally leans upon the heuristic knowledge to create the decision model. If we adopt an Evolutionary Computation approach, then the heuristic information is still useful. However, further changes to the evolutionary operators (i.e. selection, crossover, mutation) are required.The new global market trends have forced companies to pursue competitiveness and attractiveness to engage productive and competent employees. Nonetheless, assessing the attractiveness of companies often leads to unstructured problems that cannot be solved through standard mathematical approaches due to their inherent complexity. In these scenarios, Artificial Intelligence techniques seem a suitable solution since they are able to compute near-optimal solutions in a reasonable execution time. On the other hand, when too many observations exist, the formalization of rules can be difficult and therefore the extraction of business value is not possible. To address such issues, the construction of prototypes could be very convenient since it allows to formalize relevant knowledge.In this paper we propose a novel Artificial Intelligence methodology to assess the attractiveness of Belgian companies. This methodology comprises two main stages that allow learning high-quality prototypes from a set of partial rankings, where respondents evaluated some factors according to their best knowledge. With this goal in mind, we introduce a novel clustering method for partial rankings, called fuzzy c-aggregations, that allows identifying groups of experts with the same tendency in their responses. This clustering algorithm produces c different prototypes, however, we cannot guarantee their optimality with respect to the Kemeny ranking problem. That is why we present a second step where such prototypes are improved by using a Swarm Intelligence approach.It should be stated that both steps involve difficult theoretical challenges regarding the unsupervised clustering of partial ranking data, and their fuzzy aggregation. To the best of our knowledge, only the algorithm developed by Jacques and Biernacki [12] is able to cluster multivariate partial ranking data. Numerical simulations have shown that our algorithm is more accurate since it generates clustering structures of superior quality. Moreover, we noticed that the fuzzy aggregation of rankings belonging to the same cluster is a suitable approach to deal with the lack of optimality of temporal prototypes (i.e. centers generated by the proposed clustering method).From numerical results we concluded that the Belgian people prefer long-term job security instead of financial-type factors. This result is interesting but no surprising, as it seems to be a direct result of the economic crisis since people prefer jobs with safer and longer contract. Despite this fact, we observed two tendencies as evidenced by the computed prototypes. The first trend involves users emphasizing on financial-type aspects such as a financially sound job or a competitive salary package, whereas in the second scenario the respondents drift toward comfort-type factors (e.g., interesting jobs having a pleasant work environment or well-located jobs providing good balance between life and work). By and large, the most desired factors include: long-term job security, financially sound, good balance between life and work, competitive salary package and well located jobs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
