@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Real coded chemical reaction based optimization for short-term hydrothermal scheduling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper solved different short term hydro thermal scheduling (STHS) problems.The paper considered both small and large size test systems.Real coded chemical reaction optimization (RCCRO) is applied to solve the problem.Performance of RCCRO has been compared with different PSO, DE, modified DE, etc.Performance of RCCRO has been found to be more encouraging to solve STHS problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chemical reaction,Hydrothermal scheduling,Optimization,Real coded chemical reaction optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a real coded chemical reaction based (RCCRO) algorithm to solve the short-term hydrothermal scheduling (STHS) problem. Hydrothermal system is highly complex and related with every problem variables in a nonlinear way. The objective of the hydro thermal scheduling is to determine the optimal hourly schedule of power generation for different hydrothermal power system for certain intervals of time such that cost of power generation is minimum. Chemical reaction optimization mimics the interactions of molecules in term of chemical reaction to reach a low energy stable state. A real coded version of chemical reaction optimization, known as real-coded chemical reaction optimization (RCCRO) is considered here. To check the effectiveness of the RCCRO, 3 different test systems are considered and mathematical remodeling of the algorithm is done to make it suitable for solving short-term hydrothermal scheduling problem. Simulation results confirm that the proposed approach outperforms several other existing optimization techniques in terms quality of solution obtained and computational efficiency. Results also establish the robustness of the proposed methodology to solve STHS problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The short-term hydrothermal scheduling involves the hour-by-hour scheduling to minimize the total operating cost of thermal power plants while satisfying the various constraints related to the hydro, thermal plant, and power system network. As the source for hydropower is the natural water resources, the objective is to plan the usage of available water for hydroelectric generation to reduce the production cost of the thermal plants, while maintaining all sets of constraints. Hydraulic and thermal constraints may include generation-load power balance, operating capacity limits of the hydro and thermal units, water discharge rate, upper and lower bounds on reservoir volumes, water spillage, and hydraulic continuity restrictions. Additional constraints such as the need to satisfy activities including: flood control, irrigation, navigation, fishing, water supply, recreation, etc., may also be considered.The optimal scheduling of hydrothermal power system is usually more complex than all the other thermal system. It is basically a nonlinear programming problem involving nonlinear objective function and a mixture of linear and nonlinear constraints. Due to these, classical calculus-based methods like Lagrangian multiplier and gradient search techniques [1] cannot perform very well for finding the most economical hydrothermal generation schedule under practical constraints. Kirchmayer [2] used coordination equations of variation for short-range scheduling problem. Mixed integer programming [3] and dynamic programming (DP) [4] functional analysis [5–7], network flow and linear programming [8–11], non-linear programming [12,13], mathematical decomposition [14–16], heuristics, expert systems and artificial neural networks [17–20] methods have been widely used to solve such scheduling problems in different formulations.In recent years, evolutionary algorithms have been used due to their flexibility, versatility, and robustness in searching a globally optimal solution. These algorithms are powerful optimization techniques corresponding to their natural selection process. Several evolutionary techniques, such as simulated annealing [21,22], genetic algorithm [23–27], evolutionary programming [28–30] and differential evolution [31–34], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [35–38] have been employed to solve the STHS problem. Improved version of PSO [39–43] has also been applied to solve STHS problem to improve the smoothness of the algorithm. Recently, a new optimization technique called clonal selection algorithm [44] has been used in STHS problem to achieve much better global optimal solution. Recently, another soft computing approach called mixed integer programming [47,48] has been applied in multiobjective hydro-thermal scheduling problem. In the year 2013, hydrothermal problems have been scheduled with considering wing power and different type of security constraints [49,50].In recent times, a new optimization technique based on the concept of chemical reaction, called chemical reaction optimization (CRO) has been proposed by Lam and Li [45]. In a chemical reaction, the molecules of initial reactants stay in high-energy unstable states and undergo a sequence of collisions either with walls of the container or with other molecules. The reactants pass through some energy barriers, reach in low-energy stable states and become the final products. CRO captures this phenomenon of driving high-energy molecules to stable, low energy states, through various types of on-wall or intermolecular reactions. CRO has been proved to be a successful optimization algorithm in discrete optimization. Basically, the CRO is designed to work in the discrete domain optimization problems. In order to make this newly developed technique suitable for continuous optimization domain, Lam et al. [46] have developed a real-coded version of CRO, known as real-coded CRO (RCCRO). It has been observed that the performance of RCCRO is quite satisfactory when applied to solve continuous benchmark optimization problems. The improved performance of RCCRO to solve different optimization problems has motivated the present authors to implement this newly developed algorithm to solve short-term hydrothermal scheduling (STHS) problems.Like other soft computing algorithm, CRO is also a population-based metaheuristic. In first few stages the operating principle of RCCRO is quite similar to GA but RCCRO uses lesser parameter and therefore lesser computational time required. As the simulation continues, it tends to keep a single solution in each iteration, like SA. Therefore, RCCRO have the benefit of the advantages of both GA and SA, and generally it performs the best. Due to the advantage of flexibility of adjusting and combining the elementary reactions, we can adopt the new concept into the short term hydrothermal scheduling problems.Section 2 of the paper provides a brief mathematical formulation of different types of STHS problems. The concept of real coded chemical reaction is described in Section 3. The parameter settings for the test system to evaluate the performance of real coded chemical reaction and the simulation studies are discussed in Section 4. The conclusion is drawn in Section 5.The optimizing schedule for hydrothermal power systems is modeled as a constrained optimization problem with a nonlinear objective function and a set of linear, nonlinear, and dynamic constraints. Generating characteristics of hydro as well as thermal plants are in non-linear in nature. Hydro plants whose outputs are a nonlinear function of water discharge and net hydraulic head.The problem of short term hydro thermal scheduling aims at minimizing the total generation cost of thermal units while making use of the available hydro resources in the scheduling horizon as much as possible, due to the zero incremental cost of hydro plants. The objective function is expressed as:(1)MinimizedF=∑k=1Ns∑t=1Tfk(Ps(k,t))where Nsis the number of thermal plants, T is the total intervals of the scheduling horizon considered, and Ps(k, t) represents the power generation of the kth thermal plant at time interval t. The fuel cost function with valve point loading effect is usually represented as:(2)fk(Ps(k,t))=aks+bks⋅Ps(k,t)+cks⋅Ps2(k,t)+|dks⋅sin(eks⋅(Psmin(k)−Ps(k,t)))|k=1,2,…,Ns,t=1,2,…,Twhere aks, bks, cks, dks, and eksare the fuel cost coefficients of the kth thermal plant andPsmin(k)represents the minimum power generation of the kth thermal plant.(3)Vh(i,t)=Vh(i,t−1)+Ih(i,t)−Qh(i,t)+∑m∈Ru(i)Qh(m,t−τm)i=1,2,…,Nht=1,2,…,Twhere Vh(i, t), Ih(i, t), Qh(i, t) are the end storage volume, inflow, discharge of reservoir i at time interval t respectively. Spillage is not considered here; Nhis the number of hydro plants; τmis the water transport delay from reservoir m to its immediate downstream; Ru(i) represents the set of upstream plants directly above hydro plant i.(4)Vhmin(i)≤Vh(i,t)≤Vhmax(i)i=1,2,…,Nht=1,2,…,TwhereVhmin(i)andVhmax(i)are the minimum and maximum storage volumes of the ith reservoir:(5)Qhmin(i)≤Qh(i,t)≤Qhmax(i)i=1,2,…,Nht=1,2,…,TwhereQhmin(i)andQhmax(i)represent the minimum and maximum water discharges of the ith reservoir.(6)Vh(i,0)=Vhbegin(i)i=1,2,…,Nh(7)Vh(i,T)=Vhend(i)i=1,2,…,Nh(8)Psmin(k)≤Ps(k,t)≤Psmax(k)k=1,2,…,Nst=1,2,…,TwherePsmin(k)andPsmax(k)are the minimum and maximum power generation of the kth thermal plant:(9)Phmin(i)≤Ph(i,t)≤Phmax(i),i=1,2,…,Nht=1,2,…,Twhere Ph(i, t) is the power generation of the ith hydro plant at time t;Phmin(i)andPhmax(i)represent the minimum and maximum power generation of the ith hydro plant respectively. Ph(i, t) is usually assumed to be a function of the water discharge and the storage volume(10)Ph(i,t)=c1i⋅Vh2(i,t)+c2i⋅Qh2(i,t)+c3i⋅Vh(i,t)⋅Qh(i,t)+c4i⋅Vh(i,t)+c5i⋅Qh(i,t)+c6ii=1,2,…,Nht=1,2,…,Twhere C1i, C2i, C3i, C4i, C5iand C6iare the constant coefficients.The power Pigenerated by the ith generator in certain interval neither should exceed that of previous interval by more than a certain amount URi, the up-ramp limit and nor should it be less than that of the previous interval by more than some amount DRi, the down-ramp limit of the generator. These give rise to the following constraints:As generation increases(11)Ps(k,t)−Ps(k,t−1)≤UR(k)k=1,2,…,Nst=1,2,…,TAs generation decreases(12)Ps(k,t−1)−Ps(k,t)≤DR(k)k=1,2,…,Nst=1,2,…,T(13)∑k=1NsPs(k,t)+∑i=1NhPh(i,t)=PD(t)+PL(t)t=1,2,…,Twhere PD(t) is the predicted demand at time interval t and PL(t) represents the total transmission losses. In these problem formulation transmission loss is not considered i.e., zero.This section presents an interesting new optimization algorithm called chemical reaction optimization (CRO) which has been recently proposed in [45].CRO loosely mimics what happens to molecules in a chemical reaction system. Every chemical reaction tends to release energy, and thus, products generally have less energy than the reactants. In terms of stability, the lower the energy of the substance, the more stable it is. In a chemical reaction, the initial reactants in the high-energy unstable states undergo a sequence of collisions, pass through some energy barriers, and become the final products in low-energy stable states. Therefore, products are always more stable than reactants. It is not difficult to discover the correspondence between optimization and chemical reaction. Both of them aim to seek the global optimum with respect to different objectives and the process evolves in a stepwise fashion. With this discovery, the chemical-reaction-inspired metaheuristic, called chemical reaction optimization (CRO) [45] has been developed by Lam et al. in 2010.However this paper is the extension of CRO. CRO has been already proved to be a successful optimization algorithm with different applications [46], most of which are discrete optimization problems. In order to make this optimization technique suitable for continuous optimization problems, Lam et al. presented a modified version of CRO in 2012, which is termed as real-coded chemical reaction optimization (RCCRO) [46].In the following sections, major components based on design of the chemical reaction, i.e., molecules and elementary reactions are described. The basic operational steps of RCCRO are described below.The manipulated agents those are involved in a reaction are known as molecules. Three main properties of each molecule are: (1) the molecular structure X; (2) current potential energy (PE); (3) current kinetic energy (KE), etc. The meanings of the attributes in the profile are given below:Molecular structure: X actually represents the solution currently held by a molecule. Depending on the problem; X can be in the form of a number, an array, a matrix, or even a graph. In this paper molecular structure has been represented in a matrix form.Current PE: PE is the value of objective function of the current molecular structure X, i.e., PEX=f(X).Current KE: KE provides the tolerance for the molecule to hold a worse molecular structure with higher PE than the existing one.In CRO, several types of collisions occur. These collisions occur either between the molecules or between the molecules and the walls of the container. Depending upon the type of collisions, distinct elementary reactions occur, each of which may have a different way of controlling the energies of the involved molecule(s). Four types of elementary reactions normally occur. These are: (1) on-wall ineffective collision; (2) decomposition; (3) intermolecular ineffective collision; and (4) synthesis. On wall ineffective collision and decomposition are unimolecular reactions when the molecule hits a wall of the container. Intermolecular ineffective collision and synthesis involve more than one molecule. Successful completion of an elementary reaction results in an internal change of a molecule (i.e., updated attributes in the profile). Different types of elementary reactions are described below:When a molecule hits a wall and bounces back, a small change occurs of its molecular structure and PE. As the collision is not so vigorous, the resultant molecular structure is not too different from the original one. If X and X′ represent the molecular structure before and after the on-wall collision respectively, then this collision tries to transform X to X′, in the close neighborhood of X, that is(14)X′=X+Δwhere Δ is a perturbation for the molecule. There are many probability distributions which can be used to produce probabilistic perturbations, e.g., Gaussian, Cauchy, lognormal, exponential, Student's T and many others. In this paper, Gaussian distribution has been employed. By the change of molecular structure, PE and KE also change from PEXto PEX′ and KEXto KEX′. This change will happen only if(15)PEX+KEX≥PEX′If (15) does not hold, the change is not allowed and the molecule retains its original X, PE and KE. Due to interaction with a wall of the container, a certain portion of molecule's KE will be extracted and stored in the central energy buffer (buffer) when the transformation is complete. The size of KE loss depends on a random number a1∈[KELossRate, 1], where KELossRate is a parameter of CRO. Updated KE and buffer is represented as(16)KEX′=(PEX−PEX′+KEX)×a1(17)buffer=buffer+(PEX+KEX−PEX′)×(1−a1)In decomposition, one molecule hits the wall and breaks into two or more molecule e.g.,X′1andX′2. Due to change of molecular structure, their PE and KE also changes from PEXtoPEX′1andPEX′2, and KEXtoKEX′1andKEX′2. This change is allowed, if the original molecule has sufficient energy (PE and KE) to endow the PE of the resultant ones, that is(18)PEX+KEX≥PEX′1+PEX′2Lettemp1=PEX+KEX−PEX′1−PEX′2Then,(19)KEX′1=k×temp1andKEX′2=(1−k)×temp1where k is a random number uniformly generated from the interval [0, 1]. (18) holds only when KEXis large enough. Due to the conservation of energy, X sometimes may not have enough energy (both PE and KE) to sustain its transformation intoX′1andX′2. To encourage decomposition, a certain portion of energy, stored in the central buffer (buffer) can be utilized to support the change. In that case modified condition is(20)PEX+KEX+buffer≥PEX′1+PEX′1The new KE for resultant molecules and buffer are(21)KEX′1=(temp1+buffer)×m1×m2(22)KEX′2=(temp1+buffer)×m3×m4(23)buffer=buffer+temp1−KEX1'−KEX2'where values of m1, m2, m3 and m4 are taken randomly in between [0, 1]. To generateX′1andX′2, any mechanism which createsX′1andX′2quite different from X, is acceptable. However, in this paper, procedure mentioned in Section IIIB of [46] is used.An intermolecular ineffective collision happens when two molecules collide with each other and then bounce away. The effect of energy change of the molecules is similar to that in an on-wall ineffective collision, but this elementary reaction involves more than one molecule and no KE is drawn to the central energy buffer. Similar to the on-wall ineffective collision, this collision is also not vigorous, therefore the new molecular structure are generated in the neighborhood of previous molecular structures. In this paper, new molecular structures are created using the same concept mentioned in on-wall ineffective collision. Suppose, the original molecular structures are X1 and X2 are transformed after collision and two new molecular structures areX′1andX′2respectively. The two PE are changed fromPEX1andPEX2toPEX′1andPEX′2. The two KE are changed fromKEX1andKEX2toKEX′1andKEX′2. The change to the molecules are acceptable only if(24)PEX1+PEX2+KEX1+KEX2≥PEX′1+PEX′2The new values of KE are calculated as(25)KEX′1=PEX1+PEX2+KEX1+KEX2−PEX′1−PEX′2×aaa1(26)KEX′2=PEX1+PEX2+KEX1+KEX2−PEX′1−PEX′2×(1−aaa1)where aaa1 is a random number uniformly generated in the interval [0, 1]. If the condition of (24) fails, the molecules maintain the original X1, X2,PEX1,PEX2,KEX1andKEX2.Synthesis is a process when two or more molecules (in present paper two molecules X1 and X2) collide with each other and combine to form a single molecule X′. The change is vigorous. As in decomposition, any mechanism which combines two molecules to form a single molecule may be used. In this paper, procedure mentioned in section IIIB of [46] is used to create X′. The two PE are change fromPEX1andPEX2toPEX′. The two KE are change fromKEX1andKEX2toKEX′. The modification is acceptable if(27)PEX1+PEX2+KEX1+KEX2≥PEX′The new value of KE of the resultant molecule is(28)KEX′=PEX1+PEX2+KEX1+KEX2−PEX′If condition of (27) is not satisfied, X1, X2 and their related PE and KE are preserved. The pseudo codes for all above-mentioned elementary reaction steps are available in [46].The three stages in CRO: initialization, iteration, and the final stage are mentioned below:(1)In initialization stage, choose unknown variables (n) number. Arrange the initial structure for the molecules and the different parameters i.e., PopSize, KELossRate, MoleColl, buffer, InitialKE, α, and β. Also indicate the lower and upper bounds of unknown variables of the given problem.Randomly generate each molecule set of the unknown variables of the problem within their effective lower and upper bounds and the molecule set must satisfying different constraints. Each molecule set characterizes a potential solution of the problem. Generate (PopSize×n) molecule set to create Molecular matrix.Determine PEs of each molecule set, by their corresponding objective function values. Set their initial KEs to InitialKE.During iterative process, first check which type of reaction to be held. Random create an unknown variable number b∈[0,1]. If b is greater than MoleColl (which is initialized earlier) or there is only one molecule left, the reaction take place is a uni-molecular reaction, otherwise it is an intermolecular reaction.In a uni-molecular reaction, choose one molecule from the molecule set randomly and check whether it satisfies the decomposition criterion: (number of hits−minimum hit number)>α. Where α is the tolerance of duration for the molecule without obtaining any new local minimum solution.If decomposition criterion satisfies, perform decomposition steps; else perform on-wall ineffective collision steps.For decomposition if (18) or (20) are satisfied, modify KE and buffer using (19) or (21), (22) and (23) respectively. Similarly for on wall ineffective collision if (15) is satisfied then modify KE and buffer using (16) and (17) respectively. For both the cases, modify the PE of each molecule set using their objective function value.For each intermolecular reaction, select two (or more) molecule sets randomly from the molecular matrix and test the synthesis criterion: (KE≤β) where, β is the minimum KE a molecule should have.If the condition is satisfied, perform the synthesis steps; otherwise, perform different steps of an intermolecular ineffective collision.For synthesis if (27) is satisfied, modify KE using (28). For intermolecular collision, if (24) is satisfied, modify KE using (25) and (26). PE of each modified molecule set is calculated in the same way as mentioned in step 5.If the maximum no. of iterations is reached or specified accuracy level is achieved, terminate the iterative process, otherwise go to step 4 for continuation.Detailed procedures of evaluation for RCCRO algorithm through flow chart have been shown in Fig. 1. Interested readers may refer [46], which contains the detail steps of the CRO Algorithm.The detailed steps of the RCCRO approach for the STHS problem can be described as follows:Step 1: For initialization, choose no. of hydro and thermal generator units, number of molecular structure set, PopSize; elitism parameter “p”. Specify maximum and minimum capacity of water volume (Vhmin,Vhmax) and water discharge (Qhmin,Qhmax) for each hydro generator, power demand for each interval (PD(t)), initial and final reservoir water volume (Vhbegin,Vhend). Also initialize the RCCRO parameters like KELossRate, MoleColl, buffer, InitialKE, α, and β, etc. Set maximum number of iterations, Itermax.Step 2: Initialize each element of a given molecule set of X matrix having discharge of water for each hydro plant for T intervals and output power generation for each thermal power plant for T intervals. As for example, if 4 nos. of hydro units, 3 nos. of thermal units are there and scheduling is done for 24h, then total nos. of elements in each molecule set will be 168 ((4×24)+(3×24)). Initialization is performed using the following procedure.For j=1, 2, …, PopSize; initialize discharges of each hydro units for first (T−1) intervals Qh(i, t) t=1, 2, …, (T−1); i=1, 2, …, Nhrandomly within lower and upper discharge limits of individual hydro units. The hydro discharge at Tth interval, Qh(i, T) is calculated using the following equation(29)Qh(i,T)=Vhbegin−Vhend−∑j=1T−1Qh(i,j)+∑j=1TIh(i,j)+∑m=1Ru∑j=1TQh(m,j−τm)i=1,2,…,NhKnowing hydro discharges, evaluate reservoir volume for each interval for each hydro units using (3). Reservoir volume of each hydro unit for each interval should satisfy the inequality constraint of (4). Find out the power generations of each hydro-unit for each interval Ph(i, t) by simple algebraic method of Eq. (10). Power output of each hydro unit for each interval should satisfy the inequality constraint of (9). From the calculated generations for all hydro-units of a given interval Ph(i, t), and the given load PD(t) of that interval, compute active power demand for all thermal units for that particular intervalPDth(t)using following equation for t=1, 2, …, T:(30)PDth(t)=PD−∑i=1NhPh(i,t)Initialize power outputs of first (Ns−1) nos. of thermal units randomly within their minimum and maximum operating limits. Compute power outputs ofNsththermal units for each interval using the following equation:(31)Ps(Ns,t)=PDth(t)−∑i=1NhPh(i,t)−∑k=1Ns−1Ps(k,t)t=1,2,…,TEach molecule set of X matrix should be in the form ofXj=Qh(1,1),Qh(1,2),…,Qh(1,T),Qh(2,1),Qh(2,2),…,Qh(2,T),…,Qh(Nh,1),Qh(Nh,2),…,Qh(Nh,T),Ps(1,1),Ps(1,2),…,Ps(1,T),…,Ps(Ns,1),Ps(Ns,2),…,Ps(Ns,T)Evaluated thermal generators output should satisfy the inequality constraint of (8).If any variable for a molecular set do not satisfy any of the constraints (4), (5), (8), (9); discard the corresponding molecule set. Re-initialize the corresponding molecule set randomly using step 2. Continue the process until the molecule set satisfies the entire operation limit and other constraints of (4), (5), (8) and (9).Step 3: Calculate the PE value (i.e., fitness function value) for each molecule set of the habitat matrix for given initial kinetic energy (KE) InitialKE.Step 4: Based on the PE values identify the elite molecule set. Here, elite term is used to indicate those molecule sets of generator power outputs, which give best fuel cost of thermal power generators. Keep top ‘p’ molecule sets unchanged after individual iteration, without making any modification on it.Step 5: Create a random number b∈[0,1]. If b is greater than MoleColl or there is only one molecule left (at the later stage of iterative procedure, this condition may hold), perform a unimolecular reaction, else perform an intermolecular reaction on each sets of molecular matrix.Step 6: If unimolecular reaction is selected, choose one molecule set randomly from the whole X matrix and check whether it satisfies the decomposition criterion.If decomposition condition is satisfied, perform decomposition on that particular molecule set. Create two new molecule sets using the steps mentioned in section IIIB of [46]. Each newly generated molecule set is one of the possible solutions of hydro-thermal scheduling problem. Calculate PE i.e., fuel cost of the new molecule sets. If the condition mentioned in (18) or (20) is satisfied, modify KE of new molecule sets using (19) or (21), (22). Modify buffer using (23).If decomposition condition is not satisfied, perform on wall ineffective collision. Create two new molecule sets using Gaussian distribution and the procedure mentioned in Section 3.2.1. Calculate PE of the modified molecule set. If the condition mentioned in (15) is satisfied then modify KE of new molecule set using (16). Modify buffer using (17).Step 7: From the condition of step 5, if intermolecular reaction is chosen, select two (or more) molecule sets randomly from the molecular matrix X and test the synthesis criterion (KE≤β).If the condition is satisfied, perform the synthesis steps. Create a new molecule set from the two selected molecule sets following the procedure given in Section IIIB of [46]. Calculate PE of the new molecule set. After new molecule creation, if the condition of (27) is satisfied, modify KE of new molecule set using (28).If synthesis condition (KE≤β) is not satisfied, perform intermolecular collision. Create two new molecule sets in the neighborhood of selected molecule sets following Gaussian distribution and the procedure mentioned in Section 3.2.1. Calculate fuel cost i.e., PE for the newly generated molecule set. After new molecule sets creation, if condition presented in (24) is satisfied, modify KE of new molecule sets using (25) and (26).Step 8: In each iteration any one of the reaction mentioned in steps 6 and 7 takes place. It may be possible that either one of the intermolecular or one of the unimolecular reactions happens that time. After the reaction, molecule sets get modified. For each modified molecule sets, operating limit constraint of (5) is verified for the modified water discharge, Qh(i, t) t=1, 2, …, (T−1); i=1, 2, …, Nh. If some Qh(i, t) elements of a molecule set violate either upper or lower operating limits, then fix the values of those elements of the molecule set at the limit hit by them. The hydro discharge at Tth interval Qh(i, T) is calculated using (29). If the value of Qh(i, T) violet their maximum or minimum value, then go to step 5 and reapply step 6 and step 7 again on old value of that molecule sets until the value of Qh(i, T) should satisfy the inequality constraints (5). Knowing the value of all feasible hydro discharges, evaluate reservoir volume for each interval for each hydro unit using (3). Reservoir volume of each hydro unit for each interval should satisfy the inequality constraint of (4). If any values of Reservoir volume do not satisfy the inequality constraint of (4) then go to step 5 and reapply step 6 and step 7 again on old value of that molecule sets until the value of all Reservoir volume is satisfied. Calculate the power generations of each hydro-unit for each interval Ph(i, t) using Eq. (10). Power output of each hydro unit for each interval should satisfy the inequality constraint of (9). If any values of Ph(i, t) do not satisfy the inequality constraint then go to step 5 and reapply step 6 and step 7 again on old value of that molecule sets until the value of all Ph(i, t) satisfy the inequality constraint (9). From the calculated generations for all hydro-units of a given interval Ph(i, t), and the given load PD(t) of that interval, compute active power demand for all thermal units for that particular interval PDth(t) using Eq. (30)t=1, 2, …,T. Initialize power outputs of first (Ns−1) nos. of thermal units randomly within their minimum and maximum operating limits. Compute power outputs of Nsththermal units for each interval using Eq. (31).Step 9: Recalculate the PE of each newly generated feasible molecule set i.e., the fuel cost for each thermal power output set of each newly generated molecule set.Step 10: Go to step 5 for next iteration. Stop the process after a predefined number of iterations.Three illustrative hydrothermal test systems are considered to inspect and verify the efficiency of the proposed RCCRO approach to solve short term hydro-thermal scheduling problems. Programs have been written in MATLAB-7 language and executed on a personal computer with 512-MB RAM and 2.3GHz Pentium Dual Core processor.Test system 1: It comprises of four hydro-plants coupled hydraulically and an equivalent thermal plant. The schedule horizon is 1 day with 24 intervals of 1h each. The hydraulic sub-system is characterized by the following: (a) a multi chain cascade flow network, with all of the plants in one stream; (b) river transport delay between successive reservoirs; (c) variable head hydro-plants; (d) variable natural inflow rates into each reservoir; (e) prohibited operating regions of water discharge rates; (f) variable load demand over scheduling period. The hourly water discharge of different hydro plants is shown in Fig. 2. The hydrothermal scheduling of hourly water discharges and hydro generations obtained by RCCRO algorithm are shown in Table 1. Table 1 also presents the output of thermal generators as obtained by RCCRO algorithm. The minimum, maximum, average system costs obtained using proposed RCCRO are much improved than those obtained using modified DE [31], DE [31], IFEP [28,31] and the CEP [28]. These are summarized in Table 2. Table 2 also shows that the simulation time for test system is 10.21s, which is much less than the time required by IFEP [28], CEP [31], etc. Fig. 3depicts the trajectories of cascaded reservoir storage volumes for the test system 1. The optimal hourly water discharge of four hydro-plants obtained by the proposed method is shown in Fig. 4. The convergence characteristic for the proposed RCCRO algorithm is shown in Fig. 5.Test system 2: This system consists of four cascaded hydro plants and three composite thermal plants. The effect of valve point loading is considered in case of thermal power plants by superimposing a sinusoidal component on their basic fuel cost characteristic. This increases the complexity of the system.Case 1: Here prohibited operating zone and ramp rate limit for thermal power plants are not considered. The detailed input data for this system are taken from [31]. The hydrothermal scheduling of hourly water discharges obtained by RCCRO algorithm is shown in Table 3. Table 3 also presents the complete scheduling of all four hydro and three thermal generators as obtained by RCCRO algorithm for 24h period. The total minimum, maximum, average system costs obtained by proposed RCCRO out of 25 trials are quite close to each other and are summarized in Table 4. Time required by the algorithm to converge to the optimum solution is 15.51s, which is also very less, compared to the complexity of the system. The trajectories of cascaded reservoir storage volumes for the test system 2 are presented in Fig. 6. The optimal hourly hydro discharge of four hydro-plants obtained by the proposed method is shown in Fig. 7. The convergence characteristic of the proposed RCCRO algorithm for this test system is shown in Fig. 8.Case 2: Here prohibited zone of hydro plants and ramp rate limit for thermal power plants are considered. Input data for hydro plant and thermal plants for this case study are taken from [28,31], ramp rate limit for thermal plants are taken from [51]. The hydrothermal scheduling of hourly water discharges obtained by RCCRO algorithm is shown in Table 5. Table 5 also presents the complete scheduling of all four hydro and three thermal generators as obtained by RCCRO algorithm for 24h period. The total minimum, maximum, average system costs obtained by proposed RCCRO out of 25 trials are quite close to each other and are summarized in Table 6. Time required by the algorithm to converge to the optimum solution is 35.85s, which is also very less, compared to the complexity of the system. The trajectories of cascaded reservoir storage volumes for case 2 of the test system 2 are presented in Fig. 9. The optimal hourly hydro discharge of four hydro-plants obtained by the proposed method is shown in Fig. 10. The convergence characteristic of the proposed RCCRO algorithm for this test system is shown in Fig. 11.Test system 3: This system is a more practical representation of hydrothermal systems consisting of four hydro plants and ten thermal plants. The effect of valve point loading is taken into account within the fuel cost characteristics of thermal generators. The detailed data for this system have been taken from [32]. The hydrothermal scheduling of hourly water discharges and hydro power generations obtained by RCCRO algorithm is shown in Table 7. For optimal operation, the outputs of 10 thermal generators as obtained by RCCRO algorithm are presented in Table 8. The minimum, maximum, average system costs obtained by proposed RCCRO for this test system are depicted in Table 9. Time required by the algorithm to converge to the optimum solution for this test system is 22.02s. These results are compared with the results obtained using MDE [43], SPSO [43] and SPPSO [43]. Fig. 12depicts the trajectories of cascaded reservoir storage volumes for the test system 3. The optimal hourly hydro discharge of four hydro-plants obtained by the proposed method is presented in Fig. 13. The convergence characteristic for the test system obtained by proposed RCCRO algorithm is shown in Fig. 14.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
