@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A social spider algorithm for global optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new nature-inspired social-spider-based swarm intelligence algorithm.We introduce a new social animal foraging model into meta-heuristic design.We introduce the design of information loss to handle pre-mature convergence.We perform a series of benchmark simulations to demonstrate the performance.We investigate the impact of control parameters on optimization results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social spider algorithm,Global optimization,Swarm intelligence,Evolutionary computation,Meta-heuristic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The growing complexity of real-world problems has motivated computer scientists to search for efficient problem-solving methods. Metaheuristics based on evolutionary computation and swarm intelligence are outstanding examples of nature-inspired solution techniques. Inspired by the social spiders, we propose a novel social spider algorithm to solve global optimization problems. This algorithm is mainly based on the foraging strategy of social spiders, utilizing the vibrations on the spider web to determine the positions of preys. Different from the previously proposed swarm intelligence algorithms, we introduce a new social animal foraging strategy model to solve optimization problems. In addition, we perform preliminary parameter sensitivity analysis for our proposed algorithm, developing guidelines for choosing the parameter values. The social spider algorithm is evaluated by a series of widely used benchmark functions, and our proposed algorithm has superior performance compared with other state-of-the-art metaheuristics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the fast growing size and complexity of modern optimization problems, evolutionary computing is becoming increasingly attractive as an efficient tool for optimization. Depending on the nature of phenomenon simulated, evolutionary computing algorithms can be classified into two important groups: evolutionary algorithms (EAs) and swarm intelligence based algorithms. EAs, which mainly draw inspiration from nature, have been shown to be very successful for optimization among all the methods devised by the evolutionary computation community. Currently several types of EAs have been widely employed to solve real world combinatorial or global optimization problems, including genetic algorithm (GA), genetic programming (GP), evolutionary strategy (ES) and differential evolution (DE). These algorithms demonstrate satisfactory performance compared with conventional optimization techniques, especially when applied to solve non-convex optimization problems [1,2].In the past two decades, swarm intelligence, a new kind of evolutionary computing technique, has attracted much research interest [3]. The term swarm is employed in a general manner to refer to any collection of interactive agents. Swarm intelligence is mainly concerned with the methodology to model the behavior of social animals and insects for problem solving. Researchers devised optimization algorithms by mimicking the behavior of ants, bees, bacteria, fireflies and other organisms. The impetus of creating such algorithms was provided by the growing needs to solve optimization problems that were very difficult or even considered intractable.Among the commonly seen animals, spiders have been a major research subject in bionic engineering for many years. However, most research related to spiders focused on the imitation of its walking pattern to design robots, e.g. [4]. A possible reason for this is that a majority of the spiders observed are solitary [5], which means that they spend most of their lives without interacting with others of their species. However, among the 35000 spider species observed and described by scientists, some species are social. These spiders, e.g. Mallos gregalis and Oecobius civitas, live in groups and interact with others in the same group. Based on these social spiders, this paper formulates a new global optimization method to solve optimization problems.Spiders are air-breathing arthropods. They have eight legs and chelicerae with fangs. Spiders have been found worldwide and are one of the most diverged species among all groups of organisms. They use a wide range of strategies for foraging, and most of them detect prey by sensing vibrations. Spiders have long been known to be very sensitive to vibratory stimulation, as vibrations on their webs notify them of the capture of prey. If the vibrations are in a defined range of frequency, spiders attack the vibration source. The social spiders can also distinguish vibrations generated by the prey with ones generated by other spiders [6]. The social spiders passively receive the vibrations generated by other spiders on the same web to have a clear view of the web. This is one of the unique characteristics which distinguishes the social spiders from other organisms as the latter usually exchange information actively, which reduces the information loss to some degree but increases the energy used per communication action [7].The group living phenomenon has been studied intensively in animal behavior ecology. One of the reasons that animals gather and live together is to increase the possibility of successful foraging and reduce the energy cost in this process [8]. In order to facilitate the analysis of social foraging behavior, researchers proposed two foraging models: information sharing (IS) model [9] and producer–scrounger (PS) model [10]. The individuals under the IS model perform searching and seek for opportunity to join other individuals simultaneously. In the PS model, the individuals are divided into leaders and followers. Since there is no leader in social spiders [11], the IS model is more suitable to formulate the foraging behavior of social spiders, and we use this model to control the searching pattern of our proposed algorithm.In this paper, inspired by the social behavior of the social spiders, especially their foraging behavior, we propose a new metaheuristic for global optimization: the social spider algorithm (SSA). The foraging behavior of the social spider can be described as the cooperative movement of the spiders towards the food source position. The spiders receive and analyze the vibrations propagated on the web to determine the potential direction of a food source [12]. We utilize this natural behavior to perform optimization over the search space in SSA.The contribution of this paper is threefold:•We propose a new nature-inspired swarm intelligence algorithm based on social spiders. This population-based general-purpose metaheuristic demonstrates outstanding performance in the global optimization benchmark tests.We introduce a new social animal foraging model into metaheuristic design. This is the very first attempt of employing the IS model to solve optimization problems. We also incorporate the information loss schemes in the algorithm, which is a unique design of our proposed algorithm.We perform a series of experiments to investigate the impact of different parameters and searching schemes on the performance of the algorithm. The result of these experiments may serve as important inputs for further research.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We will first present some related work on swarm intelligence and bio-inspired metaheuristics in Section 2. Then we will formulate and elaborate on SSA by idealizing and imitating the foraging behavior of social spiders in Section 3. Section 4 introduces the benchmark functions we use for testing the performance of SSA, with the experimental settings. Section 5 presents the simulation results of SSA on the benchmark functions and the comparison with other popular metaheuristics. Finally we will conclude this paper in Section 6 and propose some future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
