@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intelligent autonomous system for residential water end use classification: Autoflow

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Smart metering technology enables the capture of high resolution water consumption data.Intelligent algorithms autonomously categorise single and combined water end use events.Hybrid combination of HMM, ANN and DTW for pattern recognition problem.Expert system developed to autonomously disaggregate water use into end use categories.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Water end use event,Residential water flow trace disaggregation,Water micro-component,Hidden Markov Model,Dynamic Time Warping algorithm,Artificial Neural Network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Over half of the world's population will live in urban areas in the next decade, which will impose significant pressure on water security. The advanced management of water resources and their consumption is pivotal to maintaining a sustainable water future. To contribute to this goal, the aim of this study was to develop an autonomous and intelligent system for residential water end-use classification that could interface with customers and water business managers via a user-friendly web-based application. Water flow data collected directly from smart water metres connected to dwellings includes both single (e.g., a shower event occurring alone) and combined (i.e., an event that comprises several overlapping single events) water end use events. The authors recently developed an intelligent application called Autoflow which served as a prototype tool to solve the complex problem of autonomously categorising residential water consumption data into a registry of single and combined events. However, this first prototype application achieved overall recognition accuracy of 85%, which is not sufficient for a commercial application. To improve this accuracy level, a larger dataset consisting of over 82,000 events from over 500 homes in Melbourne and South-east Queensland, Australia, were employed to derive a new single event recognition method employing a hybrid combination of Hidden Markov Model (HMM), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) algorithm. The classified single event registry was then used as the foundations of a sophisticated hybrid ANN–HMM combined event disaggregation module, which was able to strip apart concurrently occurring end use events. The new hybrid model's recognition accuracy ranged from 85.9% to 96.1% for single events and 81.8–91.5% for combined event disaggregation, which was a 4.9% and 8.0% improvement, respectively, when compared to the first prototype model. The developed Autoflow tool has far-reaching implications for enhanced urban water demand planning and management, sustained customer behaviour change through more granular water conservation awareness, and better customer satisfaction with water utility providers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Growing urban areas and climate change implications are raising concerns on water security [1]. In response to growing pressure on urban water supplies, many governments and public utilities are investing significant funds in the development and implementation of strategies to ensure future urban water demand can be met [2]. With the advent of advanced water metering, logging and wireless communication technologies, one of the top priorities in major metropolitan areas globally is to develop a smart water management system that helps to heighten water security through capturing, analysing, and disseminating near real-time water consumption data and concise reports to both water utilities and customers. Specifically, once in place, the system enables customers and utilities to actively monitor, through web-portal interfaces, real-time information about what, when, where and how water was consumed at their metre connection (e.g. 56L shower occurring between 06:55 and 07:08 on Tuesday 25 May 2014). It also allows individual consumers to log into their user-defined water consumption web page to view their daily, weekly, and monthly consumption summaries, as well as more granular charts displaying their water end-use patterns across major end use categories (e.g. leaks, clothes washer, dishwasher, tap, toilet, shower and irrigation). The analytical report generated by the new advanced integrated water management system will help utilities identify the water consumption patterns of their various consumer types and assist with a range of urban water planning and management functions [3].The key enabler for this system is the development of pattern matching algorithms which are able to automatically categorise high resolution flow data into particular water end-use categories. There are currently three approaches to the water end use classification problem: (1) simple decision tree method based on three physical features of each event, namely volume, duration and flow-rate (e.g. Trace Wizard and Identiflow); (2) sensor networks on water end use appliances supported by data mining techniques (e.g. Hydro Sense); and (3) a hybrid combination of pattern recognition algorithms and data mining techniques to learn distinct flow signature patterns for each end use category to perform the classification process (e.g. Autoflow).The first approach is resource intensive requiring significant analysis to disaggregate water end use patterns into discrete events accurately [3]. The second approach achieves high accuracy and does not require human interaction once the system is operating but requires sensors to be attached to many water use devices in the home, which makes this technique cost-intensive, intrusive and can artificially influence water use behaviour [4,5]. The third approach (see [5–7]) overcomes the deficiencies of the first two, by only requiring a smart metre installed at the property boundary (i.e. replacement of traditional metre only). This approach uses pattern recognition (i.e. Hidden Markov Model and Dynamic Time Warping algorithm) coupled with other data mining techniques (i.e. event probability analysis) to automate the end use analysis process. A prototype software tool (Autoflow) was developed to provide a user-friendly platform to aid this process as described in the following paragraph.The first prototype version of Autoflow was founded on an analytical procedure developed by the authors (see [5–7]) and achieved an average overall pattern recognition accuracy across all categories of 85%. However, higher recognition accuracies and the ability to recognise and adapt to new or altered end uses are needed before a commercially viable software tool can be developed. While mechanised appliance (e.g. clothes washer) recognition accuracy is greater than 90%, behaviourally influenced end use categories such as shower, bathtub and irrigation, need to be improved to develop a more reliable system (i.e. currently below 70%).This paper enhances previous research conducted by the researchers [5–7] by combining Hidden Markov Model (HMM), Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) techniques to examine both the shape pattern and physical characteristics of each event in order to identify the most likely end use category a particular flow pattern signature belongs. In this paper we have supplemented HMM with an adjunct ANN pattern recognition model in order to help capture water user habits in all human-dependent end uses and also the distinct operational features of all mechanised categories in that particular home. This has been achieved using ANN to decipher the likelihood occurrence for an extensive database of nine different characteristics or features of each end use event (i.e. volume, duration, maximum flow-rate, most-frequent flow rate, frequency of most frequent flow-rate, magnitude of initial flow-rate rise, magnitude of flow-rate drop at the end of event, gradient of initial flow-rate rise, and gradient of flow-rate drop at the end of the event). In this present paper, the influence of this newly supplemented ANN computational procedure has significantly improved the accuracy of the prior reported water end use event pattern recognition models for both the single [6] and concurrently occurring [5] residential water end use events. Moreover, the compiled expert system software presented at the end of this paper is a demonstrably enhanced version of that presented in Nguyen et al. [7] with significantly more accuracy and functionality. The present application is close to a commercial application standard.The overall recognition process for the refined HMM–ANN–DTW method can be divided into four main stages: (1) likelihood estimation using HMM based on the event flow-rate pattern (i.e. flow pattern signature); (2) examination of physical feature similarities (e.g. rate of change of water flow) using ANN; (3) integration of HMM and ANN likelihood decisions to categorise events; and (4) where uncertainty still exists, apply further decision support algorithms such as DTW and event probability tables. The following sections of the paper will outline the background to this research, the establishment of classification model architecture, the customisation of HMM and ANN for the study, the model validation and calibration, and finally a description on how this novel research is an integral part of the future intelligent metering and information management future.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
