@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An engineering approach to human resources performance evaluation: Hybrid MCDM application with interactions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a performance evaluation method for human resources.We use a Hybrid Multicriteria Decision Making Model fort his purpose.All possible interaction types are considered and handled with the proposed method.Ignoring the interactions may lead to erroneous decisions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Performance evaluation,Human resources,MCDM,ANP,Choquet Integral,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human performance evaluation is one of the most important fields to analyze for the continuity of an organization. Evaluation files filled by the managers generally end up in dusty folders where no one looks. This decreases the credibility of the evaluators and the process itself. Whereas the management thinks that they are taking the valuable time from the people who can do better things instead of these evaluations. In this paper, we add an engineering point of view to this process by giving a Hybrid Multicriteria Decision Making (MCDM) approach to evaluate employees’ performances working for a same task and explain an efficient way of handling the qualitative and quantitative data simultaneously. The real life situations where performance criteria show interaction will be possible to solve and the different types of interactions will be handled with the proposed hybrid method using Analytical Network Process (ANP) and Choquet Integral (CI) simultaneously. We also give a numerical illustration at the end of the study with the appropriate concluding remarks including the advantages of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The purpose of performance evaluation (PE) is to see in which situation the individual or the organization is and take the necessary actions according to the situation. A research shows that PE information is used specially in four fields: decisions requiring inter-personal comparisons (salary determination, promotion, etc.), decisions requiring personal comparison (feedback, personal educational need, etc.), decisions orientated to the continuation of the system (target determination, human force planning, etc.) and documentation.To avoid psychological phenomena and answer the expectations of the employees, the evaluation process has to insure a sufficient level of objectivity and only a limited level of subjectivity. Very often, the impossibility of being perfectly objective drives the evaluators to be perfectly subjective which will lead to the mistrust to their legitimacy.In addition to these, the evaluation process has to be explicit and organized. Therefore it will lay on criteria defined beforehand; it will be elaborated by maintenance and will allow a connection between the evaluation realized and the perspectives of career evolution and rewards offered. Such system will give a chance to the evaluation in order to be concrete, transparent and to satisfy the conditions of sufficient objectivity and limited subjectivity [1].In the last decade, great majority of all the papers about human resource management – HRM and performance focused on the human resources – HR as department in an enterprise, personnel selection, performance improvement professionals, performance metrics and improvement and the organization's performance. Some of the works in the mentioned areas were:•The connection between HRM (as a source of competitive advantage) and the organizational performance [2–5].The need to develop effective personnel selection mechanism to find the most suitable talents to the organizations. Optimizing HR allocation problems with respect to organizational requirements and jobs classification [6–8].Salary and benefit determination for the applicants based on their qualifications [9].The main contributions of HR dimensions for the environmental management in a company [10].The expectations from performance improvement professionals [11,12] and performance improvement professionals’ effectiveness [13].New metrics for employee development [14].Performance improvement of employees [15–17].Effects of education [18], objective feedback [19], hope [20] on performance and performance improvement.Injustices occurring in performance evaluation of the employees [21].Of course in a conventional way, there are methods and tools to do that task. The common methods are graphic rating scale, force distribution, behaviorally anchored rating scale, management by objectives, 360° evaluation method, etc. However these methods can only get some surface information of data, and cannot account for the potential correlation between the data and the uncertainties of the data [22]. Also, the questions to ask ourselves are:•Are these methods objective enough?Are they completely able to compare effectively the employees?How they manage to assess simultaneously the tangible and intangible factors?Do they take the interdependencies/interactions in consideration?Traditional PEs are subjective and one-sided and therefore ineffective in providing honest and objective feedback. The 360° PE, which in the last decade became very popular around the world, is a system that evaluates the employees’ performance through an open feedback system. Therefore, 360° feedback assessment process offers a relatively better way. Regardless of the position you hold in a company, it is important to understand how others (boss, team, peers and customers) perceive your effectiveness, strengths and weaknesses. A number of evaluators including the superiors, co-workers, customers and subordinates of the employee, with their immediate superior are evaluating the employee. Hence the employee observes his/her PE from many different perspectives. From that point of view, if the feedbacks are objective as they are expected to be, the PE may be effective.There are three very frequent situations which make us think that PEs have got errors.•The first is the fact that 80–90% of the users do their evaluations clearly above the average, in other words, the generosity error.The second is the fact of not being able to observe the expected performance differences of a group in the evaluations.The third is the situation in which the evaluations of a person on different performance dimensions show a strong correlation.The managers accepted they are generous in their judgments because, they think giving a negative feedback will affect face to face relations and they want to motivate and help to advance their employees. They also confessed that they decreased their evaluations in order to teach something to the employee or to say to him/her that it is time to quit. To avoid this kind of political attitudes, the high level management has to take the PE in serious and transmit this to the lower levels.In their studies, He [23], Fang and He [24], Qin et al. [25] used data mining in order to cope with potential correlation among the data in general performance evaluation. On top of that, Li et al. [22] used fuzzy sets theory in order to handle the uncertainty and ambiguity existing in the data in HRM.The companies consider several different criteria to be fulfilled by their employees. Not only to work well is important, but other criteria such as good relations with co-workers, have a social life outside work are also considered. Hence, we have to deal with a basket containing several different goods which we cannot add one to another as we like. That is why we chose to add a Multicriteria Decision Making (MCDM) perspective to this subject. Moon et al. [26] used a distance based fuzzy MCDM method to propose a promotion ranking system for military organization. However the interactions are not considered in this study. As we want to model the problem as close as we can to the real life situation, the interactions between different factors of the performance will be considered in the study.This paper is aimed to measure the performance of a group of individuals performing the same task, with a new hybrid approach used in [27] including Analytical Network Process (ANP) and Choquet Integral (CI). By doing that, not only a MCDM approach will be applied to human PE with an engineering point of view, but also the interactions between different performance criteria and different types of those interactions will be handled.Therefore the originality of the paper comes from:•The use of MCDM methodology in human resources performance evaluation (HRPE).Attaching different level of importance to different dimensions of performance as opposed to the traditional methods used in almost all companies.Considering the interactions between different dimensions of performance under consideration which is also not a feature of the current PE methods used in HR.Handling two different types of interactions simultaneously with the proposed hybrid method.Presenting an expert system for human PE regardless the sector, position, department of the employee.The reason why ANP is chosen is that in today's world, as we mentioned above, the performance has several dimensions and these dimensions most of the time shows interdependencies. Not only the criteria play a role in determining the alternatives’ relative importance, but the alternatives also play this role on the criteria [28,29]. On the other hand, CI, which is a fuzzy integral, deals with the “conjunctive/disjunctive” interactions among criteria. The classical MCDM tools will not be effective in this kind of evaluations where criteria show interactions whereas the ANP and CI are powerful tools in handling these situations. The originality of the work comes from measuring the human performance with MCDM approach and doing so by including the consideration of interactions, and different types of interactions simultaneously, between criteria and sub-criteria.The rest of this paper is as follows: In Sections 2 and 3 of the study we state the basic information about ANP and CI, respectively. Then we give the methodology in Section 4. The construction of the model and a numerical illustration will be given in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. The effects of ignoring the mentioned interactions and how important they might be will be discussed in concluding remarks of the study.Considering the concept of MCDM, Saaty [28,30] created Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) and ANP which are both MCDM tools handling models possessing qualitative and quantitative clusters.AHP models the decision problem with a hierarchy consisting of multiple levels with unidirectional relationships whereas the ANP models the decision problem with a network structure that relaxes the hierarchical and unidirectional assumptions in AHP to allow the interdependencies in the framework [31].Thus, ANP consists of three parts: the first part is the control hierarchy for the network of the criteria and sub-criteria, the second part is a network of influences among the elements and clusters, and the third is the feedback between the various clusters and elements within a cluster. Therefore ANP can treat problems having complex interrelationships among factors (dependencies and feedbacks) so that it can handle the complexities of real-world problems for making societal, governmental, and corporate decisions [32–36].Many decision problems cannot be built as a hierarchy because of the dependencies between clusters. To deal with the complexity, the decision makers choose to use simple hierarchic structures consisting of a goal, criteria and alternatives. Yet decisions obtained from a network can be significantly different than the ones obtained from a simple, moreover a complex hierarchy. It is not smart to avoid the complexity artificially and hope for the correct results which will reflect the reality. To deal with complex networks will surely take more time and effort but will give us “healthier” results. There are two types of influence/dependence: outer and inner. In outer dependence, one compares the influence of elements in a component/cluster on elements of another component/cluster with respect to a control criterion. In inner dependence, one compares the influence of elements in a group on each one. So, ANP is very useful in these kinds of situations providing a general framework without the assumptions of independence of higher-level elements from lower ones, or independence on the same level [37].The ANP approach has been successfully used in many areas such as business and management [38–45]; location selection [31,46], supplier selection [37,47,48], social themes [49–53]; manufacturing [32,54–57]; new product design [58], decision contexts or used to predict sports outcomes [59], economic turns [60], construction [61], supply chain management [62], personnel selection [63], risk assessment [64] and waste water treatment [65].For quantitative criteria, one can collect the values from the official documents or the company. However for the qualitative criteria, the evaluation is not that easy. In ANP, relative priorities are established in the same way that it is done in AHP: through the pairwise comparisons. The qualitative aspects are weighted through pairwise comparisons using the fundamental 1–9 scale of Saaty.However, the decision makers’ (DMs) evaluations will not be perfectly consistent and this is something to be checked after each comparison matrix is obtained and relative priority vector according to that matrix is retrieved. The judgments in the comparison matrix are said to be consistent and therefore the relative priority vector estimation is accepted if Consistency Ratio – CR value is less than 10%. When greater values are found, the comparison matrix, i.e. the judgments in the matrix need to be revised.Considering the dependencies, the priorities derived from pairwise comparison matrices are placed into a supermatrix. The supermatrix (W) represents the influence priority of an element on the left of the matrix on an element on the top of the matrix with respect to a particular control criterion. Every element of a cluster does not need to impact an element in another cluster. Thus those who do not impact are given a zero value for their contribution. The resulting matrix needs to be stochastic, i.e. the columns have to sum up to one, in order to continue the calculations and obtain meaningful limiting results. It is necessary to compare the clusters themselves to ensure that. The pairwise comparisons of the clusters are made with respect to each of the clusters or according to some attribute presented in a separate control hierarchy for that system. The resulting priorities are used to weight the column vectors of the supermatrix previously obtained. Hence the resulting supermatrix is column stochastic.The overall priority of each element of each cluster is given by the solution to the following limit:(1)limk→∞W2k+1We can summarize the ANP in a six step procedure. The first step is to decompose the problem and to define the main goal. The second step is to define precisely what the criteria will be to achieve previously defined goal. In this step one may also define the sub-criteria for these criteria. The third step is to design the hierarchy starting from the goal, all the way down to the alternatives passing from the criteria and the sub-criteria previously defined and determine all the inter-dependencies that exist in the decision problem. After this step, the network of the decision problem is determined.Once the skeleton of the problem is designed, the fourth step is to build the supermatrix by performing the pairwise comparisons, prioritization and define the weights of the criteria and the sub-criteria while considering the inter-dependencies between them. In this step, one have to check the consistencies of the pairwise comparisons made by the experts or DMs, in order to make the necessary changes if there is any inconsistency above the allowed limit. The next step is to rate the alternatives according all the criteria and sub-criteria. The sixth and final step is to compute the overall score for the alternatives and make the final decision as to choose the best alternative or to obtain the final ranking of the alternatives.The CI, which has been introduced in the fuzzy measure community by Murofushi and Sugeno [66] is a fuzzy integral proposed by Gustave Choquet [67] and considers the interactions between k out of n criteria of the problem, which is called the k-additivity property. Some of the recent studies including CI in MCDM are in the following areas: software development risk assessment [68], job-shop scheduling [69], student PE [70], supplier chain management [71], group decision making [72,73]. This section is devoted to give the basic definitions and the procedure of CI.Let μ be a non-monotonic fuzzy measure on X and f a function on X with range{a1,a2,…,an}, wherea1≤a2≤⋯≤an. The CI(C)∫f(x)dμ(x)or simply(C)∫fdμof f with respect to μ is defined as follows:(2)(C)∫fdμ=∑i=1n(ai−ai−1)⋅μ({x|f(x)≥ai})wherea0=0Since a fuzzy measure defined on a set of n elements requires 2n real coefficients for its definition, k-additive measures have been introduced by Grabisch [74] in order to decrease the exponential complexity of fuzzy measures in practical applications. In a k-additive CI the interactions of higher order than k will not be taken in consideration or they will be considered null. Therefore, k-additive measures can be represented by a limited set of coefficients, at most∑i=1kCincoefficients.Lettingti,i=1,…,nbe the scores on the criteria, by using only the interaction index, it is possible to express CI in the case of 2-additive measures as follows [74]:(3)Cμ(t1,…,tn)=∑Iij>0(ti∧tj)Iij+∑Iij<0(ti∨tj)|Iij|+∑i=1ntiΦi−12∑j≠i|Iij|withΦi−12∑j≠i|Iij|≥0,∀i=1,…,nHere,Φirepresents the relative importance of criterion i with∑i=1nΦi=1and Iij, defined in the interval [−1; 1], is the interaction value between criteria i and j. Three cases may be observed for interaction value:•Positive values of Iijimplies a conjunctive behavior between criteria i and j, i.e. simultaneous satisfaction of both criteria is significant for the global score.Negative values of Iijimplies a disjunctive behavior between criteria i and j, i.e. the satisfaction of either one is sufficient to have a significant effect on the global score.If Iijis null, then there is no interaction between criteria i and j. If for all pairs of criteria, Iijare null then theΦivalue acts as a weight vector in a weighted arithmetic mean. This represents the linear part of CI.Measuring Attractiveness by a Categorical Based Evaluation TecHnique – MACBETH is a multi-criteria decision analysis approach which has been proposed by studies of Bana e Costa [75], Bana e Costa and Vansnick [76–78]. MACBETH has been used in various fields such as individual's career choice [79], evaluation and comparison of the technical performance of on-board hydrogen storage technologies [80], politics [81], supply chain management [82], earthquake risk mitigation [83], and logistics [84].The method requires only qualitative judgments about differences of value to help an individual or a group in quantifying the relative attractiveness of the elements of a finite set A and to associate a real number v(x) to each element x of A[85].The DM is first asked to provide a judgment about the relative attractiveness of two elements at a time to retrieve the ordinal judgment. Then secondly, he/she is asked to provide a qualitative judgment on the difference of attractiveness of those two elements if they are not equally attractive using the following linguistic terms: Very weak (VW), Weak (W), Moderate (M), Strong (S), Very strong (VS) and Extreme (E).The MACBETH method presents a procedure to transform qualitative preferences into coherent quantified elementary and aggregated performances. To solve the inter-criteria commensurability problem, it is sufficient to determine, for all interval scales, two common reference points namely the good situation and the neutral situation with the performance values one and zero, respectively.Letpikbe the performance expression of the kth alternative for criterion i. Suppose the DM prefers for criterion i the alternative k to the alternative l and in addition to that information, DM will characterize the strength of his judgments with a level of strength that can take values from one to six (from the least to the most strong level) according to the six semantic categories of difference of attractiveness explained above and zero for a null strength. This level will be denoted with “h”. Therefore, if the DM prefers for criterion i the alternative k to the alternative l, with a strength h, then the following equation, where α is a coefficient necessary to meet the condition pkand pl∈[0; 1], will be obtained:(4)Ak≻hAl⇔pik−pil=hαTherefore, a preference ranking of alternatives for a specific criterion collected from a DM with the strength of the comparisons will give us a system of equation and after solving it, the individual performance values of the alternatives for the criterion in question will be determined.In CI, to define the weight of each elementary performance expression in relation to all other contributions to the overall performance, i.e. the Shapley parameters and the interaction parameters of any pair of performance criteria is one of the most important matters. In this section, the calculations of the Shapley parametersΦiand the interaction parameters Iijof any pair of performance criteria will be explained.If the DMs are able to provide a fuzzy measure for their criteria set, it is possible to define the Shapley indices and interaction values using their definition. Or if, using their experience and expertise, they are able to provide the weights of their criteria and information about interactions (being strongly positive, positive, null, negative or strongly negative) then in this case also the interaction values can be retrieved using some other simplifying approaches such as the one used by Berrah et al. [86]. There is also definition with linear programming to do that but in this study, one of them will be used: determination of the weights by MACBETH.Let pibe the performance value of an alternative for criterion i. In the case of performance expression, the 2-additive CI expression is represented as follows:(5)pTotal=∑i=1nϕipi−12∑{i,j}i≠jIij|pi−pj|whereϕi−12∑j=1n|Iij|≥0∀i∈[1,n]andj≠iThe operators of the CI family can be written under the form of a conventional weighted mean modified by effects coming from interactions between elementary performances [87]. They are stable under linear transformation [88] and thus consistent with the performance expressions on an interval scale on the universe [0; 1]. This property constitutes the theoretical basis of the extension of the MACBETH procedure to the CI aggregation operators [87].So the CI parameters have to be defined. In order to do that, the DM is asked to provide preferential information on the criteria and the couples of criteria including the strength of the preferences. As for the elementary performance expressions, MACBETH proposes to consider some particular and possibly fictive situations, S, in which the alternatives satisfies one criterion or two criteria simultaneously.In the situations where only onepi=1(i.e. criterion i is satisfied) and all others are equal to zero, the aggregated performance expression will be as follows [87]:(6)pAgi=ϕi−12∑j=1j≠inIijThe aggregated performance expression of the situations where only onepi=0and all others are equal to one (i.e. all criteria except i is satisfied) will be as follows [87]:(7)pAgi=1−ϕi−12∑j=1j≠inIijThe aggregated performance expression of the situations where only two elementary performance expressions are equal to one (namely i and j) and all others are equal to zero (i.e. criterion i and j are satisfied) will be as follows [27]:(8)pAgi,j=ϕi+ϕj−12∑k∈ℵ1;n|pk=0Iik+∑k∈ℵ1;n|pk=0IjkIn the same way as described in Section 2.2.3, a preference ranking of those situations collected from a DM with the strength of the comparisons will give us a system of equation and after solving it the CI parameters will be determined.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
