@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
When trust and distrust collide online: The engenderment and role of consumer ambivalence in online consumer behavior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We show that situational abnormalities and suspicion are separate antecedents of distrust in e-commerce.We find that ambivalence modestly affects truster’s intentions in e-commerce.We demonstrate empirically that trust and distrust are separate constructs in e-commerce.We establish that distrust has a larger impact than trust in e-commerce.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Trust,Distrust,Ambivalence,Online behavior,e-commerce,Situational abnormality,Situational normality,Suspicion,Systematic processing,Discriminative encoding,Heuristic–systematic dual-processing model (HSM),Least-effort principle,Sufficiency principle,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Trust and distrust are both considered to be crucial in online truster–trustee relationships. Although some research has proposed that trust and distrust are distinct, other research continues to hold that they are merely opposite ends of the same continuum. Given this debate, it is important to consider how distrust is distinguished from trust. To that end, this paper extends the nomological network of distrust and introduces two novel antecedents never introduced in online behavior literature: situational abnormalities and suspicion. For this nomological network, we also propose that trust and distrust coexist in online e-commerce relationships and can result in ambivalence when they both have high attitudinal values (represented in emotions, beliefs, or behaviors).Using an empirical study of online consumer behavior with 521 experienced online consumers, we found strong empirical validation for our newly proposed model. We provide evidence that suspicion and situational abnormalities are separate, important antecedents to distrust. We also examine the effect of ambivalence on the truster’s intentions toward the website and find a small positive effect that increases the user’s intentions toward the website. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the coexistence of trust and distrust as separate constructs and emphasize that distrust has a much larger impact on the truster’s intentions than does trust. We conclude with implications for theory and practice, along with a discussion of the limitations of and future opportunities revealed by this study.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Substantial research has focused on the critical role that trust plays in the success of online transactions. Trust is exhibited when a truster displays a willingness to be vulnerable to the trustee based on the expectation that the trustee will perform as desired by the truster (Mayer et al. 1995). Conversely, distrust is exhibited when a distruster expects that the other party either will not or cannot perform the desired behaviors and is unwilling to cope with such outcomes, but might rather act in a negative manner toward the distruster (McKnight et al. 2001).Initially, research in this area posited that distrust is simply a form of low trust and thus that distrust could be overcome merely by developing trust e.g., (Mayer et al. 1995; McKnight et al. 1998). However, more recent research has argued that distrust is a construct distinct from low trust (Dimoka 2010; Komiak and Benbasat 2008; Wu et al. 2006). Perhaps most convincing is a seminal information systems (IS) neuroscience study that showed trust and distrust being activated in different parts of the brain and coexisting with different triggers (Dimoka 2010). Hence, we choose to conceptualize these constructs as distinct. Given the obvious importance of trust and distrust in the study of online behavior in e-commerce, it is crucial for researchers to understand thoroughly both constructs and their relationships (Jarvenpaa and Majchrzak 2010). The findings should be of interest to practitioners, because merchants who wish to encourage trust might also need to discover how to diminish distrust.Although the importance of distrust has been suggested for several years, the current nomological network of distrust remains relatively unexplored, and few known antecedents of distrust have been identified e.g., McKnight et al. 2004. Our knowledge is limited mainly to the fact that the general disposition to distrust increases distrusting beliefs. An important step in determining the importance of distrust is identifying the constructs that can independently alter distrust or at least produce effects on distrust distinct from those of trust. Because the majority of e-commerce research has focused on trust, and most often specifically on factors that influence trust, our understanding of the complexity and richness of online consumer behavior can be enhanced by a reexamination of distrust and its role in e-commerce (Dimoka 2010; Komiak and Benbasat 2008). This opportunity leads to the first research question of this study:RQ1: What constructs serve as antecedents of distrust in online e-commerce relationships, thereby extending the known nomological distrust network?Communication research has long held that anomalous events serve as cues for distrust (Buller and Burgoon 1996; Fein and Hilton 1994). Both social psychology and communication research have proposed that abnormalities in a particular environment might also serve as signals for distrust (Schul et al. 1996, 2004), but this has not been empirically validated. We thus believe that situational abnormality—a truster’s perception that something in relation to the trustee is improper or abnormal (Schul et al. 2008)—can cause an increase in distrust and suspicion.The same streams of research further posit that the relationship between distrust and abnormal events is enabled through the process of suspicion. Suspicion is defined as the truster doubting the sincerity or motivations of the trustee (Hilton et al. 1993). Although no study has empirically validated this proposition, recent work has emphasized the connection between deception and distrust (Jarvenpaa and Majchrzak 2010). For example, Schul et al. (2004, 2008) produced a theoretical model and empirical results showing how distrust enhances suspicion and increases the motivation for certainty, thus causing people to engage in more systematic processing and producing better decision outcomes. Systematic processing is the active cognitive elaboration of the given information available when solving nonroutine problems (Bohner et al. 1995). The model was a substantial contribution, but in their multiple studies, Schul et al. did not verify empirically how trust and distrust were directly impacted as dependent variables, and their work was not based on online behavior or e-commerce. These issues raise an interesting question: can it be demonstrated that suspicion increases distrust?RQ2: Do abnormalities in the interaction between the truster and trustee in online e-commerce relationships lead to an increased level of suspicion felt by the truster, ultimately causing an increased sense of distrust?Because distrust has been defined as a functional equivalent of trust and aids in the ability to understand one’s environment (Lewicki et al. 1998), distrust can be conceptualized as a negative attitude and trust as a positive one. In situations in which a person can form both a positive and negative attitude toward the same attitude object, it is possible for these attitudes to coexist, thereby engendering ambivalence. Ambivalence is defined as holding simultaneously at least two contradictory attitudes toward the same attitude object (Kaplan 1972).By extending the ambivalence literature to include both trust and distrust, the joint effects of trust and distrust in e-commerce can be explained theoretically. Ambivalence is likely to attenuate the relationship between an individual’s trusting beliefs and their intentions (Conner et al. 2002; Kaplan 1972; Priester et al. 2007). Moreover, as described above, ambivalence itself could alter how information is processed by buyers, and observing and understanding that alteration could provide additional insights for future e-commerce research (Jarvenpaa and Majchrzak 2010; Priester et al. 2007). If Schul et al. (2008) were correct that signals for distrust might cause information to be processed systematically, their prediction that such a combination will paradoxically lead buyers to engage in trusting behaviors might be justified. Recently, (Jarvenpaa and Majchrzak 2010) called for additional research on ambivalence to show how it can be applied to the juxtaposed trust-distrust relationships found in e-commerce. These points lead to our final research question:RQ3: Does the existence of both trust and distrust in online e-commerce relationships cause the truster to feel ambivalence toward the trustee? Furthermore, does ambivalence strengthen or weaken the trusting relationship between the truster and trustee?In answering these research questions, our study seeks to provide several new contributions to the trust and distrust literature in e-commerce: First, we extend the distrust nomological network by examining the role of situational abnormality and suspicion as novel antecedents of distrust. Second, we introduce an ambivalence construct and its measurement to IS researchers and identify when ambivalence is likely to be engendered in e-commerce settings while explaining its consequences for online trustee-truster relationships. Third, we validate empirically the hypothesized role of suspicion as the process whereby situational abnormalities could lead to distrust. Finally, we provide further validation that trust and distrust are separate constructs, not different ends of the same continuum.We propose two main improvements to the extant trust-distrust model, which was based originally on the theory of reasoned action. First, we propose that situational abnormality and suspicion serve as novel antecedents of distrusting beliefs; further, we predict that the effects of these relationships will be stronger than the effects of the dispositions to trust and distrust. Second, we introduce and propose the moderating role of ambivalence when both trusting and distrusting beliefs are present. We predict the effect of ambivalence in the relationship between trusting and distrusting beliefs on behavioral intentions. Our model is depicted in Fig. 1(proposed negative relationships are depicted with dashed lines). The remainder of this section further explains and proposes our model in two main subsections: antecedents of both distrusting and trusting beliefs, and the generation of ambivalence.Because this paper extends the nomological network of trust and distrust in an e-commerce context, we adopt generally accepted conceptualizations of trust and distrust from the same context. Trusting beliefs are defined as the willingness of the truster to become vulnerable to the trustee based on the belief that the trustee will perform a desired behavior (Mayer et al. 1995; McKnight et al. 1998). In contrast, distrusting beliefs are defined as unwillingness to become vulnerable to the trustee based on the belief that the trustee will behave in a harmful, neglectful, or incompetent manner (McKnight et al. 2001, 2003).We likewise build upon recent work that has established the duality of trust and distrust as separate, yet related, constructs. Earlier literature defined them as opposite ends of the same spectrum.3These conflicting conceptualizations are known as the unidimensional and bidimensional models of trust (Lewicki et al. 2006). Unidimensional models of trust treat trust and distrust as opposite ends of the same continuum. These models propose that trust has several components that can be captured within a global construct that measures overall trust for a consumer (McAllister 1995; Williams 2001). Based on the perception of the trustee’s trustworthiness, the individual expects and feels that the organization will behave in a desired manner and is willing to become vulnerable to the organization (Williams 2001). The unidimensional conceptualization assumes that if the global trust score is high, then trust exists. Conversely, if the score is low, then there is distrust. These unidimensional models of trust and distrust are built on earlier trust research that was based on economic game theory, wherein trust was conceptualized as cooperative behavior and distrust as opportunistic behavior (Arrow 1974). Additionally, this approach tended to view trust and distrust as mutually exclusive (Lewicki and Bunker 1996) substitutes for each other (Lewis and Weigert 1984) rather than separate constructs. The unidimensional assumption is challenged by the bidimensional approach to trust-distrust upon which our model is built. Bidimensional models of trust (Dimoka 2010; Lewicki et al. 1998; McKnight et al. 2006) are based on the conceptual foundation of separating constructs of negative valence from those of positive valence (Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Kaplan 1972). Hence, bidimensional models of trust-distrust propose that the constructs trust and distrust are distinct; although they generally consist of the same components, they exhibit opposite valences. In this conception, trust includes positive expectations regarding the organization’s conduct, whereas distrust includes negative expectations (Luhmann 1979).3McKnight et al. (2001) originally proposed that distrust, as a potentially more emotional construct than trust, should also be considered in e-commerce literature. Since then, numerous studies have investigated these related constructs and found that despite their naturally polarized definitions, they are in fact separable and distinct (Dimoka 2010; Komiak and Benbasat 2008). The most recent study to support the distinction between trust and distrust used fMRI to show that different areas of the brain are activated when participants were manipulated with trusting versus distrusting cues about an online seller (Dimoka 2010). The study showed that trusting cues are activated in areas of the brain that are associated with higher-order cognitive functions. We thus follow the assumption of the latest literature that trust and distrust are related but separate constructs.Despite the emerging importance of distrust, little research has explored its antecedents. Initial studies, building on trust models, proposed and found that the disposition to distrust is a significant predictor of distrusting beliefs (McKnight et al. 2001, 2003, 2004). Given the substantial focus on trust in e-commerce research, its nomological network is vast and includes many antecedents e.g., (Cyr 2013; Lowry et al. 2008, 2014, 2010), which include but are not limited to social presence and website design, branding, system quality, culture, shared values, interaction, credibility, relationships, justice, and customer reviewers. Compared to distrust, the basic features of trust and its nomological network are much better understood.Distrust models have yet to explore unique antecedents of distrust that are potentially key components of the distrust nomological network. Because the majority of IS research on distrust has focused on the disposition to distrust, it is useful to extend the nomological network of distrust further to explain its primary antecedents and thereby better understand how distrust is engendered. Our study is among the first IS studies to pursue this line of research, and proposes situational abnormality and suspicion as two such antecedents of distrust. For purposes of nomological validity, we also include disposition to trust and distrust.Previous research (McKnight et al. 2002) has inspired the notion of situational normality within institution-based trust, which derives from the perceptions of the truster created during a transaction. We introduce four subdimensions of situational abnormality that are more specific than the general notion of normality: (1) general abnormalities (i.e., errors related to the general perception of the truster with regard to the normalcy of the situation); (2) informational abnormalities (i.e., errors related to the detailing of the product and its related information only); (3) process abnormalities (i.e., errors related to unexpected events during the buying process); and (4) design-related abnormalities (i.e., unexpected events or errors related to the design of the webpage itself). We thus conclude that situational abnormality is quite distinct from the institution-based trust identified by McKnight et al. (2002) and include it as a specific construct, which is derived from the perceptions of the truster that are created during the transaction process. Further, these concepts have been proposed and found in other e-commerce-related literature (Everard and Galletta 2005) and in the communications and psychology research discussed above.Situational abnormality refers to environments that defy or violate the dominant rules and social norms that serve as general expectations for a truster in determining what would normally be expected within the truster-trustee relationship (Schul et al. 2008). Namely, a truster perceives abnormal situations when conditions appear to be out of the norm or when unexpected events occur. In such environments, people sense that the setting or people might not be as they appear (Schul et al. 2008). When a given context is perceived to be abnormal and thus novel, a person does not have prior experience, knowledge, or feelings to draw upon to guide attitudes or behaviors (Fein and Hilton 1994; Hilton et al. 1993). Because routine behaviors and attitudes are not available in these situations, people must resort to nonroutine information processing to understand the situation (Schul et al. 2008).As people seek to understand an abnormal environment, they try to understand the motivations behind the available information by engaging in discriminative encoding (Kelley and Michela 1980), which refers to a process in which a person delays information encoding while constructing alternative scenarios, motivations, or interpretations (called counterscenarios) in an attempt to understand what motivates the potentially harmful behaviors of others (Schul et al. 1996). Importantly, this search for underlying motives often results in assuming that others’ underlying motives are negative and might not result in positive outcomes for the person (Fein and Hilton 1994; Kelley and Michela 1980; Schul et al. 1996).In summary, research has shown that abnormal situations cause people to engage in nonroutine processing that focuses on discriminative encoding designed to systematically judge the motives of those behind the abnormality. This systematic judgment process fosters distrust because of the negative counterscenarios that are created in one’s mind to explain the motives behind the abnormality. Notably, previous studies outside of the e-commerce field have found that abnormal situations are likely to lead people to distrust others (Hilton et al. 1993; Schul et al. 1996, 2004, 2008). We thus hypothesize that:H1Situational abnormalities will be (a) positively related to distrusting beliefs and (b) negatively related to trusting beliefs.We propose suspicion as another key antecedent of distrust. Suspicion occurs when a person actively entertains multiple, rival hypotheses regarding the intentions of another’s behavior that prevent the person from adopting a positive or negative attitude toward the object (Kramer 1999). In this study, suspicion refers specifically to state suspicion, the suspicion that a person feels in a specific situation. People who are suspicious of others actively consider multiple hypotheses due to a lack of evidence that would allow them to reach a threshold of sufficient certainty to maintain their beliefs (Buller and Burgoon 1996; Hilton et al. 1993). This lack of preference for one attitude causes increased motivation to acquire more information or to more thoroughly process information to arrive at a decision (Hilton et al. 1993). The increased motivation causes people to become more vigilant about and thus more suspicious of available information. The resulting lack of knowledge and certainty leads to greater reluctance to draw inferences regarding distrust or trust toward a given seller (Hilton et al. 1993).Suspicion is usually manifested in two ways (Kramer 1999). First, people experiencing suspicion know that they lack information related to other people (Hilton et al. 1993). Second, because of the lack of information, suspicious people are unable to correctly attribute the behavior of others to either internal or external causes (Kelley 1973). It thus follows that the inability to attribute the behavior of other people to either a trusting or distrusting concept reduces the ability of people experiencing suspicion to evaluate hypotheses regarding the trusting or distrusting nature of others (Kelley 1973). They thus must begin to evaluate all possible information to increase certainty enough to discount rival hypotheses and firmly accept one of the relevant attitudes (e.g., trust or distrust) (Kelley 1973).Another important consideration with respect to suspicion is the relative weight assigned to each of the conflicting attitudes. Previous research on risk and risk taking shows a general tendency among people to shy away from risky behavior (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Even if more relevant and/or specific evidence supports a positive outcome, the desire to avoid a negative outcome is stronger for most people than the desire for a potentially positive outcome. It is thus likely that negative attitudes will have greater weights attached to them and be of more importance compared to positive attitudes (Kahneman and Tversky 1979).Suspicious people are more likely to overestimate the likelihood of ulterior motives, as seen in correspondence bias (Hilton et al. 1993), which occurs when people assume that the behavior of a person is demonstrative of the intention motivating the behavior. However, an individual who is experiencing suspicion will be unable to discount any potential motives for behavior, due to (1) the lack of information regarding the true internal state of the other person and (2) the motivation to correctly evaluate all potential behaviors. Rather, the more probable motivations are elaborated upon as possible scenarios, and given the increased weight placed upon negative attitudes, it is more likely that negative motivations will be placed within this consideration set. Although people strongly oriented toward suspicion might have the same information as those who display correspondence bias, the inability to ascertain the certainty of the information toward one specific attitude relegates them to remain suspicious and noncommittal to any particular attitude over another regarding the attitude object (e.g., the seller’s website).Researchers have also asserted that suspicion is most likely to occur when something in the situation is different than expected (i.e., abnormal) Gurtman and Lion 1982. When trusters encounter something that is abnormal, they are more likely to become more vigilant about and aware of the environment and actors in the given circumstance (Gurtman and Lion 1982). If the abnormality provides cues or signals that a trustee might have ulterior or hidden motives beyond what is readily apparent, the truster will likely become suspicious. The presence of both positive signals about aspects of the trustee and negative signals inferred from the abnormalities provides some information to the truster. However, it might not be enough to clearly convince the truster to either trust or distrust—thereby increasing the level of suspicion (Gurtman and Lion 1982). The vigilance of the buyer would increase, resulting in more thorough information processing—a process that is more likely to produce distrust (as described earlier). Supporting this assertion, communication and management research has proposed that abnormalities in the environment lead to suspicion, which then leads to distrust (Gurtman and Lion 1982; Hilton et al. 1993; Schul et al. 2004, 2008). In spite of their rich theoretical contributions, researchers have not yet empirically validated this relationship. We thus hypothesize that:H2Situational abnormality will be positively related to suspicion.Previous research has also proposed that suspicion is the main antecedent of distrust (Gurtman and Lion 1982; Kramer 1999; Luhmann 1979; Schul et al. 2008). People who are generally suspicious of other persons and situations are more likely to be sensitized to motives in others that could cause potential harm to the individual. By identifying potential negative consequences, a person is able to form negative expectations about the actions of others, which serve as the basis for distrusting beliefs. Therefore:H3Suspicion will be positively related to distrusting beliefs.Finally, we include the known relationships of dispositions to distrust and trust for purposes of nomological validity. Disposition to distrust is a persistent view that a person holds across situations and irrespective of the other people involved (McKnight et al. 2001, 2003). Disposition to distrust is marked by the tendency of the truster to believe that most other people are either incapable of performing desired behaviors or lack the motivation to engage in those behaviors (Kramer 1999). If trusters doubt either the ability or motivation of trustees to perform a given behavior, trusters will thus believe that trustees have ulterior motives to take advantage of them. Hence, if a truster has a general tendency to distrust everyone, it is likely that no matter the situation, he or she will be more suspicious of others because of easily imagined hidden intentions in others. Notably, previous research has proposed that the disposition to distrust, or suspicion of humanity in general, is linked to increased tendencies toward suspicion (Kramer 1999; Luhmann 1979; McKnight et al. 2004). Having previously established these relationships, we include each for model completeness.H4aThe disposition to distrust will be positively related to suspicion.The disposition to distrust will be positively related to distrusting beliefs.Conversely, the disposition to trust is a persistent view that a truster holds across situations (McKnight et al. 2002, 1998). If a person has a high disposition to trust, he or she will be highly likely to believe in the trustworthiness of the trustee and as a result will rely on the trustee. This relationship has been long proposed and supported in the trust literature (McKnight et al. 2002, 1998). Therefore, we hypothesize the following:H4cThe disposition to trust will be positively related to trusting beliefs.Turning from our proposed antecedents of distrust and trust, we newly propose ambivalence as a key addition to the literature and to our nomological net of trust-distrust. Ambivalence, more specifically attitudinal ambivalence, is the state in which a person is inclined to assess equivalently strong positive and negative evaluations toward an attitude object (Thompson and Zanna 1995). Because trust is a positive evaluation and distrust is a negative evaluation, the combination of the two attitudes has the potential to produce attitudinal ambivalence if they are held at roughly equivalent levels toward the same attitude object (Jonas et al. 1997; Kaplan 1972). Yet, this compelling possibility is not accounted for in extant trust-distrust research or e-commerce research.A better understanding of attitudes is essential for comprehending the generation of ambivalence. Research posits that attitudes consist of multiple components: feelings, beliefs, and behaviors4This body of literature defines feelings as the emotional response and attachments that a person ascribes to other people or objects (Kachadourian et al. 2005); beliefs are the logically held information regarding the characteristics of other people or objects (Kachadourian et al. 2005). Feelings thus involve affect and beliefs involve cognition, and thus can also be referred to as affective beliefs and cognitive beliefs. Finally, behaviors are actions that are performed by a person (Kachadourian et al. 2005)—that are intended to reflect the held feelings and beliefs of the individual.4[e.g., 20]. Further, ambivalence can occur within (i.e., intracomponent ambivalence) or between (i.e., intercomponent ambivalence) these three attitude components (MacDonald and Zanna 1998). Ambivalence can thus be created through conflicting attitudes within the same component (e.g., positive and negative feelings) or through having different components with opposing valences (e.g., positive feelings and negative beliefs).For example, suppose that an online buyer holds trusting (positive) affect toward the buyer due to numerous customer ratings that serve as indicators of the seller’s benevolent reputation with other buyers. Yet, suppose that the buyer also feels distrust toward the seller due to the perception that the seller lacks competence—as demonstrated by errors or incomplete information about the product (Everard and Galletta 2005) on a website. In this scenario, the buyer could feel both trust and distrust toward different aspects of the seller that would eventually be used to formulate a decision regarding the purchase of an item from that seller. If the strength of each of these feelings is relatively strong, then it is likely that the buyer will experience a form of intercomponent ambivalence.Extant literature on trust and distrust has emphasized that distrust and trust can coexist and are of opposite valences e.g., (Lewicki and Bunker 1996). Trust has been proposed to involve positive expectations regarding the seller’s behaviors, whereas distrust focuses on the buyer’s negative expectations regarding the seller’s behaviors (Lewicki and Bunker 1996; McKnight et al. 2004). Each of these beliefs can result in a positive or negative expectation in the truster regarding the trustee’s behavior. Accordingly, trusting and distrusting beliefs can be juxtaposed within a truster—resulting in conflicting beliefs regarding the trustworthiness of the seller.These conflicting beliefs are expected to result in an increased likelihood of ambivalence due to conflict between the two beliefs. Mixed, concurrent beliefs have been shown to result in attitudinal ambivalence (Kachadourian et al. 2005; Priester et al. 2007). A similar effect has also been proposed regarding trust and distrust, but has never been tested (Lewicki and Bunker 1996). We thus hypothesize that:H5Simultaneously high levels of both trust and distrust will be positively related to perceived ambivalence.Many studies have provided evidence that ambivalence attenuates the relationship between attitudes and behavior; however, some research proposes that ambivalence could have a direct impact on future behaviors and that it therefore does not attenuate the relationships of trust and distrust in future behaviors (Jonas et al. 1997). For example, a buyer who feels ambivalence toward a seller due to high levels of both trust and distrust is more likely to engage in systematic processing because of increased motivation to process and arrive at a solution. Thus, cues regarding trust or distrust toward the seller might be more closely scrutinized in an attempt to arrive at a solution. With a more thorough analysis, a buyer’s intentions toward the seller will be based more on information processing than with a buyer with lower or no ambivalence toward the seller who does not engage in systematic processing.Jonas et al. (1997) thus proposed that researchers focus on how ambivalence can be decreased, an interesting departure from the general trend of focusing on how ambivalence attenuates the relationship between attitudes and behaviors. Jones et al. reasoned that dual-attitude models naturally extend and combine with dual-processing models of information—particularly with the heuristic–systematic dual-processing model (HSM) Chaiken and Maheswaran 1994. HSM is an information-processing model that posits that people employ two general strategies (i.e., systematic and heuristic) to acquire and evaluate information. HSM is built on two basic principles. First, the least-effort principle proposes that people are cognitive misers and will only expend energy as needed. This inherent desire to avoid cognitive work leads people to use heuristics, which allow people to make decisions with minimal expenditures of effort (Chaiken and Maheswaran 1994). Heuristics allow people to quickly evaluate information based on general rules—as long as these rules provide sufficient confidence, as described next.Second, the sufficiency principle proposes that every situation has a given threshold of desired certainty. The level of certainty varies on the basis of individual differences and motivational states. If higher confidence is desired from the processed information, the sufficiency threshold will rise, which alters the motivational state. Additionally, as both the motivation and sufficiency requirements rise, it is unlikely that the available heuristics will be able to provide enough confidence to meet or exceed the desired certainty threshold. It is therefore likely that the person will engage in systematic processing (Bohner et al. 1995)—the active cognitive elaboration of the information available.Jonas et al. (1997) proposed that ambivalence demonstrates little confidence in one’s attitudes. It is thus possible that this lessening of confidence is below the sufficiency level desired by the person for the given situation. Consequently, a person will likely engage in systematic processing in an attempt to increase the confidence level regarding the processed information. As a person performs a more thorough and effortful elaboration of the information, the relationships among attitudes, intentions, and behaviors are likely to become more consistent. Further, it becomes possible that those with higher levels of ambivalence are more likely to have more established intentions to engage in a specific behavior, implying a potential main effect between intentions and ambivalence.Applying this literature to the e-commerce domain, trust and distrust can be conceptualized as related, conflicting positive and negative attitudes. Because they are related attitudes, it is possible for a person to experience both of these conflicting attitudes at the same time, which might result in ambivalence if the person does not have strong feelings of either trust or distrust, or relatively equivalent levels of trust and distrust, toward the attitude object. Given the opposing predictions found in the literature on ambivalence, we offer two competing hypotheses that we further test in this study:H6aHigh levels of perceived ambivalence will attenuate (negatively moderate) the relationship between trusting and distrusting beliefs with behavioral intentions.High levels of perceived ambivalence will amplify (positively moderate) the relationship between trusting and distrusting beliefs with behavioral intentions.Further, we extend the work of Jonas et al. (1997), as explained above, and propose that individuals experiencing heightened levels of ambivalence will experience more confidence in their intentions and will thus be more likely to intend to engage in the behavior. We thus propose:H7High levels of perceived ambivalence may directly impact behavioral intentions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
