@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficiency enhancement of a process-based rainfall–runoff model using a new modified AdaBoost.RT technique

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
AdaBoost.RT algorithm is firstly applied in a process-based rainfall–runoff model.Four modifications are made based on the original version of AdaBoost.RT algorithm.PSO algorithm is employed for the determination of model parameters.A new ensemble model, namely AdaBoost-XXT, is initially presented in this paper.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
AdaBoost.RT algorithm,Particle swarm optimization,Process-based hydrologic model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High-efficiency rainfall–runoff forecast is extremely important for flood disaster warning. Single process-based rainfall–runoff model can hardly capture all the runoff characteristics, especially for flood periods and dry periods. In order to address the issue, an effective multi-model ensemble approach is urgently required. The Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost) algorithm is one of the most robust ensemble learning methods. However, it has never been utilized for the efficiency improvement of process-based rainfall–runoff models.Therefore AdaBoost.RT (Adaptive Boosting for Regression problems and “T” for a threshold demarcating the correct from the incorrect) algorithm, is innovatively proposed to make an aggregation (AdaBoost-XXT) of a process-based rainfall–runoff model called XXT (a hybrid of TOPMODEL and Xinanjing model). To adapt to hydrologic situation, some modifications were made in AdaBoost.RT. Firstly, weights of wrong predicted examples were made increased rather than unchangeable so that those “hard” samples could be highlighted. Then the stationary threshold to demarcate the correct from the incorrect was replaced with dynamic mean value of absolute errors. In addition, other two minor modifications were also made. Then particle swarm optimization (PSO) was employed to determine the model parameters. Finally, the applicability of AdaBoost-XXT was tested in Linyi watershed with large-scale and semi-arid conditions and in Youshuijie catchment with small-scale area and humid climate. The results show that modified AdaBoost.RT algorithm significantly improves the performance of XXT in daily runoff prediction, especially for the large-scale watershed or low runoff periods, in terms of Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency coefficients and coefficients of determination. Furthermore, the AdaBoost-XXT has the more satisfactory generalization ability in processing input data, especially in Linyi watershed. Thus the method of using this modified AdaBoost.RT to enhance model performance is promising and easily extended to other process-based rainfall–runoff models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For daily rainfall–runoff modeling and sustainable water resources management, efficiency of hydrologic models plays a decisive role in it. Hence, in order to meet higher and higher demands of precise prediction, many hydrologists have employed various methods to improve the traditional rainfall–runoff models for better accuracy [1–6].However, practical experience with model calibration suggests that no single-objective function was adequate to match the important characteristics of the observed data [7]. Specifically speaking, single model, even the quite great distributed model, may well capture the spatial characteristics of catchment but cannot successfully depict the runoff variation during the different periods. Krishnamurti et al. [8] assigned weights to each model of his superensemble whose error for the monthly mean fields was proved quite small compared to all other individual models for the seasonal climate simulations using the Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP) dataset. Moreover, Zhang [9] has indicated that no single model can provide the best forecast result for all kinds of time series data. Therefore, combining multiple forecasts effectively is regarded as an effective way to reduce the prediction errors and hence it provides considerably increased accuracy [10]. Without doubt deterministic rainfall–runoff model is also not sufficiently adapted to all natural conditions for whole time series, such as rainy season and dry season. Therefore ensemble method may be a useful and hopeful technique for accuracy improvement of process-based rainfall–runoff models.The Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost) algorithm, considering sample reweighting from error computation, is one of the most robust ensemble learning methods, which has been frequently studied in past years [11–14]. It derived from the concept of ensemble learning and was originally designed for classification problems. However, by using different loss criteria, the boosting copes with not only classification problems but also regression problems [15]. Avnimelech and Intrator [16] made the threshold-based boosting algorithm for regression which used an analogy between classification errors and big errors in regression. Zemel [17] proposed an analogous formulation for adaptive boosting of regression problems, utilizing a novel objective function that leads to a simple boosting algorithm, and then got a better effect versus the general methods. Similarly, it is proved that AdaBoost outperforms other boosting methods, bagging, artificial neural networks, and a single M5 model tree for regression problems [18]. Alfaro et al. [19] compared AdaBoost and neural networks for bankruptcy forecasting and the results show that their method can decrease the generalization error by about thirty percent with respect to the error produced with a neural network. Sun et al. [20] constructed AdaBoost ensemble respectively with single attribute test (SAT) and decision tree (DT) for financial distress prediction. The experiments indicate that AdaBoost ensemble with SAT outperforms AdaBoost ensemble with DT, single DT classifier and single support vector machine classifier. Moreover, Wang and Yu [21] have made the conclusion that BP-AdaBoost.RT model is better than multiple linear regression and single BP (back propagation) network. It can be obviously seen that different modifications of boosting algorithm are suitable for different regression problems. However, it is absolutely a pity that so rare reports of the boosting methods are related to hydrologic modeling. Recently, Brochero [22] has adopted the AdaBoost.RT (Adaptive Boosting for Regression problems and “T” for threshold “φ” demarcating the correct from the incorrect) [23] to build the stacked ANN model for streamflow forecast with exploiting radar rainfall estimates. One of the conclusions suggests that the stacked ANN response performs better than the best single ANN.Nevertheless, the combination of the boosting approach and process-based hydrologic model seems never being reported. Hence a novel approach of using the AdaBoost method to enhance the effecincy of process-based daily rainfall–runoff model is firstly proposed in this paper. Additionally speaking, based on the soil moisture storage capacity distribution curve (SMSCC) of the Xinanjiang model and the simple model structure of TOPMODEL, a rainfall–runoff model named XXT (X for Xinanjiang model and T for TOPMODEL) was developed by Xu et al. [24]. The relevant results make it clear that the XXT model is better than TOPMODEL and the Xinanjiang model for watersheds rainfall–runoff modeling. XXT model can be regarded as a very worthy rainfall–runoff process-based model. So we have employed the XXT model to be the base learner of AdaBoost algorithm. Then, we have used a new modified AdaBoost.RT algorithm to build an ensemble of base learners. Finally, we have applied the AdaBoost-XXT model and the well trained single XXT in two watersheds of different climate types and scales.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The AdaBoost algorithm is a widely-used and mature ensemble approach to make an aggregation of some weak learners with weights distribution. In order to improve the efficiency of process-based rainfall–runoff model, this study has utilized a new modified version of AdaBoost.RT algorithm to build a robust ensemble of XXT models. Then, we have applied the XXT model and AdaBoost-XXT model in two different climatic kinds of basins. In Linyi watershed, the observed data from 2001 to 2003 were used for calibration and daily data from 2006 to 2007 were considered as the validation set. In Youshuijie catchment, the observed daily rainfall, pan evaporation and stream flow data from 1981 to 1983 were used for calibration and daily data from 1984 to 1985 were considered as the validation set. The results show that (a) for calibration period, the NE and R2 of XXT model are respectively 0.76 and 0.76 while 0.78 and 0.79 for AdaBoost-XXT model in Linyi watershed; the NE and R2 of the XXT model are respectively 0.89 and 0.90 while 0.91 and 0.92 for the AdaBoost-XXT in Youshuijie catchment; (b) for validation period, the NE and R2 of XXT model are respectively 0.66 and 0.69 but 0.74 and 0.75 for AdaBoost-XXT model in Linyi watershed and the NE and R2 of the XXT model are respectively 0.84 and 0.86 while 0.89 and 0.89 for the AdaBoost-XXT model in Youshuijie catchment. Furthermore, t-test proves that the difference of NE is highly significant. In general, the AdaBoost-XXT model performs much better than the best single XXT model especially in Linyi watershed or during low runoff periods and the former has the better generalization ability for runoff prediction. Hence, using the modified AdaBoost.RT to enhance the predictive ability of XXT is a promising approach and it can be also easily popularized to other process-based rainfall–runoff models.