@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An interactive fuzzy programming approach for bi-objective straight and U-shaped assembly line balancing problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a new fuzzy mixed-integer linear programming model for SALBP and SULBP.We proposed a new two-phase interactive fuzzy programming to solve the problems.Our interactive fuzzy approach is capable to handle any practical MOLP models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interactive fuzzy programming,Multi-objective optimization,Assembly line balancing,Fuzzy numbers,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The consideration of this paper is given to address the straight and U-shaped assembly line balancing problem. Although many attempts in the literature have been made to develop deterministic version of the assembly line model, the attention is not considerably given to those in uncertain environment. In this paper, a novel bi-objective fuzzy mixed-integer linear programming model (BOFMILP) is developed so that triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs) are employed in order to represent uncertainty and vagueness associated with the task processing times in the real production systems. In this proposed model, two conflicting objectives (minimizing the number of stations as well as cycle time) are considered simultaneously with respect to set of constraints. For this purpose, an appropriate strategy in which new two-phase interactive fuzzy programming approach is proposed as a solution method to find an efficient compromise solution. Finally, validity of the proposed model as well as its solution approach are evaluated though numerical examples. In addition, a comparison study is conducted over some test problems in order to assess the performance of the proposed solution approach. The results demonstrate that our proposed interactive fuzzy approach not only can be applied in ALBPs but also is capable to handle any practical MOLP models. Moreover, in light of these results, the proposed model may constitute a framework aiming to assist the decision maker (DM) to deal with uncertainty in assembly line problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The growing global competitive market compels manufacturing organizations to engage themselves in all productivity improvement plans aiming to promote efficiency and effectiveness. In this direction, constructing an efficient assembly line is being considered as one of the most important issues in developing an assembly line [1]. Generally, assembly line balancing problem (ALBP) is considered as an assignment of the required tasks to the set of workstations to produce a product using either batch or mass production method with respect to the precedence relations among tasks and some other constraints. Thus, the main issue in ALBPs lies on design of appropriate order and sequence of the tasks [2]. ALBPs are generally classified into two main categories including simple ALBP (SALBP) and generalized ALBP (GALBP). GALBPs have some extra features such as cost goals, station parallelization, mixed-model production, etc. in comparison with SALBPs [3].All versions of SALBPs with respect to their objectives are presented in Table 1[4].SALBP-F is considered as a feasibility problem for a given combination of cycle time and the number of stations. SALBP-I and SALBP-II models have a dual relationship while the first tries to minimize the number of stations with respect to a given cycle time, the second, tries to minimize the cycle time with regard to a given number of stations. Additionally, SALB-E model aims to simultaneously minimize the number of stations as well as the cycle time so that the efficiency has to be maximized.The assembly line can be also organized into other classifications depending on its layout as well as variety of products. In this direction, in layout of production line perspective, it can be classified into two groups: straight and U-shaped assembly lines, while with regard to number of different products it might be categorized into the single model (one product) and mixed model (multi-product) assembly lines.The straight assembly line has been considered as the most important part of traditional mass production until introducing U-shaped assembly line as a result of continuous improvement and cost reduction proposed in just-in-time (JIT) system [5]. There are several advantages associated with U-shaped assembly line in comparison with the straight one, such as flexibility increase, productivity increase, quality improvement, and lower WIP inventory.The main feature which makes the U-shaped assembly line different from a straight one is that in the former, the entrance and exit are located in the same position.The two main problems investigated in this paper consist of the simple assembly line balancing problem (SALB) and U-shaped version of SALB (SULB) such that SALB and SULB refer to straight and single model assembly lines, and U-shaped and single model assembly lines problems, respectively.The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 is devoted to report the relevant literature in this area. In Section 3, proposed fuzzy MOLP models for the SALB and SULB are developed. A novel interactive fuzzy approach as a solution procedure for solving the problem is provided in Section 4. In Section 5, the validity of the proposed model and the solution method are evaluated through illustrative examples. Finally, conclusion remarks and proposal for future works are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
