@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evolutionary collective behavior decomposition model for time series data mining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Collective behaviors are modeled as aggregations of individual behaviors.Individual behavior is modeled by the minority game.Parameters of individual behavior can be learned using genetic algorithms.The new model is tested based on real-world financial data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Minority games,Mixed games,Collective behavior decomposition,Genetic algorithms,Evolutionary mixed games learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this research, we propose a novel framework referred to as collective game behavior decomposition where complex collective behavior is assumed to be generated by aggregation of several groups of agents following different strategies and complexity emerges from collaboration and competition of individuals. The strategy of an agent is modeled by certain simple game theory models with limited information. Genetic algorithms are used to obtain the optimal collective behavior decomposition based on history data. The trained model can be used for collective behavior prediction. For modeling individual behavior, two simple games, the minority game and mixed game are investigated in experiments on the real-world stock prices and foreign-exchange rate. Experimental results are presented to show the effectiveness of the new proposed model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Collective intelligence is a shared or group intelligence that emerges from the collaboration and competition of many individuals and appears in consensus decision making of agents. Collective behaviors can be modeled by agent-based games in which each individual agent follows its own local strategies. Agent-based experimental games have attracted much attention in different research areas, such as psychology [21], economics [4,24] and financial market modeling [6,12,17]. Agent-based models (ABM) of complex adaptive systems (CAS) provide invaluable insight of the highly non-trivial collective behavior of a population of competing agents. Researchers aim to model these systems where the agents involved have similar capabilities, share global information and are competing for limited resources.In a given complex system populated with a group of agents, it is unrealistic that the whole population follows the same strategy. The basic assumption is the existence of various types of strategies for agents. In this research, we propose a model that the behavior of an agent can be modeled using a simple game theory model. Aggregations of the individual behaviors become the collective behavior of the system. Two learning scenarios are considered in the proposed framework: Learning with complete information where all the data of agents’ choices and behaviors in each round are available. However in reality, it is always infeasible to obtain all records of agents’ choices in each round of the game. Since we have assumed that the collective data are generated from the combination of variant groups of agents’ behaviors, how can we decompose the collective data into the combinations of micro-level data. That is referred to as learning with incomplete information.In the proposed framework, the behavior of an agent is modeled by a game and can be determined by a set of parameters. A genetic algorithm (GA) can be used to optimize these parameters to get the best approximation of the original system. To further explore collective behaviors, we add variant groups of agents playing different game theory models and proposed a new data mining framework. We estimate the resource-constrained environment parameters to maximize the approximation of the system outputs and test the effectiveness of the proposed model in the real-world stock market. This framework provides a new way to understand the relationship between micro-behaviors and macro-behaviors in complex dynamic systems.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the recent related research. In Section 3, we describe the new model of collective behavior prediction with complete information. In Sections 4 and 5, we investigate the environment with incomplete information, we use GA to discover the composition of agent behaviors of the system based on the minority game and the mixed game, respectively. In Section 6, we apply the model to predict the real-world financial time series data to verify its effectiveness. Conclusions and discussions are given in the end.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a novel learning framework in which the collective market behavior is considered as an aggregation of behavior of subgroups. By using genetic algorithms to explore all the possibilities of decomposition of the system, the proposed framework has the ability to capture the possible combinations based on the history data, and these combinations should have the maximum likelihood to the real structure of the system. We tested the model based on the minority game (MGDM) and the mixed game (EMGL) on a few real-world stock data and the USD-RMB exchange rate. We found that the new proposed framework consistently outperforms the random guesses. We can capture some week trends in the stock data which has been regarded as unpredictable random walk in classical economics. The EMGL performs a little better in the experiments comparing to the MGDM model, the possible reason is because the mixed game model is a more realistic approximation of the real-world market. However, we still need test on more data and further investigation to verify effectiveness of this new proposed model. Another future work is to apply this framework to other areas rather than financial data which are highly random and much corrupted by noise.