@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
E-visibility maturity model: A tool for assessment and comparison of individual firms and sets of firms in e-business

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
E-visibility maturity (e-VM) model of firms, industries, and countries is suggested.Interactivity, globalization, sociability & security of firms’ websites are analyzed.e-VM assesses the potential of companies to engage customers in the global e-commerce.We apply the model to assess e-VM based on 1868 firms, 27 industries and 5 countries.The model allows evaluating firms’ adaptation to the challenges of the social web.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-business,Maturity model design,Social software,E-visibility,Interactivity,Global market,Sociability,Internet security,Internet presence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Internet has transformed traditional patterns of firm-to-customer communication and opened new channels through which enterprises can engage with consumers around the world. Yet ways to measure firms’ visibility in this electronic marketplace have failed to keep pace with these developments. We present a new model – the e-visibility maturity (e-VM) model – that can be used to assess the degree to which a firm or set of firms has the potential to engage customers in the global e-business market. The suggested model is developed based on a literature review, an international survey of online customers, and a comprehensive review of 1868 firm websites representing 27 industries in five countries. After presenting the model, we show how it can be scaled to different levels (e.g., the industry or country level) using three illustrative cases: a set of four countries across industries; a set of four industries across countries; and a set of four individual firms. We found substantial differences in levels of e-visibility and its specific dimensions of interactivity, firm globalization, sociability, and security between the countries and specific firms sampled. The industries sampled all emphasize firm globalization and interactivity. The model offers a simple and reliable way to evaluate a company’s adaptation to the challenges of the social web, and can be used by strategists and policy makers at the industry or government level as well as to help firms establish strategies for improving their position in the online marketplace.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Internet has transformed the world of business, upending traditional patterns of firm-to-customer communication and opening new channels through which enterprises can engage with consumers around the world. In recent years, the emergence of social software (SoS) has accelerated this development by enabling fast and even real-time interaction between customers and enterprises, and even among customers (Coelho et al. 2014, Hollenbeck and Kaikati 2012, Mollen and Wilson 2010, Papasolomou and Melanthiou 2012). SoS – interactive Internet-based applications such as blogs, wikis, instant messaging, and social networks (Bryant 2006, McCarthy 2013, Pereira et al. 2010) – can be a potent customer service tool, enabling companies to respond to consumer queries and concerns rapidly and effectively. Well-managed SoS also offer firms a source of insight into customers’ attitudes, as well as an opportunity to spread commercial information through the power of electronic word of mouth (eWOM) – a phenomenon first described by Westbrook (1987) and further documented by Dellarocas (2003), De Bruyn and Lilien (2008), and Hennig-Thurau et al. (2004).Given the power of the Internet in general and SoS in particular to support the most essential business processes, from customer service to marketing to sales, it is unsurprising that enterprises throughout the world and in all types of industries now conduct at least some portion of their business online – a phenomenon known as e-business or e-commerce. Yet the extent to which individual firms – and by extension, nations and industries – maintain an active, visible online presence can vary considerably.The current paper presents a maturity model designed to assess the degree to which a firm or set of firms has a visible presence in the online marketplace – i.e., its e-visibility. Maturity models serve as means to evaluate some feature of a given domain for purposes of benchmarking, assessment, and comparison (Rosemann and de Bruin 2005). Building on Capriotti’s notion of media visibility as key to a firm’s public prominence (Capriotti 2009), we define e-visibility as the accessibility of opportunities to interact with the firm in the online market, via tools such as Internet sales, SoS, etc. The e-visibility maturity (e-VM) model presented here thus offers scholars, decision makers, and practitioners (e.g., marketing and sales executives) a powerful tool for assessing the relative strength of a firm or other object of interest (e.g., industry, region, or country) in the online market for purposes of analysis and future development.In developing the e-VM model, we followed the design science approach (Becker et al. 2009) and employed the latest research methods in e-commerce (Liang and Turban 2011–2012) and marketing (Coelho et al. 2014, Parka et al. 2011). In so doing, we drew on social presence theory (Gefen and Straub 2004) and social impact theory (Latané 1981) to clarify the ways in which firms can use online tools, in particular SoS, to strengthen their relationship with existing customers and reach out to potential new customers. We asked the following questions: What are the dimensions that characterize e-visibility? What instruments or functionalities exist by which these dimensions can be operationalized? What are the maturity levels to which these operationalization criteria can be mapped? We then used two independent sources to construct the model: an international survey of 92 online consumers (specifically, undergraduate students in Germany and Israel – two countries in which young people are known to conduct much of their consumer activity online); and a comprehensive literature review. These sources enabled us to define specific evaluation criteria and indicators for each dimension and stage of the model. A comprehensive review of 1868 firm websites covering 27 industries in five countries was conducted to illustrate the usage of the suggested model.The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. We begin with a review of the relevant literature about the social presence and social impact theories, SoS, and existing e-commerce maturity models. We then present our suggested framework for the assessment of e-business visibility. Following this, we describe the methodology used for development of the e-VM model, and we illustrate its application using three cases: a comparison of e-VM between countries (across industries), between industries (across countries), and between individual firms. We conclude by discussing the implications of the case analyses and the contribution of the model to the e-market.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
