@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Artificial bee colony based algorithm for maximum power point tracking (MPPT) for PV systems operating under partial shaded conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An artificial bee colony based MPPT under partially shaded conditions is proposed.Photovoltaic systems are considered.A co-simulation methodology combining Simulink and Pspice has been adopted.Excellent efficiency and tracking performance compared to the PSO-based MPPT.The effectiveness of the proposed method has been confirmed experimentally.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maximum power point tracking,Photovoltaic systems,Partially shaded conditions,Artificial bee colony algorithm,Co-simulation Simulink/Pspice,DSP implementation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm has several characteristics that make it more attractive than other bio-inspired methods. Particularly, it is simple, it uses fewer control parameters and its convergence is independent of the initial conditions. In this paper, a novel artificial bee colony based maximum power point tracking algorithm (MPPT) is proposed. The developed algorithm, does not allow only overcoming the common drawback of the conventional MPPT methods, but it gives a simple and a robust MPPT scheme. A co-simulation methodology, combining Matlab/Simulink™ and Cadence/Pspice™, is used to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method and compare its performance, under dynamic weather conditions, with that of the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) based MPPT algorithm. Moreover, a laboratory setup has been realized and used to experimentally validate the proposed ABC-based MPPT algorithm. Simulation and experimental results have shown the satisfactory performance of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Photovoltaic (PV) energy sources are becoming a mature technology while their applications are spreading, ranging from supplying small electronic devices to large power plants connected to medium and low voltage grids. However, some problems remain a challenge for PV systems as improving overall efficiency, maximize the available power, minimize the return period of the installation cost, detection and diagnosis of faults, etc. [1–4]. Several research works and specialized laboratory reports have addressed the issue of low yields and power losses in PV systems facilities and all have approved the use of a power optimizer known as maximum power point tracking (MPPT). Typically, the maximum power point (MPP) is achieved by adjusting the operating point of the PV array using a DC–DC converter.Most MPPT techniques are based on the assumption that all cells in the same module and all modules in the same string receive the same irradiance. Perturb and observe (P&O) and incremental conductance are the most popular algorithms implemented in commercial charge regulators and grid connected inverters and can accurately track the MPP under uniform illuminating conditions [5–7]. However, PV modules are often subject to partial shade conditions (PSC), being the real problem responsible of most output power reduction and mismatch [8–10]. When PV array is operating under this conditions, the power voltage curves are characterized by the apparition of multiple local peaks which are due to the activation of bypass diodes avoiding shaded cells from damage [11–13]. In such case, conventional MPPT algorithms may miss the goal by converging to a local maximum rather than the global one, giving a rise to a significant loss in the output power and consequently to a low yield of the overall system. In order to cope with the effects of shading on the P–V curves, a number of improvements of conventional MPPT algorithms have been proposed. Some of them are topology based and need extra additional power circuits to perform global MPPT (GMPPT) [14–16]. Thus, the overall efficiency is reduced and the total cost will be increased. Some other techniques are algorithm based, such as fuzzy logic with polar controller [17], sequential extremum seeking control [18], dividing rectangle (DIRECT) search control [19]. These techniques are costly, time-consuming processes and need a complex hardware for their implementation.Recently, bio-inspired (BI) methods such as Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), evolutionary computation and swarm intelligence algorithms have emerged as powerful optimization algorithms for solving complex problems and providing optimum solutions. Parallel, dynamic, decentralized, asynchronous and self-organizing behavior of the nature inspired algorithms is best suited for soft computing applications [20,21]. Indeed, BI-inspired techniques were used in several applications as an efficient tool to solve complex optimization problems and design sophisticated controllers [22–25].The effectiveness of BI-inspired methods in handling complex nonlinearities, such that encountered in PV array behavior, and their implementation simplicity make them very attractive to solve the MPPT problem of PV systems, especially in the case of partial shading and module mismatches [26,27]. Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), are one of the bio-inspired methods that was used in MPPT techniques. Typically, they were used to estimate the MPP with respect to the randomly changing weather conditions [28], and to improve the P&O and IC algorithms [29]. It is known that, using ANN with larger number of hidden nodes leads to more accurate results, but at the expense of longer computational time and complex hardware implementation. Evolutionary computation techniques, such as Genetic algorithm (GA) [30] and Differential Evolution (DE) [31], have been also proposed to deal with the MPPT problem. Commonly, the parameters setting of these algorithms are achieved using trial-and-error process which leads to a large computational time [32].Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) are the most swarm intelligence techniques used in the development of MPPT schemes [33,34]. The PSO convergence significantly depends on the initial position of the agents which gives a poor convergence rate in some situation. In [35] the authors have used the ant colony based optimization technique. Though the authors have demonstrated the applicability of the method using simulation, it is difficult to be implemented and realized in hardware platform. In addition, both of PSO and ACO have five parameters to be determined, which make them inflexible and complex. In [36] the authors have used fuzzy logic to dynamically adapt some important parameters in PSO and ACO approaches. Better results than those of the original methods have been obtained, but the developed MPPT algorithms are complex and time-consuming.Artificial bee colony (ABC) is a relatively new member of swarm intelligence techniques. It was proposed by Karaboga [37], based on foraging behavior, learning, memorizing and information sharing characteristics of honeybees. Several research papers have already evaluated the performances of ABC algorithm against different approaches like PSO, ACO and several other optimization techniques [38–41]. Their finding states that the main advantages of the ABC algorithm are its simplicity [42], light computing complexity, high solutions accuracy [38,43,44], convergence independent of the initial conditions [45] and its ability to deal with local minima [37]. At present, the ABC algorithm has been successfully applied in distinct fields of science such as electrical engineering: in power flow optimization and optimal sizing of photovoltaic systems [46,47], control engineering: in enhancement of control algorithms [48], image processing: in block matching techniques [49], mechanical engineering: in optimization of design approaches [50] and many others.In this work, a novel ABC-based MPPT with direct control method for PV systems working under PSC is proposed. With this MPPT control scheme, the duty cycle is adjusted directly by the algorithm without the need of using a linear controller. The proposed MPPT scheme advances the state-of-the art through the following contributions:•Excellent tracking capability with a good accuracy.No requirement of knowledge about the characteristics of the PV array.The use of just two control parameters, allowing great flexibility and simplicity.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of partial shading on PV modules and its impact on MPP location. Section 3 briefly describes the principle of the ABC algorithm and how it is applied to MPPT in PV systems. Section 4 provides simulation and experimental results of the proposed approach. A comparison of the proposed MPPT algorithm with the PSO-based MPPT method is also presented in this section. Finally, the drawn conclusions from this work are provided.A PV array is formed of several PV modules connected in series and/or parallel and the total power is a combination of the power derived from each PV module. Fig. 1(a) presents a PV array formed by two series connected PV modules. If one of the PV modules is shaded, it acts as a load instead of a power source. In long term conditions, the shaded PV module will be damaged due to hotspots phenomenon. Hence, the bypass diodes are added to protect the PV modules from self-heating during partial shading conditions [12]. Under uniform insolation, the bypass diodes are reverse biased and have no impact. When the PV module is shaded, the bypass diode across the PV module is forward biased and the current passes through the diode instead of the PV module as shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b).However, the bypass diode transforms the P–V curves into more complicated shape characterized by multiple peaks as it is shown in Fig. 1(c). So, in order to extract the maximum power from the PV array, the system should be operated at the global maximum power point (Gmpp). If not it is the case, up to 70% of power could be lost [51].Thus, in order to achieve optimal energy harvesting from the PV array, an intelligent and efficient MPPT method should be used.The artificial bee colony algorithm is a swarm based meta-heuristic algorithm that was introduced for solving multidimensional and multimodal optimization problems. The algorithm is specifically based on the model proposed by Tereshko and Loengarov [52–54] for the foraging behavior of honeybee colonies.In the ABC algorithm, the artificial bees are classified into three groups: employed bees, onlooker bees and scouts. A bee that is currently searching for food or exploiting a food source is called an employed bee. A bee waiting in the hive for making decision to choose a food source is named as an onlooker. Employed bees whose food sources cannot be improved through a predetermined number of trials become scouts and their food sources are abandoned. The number of food sources is equal to the number of employed bees and also equal to the number of onlooker bees. Analogously, in the optimization context, the position of a food source represents a candidate solution of the optimization problem and the nectar amount of a food source corresponds to the quality (fitness) of the associated solution.At the initialization phase, the ABC generates a randomly distributed initial population of SN solutions. Each solution is produced within its limits according to the equation below:(1)xij=xminj+rand[0,1](xmaxj−xminj)i=1,2,…,SN,j=1,2,…,Dwherexminjandxmaxjrepresent respectively the minimum and the maximum of the parameter j and D is the number of optimization parameters.After initialization, the population of the solutions is subject to repeated cycles C=1, 2, …, MCN, of the search processes of the employed bees, the onlooker bees and the scout bees.For each cycle, every employed bee produces new solution vijaccording to Eq. (2) and then evaluates its fitness fiti.(2)vij=xij+ϕij(xij−xkj)where k∈{1, 2, …, SN} and j∈{1, 2, …, D} are randomly chosen indexes. Although k has to be different from i. ϕijis a random number between [−1, 1].After the information is shared by the employed bees, each onlooker finds new solution vijwithin the neighborhood of xiby using Eq. (2), based on the probability Pidefined as:(3)Pi=fiti∑n=1SNfitnwhere fitiis the fitness value of the solution xi.The value of each generated candidate solution vijthat is not within the boundary of the allowed search space is updated so that it will be within this space.The fitness of each new produced candidate solution vijis compared with that of its old one. If the new solution has an equal or better fitness than the old solution, it replaces the old one in the memory. Otherwise, the old one is retained in the memory. In other words, a greedy selection mechanism is employed in the selection operation between the old and the candidate one.At the end of each search cycle, if the fitness of a solution cannot be improved and the predetermined number of trials, which is called “limit”, is exhausted, then the solution will be abandoned by scout bee and a new solution is randomly searched. The new solution xiwill be generated using Eq. (1).It is clear, from the above explanation, that there are three control parameters in the basic ABC: The number of candidate solutions which is equal to the number of employed and onlooker bees SN, the value of “limit” and the maximum cycle number MCN.A detailed pseudo-code of the ABC algorithm for one-dimensional optimization problem is given below:1: Begin2: Generate the initial solutions xi, i=1, 2, …, SN using Eq. (1)3: Evaluate the fitness (fiti) of the population4: Set cycle to 15: Repeat6:For each employed bee {Produce new solution viusing Eq. (2)Calculate the value fitiApply the greedy selection process}7:Calculate the probability values Pifor the solutions xiby Eq. (3)8:For each onlooker bee {Select a solution xidepending on piProduce new solution viby using Eq. (2)Calculate the value fitiApply the greedy selection process}9:If there is an abandoned solution for the scoutThen replace it with a new solution which will be randomly produced using Eq. (1)10:Memorize the best solution achieved so far11:cycle=cycle+112: until cycle=MCNThe ABC-based optimization described in Section 3.1 is now applied with a slight change made in the scout bees’ phase, to realize the MPPT algorithm for photovoltaic generation system (PGS) operating under PSC with direct control technique.To realize the direct control ABC-based MPPT, each candidate solution is defined as the duty cycle value d of the DC–DC converter, so the optimization problem has one parameter to be optimized (D=1). Thus, Eqs. (1) and (2) become:(4)di=dmin+rand[0,1](dmax−dmin)(5)new_di=di+ϕi(di−dk)The fitness of each solution (duty cycle) is chosen as the generated power Pptof the PGS. Then, Eq. (3) becomes:(6)Pi=Ppvi∑n=1SNPpviTo evaluate the duty cycles, the digital controller successively outputs the PWM signal according to the value of di, and then the PV voltage Vpviand current Ipvican be measured and the corresponding power (Ppvi) of each duty cycle dican be calculated. It should be noted that in order to acquire correct samples, the time interval between two successive duty cycle evaluations (Ts) has to be greater than the power converter's settling time.In the original ABC algorithm, at the end of each search cycle the abandoned solution that has not improved its fitness over a predetermined number of cycles (limit) is replaced by a new randomly chosen solution. If this strategy is used in the MPPT algorithm, the stopping criterion stops the search process before the limit cycle be reached, because the power Ppv remains unchanged (premature convergence). Thus, a very important phase that gives ability to the algorithm to escape from local minima is eliminated. In this work a different strategy for the scout bees’ phase is proposed to avoid that problem, which consists in replacing the duty cycle giving less power at the end of each search cycle, by another randomly chosen value.The application procedure of the proposed method can be divided in four phases:-Initialization phaseSet the algorithm parameters by including the number of candidate solutions SN, the maximum cycle number MCN and the sampling time Ts. Then, a randomly distributed initial SN duty cycles are generated using Eq. (4) and evaluated.di(i=1,2,…,SN)Employed bees phaseThe employed bees’ duty cycle are updated using Eq. (5) and then evaluated. Then, the greedy selection process is applied and the probability value Pifor each duty cycle diusing Eq. (6) is calculated.Onlooker bees phaseThe roulette wheel selection is used to recruit the onlooker bees for local searching around the chosen duty cycle value which is depending on the calculated probability Pi. The new duty cycles are evaluated and then the greedy selection process is applied.Scout bees phaseEq. (4) is used to replace the duty cycle giving less power with the new randomly chosen duty cycle. The fitness of the generated duty cycle is then evaluated.At the end of each search cycle, the algorithm memorizes the best solution achieved so far and repeats the procedure from the employed bees phase until the maximum cycle number (MCN) is reached or until the power value remains unchanged within a specified number of cycles.Usually, the real working environment of the PV system is always changing due to the varying weather conditions, and as a result, the global MPP is always changing. This requires the MPPT algorithm to have the ability to search for a global MPP for the new weather condition. For this purpose, the search process has to restart with a total re-initialization whenever the weather conditions are changed. Here, we use the following strategy to detect these changes:(7)|Ppvnew−Ppvlast|Ppvlast≥ΔPpv(%)The search process of a new MPP will be executed again whenever the inequality, given above, is satisfied. This ensures that the MPPT algorithm can always find the global MPP under various working environmental conditions.The flowchart of the proposed ABC-based MPPT algorithm of PV systems is shown in Fig. 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
