@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The evaluation of hospital service quality by fuzzy MCDM

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have applied Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) to evaluate the service quality of Turkish hospitals.We adopted fuzzy set theory as a research template.Importance weights of the performance criteria have found with AHP.TOPSIS which is MCDM method has applied to find and rank the crisp performance values.OWA operators, Compensatory AND operator and Yager's Min–Max method have investigated instead of TOPSIS method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MCDM,Fuzzy sets,OWA,AHP,TOPSIS,Compensatory AND,Yager's min–max,Service quality,Health statistics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study applies the Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) to evaluate the service quality of some Turkish hospitals. In general the service quality has abstract properties, which mean that using the previously known measurement approach is insufficient. It is for this reason that the fuzzy set theory is adopted as a research template. In Istanbul, Turkey, there are four B class hospitals classed as private hospitals that are covered by the Social Security Institution (SSI) and for which we propose to represent the service performance measurement using triangular fuzzy numbers. In this study, importance weights of performance criteria are found with AHP. Then, the Multiple Criteria Decision Making methods TOPSIS and Yager's min-max approach are applied to find and rank the crisp performance values. In a second step, an aggregation of performance criteria with OWA and Compensatory AND operators are looked at instead of the TOPSIS method and min-max approach. Thereby numerical applications are supplied by the four methods and the obtained results are compared.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For the last few years in Turkey, health insurance network has covered almost all the population. In Turkey the general health insurance services are being managed by SSI.As a result of the increasing consciousness of the clients about the service quality and improvements of the competitive environment, the market of health services in Turkey has gained much more experience recently. Hospitals try to stiffen and increase the profits of their own market shares, but the marginal profit of their marketing strategies is getting smaller. This is because the majority of hospitals are offering the same services. These days a number of CEOs are aware of the marketing strategy rules and are focusing on improving the client service quality. The importance of this increase in the health service quality is partly a result of the revenue gained by both the health services of the hospitals and the health institutions services [28].Client of hospital firms, the system of patients appointment, acceptance of the patients, diagnostics, cures, intensive care, bills, recovery, ambulances provision, the patient's follow-up and so on are services that must be given the importance they deserve. To satisfy the different needs of their patients, every health institution must not only buy the latest medical provisions, but at the same time must concentrate on improving the marketing strategy and the way it works. It is clear that the medical equipment is not the single factor that attracts the patient. On the contrary, the general health services and the quality satisfaction are more important indicators. Therefore, the hospital must constantly understand the needs of the patients and provide all the health services needed in order to attract them. Lessons learned concerning the communication skills and the problem solving ability have a positive effect in the medical board trustiness [26]. Being able to trust the professional sufficiency is of a great importance for the patients and the way they feel, in this way the satisfaction increases.Great direction performance is an important issue when mentioning directing quality. The service quality is the main indicator of client preferences and this is the reason why the directors want to measure them. Many academics, advisors and experts have mentioned the need to link management and strategy as well as control and revision [10,12,14].Services quality may seem like the composition of different specialties. Service quality is not only concrete, but owns also intangible properties which are not easy to measure such as: trustiness, comfort, ability. In general people do have different perceptions about the service quality issue, so classical measurement tools have been used to measure service quality. Most of the criticisms about this type of measurement are based on the fact that obtained scores usually cannot show users’ preferences. It is possible to get an irregular behaviour of the patient while ranking the service during a questionnaire [27].“Quality in tangible goods can be described and measured by marketers; quality in services is largely undefined and unresearched” [20]. Sensitively measuring the quality of service as perceived by the patients is defined as inevitable for the health organizations [11]. By the logic of the service quality, research made upon the patients show that the service quality and the satisfaction they got from the hospital are important factors when selecting a hospital for the next time. Service quality is determined by the difference between the service quality given by the hospital and that received by the patient [13,19–21].In Turkey the hospitals are of high quality but the financial cost is relatively low and this creates a large selection area. In fact, the Turkish health services are a very competitive environment. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the health services provided by some private hospitals from the patients’ viewpoint in order to make continuous progress. In the past SERVQUAL model [2,4,5,18,25,29,36], advised by Parasuraman et al. [21], was often used by the hospitals to value the service quality.Services are abstract. They are directly reflected from the producer to the consumer; they are not removable; they cannot be restored; they are almost in the quality of violability and they cannot be separated from the service provider, they are a whole with the provider. Because of these reasons, measuring service quality gets harder. When studying researches from the past, it becomes apparent that most of the healthcare services evaluation methods are calculated with statistical methods. Five point Likert scale used to be the most important way to evaluate service quality. Today, the fuzzy set theory is used in management sciences field as well as decision making [15,30,32]. However, its use in service quality is rare.Linguistic expressions such as “satisfied”, “reasonable” or/and “dissatisfied” are accepted as preference or judgement of natural expression. These characteristics show the feasibility for fuzzy set theory to become the preferred structure from decision makers. Fuzzy set theory helps to measure the uncertainty of concepts about human subjectivity. Since this evaluation is made up of various evaluators interpreting linguistic variables, this situation has resulted in uncertainty in fuzzy environment. MCDM (Multiple Criteria Decision-Making) theory is used in this study to minimize the errors made in the course of decision making and to strengthen the extent of the process.Health Services in Turkey are offered in a very competitive environment and for that reason, the services provided by the hospitals should be monitored and evaluated in terms of the patients’ satisfaction. In the current study, an examination has been made over four hospitals in Istanbul, all providing hospital service in the field of private medicine in Turkey. The evaluation made about the service provided to patients and regarding the service quality have been processed with fuzzy approach, and the results have been carried out.The rest of this study is prepared as follows: the section ‘Measuring hospital service quality’ defines important parts of measuring the service quality of hospitals and presents methodology with evaluation. The section ‘Empirical study to find out the best service quality in hospitals’ discusses the process and the results of the experimental study. In the section ‘Conclusions’, the results of experimental study are given and discussed.The process of evaluation of this study consists of a number of steps, as seen in Fig. 1. The first step is for us to define service quality dimensions and characteristics. After setting the system of evaluating criteria, we find the weight of the criteria, using AHP method. Performance measured for each criterion is found using fuzzy set theory. Finally, ranking is made by performing TOPSIS, Yager’ min-max, Compensatory AND, or OWA. There are also hybrid approaches, C. Pramodh, V. Ravi, T. Nagabhushanam [22] goal of which is to measure the productivity levels of Indian banks and rank them. In this approach the evaluation criteria are treated as fuzzy sets and banks as alternatives. The hybrid in this article is between DEA and FMDMA.There are many experimental studies about the service quality. Parasuraman et al. [21] produced a five-dimensional SERVQUAL concept of the so-called service quality. These five concepts are reliability, responsiveness, assurance, empathy and tangibles. In the questionnaire used in this study there are 46 criteria. Linguistic variables are taken as the values of the performance of these criteria. Then, these values are converted into triangular fuzzy numbers to continue with operations.In the section, the theoretical background, which is operated in our study, is explained briefly. First of all, The AHP, which is used to find the weights of criteria, is going to be mentioned. After that, the fuzzy set and the fuzzy numbers, which are utilized to measure the performance of criteria, are going to be referred in short. Last but not least, short information relevant with TOPSIS, min-max approach, Compensatory AND and OWA, which are from MCDM and aggregation methods, are given.AHP was introduced for the first time in 1980 by Thomas L. Saaty [24]. For years AHP has been used in various fields such as social sciences, health planning and management. Many researchers have preferred to use AHP to find the weights of criteria [26,27]. Due to the fact that criteria weights in the decision-making problems are various, it is not correct to assign all of them as equalled [8]. To solve the problem of indicating the weights some methods like AHP, eigenvector, entropy analysis, and weighted least square methods were used. For the calculation of criteria weight in AHP the following steps are used:(i)Arrange the criteria in n×n square matrix form as rows and columns.Using pairwise comparisons, the relative importance of one criterion over another can be expressed as follow:If two criteria have equal importance in pairwise comparison enter 1; if one of them is moderately more important than the other enter 3 and for the other enter 1/3; if one of them is strongly more important enter 5 and for the other enter 1/5; if one of them is very strongly more important enter 7 and for the other enter 1/7, and if one of them is extremely important enter 9 and for the other enter 1/9. 2, 4, 6 and 8 can be entered as intermediate values. Thus, pairwise comparison matrix is obtained as a result of the pairwise comparisons.Then(a)Take the square of n×n matrix.To find the first eigenvector, sum the rows of the matrix.Sum the row totals.Normalization is done by dividing the row sum by the total rows.The obtained result is first eigenvector.In the Eigenvector solution, the processes in a-d choices are done iteratively when a suggestive difference is not found between the previous and the last solution.Honesty, optimism and/or mental measurements are not precise and absolute. “How is your health? How is your income?” Our answers to these questions are neither precise nor clear (non-metric) but more like “well”, “very well”, and therefore in the “moderate” form. These answers have in common that they are fuzzied. They are not clear like black or white but are expressed in the grey. Answers containing uncertainty (or being grey) should be taken into consideration throughout our daily lives as we often come across them. The expression of Andre Gide “colour of truth is gray” highlights the importance of the uncertainty feature in our everyday lives. Linguistic variables are words of which values contain uncertainty or fuzziness. If the decision-making problem procedure used linguistic variables for which values have imprecise categories, it is obvious that the results would be closer to the truth.To explain with imprecise, vague, complex events associated interactions and to inference from the situation, arithmetic is made with the linguistic variables. Today almost all the topics of modern mathematics are being developed on the basis of set concept and procedures. To eliminate uncertainty in the economy and management problems, fuzzy set theory [37] has been used for years and is still being used today. This theory is also applicable to support decision making. Andrea [3] defined a fuzzy linguistic model for connecting organizational activity, knowledge and skill structure and performance measurements. Andrea also stated that abstract factors of this model have been evaluated and that this model is also about heterogeneous measurements. In the literature review related to the fuzzy set theory in health sector, it can be seen as if the health sector could apply the quality management several times [31]. Fuzzy linguistic structure mentioned in this part of the study is to assess the overall quality of health care providers, and aims to provide strategic advice.This study is to analyze the data gathered by survey administered to the theory of fuzzy set. Before defining the structure of fuzzy linguistic, some basic concepts of fuzzy set theory have been referred [7,17,38,39].Fuzzy numbers are fuzzy sub-set of real numbers and confidence interval and this is important in the definition of fuzzy numbers. According to Dubois and Prade [9], they must provide the following requirements to be fuzzy numbers and must comply with the rule of the triangular fuzzy number. Fuzzy set boundaries are a non-collection of crisp elements, so staff members in the transition to become nonmembers is gradual not sudden. The rule of fuzzy set theory is that an element can be joined partially to the fuzzy set. A set of x elements gets X. Let A be defined as a fuzzy set. If μA(x)=1, then x completely belongs to the set of A. If μA(x)=0, then x does not belong to A. For this reason 0<μA(x)<1, x partially belongs to A. Triangular membership functions are often used because of the convenience of calculation. Fig. 2indicates that triangular fuzzy number C is defined by the following membership function:(1)μC(x)=(x−k)/(l−k)fork≤x≤l(x−m)/(l−m)forl≤x≤m0otherwiseThe parameters k and m respectively set the lower and upper limits of the fuzzy number C. l parameter determines the centre of fuzzy number C. l parameter is membership function of where μA(x)=1. As a result, fuzzy number C=(k, l, m) indicates a fuzzy value “approximately l”. This value cannot be smaller than k or bigger than m. The membership value increases linearly from k to l and decreases from l to m. The reason of using triangular fuzzy numbers is that can easily be expressed for the decision makers.Variables whose values are qualitative words in natural languages are called linguistic variables. Linguistic variables values are not numbers; they are rather words or sentences of natural or artificial language [39]. A linguistic variable G consists of terms, so in fact linguistic values of G are fuzzy sets. Fig. 3shows triangular membership functions of linguistic values as not all satisfied, not satisfied, normal, satisfied and very satisfied [1].The survey respondents’ having different perception of criteria is quite normal. Therefore, linguistic variables vary between individuals. In general, if we want to explicate the fuzzy variables, we need to take the average from them. Fuzzy average is solved by the following formula:(2)Aave=1/n∑i=1nki,∑i=1nli,∑i=1nmiIts result is also a triangular fuzzy number:(3)Aave=(ka,la,ma)=1n∑i=1nki,1n∑i=1nli,1n∑i=1nmiHere, it shows average value of satisfaction for hospitals and criteria of n patients.Theorems and proofs about these equations are a well-defined work in the Dubois and Prade [9] and Buckley [6] studies.The result of the artificial fuzzy decisions obtained from hospitals is also fuzzy. Therefore, it is essential that the non-fuzzy ranking method for fuzzy numbers is employed during service quality comparison for each hospital. The process of converting the fuzzy number into real numbers is called defuzzification. There are various methods which find the value of The Best Non-fuzzy Performance (BNP) for Defuzzification Technique: Centre of Area (Gravity), Mean of Maximum, and Height Defuzzification method. Because it is easy to compute, Centre of Area method was used in this study. The defuzzified value of fuzzy number can be obtained from Eq. (4).(4)BNP=(m−k)+(l−k)3+kTOPSIS method was presented by Hwang and Yoon's studies [16] for the first time. TOPSIS method is known as one of the popular Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) methods. Hwang and Yoon [16] have developed TOPSIS method based on the assumption that the best alternative should have the shortest distance from the positive ideal solution and the farthest distance from the negative ideal solution.In this study the inspection of the hospital service quality is a MCDM problem, in other words, the steps below are identified to acquire the general performance values of hospitals using linguistic variables which are shown with triangular fuzzy numbers:Step 1: Calculation of the normalized performance matrixTo get rid of the difficulties caused by different scales and units of measurement in some MCDM problems, the row data are normalized. If we assume that Aijis performance matrix, i shows alternative number and j shows criteria number. Rijnormalized performance matrix is found from matrix by using Eq. (5):(5)rij=aij∑mi=1aij2i=1,2,…,mj=1,2,…,nStep 2:Calculation of weighted and normalized performance matrixWeighted and normalized matrixes are found by multiplying the normalized values, which are calculated in the previous step with common wjvalues:(6)Vij=wj×riji=1,2,…,mj=1,2,…,nwhere, wjis weight of criterion j.Step 3: Determination of positive ideal solution and negative ideal solutionPositive ideal solution (A+) and negative ideal solution (A−) are acquired as weighted and normalized values from Vijmatrix.(7)A+=(V1+,V2+,…,Vn+)(8)(A−=V1−,V2−,…,Vn−)Both solution set elements which are equal to the number of criteria. Where,Vj+is the best alternative value in criterion j,Vj−is the worst alternative value in criterion j.Step 4: Calculation of distance values between alternativesThe distance of alternatives from the positive ideal solutionSi+and the distance of alternatives from the negative ideal solutionSi−are calculated with Eqs. (9) and (10) respectively.(9)Si+=∑j=1n(Vij−Vj+)2i=1,2,…,m,(10)Si−=∑j=1n(Vij−Vj−)2i=1,2,…,m,Step 5: Calculation of the closeness to the positive-ideal solutionRelative closeness of each alternative to the ideal solution(Ci+), in other words similarities to positive ideal solution, could be calculated by applying Eq. (11):(11)Ci+=Si−Si++Si−i=1,2,…,m,Ci+value is in the0≤Ci+≤1interval. AsCi+gets closer to 1, alternative i gets closer to A+, whereas ifCi+gets closer to 0, alternative i gets closer to A−.Step 6: Arrangement of alternative choicesAlternatives are arranged according to the decreasing order ofCi+.Let X={x1, x2, …, xn} be the set of hospitals. Objectives (criteria) are shown with Gjfuzzy sets j=1, …, m. The importance of objective is expressed by wj. The attainment of criterionG˜jby hospital xiis expressed by the degree of membershipμG˜j(xi). According to Yager [35] the decision is the intersection of all fuzzy criteria raised to the powers wjand is given as follows:(12)D˜=G˜1w1∩G˜2w2∩…∩G˜mwmwherewj(j=1,…,m)is the weight attached to the criterionG˜j(j=1,…,m)depending on its importance and the optimal hospital is defined as that achieving the highest degree of membership inD˜[23]. The more the weight is attached exponentially to criterionG˜j, the more possible it is included inD˜(13).(13)D˜=xi,minjμG˜j(xi)wji=1,…,n;j=1,…,mwjimportance is computed by AHP method. Here we should know that∑jwj=m[35].Ordered Weighted Averaging (OWA) operators were introduced for the first time by Yager and the following definition is cited from [33].“Definition: A mapping F fromIn→Iwhere(I=[0,1])is called an OWA operator of dimension n if associated with F which has a weighting vectorWW=w1w2wnsuch that(1)wi∈(0,1)(2)∑iwi=1and where(14)F(a1,a2,…,an)=w1b1+w2b2,…,wnbn,where biis the ith largest element in the sequence a1, a2, …, an.”The value of function F(a1, …, an) determines the aggregated value of a1, …, an. The important issue in OWA operator is to rank the arguments (a1, …, an) in a descending order. In this case weight wicorresponding to the argument bi, i is the largest among all arguments.At this stage of our study, we have found “importance weighted quantifier guided aggregation” [34] as suitable to apply (The reason for doing that is to compare the hospital measurements found by TOPSIS method with the results in OWA). Some information seen below are relevant to this issue: at this stage, the importance weights which are found with AHP method among criteria are applied onto criteria. Mentioned importance weights are shown as Vi, and they are inside the unit interval. That is Vi∈[0, 1]. There is no compulsory rule such as their sum needs to equals 1. Our goal is to detect the (importance, criterion) value, which is satisfied by alternatives, with Q. In order to evaluate overall satisfaction of hospitals computational procedures are as follow:(i)Hospitals are arranged separately as (Vi,Ai(H)) couples.Ai(H)'s are aligned as descending. It means that bjis the biggest jth value of Ai(H). Moreover, Ujs represent the importance linked with the agent that has the jth biggest hospital satisfaction. For instance: if A8(H1) is the biggest value of Ai(H1), therefore b1=A8(H1) and u1=V8. Our information is formed as n couple like (uj,bj) and depends on H1 alternatives in here. Such that, bjs are in descending order.The OWA weights relevant to this aggregation have to be found. These weights are found as follows:wj=QSjT−QSj−1TIn here(15)Sj=∑k=1jUkandT=∑k=1nukAfter finding the weights, we could calculate D(x) evaluation linked with H1 alternative.(16)D(x)=∑j=1nbjwj(H1)Zimmermann and Zysno [40] defined Compensatory AND operator as below:(17)μAθB=μA∩B1−γ.μA∪Bγwhere θ is the Compensatory AND operator and A and B are fuzzy sets. The membership of an object in the set AθB equals the product of the weighted membership values for the intersection and the union.If the intersection and the union are algebraically represented by the product and the algebraic sum, respectively, then Eq. (17) becomes:(18)μθ=∏i=1mμi1−γ.1−∏i=1m(1−μi)γ0≤μ≤1;0≤γ≤1.If it is desired to introduce different weights for the sets in question, μiand 1−μicould for instance be replaced byμi=ϑiδi,1−μi=1−ϑiδiwhere ϑiare the (raw) membership values and δitheir corresponding weights. The sum of weights δishould be equal to the number of sets connected. That means ∑iδi=m[40].Private hospitals in Turkey are categorized into various classes. This empirical study is implemented in four B class hospitals which are members of Social Security Institution (SSI) in Istanbul. 100 questionnaires were sent to each hospital: 96 of these were returned from hospital A, 56 of these were returned from hospital B, 98 of these were returned from hospital C and 35 of these were returned from hospital D.The questionnaires essentially consist of 2 sections. There are performance points which determine the service quality according to 46 criteria in section 1, and there are demographic questions in section 2.A commission consisting of 3 specialist doctors and 3 research academicians, all of which chosen by sampling method, have implemented AHP in order to find the importance weights of performance criteria. The commission determine the importance of criteria against another by using pairwise comparisons. A 46×46 size matrix is formed because 46 criteria are considered in this study. Using pairwise comparisons, the relative importance of one criterion over another can be expressed:1 – equal, 3 – moderate, 5 – strong, 7 – very strong, 9 – extremeIt is possible to use intermediate values like 2, 4, 6 and 8. All the digits will be 1 in the diagonal of comparison matrix. First, the values of upper diagonal of the comparison matrix are filled with this logic. To fill lower triangular matrix, upper diagonal is inverted. If ith is row element and jth is column element of aijmatrix, lower diagonal is filled using aji=1/aijformula. Note that, all elements in the comparison matrix are positive, in other words aij>0.Normalized Eigen Vector is found after the comparison matrix is arranged. First, rows of the comparison matrix are added up. Then normalized matrix is found by dividing each element of the matrix with the sum of rows which it belongs to. The sum of rows of matrix is equals to 1.Sum of vector elements is equals to 1 because Eigen vector is normalized. This Eigen vector shows relative weights among the criteria we compared. In Table 2, which is obtained by using AHP, the five aspects (divided by bold lines) show measurements of service quality. In other words, criteria between 1 and 19 shows tangibility aspect (weight=0.2137), 20 and 23 reliability (weight=0.1278), 24 and 31 responsiveness (weight=0.2099), 32 and 39 assurance (weight=0.2531), 40 and 46 empathy (weight=0.1955). The weights which correspond to the criteria are also shown in Table 2. The sum of these weights is equals to 1.Criteria related to performance evaluations (taken from test subjects) are calculated by being transformed into triangular fuzzy numbers, and this is done in order to find which hospital has the best service quality performance. Linguistic scales which are used to rate the hospitals in this transformation are arranged by considering Fig. 4and Table 1. General performance measurement of hospital based criteria are found with the aid of fuzzy average Eqs. (2) and (3) which are calculated with sum of fuzzy values (taken from test subjects). Table 3lists the average fuzzy performance measurements of four hospitals.After getting an estimate of the average performance according to fuzzy numbers, the fuzzy numbers are changed into crisp numbers. For the defuzzification of the fuzzy numbers, the Centre of Gravity method is used. The results obtained with Eq. (4) are given in Table 4. Then ranking the results with the TOPSIS and Yager's min-max methods can progress.The next four sub titles will be perform applications of the TOPSIS method, min–max method, OWA operator and Compensatory AND operator and the obtained results will be compared in the title of conclusions.Step 1: The normalized performance matrix (R) is calculated with Eq. (5) and the results are shown in Table 5.Step 2: Eq. (6) is used to find the weighted and normalized performance matrix. The pre-calculated importance weights of the criteria are multiplied with the normalized matrix. The V matrix is found with this operation, which is as shown in Table 6.Step 3: Ideal (A+) and negative ideal (A−) solution sets are constructed. The biggest value in each line in matrix V is picked for the A+ set, and the lowest value for A− set. Then the sets are placed in the right column of the matrix V in Table 6.Step 4: Each hospital's distance from the positive ideal solution(Si+)and the negative ideal solution(Si−)has been calculated with the help of Eqs. (9) and (10):Si+=(0.020235,0.0000956,0.013115,0.008218)Si−=(0.001823,0.02077,0.011412,0.014031)Step 5: TheCi+closeness values to ideal solution, found using Eq. (11), have given the hospital which has the closeness coefficient. The one closest to 1 is the hospital which is the closest to the positive ideal solution, and the least close to the negative ideal solution. Thus, the hospital which has the biggest closeness parameter has performed best. According to Table 7, hospital B has shown the best performance.The BNP values that available in Table 4 may be used instead of the membership values [40].Min–max method application can be done with below steps:Step 1→Product n=46 by criteria’ weights that obtained from AHP in Table 2[35,40].Step 2→Weigh the membership valuesμG˜j(xi)exponentially by the respective wj(Eq. (12)). The values found are represented in Table 8.Step 3→Minimum values of the four hospital are determined and are indicated the last line of Table 8:D˜=(0.316,0.573,0.379,0.546)Step 4→Select the hospital xiwith largest degree of membership value inD˜decision as the best hospital. This is hospital B.In this part, we will be making an application of computations to evaluate the general satisfaction of hospitals. These computations consist of 4 steps mentioned in the section Yager's min–max approach.In the first step, the importance weights found with AHP and given in Table 2 will be taken as Vi's. According to criteria given in Table 4, performance measurements of the hospitals are taken as Ai(Hj). The 1st hospital's performance measurements, which are edited as descending order (bj) and their corresponding weights of importance (Vi) are given in Table 9.In the second step, OWA weights, which are obtained using Eq. (15) in order to find OWA weights relevant with the aggregation, are seen into column wiof Table 9. In the calculation, the quantifier guiding used for this aggregation is “most” which is defined Q(r)=r2.In the last step, the first hospital's evaluation is obtained via Eq. (16). This value is seen as 0.581171 in the last column of Table 9. For other hospitals, D(H2), D(H3) and D(H4) values are calculated with computations made in similar ways. These values are given in Table 10sequentially.Step 1→The product of the weighted membership values for the algebraic product and the algebraic sum is computed for each hospital (Eq. (18)).Step 2→The values found are shown the following:For Hospital A: 0.0001368For Hospital B: 0.0126792For Hospital C: 0.0012099For Hospital D: 0.0031209Step 3→We select the largest degree of membership value in above results as the best hospital. That is, the hospital B is the best hospital according to above state results.Step 4→γ=0.6 is received in calculations [40].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Measuring the service quality is one of the most important challenges of our time. In this kind of investigations, the client's perceptions about services must be analyzed and the services should be designed according to the results of the investigations. In picking up the problems of the best performing hospital, various alternatives were envisaged and assessed according to a number of criteria. Using the most effective assessment approach should affect the decision quality in a positive way, thus the result will be more scientific and personal. This study offers a scientific way to evaluate the hospital decision. The comparison matrix for finding the weights of criteria was created with the suggestions of a committee of six professionals. The criteria's importance weights were determined using the created comparison matrix with AHP. The triangular fuzzy numbers were used to express the linguistic variables collected from surveys. The multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) approach was used for synthesizing the group decision. Determining and ranking the overall performance values of the hospitals were managed with the TOPSIS, Yager's min-max, OWA and Compensatory AND methods. In this particular study, the topic in question as to determine the best hospital, we have not used only one aggregation technique, but we have used four different aggregation techniques to increase the reliability. Thus, it is observed that the deductions of the four aggregation techniques indicate that the ranking of hospitals remains unchanged.Hospital B indicates the best performance in four methods. Hospital A receives the lowest performance. Obtained results from application of the four methods are summarized in Table 11. As is seen from Table 11, although the computation methods were different, nevertheless the ranking of hospitals have unchanged.In brief, when the criteria and the importance weights of them were taken into account, ranking the hospitals according to quality would assist the customers that preferring the best and the most reliable hospital. According to this research, the hospital management would need to take more administrative precautions on the service quality that it has weaknesses in. Also, it should be open to the suggestions about which service has to be improved regarding the administration results.In the competitive market conditions, even though the quality of services is essential in the health sector, other factors like the wage policy and promotion programmes also play an important role. Besides, the client impression in the quality of service might be high in industrial accidents.