@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Climbing combinatorial fitness landscapes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Comparison of the behavior of classical basic local search techniques and their ability to reach high local optima in combinatorial fitness landscapes.Two particular aspects of local search are considered: pivoting rules (first and best improvement strategies), neutral move policies (how neutral moves are considered during the search).Experimental analysis on four different landscape models (non-neutral and neutral NK landscapes, flow-shop, QAP, MAXSAT).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hill-climbing,Local search,First-improvement,Best-improvement,Fitness landscapes,Neutrality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hill-climbing constitutes one of the simplest way to produce approximate solutions of a combinatorial optimization problem, and is a central component of most advanced metaheuristics. This paper focuses on evaluating climbing techniques in a context where deteriorating moves are not allowed, in order to isolate the intensification aspect of metaheuristics. We aim at providing guidelines to choose the most adequate method for climbing efficiently fitness landscapes with respect to their size and some ruggedness and neutrality measures. To achieve this, we compare best and first improvement strategies, as well as different neutral move policies, on a large set of combinatorial fitness landscapes derived from academic optimization problems, including NK landscapes. The conclusions highlight that first-improvement is globally more efficient to explore most landscapes, while best-improvement superiority is observed only on smooth landscapes and on some particular structured landscapes. The empirical analysis realized on neutral move policies shows that a stochastic hill-climbing reaches in average better configurations and requires fewer evaluations than other climbing techniques. Results indicate that accepting neutral moves at each step of the search should be useful on all landscapes, especially those having a significant rate of neutrality. Last, we point out that reducing adequately the precision of a fitness function makes the climbing more efficient and helps to solve combinatorial optimization problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Metaheuristics has been designed to handle difficult and/or large combinatorial problem instances which cannot be solved practically by complete algorithms. Most of these methods are based on a neighborhood search technique, which consists in transforming an initial solution by successive applications of local moves chosen from a neighborhood structure. Metaheuristics are widely studied in many contexts [1], including multiobjective optimization [2], optimization under uncertainty [3], fuzzy logic based metaheuristics [4], island model based metaheuristics [5], among many other original methods for solving difficult optimization problems. In the last decades, a large set of neighborhood search algorithms have been designed, such as hill-climbing, tabu search, simulated annealing or iterated local search [6]. These neighborhood search techniques, which mainly differ in the move selection heuristic employed, are widely used as basic elements of advanced metaheuristics and hybrid algorithms to handle NP-hard problems.The conception effort of a local search algorithm usually focuses on the design of the neighborhood structure as well as how to build the solution initiating the search. However, several questions relating to the climbing move strategy are regularly considered during the conception process, but are not empirically or theoretically investigated, except on specific problems [7,8].In [9], we showed that starting from a random configuration, there often exists a hill-climbing path allowing the global optimum to be reached. It means that hill-climbing strategies, which never allow deteriorating moves, do not restrict the possibilities to reach a global optimum as well as high-level solutions. This result constitutes a motivation to provide specific studies of hill-climbing strategies. In particular, we investigate in this paper how the climbing strategy can have an effect on the quality of the solutions reached. To achieve this, we use the fitness landscapes model, which gives us the opportunity to combine the evaluation of climbing techniques and structural analysis of problem instances.The notion of fitness landscapes has originally been introduced to intuitively illustrate biological evolutionary processes. In the seminal paper [10], evolutionary mechanisms are visualized through a genotype–phenotype space. Nowadays, fitness landscapes are widely used in various research areas and especially in evolutionary computation, in which search behaviors and problem representations can be both theoretically and empirically analyzed [11–15].Neighborhood search algorithms traditionally combine two complementary components: a climbing strategy, which allow the convergence towards local optima, and a perturbation mechanism to escape from local optima. These diversification and intensification components can work alternatively (e.g. iterated local search) or can be mixed into a sophisticated moving strategy (e.g. simulated annealing). In this paper, we focus on the intensification mechanism and will consider only climbing strategies which do not allow deteriorating moves. More precisely, we aim at determining how to reach better local optima with such climbings. Then, we are interested in evaluating the behavior of classic climber components on various search landscapes. We first focus on the pivoting rule choice by comparing best and first improvement strategies. Secondly, we consider the neutral moves policy, which defines how neutral neighbors are handled during the search.Preliminary work on NK landscapes [16] showed that landscapes properties (dimension, ruggedness, neutrality) have a substantial impact on the relative efficiency of climber variants. Here, we extend this study in order to extract information which could be helpful while tackling any combinatorial optimization problem. To achieve this goal, we first set indicators to discriminate combinatorial landscapes, and empirically compare climbers on a large set of landscapes derived from various academic problems (quadratic assignment, flow-shop, MAXSAT).The first part of this study is dedicated to the analysis of the two commonly used hill-climbing move strategies: first-improvement and best-improvement. The empirical comparison of these methods combined with the analysis of characteristics of various landscapes indicate that first improvement is often more suitable to reach higher local optima. A second investigation focus on how neutral moves should be considered during the climbing process. Experiments clearly show that when a neutral move is encountered, it should be accepted in order to reach higher areas of landscapes in a reduced computational time.The paper is organized as follow. The next section focuses on landscapes characterization and indicators to discriminate them in a hill-climbing context. In Section 3, we present different ways to design climbers, and introduce the different problems under study (including NK landscapes). In Section 4, we focus on the pivoting rule choice, by analyzing the behavior of first-improvement and best-improvement strategies on various landscapes. Section 5 focuses on evaluating and analyzing the behavior of classical neutral move policies. Contributions and outcomes are discussed in the last section.Fitness landscapes constitute a key concept in theoretical/evolutionary biology since the beginning of the 1930s [10]. Nowadays, they form a growing research area in the combinatorial optimization community for analyzing combinatorial search spaces and evolutionary computation techniques. Here, we aim at evaluating climbers according to landscapes characteristics. Recently, [17] proposed a survey of techniques for characterizing fitness landscapes. In this paper, we propose a set of adapted measures in order to establish a parallel between landscape characteristics and climbers behavior. After introducing definitions and notations of fitness landscapes, we will discuss features to characterize them: size, connectivity, ruggedness and neutrality.A combinatorial optimization problem instance can be defined as a pair (X, f), where X is a discrete set of feasible solutions, andf:X→ℝa scalar objective function which has to be maximized or minimized. In this section, we will consider the maximization context, without loss of generality. Solving a problem (X, f) consists then in finding x★∈argmaxx∈Xf(x).A fitness landscape is a triplet(X,N,f), whereXis a set of configurations (or candidate solutions) called search space,N:X→2Xis a neighborhood relation, andfis a fitness function (or evaluation function).f(x)is the fitness (or height) of a configurationx∈X.x′∈N(x)is a neighbor of x.N(x)is called the neighborhood of x. The distance d(x, y) between two configurations x and y corresponds to the length of the minimal path between x and y in the transition graphTG(X,N[,f])=(X,{(a,b)∈X2,b∈N(a)}). We denote as an iterative search transition graph a constrained transition graph where each arc which does not satisfy a transition criterion is removed. For example,TG>(X,N,f)=(X,{(a,b)∈X2,b∈N(a)andf(b)>f(a)})is the transition graph resulting from(X,N,f)and the stricly improving criterion (see Fig. 1). Finally, a (non-strict) local optimum is a configurationx∈Xsuch that∀x′∈N(x),f(x′)≤f(x), while a global optimum is a configurationx★∈argmaxx∈Xf(x).Note that a fitness landscape(X,N,f)is usually linked with a combinatorial optimization problem instance (X, f), withX=Xandf=f. Solving (X, f) consists then in finding the highest configuration of(X,N,f), the search being guided by a transition criterion depending on the neighborhood relationN.The dimension of a fitness landscape is determined by two components:•the size of the search space, i.e. the number of candidate solutions, which clearly affects the global difficulty of reaching a particular configuration, and especially the highest one;the landscape connectivity implied by the neighborhood relation, which determines distances between configurations.Usual concepts of graph theory are useful to characterize the connectivity of a landscape (e.g. diameter and density of the transition graph, average distance between solutions, etc.). Nevertheless, neighborhood structures generally used lead to symmetric or nearly symmetric transition graphs. That leads us to consider the neighborhood size as a satisfactory indicator to evaluate the connectivity of landscapes derived from classical combinatorial problems.In some fitness landscapes, particularly when the fitness function is weakly discretized, a significant part of neighboring configurations have equal fitnesses. This phenomenon, called neutrality, has a large influence on the behavior of search algorithms [18]. Consequently, neutrality is a major feature for fitness landscapes characterization.Let us recall some basic definitions. A neutral neighbor of a configuration x is a configuration x′ such thatx′∈N(x)andf(x′)=f(x). The neutral degree ι of a configuration x denotes its rate of neutral neighbors:ι(x)=#{x′∈N(x)|f(x′)=f(x)}#N(x). A plateau (or neutral network) is a set of connected configurations of same fitness, i.e. a connected graph (V, E) whereV⊆Xand∀(xi,xj)∈V2,f(xi)=f(xj).Usual neutrality indicators used in [19,20] and discussed in [17], focus on neutral networks. In this work, we focus on comparing strategies for climbing fitness landscapes through local moves. Then, it makes sense to consider the rate of neutral edges in the transition graph (neutrality rate), since these particular edges will distinguish neutral move policies through their associated iterative search transition graphs.Definition 1(neutrality rate)The neutrality rate of a fitness landscape(X,N,f)is defined by:(1)ν(X,N,f)=#{(x,y)|y∈N(x)∧f(x)=f(y)}#{(x,y)|y∈N(x)}The neutrality rate of a fitness landscape can be estimated by sampling its edge setN. In particular, if all configurations have the same number of neighbors, the neutrality rate is equal to the average neutral degree of all configurations:|N(x)|=|N(y)|,∀x,y∈X⇒ν(X,N,f)=1|X|∑x∈Xι(x)In this case the neutrality rate can be estimated by sampling the vertex setXof the fitness landscape and averaging the neutral degree of configurations. This sampling method allows the estimation of the dispersion of neutral degrees and provides additional information about the neutrality distribution. Such an neutrality estimation can be found in [21].In the biology community, a fitness landscape is a genotype-phenotype mapping [10] which emphasizes the effect of mutations (genotype modifications) on fitness (lifetime reproductive success). In this context, interactions among genes increase the overall complexity of fitness landscapes. This phenomenon, called epistasis, means that the fitness effect of a mutation is conditional on the presence of other mutations [22]. Here, we are interested in the concept of sign epistasis[23], which occurs when mutations are beneficial on some genetic backgrounds and deleterious on others (see Fig. 2).The notion of ruggedness is a major characteristic of fitness landscapes. However, it is not obvious how to define ruggedness and design indicators to evaluate it (see examples of fitness landscapes in Fig. 3). In various works like [24], the ruggedness of a landscape is reduced to an auto-correlation measure. In their survey, [17] distinguish the degree of variable interdependency (epistasis) and ruggedness, referred as the number and distribution of local optima. We believe that it is appropriate to link directly the ruggedness of a landscape to the amount of epistatic interactions, since a large number of local optima implies a high degree of variable interdependencies as well as an accurate measure of the climbing difficulty. In a combinatorial fitness landscape context, this measure should express the local neighborhood-fitness sign correlation. Since neighborhood relations represent here genetic mutations by analogy, the sign of fitness variations will express beneficial or deleterious moves. This leads us to introduce a ruggedness measure based on the concept of ladder (see Definition 2 and Fig. 4) and the sign epistasis indicator ξ (see Definition 3).Definition 2(k-ladder)In a transition graphTG(X,N), a k-ladder of vertices(x0,x0′,xk,xk′)is a bipartite set of solutions{(x0,…,xk),(x0′,…,xk′)}such that∀i,j∈{0,…,k},d(xi,xj)=d(xi′,xj′)=|i−j|andd(xi,xj′)=|i−j|+1. We noteLkthe set of all quadruplets (x, x′, y, y′) which are vertices of a k-ladder, andL=∪kLk.Definition 3(sign epistasis indicator)Let(x,x′,y,y′)∈L, we define the sign epistasis indicator ξ as follow:(2)ξ▷(x,x′,y,y′)=1if(x′▷x)⊕(y′▷y)(signepistasis)0otherwise(nosignepistasis)Here ⊕ symbolizes the exclusive disjunction operator and ▷ is a comparison criterion. Indeed, we consider two interpretations of sign epistasis, whether or not equivalent fitnesses are considered as acceptable (▷∈{>, ⩾}). On one hand, a hill-climbing algorithm accepting only strictly improving moves (>) does not distinguish neutral neighbors and deteriorating ones. On the other hand, in a climber accepting improving and neutral moves (≥), neutral moves cannot be considered neither beneficial nor deleterious, since the reverse move is acceptable too. Table 1indicates the presence of sign epistasis for both accepting criterions and different configurations of comparative vertices heights.The aforementioned ξ indicator allows us to define the k-ruggedness indicator, which corresponds to the rate of sign epistasis of elements ofLk.Definition 4(k-ruggedness)The k-ruggedness of a fitness landscape(X,N,f)is defined by:(3)ρk▷(X,N,f)=1#Lk∑q∈Lkξ▷(q)The k-ruggedness indicator, which can be estimated by sampling, provides a set of values for a fitness landscape. The 1-ruggedness (k=1), which corresponds to the rate of epistasis measured from pairs of mutations, will be denoted as local ruggedness. Other k-ruggedness values indicate the ruggedness at larger scales of the landscape, considering the fitness effect of a mutation applied on k-distant solutions (see Fig. 5).Note that the neutrality and ruggedness indicators presented here assign a value to the overall fitness landscape and consider all solutions uniformly. However, a local search will explore solutions which tend to belong to highest areas of the landscape, with possibly different properties. This aspect has notably been highlighted in [18] for neutrality and will be debated later in this paper.In the following, we focus on evaluating the behaviors of climbing strategies on various landscapes, in order to determine ways to use ruggedness and neutrality indicators to design local search algorithms more efficiently.A hill-climbing algorithm (or climber) is a basic local search strategy which navigates through the search space thanks to non-deteriorating moves only. Given an initial configuration called starting point, a traditional climber iteratively moves to better neighbors, until a local optimum is reached. Such a search mechanism, also known as iterative improvement, allows to distinguish several variants which are discussed hereafter. To summarize, climbing a fitness landscape(X,N,f)consists actually in defining a move strategy which reaches a configuration as highest as possible.Two commonly-used climbing move strategies, first and best improvement, constitute the widely used pivoting rules. These rules define how to select a better neighbor from a not locally optimal configuration [25]. More precisely, the best-improvement strategy (or greedy hill-climbing) consists in selecting, at each iteration, a neighbor which achieves the best fitness. This implies to generate and evaluate the whole neighborhood at each step of the search, and can require high computational cost if an incremental evaluation of all neighbors cannot be performed. The first-improvement strategy accepts the first evaluated neighbor which satisfies the moving condition. This avoids the systematic generation of the entire neighborhood and allows more conceptual options.An additional rule often has to be considered while climbing landscapes with neutrality. First, a basic hill-climbing algorithm does not allow neutral moves during the search, and only performs improving moves until reaching a local optimum. Neutral moves can be considered once a local optimum is reached (neutral perturbation, NP), especially when the fitness landscape contains a substantial proportion of neutrality. Another variant, called stochastic hill-climbing,11Sometimes denoted as netcrawling[26] in the evolution strategy community.can accept indifferently neutral or improving neighbors throughout the search, even before reaching a local optimum. It is not obvious to determine the influence of the neutral move policy on the quality of the configurations reached. However, it is interesting to note that the simulated annealing algorithm, which allows some deteriorating moves during the search, systematically accepts neutral moves under consideration.By combining pivoting rules (first, best) and neutral move policies (basic, basic+NP, stochastic), one can design five climbing strategies, since stochastic hill-climbing is necessarily an iterative first-improvement. In a combinatorial fitness landscape context, these move strategies correspond actually to 5 ways to produce iterative search transition graphs by restricting an initial unconstrained transition graph (see Fig. 6). Let us notice that these 5 climbers never allow deteriorating moves.This section presents typical combinatorial fitness landscapes, obtained from well-known combinatorial problems (fitness functions) with usual associated solutions representation (search space) and neighborhood. This various sample of problems and landscapes (NK landscapes, MAXSAT, Flow-shop, QAP) will be used for comparing climbing strategies in the experimental part.The NK family of landscapes [27] is a problem-independent model for constructing multimodal landscapes. NK landscapes use a basic search space, with binary strings as configurations and bit-flipNflipas neighborhood (two configurations are neighbors iff their Hamming distance equals 1). Characteristics of an NK landscape are determined by two parameters N and K. N refers to the length of binary string configurations, which defines both the search space size (|X|=2N) and the neighborhood size (|Nflip(x)|=N,∀x∈X). K∈{0, …, N−1} specifies the level of variables interdependency, which directly affects the ruggedness of the landscape; indeed, the fitness value of a configuration is given by the sum of N terms, each one depending on K+1 bits of the configuration. Thus, by increasing the value of K from 0 to N−1, NK landscapes can be tuned from smooth to rugged. In particular, if K=0, then the landscape contains only one local (global) optimum; on the contrary, setting K to N−1 leads to a random fitness assignment.In NK landscapes, the fitness function FNK:[0, 1]N→[0, 1) to be maximized is defined as follows:(4)FNK(x)=1N∑i=1NCi(xi,Πi(x))xiis the i-th bit of configuration x (1≤i≤N). Subfunction Πidefines the dependencies of bit i, withΠi(x)={xπ1(i),…,xπK(i)}such that πj(i)∈{1, …, N}\{i} and∀j′≠j,πj′(i)≠πj(i)|=K. Subfunction Ci:[0, 1]K+1→[0, 1) defines the contribution value of xiwith respect to its set of dependencies Πi(x).NK landscapes are formally defined by the triplet({0,1}N,Nflip,FNK). NK landscapes instances are both determined by the (K+1)-uples(xi,xπ1(i),…,xπK(i))and a fitness contribution matrix C describing the 2N×(K+1) possible contribution values. In standard NK landscapes instances considered here, dependencies between variables and contribution values are randomly generated from a uniform distribution.The precision of randomly generated fitness contributions implies that neutrality is almost absent on NK landscapes. Several models add neutrality to NK landscapes (NKp, NKq, NKr) and are described hereafter.NKp landscapes. Probabilistic NK landscapes [24] are particular NK instances in which the fitness contribution matrix contains many zeros. While generating an NKp instance, values of C are set to 0 with a probability of p, the others being randomly generated in [0, 1). An NKp landscape class is then determined by three parameters: N, K and p. In extreme cases, classic NK landscapes are obtained for p=0, while landscapes are entirely flat when p=1.NKq landscapes. To add neutrality to NK landscapes, [28] introduced quantized NK landscapes by modifying the discretization level of contribution values. Indeed, limiting their possible values increases the number of neutral neighbors. Thus, NKq implies an additional integer parameter q⩾2 which specifies the Cisubfunctions codomain size. The maximal degree of neutrality is reached when q=2 (C is then a binary matrix), and decreases while q increases.NKr landscapes. In [16], we proposed to artificially create neutrality by truncating the fitness function of a standard NK model. Then, in this rounded NK (NKr), an original NK landscape is divided into a predefined number of fitness levels. Contrary to NKp and NKq, NKr is not a generalization of the NK model in which the fitness contribution matrix is depending of a neutrality parameter. r affects the final fitness values without modifying the contribution matrix generation policy:(5)FNKr(x,r)=⌊r.FNK(x)⌋rIn this model, FNK(x1)<FNK(x2)⇒FNKr(x1, r)≤FNKr(x2, r), which implies that every global optimum of an NK instance is also a global optimum of the corresponding NKr instance.Note that these three models of neutral NK landscapes do not modify their original dimension properties (size and connectivity).The satisfiability problem (SAT) consists in determining an instantiation of n boolean variables (xi∈B={⊥,⊤}) which satisfies a Boolean formula expressed in conjunctive normal form. The MAXSAT optimization problem consists in satisfying the maximum number of disjunctive clauses of the formula.22A clausecj=⋁k=1njljkis a disjunction of litterals ljk, a litteral being a Boolean variable (xi) or its negation (¬xi).Given a MAXSAT instance {c1, …, cm} with n variables and m clauses, the objective value of a instantiationx∈Bnis given by:(6)V(x)=∑j=1mv(x*(cj)),withv(x*(cj))=1,ifcj=⊤w.r.t.x0,otherwiseMost of the time, MAXSAT is actually handled as a minimization problem, using the opposite fitness function m−V, which corresponds to the number of unsatisfied clauses. Thus, in the experimental section, the results reported will correspond to the minimization version.Note that MAXSAT configurations are usually represented as binary strings (0≡⊥, 1≡⊤), which allow to connect them with the bit-flip neighborhoodNflip. Since NK and MAXSAT landscapes have equivalent transition graphs, a MAXSAT landscape({0,1}n,Nflip,V)has a search space size of 2nand a neighborhood size of n, ∀x∈{0, 1}n.The Flow-shop Scheduling Problem (FSP) can be presented as a set of n jobs {J1, J2, …, Jn} to be scheduled on m machines {M1, M2, …, Mm}. Machines are critical resources: one machine cannot be assigned to two jobs simultaneously. Each job Jiis composed of m consecutive tasks {ti1, …, tim}, where tijrepresents the jth task of the job Jirequiring the machine mj. To each task tijis associated a processing time pij. Each job Jimust be achieved before its due date di. In our study, we are interested in the permutation FSP where jobs must be scheduled in the same order on all machines.Each task tijbeing scheduled at the time sijwith respect to the ordering π, the makespan (total completion time) is defined by:(7)Cmax(π)=maxi∈[1,…,n]{sim+pim}The minimization of Cmaxhas been proved to be NP-hard for more than two machines [29].n refers to the permutation size, which defines the search space Sn, of size |Sn|=n! (Snis the set of all permutations of {1, …, n}). The insertion operator provides a neighborhood relationNinsand completes the definition of the fitness landscapeFSPins=(Sn,Nins,Cmax). Note that the insertion operator is commonly used while optimizing the makespan. It consists in moving a job of the permutation π to a different position. The neighborhood size resulting is|Nins(π)|=(n−1)2,∀π∈Sn.The quadratic assignment problem (QAP) is one of the hardest NP-hard combinatorial problems [30,31] which allows to model many real-life problems (e.g. facility location, parallel and distribute computing, combinatorial data analysis). QAP can be described as the problem of assigning a set of facilities to a set of locations with given distances between locations and given flows between facilities. Given n facilities, n locations, and two n×n matrices D and F—where dijis the distance between location i and j, and frsis the flow between two facilities r and s—the objective value of an assignment π corresponds to the sum of the products between flows and distances:(8)WQAP(π)=∑i=1n∑j=1ndijfπiπjπigives the location of item i in a configuration π∈Sn. Here, WQAP has to be minimized.The neighborhood commonly used while optimizing QAP,Nswap, is based on the swap operator which consists in exchanging the location of two facilities in the permutation. Thus,QAPswap=(Sn,Nswap,WQAP)is a natural fitness landscape derived from the QAP problem. The neighborhood size is|Nswap|=2n,∀π∈Sn.In this section, the two main pivoting rules (first and best improvement) are compared on a large scale of fitness landscapes. We aim at determining if landscapes properties have an influence on their relative efficiency, by focusing on the landscapes described in the previous section. In the following, the two considered basic hill-climbings will be denoted as FIRST (first-improvement) and BEST (best-improvement). We compared both climbers on a set of 304 landscapes:•NK33Neutral NK landscapes will be considered for the evaluation of neutral move policies only (Section 5).: obtained with 16 basic NK landscape parameterizations (N={128, 256, 512, 1024}, K={1, 2, 4, 8}).Flow-Shop: 27 landscapes, obtained from 27 FSP instances taken from [32], the Cmax objective function and the insertion neighborhood.QAP: 132 landscapes, obtained from 132 instances taken from QAPLIB [33] and the swap neighborhood.MAXSAT: 129 landscapes, obtained from 129 instances taken from SATLIB [34] and the bit-flip neighborhood.We first evaluate the ruggedness of landscapes by sampling. Since climbers evaluated here accept only strictly improving moves, the ruggedness evaluation is based on indicatorρk>. To estimateρk>by sampling, we compute for each possible value of k a set of 1 million sign epistasis values ξ>(x, x′, y, y′) obtained from randomly selected k-ladders.In the result tables, only local ruggednessρ1>will be reported, since we observed thatρ1>is sufficient to order the landscapes considered by ruggedness level. Indeed, higher values of k do not affect significantly the comparative ruggedness level of all landscapes considered in this study, contrary to artificial landscapes provided in Section 3.1 (see Figs. 3 and 5). Fig. 7illustrates this aspect on NK landscapes.Neutrality is not considered in this section, since neutral moves are not allowed in the strategies under consideration here.For each couple landscape×climber, 100 executions have been performed. For each landscape, FIRST and BEST start their searches with the same set of 100 starting points, in order to cancel the initialization bias. Climbings are stopped when a local optimum is reached. Then we report the average fitness of the 100 resulting configurations. For each landscape, the best average value appears in bold. Moreover, we indicate in (dark or light) grey methods which are not statistically outperformed by any other method according to the Mann-Whitney test with p<0.05. Among them, we indicate in light grey methods which are statistically outperformed with p<0.1. Thus, we obtain three levels of dominance, which will be denoted as follow:•A≻95%B iff method A statistically outperforms method B with p<0.05 (w.r.t. the Mann–Whitney test),A≻90%B iff A statistically outperforms B with 0.05<p<0.1,A≻avgB iff A performs better that B in average, but does not necessarily outperform statistically B with p<0.1.Tables 2–5summarize the results obtained by first and best improvement climbers on different types of combinatorial landscapes: NK (Table 2), QAPswap (Table 3), FSPins (Table 4) and MAXSAT (Table 5).Results on NK landscapes, in which ruggedness and dimension properties are tunable in function of N and K, provide us several pieces of information. Best-improvement statistically outperforms first-improvement for K∈{1, 2}, and first-improvement appears more efficient while K — and consequently the ruggedness — increases. At first reading, the size of the search space (2N) seems not affect the relative efficiency of pivoting rule variants. However, one can see that the ruggedness level ρ of landscapes is not only determined by K but also decreases while N grows. Consequently,the efficiency of hill-climbing techniques seems to be affected by the ruggedness of the landscape as well as its dimension. Fig. 8.a emphasizes the relation between ruggedness, size and relative efficiency between first and best improvement. This figure points out that the more an NK landscape is rugged and large, the more a first-improvement tends to outperform a best-improvement hill-climbing.Table 3 summarizes results obtained on QAPswap landscapes. These landscapes are derived from state-of-the-art instances of an academic combinatorial problem. A large scale of instance types is considered, and allows us to consider landscapes with different properties. To summarize the results, FIRST ≻95%BEST on 32 of 124 landscapes, while BEST ≻95%FIRST on 9 landscapes. In particular, BEST seems more suited to tackle Burkard and Offermann instances (bur*) as well as Christofides and Benavent ones (chr*). FIRST is particularly adapted to tackle Skorin-Kapov (sko*), Steinberg (ste*) and larger Taillard (tai*) instances. Fig. 8.b tends to respect observation made for NK landscapes, i.e. climbers efficiency depends both on ruggedness and size of landscapes. Besides, one can observe that it is possible to determine the most suited pivoting rule according to the landscape properties through an indicator. Indeed, both in NK landscapes and QAPswap experiments, a basic indicator involving size and ruggedness provides a suitable classification of these landscapes corresponding to their ability to be climbed by FIRST or BEST. In particular, we observe that the first-improvement strategy seems more suitable to tackle harder instances (large size, high ruggedness level).The superiority of FIRST is particularly clear on FSPins landscapes, since it systematically outperforms BEST in average, with FIRST ≻95%BEST on 23 of 27 landscapes (see Table 4). An interesting point is that most work tackling flow-shop uses first-improvement-based local search algorithms, e.g. [35] for ILS, or [36,37] for specific first-improvement-based tabu searches. Nevertheless, in these works, the use of FIRST is usually not discussed, and is probably more resulting from practical aspects since there is no significant benefit of evaluating the neighborhood incrementally.Results obtained for MAXSAT landscapes (Table 5) lead us to slightly different conclusions. Indeed, features n and ρ do not provide a clear consensus for discriminating FIRST and BEST. However, a noticeable tendency exists for random instances, where FIRST is never statistically outperformed. On problem-based instances, results seem to depend on particular specificities on each type of instances. Nevertheless, let us notice that the difficulty of discriminating MAXSAT landscapes with general indicators can be explained by the problem specificity, especially for non-random instances. In [8], authors come to similar conclusions, where first-improvement produced better results on uniform random MAXSAT problems (Table 5, left), and best-improvement produced better results on industrial problems (Table 5, right, for different kinds of problem-based instances). They explain that, contrary to random instances in which variables interactions are uniformly distributed, industrial problems often contain critical variables which have more effect on the fitness function and which should be flipped in early stages of the search. This heterogeneity of variables impact probably leads classical indicators to fail to classify landscapes adequately. Alternative indicators could be defined in order to represent heterogeneity in landscapes, e.g. by measuring the variability of epistatic interactions level.This study aims at comparing the efficiency of climbers according to the quality of local optima reached, and do not focus on computational costs. Nevertheless, as we can expect, FIRST systematically required less fitness function evaluations than BEST to reach local optima. The average ratio #eval(FIRST)/#eval(BEST), considering all executions, instances, and problems, is about 13%. In particular, this ratio range from 1.5% to 19% for NK landscapes, from 3% to 21% for QAPswap landscapes, from 7% to 38% for FSPins landscapes, and from 0.05% to 33% for MAXSAT landscapes. For all problems, this ratio decreases while instance size grows.This section aims at determining the ability of neutral move policies to climb landscapes with neutrality. In section 3.1, three neutral move policies are described (basic, basic with neutral perturbation, stochastic), which lead to five climbers variants while combined with first or best improvement pivoting rule. Basic FIRST and BEST climbers do not consider neutral moves during the search and have been tested in the previous section. Here, we focus on the three remaining variants: the stochastic hill-climbing — a first-improvement hill-climbing with a non-strictly improving acceptance criterion — and the two basic hill-climbings (first, best) combined with a neutral perturbation mechanism. These three climbers will be respectively denoted as STOCH, FIRST+NP, and BEST+NP.Experimentations are performed on a set of 480 landscapes:•NKp: 64 NKp landscapes, resulting from the 16 basic NK landscapes used in section 4 and modified with four p values (0.50, 0.80, 0.95, 0.99).NKq: 64 NKq landscapes, resulting from the 16 basic NK landscapes modified with four q values (2, 3, 5, 10).NKr: 64 NKr landscapes, resulting from the 16 basic NK landscapes modified with four r values (10, 100, 1000, 10 000).Flow-Shop (27 landscapes), QAP (132 landscapes), MAXSAT (129 landscapes): the sets of landscapes used in section 4.Since this section focuses on the comparison of neutral move policies, we will only report the neutrality indicator ν, presented in section 2.3. For each landscape, ν is evaluated by sampling (from 1,000,000 random pairs of neighboring solutions).We will reuse the experimental protocol and tables representation detailed in the previous section, except for the stopping criterion. All climbers stop after a prefixed maximal number of evaluationsn, set to allow a convergence of the search. We setn=10.|Nflip|2evaluations for binary strings landscapes, andn=500.|N{ins,swap}|for permutation landscapes. Thus, for each landscape, the number of evaluations allowed is cubic with respect to the instance size, since the neighborhood size is linear for NK and MAXSAT (repectively N and n), and quadratic for Flow-shop and QAP (respectively (n−1)2 and2n). These settings have been tuned in such a way that no significant improvements were observed while allowing more evaluations.Note that, for a given landscape, random seeds and starting points sets are unique for all climbers considered in the paper (FIRST, BEST, STOCH, FIRST+NP, BEST+NP).Table 6.a summarizes the results obtained on the NKp landscapes. These landscapes do not allow the discrimination of methods with a high level of confidence: STOCH is statistically dominated on only 8 landscapes, FIRST+NP on 14 landscapes, and BEST+NP on 12 landscapes (with p<0.05). BEST+NP tends to outperform first-improvement variants on landscapes with low levels of neutrality (see ν) and ruggedness (K∈{1, 2}). First-improvement variants — and especially STOCH — reach globally higher solutions on more neutral and rugged landscapes.NKq experiments (Table 6.b) lead to more relevant outcomes. This table emphasizes significant differences between the three strategies. Stochastic climbers reach best results on most instances, especially on more rugged and/or neutral landscapes (high K, low q). This is particularly interesting since, to our knowledge, basic policies are more traditionally used while designing metaheuristics. Comparing STOCH with FIRST+NP is particularly relevant to evaluate the interest of accepting neutral moves all along the search, since this constitutes the only difference between these two strategies. On NKq landscapes, STOCH outperforms in average FIRST+NP on all instances but 3, and points out the usefulness of stochastic hill-climbings. However, a best-improvement strategy combined with neutral perturbations remains suitable in smooth landscapes, especially those with low levels of neutrality. One observes that the search space size, given by parameter N, does not influence the overall tendency of the results, although efficiency differences between policies tends to be more significant for larger search spaces.Major conclusions highlighted with NKq remain valid for NKr as shown in Table 6.c. Stochastic climbing statistically dominates other variants on most instances where ν>10%. As on NKq landscapes, considering neutrality even in early stages of the search improve the climbing efficiency: on most instances, STOCH outperforms in average FIRST+NP. Note that since setting r to 10 leads to excessively flat landscapes, a significant difference between climbers is observed on *_*_r10 instances only for N=128, where STOCH strongly dominates FIRST+NP and BEST+NP. For higher values of N, these flat landscapes contains huge plateaus and escaping from them requires the use of more specific methods.Let us recall that the only difference between original and rounded NK landscapes results of the precision of the configuration fitnesses. Since∀x∈X,FNKr(x,r)≤FNK(x)<FNKr(x,r)+(1/r), it makes sense to compare directly the NK and NKr results for each (N, K) parameterization. While comparing results from Tables 2 and 6c, one observes that several r parameterizations can reach configurations of higher fitness values, despite the unfavorable rounding (truncated fitness value). This is illustrated on Table 7, which compares the efficiency of climbers using original fitnesses (NK landscapes), against STOCH which uses rounded ones (NKr landscapes, with r=1000 and r=100). Experiments also indicate that the most suitable r values are those which lead to landscapes with an average rate of neutrality belonging between 15% and 75% (for details, see Table 6c). It means that, for each (N, K) parameterization, an appropriate rounding of the fitness function lead to more efficient climbings, provided that the bringing of neutrality is exploited. Adding neutrality necessarily decreasesρk≤and creates plateaus which increase the average number of transitions needed to reach local optima. Setting r consists then to find a compromise between decreasing the ruggedness and keeping a sufficiently low level of neutrality.Rounding fitnesses intuitively leads to consider some deteriorating moves during the search and avoids to be trapped prematurely in local optima. Benefits of such a move policy have been verified by advanced search techniques like simulated annealing. To summarize, an appropriate discretization of evaluation functions can help to solve optimization problems with neighborhood search techniques.Results obtained on QAPswap are provided in the Table 8. Only 77 out of the 132 landscapes are displayed here, since no neutrality was observed in the remaining 55 landscapes.44On non-neutral landscapes, FIRST ↔ STOCH ↔ FIRST+NP and BEST ↔ BEST+NP.The dominance of STOCH remains noticeable on QAPswap landscapes: STOCH is statistically outperformed on only 6 landscapes, and obtained the best average results on the majority of instances (44 out of 77). FIRST+NP and BEST+NP are respectively dominated on 14 and 23 instances.Table 9shows a strong superiority of stochastic hill-climbing for tackling FSPins landscapes. On all instances, the best average value is obtained by STOCH. Both FIRST+NP and BEST+NP are statistically dominated by STOCH on 22 out of the 27 landscapes. 2 out of the 5 remaining instances (70_5_01 and 150_5_01) are among the easiest ones, and STOCH systematically obtains an optimal solution. The interest of accepting neutral moves even before reaching a local optimum was already emphasized for neutral NK landscapes and is clearly confirmed here.On MAXSAT landscapes (Table 10), differences between climbers are clearly visible. This is especially true for random 3-SAT instances (left), where STOCH statistically dominate FIRST+NP and BEST+NP on almost all instances. These landscapes contain a high rate of neutral neighbors (ν>20%) which clearly have to be considered like improving moves to reach better local optima.Results obtained from problem-based instances (Table 10, right) are also extremely favorable to STOCH. Let us recall that best-improvement obtained better results than first-improvement on most of these instances (see Table 5, right). While considering neutral moves, stochastic hill-climbing obtains best average results on 55 out of 68 landscapes, and is statistically outperformed on only 5 landscapes by BEST+NP, the best-improvement with neutral perturbations.Additional pieces of information can be extracted while considering the specificities of particular class of problems. First, sw* landscapes result from SAT-encoded graph coloring problems generated thanks to a morphing parameter, which determines the randomness of graphs [38]. These graphs are resulting from a morphing between a random graph and a regular ring lattice, where vertices are connected to their 8 nearest neighbors. The 10 instances are sorted by level of structure, sw100-8-lp0-c5 corresponding to a SAT-encoded random graph, and sw100-8-p0-c5 to a SAT-encoded regular ring lattice. In [38], authors claim that a high rate of structure in graphs leads to SAT instances which are more difficult to be solved by local search algorithms. This observation is confirmed by the experiments on FIRST+NP and BEST+NP, since the number of non-satisfied clauses globally increase with the level of structure. At the contrary, STOCH is efficient on all sw* instances and especially on the most structured instances where the global optimum is almost systematically attained (97 out of 100 for sw100-8-lp8-c5-1, 98 out of 100 for sw100-8-p0-c5-1), which contradicts Gent et al. affirmation.A second observation is specific from qg* landscapes, which correspond to SAT-encoded quasigroup instances. The neutrality estimation of these landscapes leads to very low values, when considering neutral moves clearly improve the quality of solutions reached (see Tables 5 vs. 10). This contradiction leads us to believe that the neutrality observed during the search is underestimated by the indicator ν. Additional experiments reported in Fig. 9show that neutrality exists in higher areas of qg* landscapes, which cannot be observed by randomly sampling the search space. In this experiment, ruggedness and neutrality have been estimated from solutions of different fitness ranges, obtained during STOCH executions. Fig. 9 reports evolution of neutrality for 4 binary string landscapes: NK_1024_q2, NK_1024_2_q2, MAXSAT_CBS_...m423_b50_0 and MAXSAT_qg5-10. Ruggedness is not reported, since no evolution has been observed while discriminating by fitnesses.Results presented in this section focused exclusively on the quality of configurations reached after a (high) fixed number of evaluations, and emphasizes that STOCH globally outperforms other hill-climbing variants. Naturally, the convergence speed is also a determining aspect while comparing local search efficiencies, and especially climbers. In particular, we have investigated if accepting neutral neighbors at early stages of the search, which requires the partial exploration of more neighborhoods, leads to more computational effort.In Fig. 10, we report the average fitness evolution during the search for 6 landscapes instances, which are representative of the whole set of landscapes used in this section. This points out that STOCH reaches very quickly high configurations, meaning that relaxing the move criterion gives more opportunities to reach promising areas of the landscapes. Intuitively, performing neutral moves increases the probability to escape from small basins of attractions and to be attracted by larger basins, in which climbing is facilitated. This aspect will be investigated in future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
