@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evidence theoretic classification of ballistic missiles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Approach presents classification of ballistic missiles using evidential theory.Airborne objects classified without prior knowledge in few seconds after detection.Decision criterion proposed to categorize airborne objects into six major classes.Approach performs better than k-NN and decision tree methods with chosen data sets.Validated with real and simulated data sets from single and multiple radars sources.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Classification,Ballistic missile,Dempster–Shafer theory,Combination rule,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, using the Dempster–Shafer theory (DST) of evidence, a new decision criterion is proposed which can quickly classify airborne objects without any a priori knowledge, whose data are laced with environmental noise characteristics, within 10seconds (10s) from the time it is detected. Kinematic parameters of an airborne object received from radars are used to classify it into one of the six classes, which include three levels of ballistic target discrimination, aerodynamic, satellite and unknown. The DST is chosen as it can suitably handle the element of uncertainty, limited a priori data and short observation times that exist with the data acquired for the purpose of classification. The focus of the work is on ballistic targets in a theater of war. The approach is compared with the popularly known k-NN and decision tree techniques and is found to perform better with the chosen data sets. This approach is tested using both real flight test data and simulated data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) for Network Centric Warfare (NCW) is a challenging mission for the defense department of the country. The BMD system is to be made capable of neutralizing target missiles received from several geographically dispersed locations that impact a defended area. A ballistic missile is a pilotless missile that generally follows a ballistic trajectory for most of its flight path to place its warhead on target [1]. Targets could be neutralized during all phases of flight – boost, midcourse and terminal phase. The targets detected by sensors used across various networks could be of several types like radar sensors, optical sensors, imaging sensors, surveillance systems for example. Each of these sensors, which could be ground based or airborne, generates data, which needs to be classified for target identification using different classification and identification techniques. Ascertaining which element in the threat complex is the lethal object is one of the fundamental challenges of the BMD. To address the security challenges posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and the ballistic missiles, and to maintain the joint war-fighting capability, it is necessary to identify and classify a threat during the early stages of its flight. Early detection and classification of a target during its ascent/boost phase gives good reaction time to the Command and Control (C2) system of the BMD to assign suitable weapons to the target to engage and neutralize it [2–4]. This requirement has been the basis of motivation of this work. The objective of this work is to arrive at a new solution to classify airborne objects to identify potential threats in real-time in military domain using suitable existing prevalent mathematical/statistical techniques without the need for training data sets and also without the assumption of any kind of distribution like Chi-squared metric, the Normal distribution or the Gaussian distribution. Various methods developed in recent times using discrimination function, Bayesian theorem and other machine learning approaches to classifying targets are prevalent. The thrust is on the classification of ballistic targets in real-time, in an environment cluttered with airborne objects.Target classification is one of the key battlefield tactical applications. It is essential for any type of weapon deployment or defense system. It provides meaningful and timely concept information and predicts the target class that enhances the process of human judgment while making critical battlefield decision. This is particularly required in the modern battle management multi-sensor NCW scenario, which demands faster reaction and quick commander response. The purpose of discrimination is to identify the lethal target in the presence of a potentially cluttered environment that may include aerodynamic objects of benign nature, spent boosters or booster segments or decoys.Target localization and classification problem is to make the best estimates with regard to the location and type of the observed targets by rationally combining information collected by relevant sensor nodes. Results from the target identifier help disambiguate observations to track associations, and provide input for higher-level situational assessment [3]. There exist several classifier models, like parametric, contributory and instance based methods, which could be used based on the application on hand. Classification algorithms can be categorized into four groups: (a) supervised parametric classifier, (b) unsupervised parametric classifier, (3) supervised non-parametric classifier and (d) unsupervised non-parametric classifier. All the information of the class probability distribution comes from the analysis of the training samples [3].Several studies and reports on related work supported by experimental evidence are available for classification of objects. Classifiers like k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) [5–7], Decision Trees [8], Transferable Belief Model (TBM) [9], Support Vector Machine (SVM) with proper choice of kernel [10], Fuzzy logic, Neural Network [7] and other non-parametric types are typically used for classification of targets. Belief functions in varied forms have been used as classifiers. Dempster and Chiu in their work [11] used the concept of memory banks visualized in the form of matrix to classify objects. Denoeux's method of evidential k-NN (EK-NN) [12–14], belief based k-NN (BK-NN) [13], Global Method, Separable Method [14] are available in literature. Fuzzy C-means (FCM) based classification technique that uses the concept of iterative updating of cluster centers and membership values, require a priori knowledge [15,16]. Twala's study on handling incomplete data for target classification is also available [8].However, these classifiers are more apt for applications where knowledge of task on hand and/or a priori data as training sets are available. In the Ballistic Missile Defense environment, prior information of a threat is not available and when information on the threat is really picked up by the sensors and is available, decision on the nature of the threat/target is to be made within a few seconds to gain a war-fighting advantage. Due to paucity of time, sufficient data cannot be acquired for generating training sets for training of classifiers. Also, no form of distribution like the Gaussian or Normal can be assumed for any incoming real-time track data. Besides, several problems associated with the target track data like sensor measurement error, short observation times, no a priori data, feature selection, missing data, conflicting data and uncertainty factors are to be addressed while discriminating a target in a battlefield environment. Moreover, the nature of the data and domain of application determines which classification algorithm will provide the best solution to the given problem. The algorithm can differ with respect to accuracy, time to completion, and transparency. Furthermore, the best information varies with time as the situation changes even if the goal remains unchanged. Hence for a dynamic and time-critical situation, it is necessary to find an optimal classifier that can achieve the goal both in terms of sufficiency and also efficiency for the temporal changes in uncertain sensor information.Classically, the discrimination function is performed using statistical methods derived from Bayes’ theorem. While Bayesian methods are theoretically optimal under certain conditions, such applications require estimates of prior probabilities and decisions are made from disjoint class hypothesis sets. The Dempster–Shafer theory (DST) of evidence potentially provides an alternative approach for object classification when conditions are not optimal [17–25]. The DST of evidence is one of the two prevalent classification schemes that handle uncertainty/indeterministic inputs using the theory of evidence or degree of belief, the other being the Bayesian inference method. These are the commonly used algorithms for multi-sensor information fusion in military applications [3,26]. Belief functions theory also called the evidence theory (DST) makes a clear distinction between the different aspects of uncertainty (mainly randomness and non-specificity) through the rigorous formalism of belief functions [13]. The theory of belief functions provides a non-Bayesian way of using mathematical probability to quantify subjective judgments. Whereas a Bayesian assesses probabilities directly for the answer to a question of interest, a belief-function user assesses probabilities for related questions and then considers the implications of these probabilities for the question of interest [3]. The DST provides an evidential reasoning methodology for scenario construction and analysis that offers potential advantages when compared to other approaches such as Bayesian nets as it places less conceptual load on the analyst by not requiring the complete specification of joint probability distributions [27]. DST has been applied already in many fields, including parameter estimation, classification, clustering and decision-making support systems [13,28].In this paper, a new and simple approach is proposed to classify ballistic targets in real-time in a cluttered environment using the DST and the combination rule which operates when data are missing or conflicting and has no strict requirements put upon the origin of the mass assignments input for combination. The sensor network environment of an airborne target is plagued by false alarms, random bad behavior, and nuisance alarms. Target kinematic data are used to arrive at this new approach. Through this new approach, a decision criterion is deduced that classifies a target within few seconds with no history, which is extremely beneficial for military defense as the DS classifier requires no training data [29]. Also, no kind of distribution like the Chi-squared metric, the Normal distribution or the Gaussian distribution of the target data is assumed. The DST is chosen to be used due to its natural handling of conflicting, uncertain and incomplete information, which is an important characteristic of a battlefield environment. It allows one to combine evidence from different sources and arrive at a degree of belief (represented by a belief function) that takes into account all the available evidence. Incompleteness of data is a form of imperfection of the environment. Handling incomplete data is an important issue for choice of classifier, since incomplete data in either the training set or test set or in both sets affect the prediction accuracy of classifiers [8]. The choice of a classifier is data dependent since the performances of different classifiers on the same data set may differ significantly and also, if one classifier performs well on one data set, it can perform rather badly on another. Use of the DST in military applications is the current trend of research in defense. The DST is used to model real-world problems. Besides, the DST provides a more accurate model of available evidence toward the classification of a target than the Bayesian approach [30]. The work is carried out using data from single radar and also from multiple radars. The method is tested using real flight test data and simulated data.Section 2 of this paper presents an insight into the DST. Section 3 brings out the new approach to the problem, and how a solution is deduced by applying the DST and Section 4 brings out the analysis and results of the approach. In Section 5, an attempt is made to compare the proposed approach with the k-NN technique and other relevant approaches and finally conclude the paper with Section 6, which also discusses the prospects of further work.The DST is a mathematical theory of evidence. The theory was first developed by Dempster [17] and Shafer [18]. The DS theory of evidence, also called the theory of belief functions, as mentioned, is a generalization of the Bayesian theory of subjective probability [18,31]. The DST is developed to overcome the inability of Bayesian method to represent incomplete or uncertain evidence [32,33]. It is based on two ideas: the idea of obtaining degrees of belief for one question from subjective probabilities for a related question and Dempster's rule for combining such degrees of belief when they are based on independent items of evidence [18]. The role of belief functions is to quantify the uncertainty of an idealized observer regarding the statement being true or false [11]. Since the evidence from multiple sources do not totally collide with each other, DST is useful for integrating uncertain information from multiple disparate sources with different levels of abstraction [34]. It provides a possibility to quantitatively describe the uncertainty of evidences or measurements. Whereas Bayesian theory requires probabilities for each question of interest, belief functions allow one to base degrees of belief for one question on probabilities for a related question [31]. It is designed to cope with varying levels of precision regarding the information. DST could be used where most tactical sensors are incapable of assigning all confidences to each target type.If Θ is a frame of discernment, then a function m:2Θ→[0, 1] is called a basic probability assignment (mass) whenever [12–14,17,18,33]:(1)m(ϕ)=0and(2)∑A⊂Θm(A)=1where m(A) is called A's basic probability number (mass number) and it is understood to be a measure of belief that is committed exactly to A. To reiterate, the quantity m(A) measures the belief that one commits exactly to A, not the total belief that one commits to A. To obtain the measure of the total belief committed to A, one must add to m(A) the quantities m(B) for all subsets B of A.DST allows the fusion of several sources using the Dempster's combination operator [32,35]. Dempster's rule combines multiple belief functions through their basic probability assignments (bpa) m[18,33,36]. Belief functions are defined over the same frame of discernment, but based on independent arguments or distinct bodies of evidence, Dempster's rule of combination enables one to compute their orthogonal sum, a new belief function based on the combined evidence. The measures of belief and plausibility are derived from the combined basic assignments. Based on the bpa given, several belief functions are defined over the same frame of discernment θ, but based on independent arguments or distinct bodies of evidence, Dempster's rule of combination enables one to compute their orthogonal sum, a new belief function based on the combined evidence [18,37]. The measures of belief and plausibility are derived from the combined basic assignments. The Dempster's rule of combination is purely a conjunctive operation (AND) [38]. Beliefs corresponding to independent pieces of information can be combined within the Dempster–Shafer framework via aggregation techniques [18,27,39].Suppose Bel1 and Bel2 are belief functions over the same frame Θ, with basic probability assignments m1 and m2 and focal elements A1, …, Akand B1, …, Bl, respectively. Refer [14,17,18,40,41].Suppose(3)k=∑i,jAi∩Bj=ϕm1(Ai)m2(Bj)<1Then the function m:2Θ→[0, 1] defined by m=(ϕ)=0 and(4)m(A)=∑i,jAi∩Bj=Am1(Ai)m2(Bj)1−kFor all non-empty A⊂Θ is a basic probability assignment. The core of the belief function given by m is equal to the intersection of the cores of Bel1 and Bel2. k represents basic probability mass associated with conflict. The constant k measures the extent of conflict between the two belief functions.A flying object is detected by a sensor when it comes within its coverage zone. These objects are then classified and identified to assess their threat capability. In the proposed approach, using kinematic parameters’ data received from ground based radars, the airborne objects are classified into six classes which include three levels discrimination of ballistic targets, aerodynamic, satellite and unknown. Sensors for target detection could be of any type. However, for this work, radar as the only active sensor type for acquiring target track data is considered. For this work, 24 sets of real flight test data (R) gathered from a single radar source and 21 sets of simulated data (S) obtained from a single source are considered. These data sets contain information on ballistic targets, aircraft and satellite. Classified data obtained from ‘Defence R&D Organization’ is used for this study. The main objective is to classify ballistic targets from a clutter of airborne objects. Hence, to avoid ground clutter and eliminate false alarms, based on judgment, data for all airborne objects above 5km altitude from ground is judiciously considered. This step has reduced the computational load considerably. Also, since any object of threat nature when detected, needs to be classified in real-time as early as possible so as to be able to engage an interceptor to neutralize the threat, gathering of data of the airborne objects for 10s is considered. If the radar picks up the target data at any height above 5km, data collected from thereon for 10s is used. Early detection and classification aids in providing higher reaction time for engagement of the target. Besides, this new approach providing early classification also helps in providing boost phase defense against incoming ballistic attacks. For BMD particularly in a theater of war, gathering of track data when an airborne object crosses 5km altitude is worthwhile.In the proposed approach, target kinematic data used are received from 3-dimensional phased array radars spaced geographically apart, but all networked with the BMD C2 System and its Decision Support System. The radars output the tracked target/airborne object state vector or measurement vector with kinematic parameters; position (x, y, z) and velocity (vx, vy, vz) in three dimensions, in Earth Centered Earth Fixed (ECEF) co-ordinate reference frame at periodic fixed time intervals, typically every 1s coupled with the environmental noise characteristics. All track data are time stamped with the GPS (Global Positioning System) time with 25μs resolution. This is converted to local East North Vertical (ENV) reference frame for computations and analysis. It is assumed that the co-variances of the kinematic parameters chosen during the 10s data gathering period is minimal and hence can be ignored. It is also assumed that the target track data is received from a well-calibrated radar sensor and hence no bias errors need to be considered. Other parameters generated by the radars like Radar Cross Section (RCS), acceleration, quality factor for example, have not been considered here. It is assumed that all radars generating the data are equally good and the target tracks are smoothened to eliminate outliers before initiating the classification process.Since there exist several sensors on a platform to collect/receive data about the targets/airborne objects and generate information by local processing of data, some of the information will turn out to be complimentary and some amount of the data will be redundant. Hence even if the quality of data received from some of the sensors is affected either due to propagation effects or due to willful enemy action like employing electronic countermeasures, the target classification does not get affected [42]. The measures of uncertainty, taken collectively are known in DST terminology as the basic probability assignment (bpa) or m. Feature selection is an important aspect for target discrimination. For optimal performance, the chosen features should be statistically independent, geometrically invariant and offer short computation times under robust conditions [43].Two critical issues that governed this approach are: (i) judicious decision on choice of features of airborne objects and (ii) definition of m for these features. This is a challenging task, since it is not heuristic and any wrong decisions in these aspects would lead to improper classification results. In the proposed method, three major features/parameters are chosen; vertical velocity (vz), energy height (Eh) and flight path angle (Г) of every target/airborne object track [1,44] to compute the final m. While vzin m/s is available directly from the target state vector at every instant of time, the parameters, Ehand Г are to be computed for every instant of vz. vzbecomes the obvious choice as the primary parameter, while the parameters Ehand Г have vzas an embedded parameter and are therefore are dependent on vz. Choice of parameters is very crucial as it essentially determines the effectiveness of the DS classifier. The parameters chosen for this work are found to be most suitable for classification as they bring out specifically the characteristics of an airborne object. Energy height is the maximum height to which an object can reach if the total energy is converted to potential energy. Energy height (in meters) in the vertical direction is calculated as:(5)Eh=v22g+hwherev=vx2+vy2+vz2and h=z; g=acceleration due to gravity=9.8m/s2.Flight path angle Γ is a measure of the direction of travel relative to inertial space, i.e., the angle between the missile/airborne object velocity vector and an inertial reference. Flight path angle in degrees is calculated as:(6)Γ=tan−1vz/vx2+vy2180πFor every target track data, first a check is made for its reach to 5km. If any target/airborne object does not cross a height of 5km, it is assumed to be an aerodynamic target. While for every target/airborne object crossing 5km, data packets for 10s are collected, whatever be the rate at which the packets are received from the radar, and m, the mass assignment is calculated to infer the target type. Also, if a target is detected by the radar at any altitude above 5km, once detected, the subsequent 10s data packets are collected.Using DST, the values of m are computed for 24 sets of real flight data (R) and the 21 sets of simulated data for the data packets gathered for 10s. These computed m are then sorted out into six major classes. Since known classes of data sets are used, subsequently using the corresponding m values, a decision criterion is deduced.To arrive at a value of m for vz, Ehand Г, data sets of several types of airborne objects including ballistic missiles of different classes are considered and analyzed. Based on judgment, unique values of m, are found. In defining the m, satellites are however omitted and the following are deduced:m1{vz}=abs(vzmax−vzmin)awhere a>max{abs(vz max−vz min)}.In this case, for data collected for 10s, the subscript ‘max’ refers to the value at the 10th second and ‘min’ refers to the value at the 1st second.As per literature and present technology, short range, medium range, long range and intercontinental ballistic class of missiles attain typical average acceleration not beyond 7g (7×9.8m/s2=68.6m/s2) [45,46]. In the present work, considering an acceleration of 10g, a is assigned a value of 1000.m1{θ}=1−m1{vz}m2{Eh}=abs(Ehmax−Ehmin)bwhere b>max{abs(Eh max−Eh min)}Typically for 5000km class of missiles, the abs(Eh max−Eh min) difference for 10s, 12s, 14s above 5km altitude from ground is less than 50,000m. Based on expert opinion and also considering analytically the dynamics of a highly agile and high maneuvering capable airborne object like a missile, b is assigned a value of 1,00,000.m{θ}2=1−m2{Eh}Using the DST rule of combination, find m3=(m1×m2). Next, assign m to Γ as follows.m4(Γ)=abs(absΓmax−absΓmin)cwhere c>max{abs(absГmax−absГmin)}Typically for 5000km class of missiles, the abs(absГmax−absГmin) difference for 10s, 12s, 14s above 5km altitude from ground is less than 15 deg. Again, based on expert opinion and considering the dynamics of a highly agile and high maneuvering capable airborne object like a missile, the gain margins and phase margins of their control systems and also the stability boundaries under consideration, c is assigned a value of 30.m4{θ}=1−m4{Γ}Again, using DST rule of combination, find m5=(m3×m4). The above procedure is illustrated considering data samples for 10s based on simulation data set available on hand, for a SRBM (Short Range Ballistic Missile) class of missiles as an example, where the basic probability assignment m for the three parameters are:m1{ν2}=0.2402and the bpa, say m1, is 0.2402 given to the focal element {vz}. In the example, m1({vz})=0.2402, and since nothing is known about the remaining probability, it is allocated to the whole frame of discernment [29,47].m1{θ}=0.7598m2{Eh}=0.2718;m2{θ}=0.7282Table 1shows the computation of m3.The parameters Ehand Г are dependent on vzand k=0m3{ν2}=(0.0653+0.1749)=0.2402m3{eh}=m3{Eh,νz,Γ}=0.2065m3{θ}=0.5533m4{Γ}=0.3110;m4{θ}=0.689Similarly, using DST rule of combination, compute m5=(m3×m4). Table 2shows the computation of m5.The parameters Ehand Г are dependent on vzand k=0m5{νz}=(0.0747+0.1655)=0.2402m5{eh}=m5{Eh,νz,Γ}=0.1423m5{γ}=m5{EhνzΓ}=0.1423m5{θ}=0.3812For every airborne object, m5 of vz, ehand γ, are calculated, where m5{eh}=m5{Eh, νz, Γ} and, based on which, the airborne object is suitably classified. Based on this method, the results of all the tables are obtained using the targets’ track data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new approach is proposed to classify targets/airborne objects in real-time into classes using single/multiple radars using the Dempster–Shafer theory (DST) of evidential reasoning in the absence of training data sets for the classifier. Considering the environmental characteristics of the military domain, which is cluttered with noise and where sensor data of detected airborne objects are plagued with uncertainty and randomness, the DST turns out to be the preferred choice of classifier. DST can suitably handle the element of uncertainty, limited a priori data and short observation times that exist with the data of the airborne objects to be classified. In this work, using the DST rule of combination, the airborne objects are classified without ambiguity in real-time. Based on the experiments and findings of this paper, the approach proposes a decision criterion using which the airborne objects are categorized into the following main classes: aerodynamic, ballistic targets of class SRBM, MRBM, IRBM and satellite. Targets that do not fall into any of the above classes are placed under the sixth class; the unknown class. The crux of the problem is the right choice of m for the selected target parameters, which is found to be the deciding factor for the classification process. In this work, vertical velocity (vz), energy height (Eh) and flight path angle (Г) of every target/airborne object track are used to compute the final m. The parameters chosen bring out the characteristics of an airborne object very effectively. Also, since targets of interest generally fly above 5km altitude from ground level, decision to gather data above 5km altitude to avoid ground clutter is justified. The focus of the work has been on classifying targets for theater Ballistic Missile Defense. It is observed that data collection for 10s above 5km altitude is adequate for ballistic targets, while for aerodynamic targets which are of maneuvering nature, gathering data sets for 10s, 12s, 14s above 5km altitude is adequate and further increase in data gathering time may not be desired. This approach is tested using available real flight test data and simulated data. Optimized classifiers determined using machine learning methods may be suitable under certain circumstances; however, the proposed approach is a simple and elegant solution to the problem of target classification for BMD systems. It is found that when compared with k-NN and decision tree techniques, the proposed approach performed better with the chosen data sets. The cross validation performed using the k-NN technique also highlights the superior performance of the new approach proposed.Though this work is done for the military domain, however, this proposed approach may find its application in the medical field like EEG and ECG data classification of healthy subjects and patients. In industries, the approach may find its application in the design of Decision Support Systems where real-time classification would yield quick results. It may find its application in ‘Big Data’ problems in an environment with limited a priori data, short observation time and incomplete information that exist with the data. In academia, this work provides an avenue for further research and study.As an extension of this work, targets that fall into the unknown class could be classified based on knowledge and judgment using DST soft computing approach. The proportional conflict redistribution which is a popular extension of the DST is also suggested to be used. The majority voting mechanism on the classification results of 10s, 12s, 14s may be considered for robustness of the approach. Ballistic targets could also be sub classified further and the characteristics of the target could be defined, which would aid in engaging the right type of weapon at the appropriate time. The Decision Support System of the BMD C2 system is tasked to prioritize available weapons against the incoming threats, which it would do more effectively with the sub classification of the ballistic targets. Besides, more appropriate parameters of airborne objects if available, may be included to define m. The process may be executed iteratively through all the phases of the ballistic flight path so as to be able to further sub classify the different stages of the ballistic targets like the boosters and the payloads.The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.