@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Defending against XML-related attacks in e-commerce applications with predictive fuzzy associative rules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A predictive fuzzy associative rule model to validate inputs to counter XML attacks.The model discovers fuzzy associative patterns to improve decision outcomes.The model is able to identify 18 interesting rules with at least 99% confidence.Determining frequently occurring features addresses the feature selection problem.Classification using random forests is 99% or more with near zero error measures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intrusion detection,Intrusion prevention,Fuzzy logic,Association rule mining,e-Commerce,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Security administrators need to prioritise which feature to focus on amidst the various possibilities and avenues of attack, especially via Web Service in e-commerce applications. This study addresses the feature selection problem by proposing a predictive fuzzy associative rule model (FARM). FARM validates inputs by segregating the anomalies based fuzzy associative patterns discovered from five attributes in the intrusion datasets. These associative patterns leads to the discovery of a set of 18 interesting rules at 99% confidence and subsequently, categorisation into not only certainly allow/deny but also probably deny access decision class. FARM's classification provides 99% classification accuracy and less than 1% false alarm rate. Our findings indicate two benefits to using fuzzy datasets. First, fuzzy enables the discovery of fuzzy association patterns, fuzzy association rules and more sensitive classification. In addition, the root mean squared error (RMSE) and classification accuracy for fuzzy and crisp datasets do not differ much when using the Random Forest classifier. However, when other classifiers are used with increasing number of instances on the fuzzy and crisp datasets, the fuzzy datasets perform much better. Future research will involve experimentation on bigger data sets on different data types.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Both the Internet and eXtensible Markup Language (XML)-based Web Services (WS) have revolutionised the Information Technology (IT) industry due to their many attractive features such as platform independence, interoperability, ease of use and ability to transport huge amount of information over the World Wide Web. Thus, more and more software applications, especially e-commerce applications are built on the Internet-enabled WS-platform. Consequently, the complex and largely unsecured Application Layer is open to various types of threats. This is further confirmed by a study by Veracode [1] on software-related Cybersecurity risks. It reported that 84% of Web applications are found to be vulnerable to the most frequently exploited Web application vulnerabilities. As a result, the Application Layer is open to various WS related threats such as Structured Query Language (SQL) injection, XML injection, XML content and parameter tampering, Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) oversized payload, coercive parsing, and recursive payload leading to XML Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack. The costs of these security threats are tremendous. Enterprises not only lose the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the WS system, but also the loss of data, businesses and the confidence of customers.Intrusion detection (ID) and intrusion prevention (IP) systems are mainly network or host-based. These systems merely detect attacks such as User-to-Root (U2R), Remote-to-Local (R2L), Denial of Service (DoS) and Probe by observing various network and host activities. Moreover, packet-level firewalls and ID systems are not able to secure WS traffic because they do not detect SOAP and XML traffic. For example, SOAP typically uses HTTP or SMTP. Therefore, it easily passes through traditional firewalls – a phenomenon known as the port 80 problem as mentioned in Khari et al. [2].Unfortunately, WS vulnerabilities and attacks related to SOAP and XML might eventually turn into XML DoS attacks. Additionally, these existing known attacks may evolve to new types of attacks as new hacking skills and tools evolve with time as well. Although the WS-Security standard exists, it does not define any direct countermeasure for DoS attacks according to Jensen et al. [3]. In addition to this, encrypted content can conceal attacks such as oversized payload, coercive parsing leading to XML injection or XML DoS. In view of this security threat, a predictive fuzzy associative rule model (FARM) incorporated in an adaptive framework is developed to validate inputs to counter attacks in WS e-commerce applications. FARM provides an added layer of security protection to compliment the inadequacy of the network-based ID systems and WS-Security standard.This paper is organised as follows: the next section reviews related works, third section describes the ID/IP framework, fourth section defines the methodology and experimental design, fifth section presents the evaluation of the predictive fuzzy association rule model, summarises and compares results and the last section concludes and discusses future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
