@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heuristic routing with bandwidth and energy constraints in sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We implement homogeneous sensor network.Four models with and without control transmission power, with and without data aggregation are considered.Increase in network lifetime is found using distributed NNT along energy and bandwidth constraints.Heuristic-I and Heuristic-II takes less energy to route data to the sink node since it deploys NNT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sensor networks routing,Bandwidth constraint,Energy constraint,Nearest neighbor tree,Distributed algorithm,Maximum lifetime,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most of the routing algorithms devised for sensor networks considered either energy constraints or bandwidth constraints to maximize the network lifetime. In the real scenario, both energy and bandwidth are the scarcest resource for sensor networks. The energy constraints affect only sensor routing, whereas the link bandwidth affects both routing topology and data rate on each link. Therefore, a heuristic technique that combines both energy and bandwidth constraints for better routing in the wireless sensor networks is proposed. The link bandwidth is allocated based on the remaining energy making the routing solution feasible under bandwidth constraints. This scheme uses an energy efficient algorithm called nearest neighbor tree (NNT) for routing. The data gathered from the neighboring nodes are also aggregated based on averaging technique in order to reduce the number of data transmissions. Experimental results show that this technique yields good solutions to increase the sensor network lifetime. The proposed work is also tested for wildfire application.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor network consists of large number of tiny sensor nodes connected via wireless communication channels. These are suitable for lots of applications such as military surveillance, temperature monitoring, wildfire detection, disaster warning, etc. In particular, sensors are deployed to monitor the regions where the human cannot intervene. For instance, sensors deployed for wildfire detection in the forest region continuously monitors the environment to detect the changes in temperature. When the temperature value crosses the threshold value say 40°C (event detection), sensor routes the data to sink node (typically a base station or a sensor/actuator node or a gateway to larger network with high computing power and energy where information is required) in the remote location through the multi-hop routing algorithms. Therefore, the sink collects the data from all the sensor nodes to derive useful information about the event (for example the geographical map of the wildfire can be plotted) detected. Fig. 1shows the model of wireless sensor networks used in the proposed work. According to the characteristics of sensor network, the sensor nodes perform sensing, preprocessing, aggregation and transmission of data on its neighboring nodes within the transmission range. Hence, the total data rate increases suddenly in the sensor networks when it detects the event. The sensor data cannot be further forwarded to the neighboring node, if the sensor node runs out of energy or due to network congestion. The sensor network starts to congest when the total link bandwidth between the sensor nodes is smaller than the data rate of the network. Hence the wireless sensor networks are considered as resource scarce, which is manifested in terms of energy, link bandwidth, computing power, etc. In most of the previous works related to sensor networks, the authors tried to increase either energy efficiency through different routing techniques [1–10] or optimize wireless link bandwidth as in [11,12]. The classical routing algorithms like minimum spanning tree [13,14], requires calculation of routing path at every node and results in high computing power to find the optimal path. The use of the distributed algorithm to find the best optimal nearest neighbors for packet forwarding will increase the network's lifetime. The network lifetime is considered as the time until which the first node in the sensor network drains out of energy. When every sensor node is allowed to forward data only to the nearest next neighboring node with optimal performance factor (energy or bandwidth efficiency) along with data aggregation (that converges number of data received from various sources into few messages), the sensor network's lifetime will be maximized as discussed in [15–17]. In [18], the authors have devised a routing technique with both energy and link constraints which will have performance degradation since it is executed in a centralized fashion. In some of the recent works [22–24], energy efficiency is attained by increasing the network coverage (resulted in increased hardware cost), standby cluster head (suffered due to central point of failure if cluster node is dead) and efficient location discovery respectively. The researchers also concluded that the distributed routing algorithm may increase the sensor network's lifetime. The works proposed in [2,5,9,15,17], suggests that using data aggregation in sensor network can utilize bandwidth efficiently. The survey of the papers [25–27] reveals that the performance of the sensor network may also depend on the type of application for which it is used. Therefore, this work proposes a model to tackle bandwidth constraints using link rate allocation and energy constraints using distributed NNT algorithm along with data aggregation considering the issues in the wireless sensor network wildfire application.The rest of the paper is outlined as follows: Section 2 describes some of the research woks in the related area and their significance. Section 3 narrates the various constraints and modules used in the proposed work. Section 4 addresses the overall design of the proposed scheme and the various algorithms used in this work. Section 5 shows the simulation results and performance of the modeled system. Section 6 gives the application details of the proposed work in a model sensor network. Section 7 concludes the paper.Chang and Tassiulas [1] reduced the sensor network traffic by routing the sensed data only based on the sensor node's remaining energy. The authors conclude that this type of routing saves ad hoc network lifetime unlike the other algorithms which try to minimize the absolute consumed power. Schurgers and Srivastava [2] derived a practical routing guideline called gradient based routing based on the energy histogram for uniform resource utilization in the network. They also suggested that robust aggregation of packet streams will reduce the sensor node energy consumption by a factor of two or three. The algorithms proposed in [1,2] did not consider the number of messages transmitted between the neighbors that may result in increased communication cost.Bhardwaj et al. [3] proposed a model for bounding the lifetime of the sensor node to formulate energy constraints. The authors assumed that there was sufficient bandwidth and only one node could act as a source in the sensor network. But in some sensor applications like wild fire monitoring, poisonous gas leakage management system, etc. there is only limited bandwidth and many nodes can simultaneously send data at a particular time. Younis et al. [4] modeled a gateway-based routing technique that finds the optimal path in the network. In this scheme, a central network manager between the sensor clusters is responsible for routing. Chamam and Pierre [14] implemented a centralized tabu search heuristic to tackle the exponentially increasing computation time which is addressing the optimal planning of sensor states for cluster based sensor networks. Senthilkumar et al. [23] discussed honeybee technique for re-election of cluster heads to increase the energy efficiency of sensor networks. In this scheme, when a cluster head goes down, immediately the standby node becomes the cluster head. Thus the sensor network works continuously without any delay in order to choose the next cluster. These techniques are less suitable for sensor networks for two reasons: (i) It needs more computing power (ii) When the central manager node dries out of battery power; the entire network is out of control.Krishnamachari et al. [5] used Greedy Incremental Tree (GIT) heuristic scheme for data aggregation. In this scheme, the aggregation tree was built sequentially that will consume more time when compared to distributed schemes. Cui et al. [6] emphasized that the energy efficiency in a multi-hop routing environment must be supported across all layers of the protocol stack. They devised a cross-layer design based on variable-length TDMA schemes where the slot length is optimally assigned according to the routing requirement of each sensor node. But this technique may not be suitable for large scale sensor networks.Ambühl [7] proposed an approximation algorithm that constructed minimum spanning tree based on the Euclidean distance to reduce the battery power consumption. Ok et al. [8] introduced a new metric for energy cost considering sensor node's remaining energies as well as energy efficiency. This metric gave rise to the distributed energy balanced routing (DEBR) algorithm that increased the life span of sensor network. Misra and Dias Thomasinous [9] suggested a simple, least-time, energy-efficient routing protocol with one-level data aggregation that ensured increased lifetime, reliability and congestion avoidance in sensor networks. Qiu et al. [10] formulated enhanced tree routing (ETR) strategy based on sensor node address assignment schemes. In addition to the parent–child links, ETR also used links to other one-hop neighbors that will lead to a shorter path. It is shown that such a decision can be made with minimum storage and less computing cost. The works in [7–10] considered only the energy efficiency leaving behind the bandwidth efficiency for data forwarding in the sensor network. Hence, the number of network communications is increased whereas the sensor network's lifetime is reduced.Madan and Lall [11] proposed a linear programming and sub-gradient distributed algorithm for routing and maximized the sensor network's lifetime. Chang and Tassiulas [12] formulated a shortest path routing algorithm using sensor link costs. The link costs reflect both the communication energy consumption rates and the residual energy levels between the sensor nodes. This work helps to derive energy constraints that can maximize the sensor node lifetime. But the overhead in executing the algorithm is slightly high and is well suited only for small scale sensor networks. Li et al. [13] proposed a new localized routing algorithm called Incident MST (minimum spanning tree) for broadcasting in wireless adhoc networks. The author concluded that if the total link power was deterministic, then the algorithm might result in high energy efficiency. Cheng et al. [18] discussed the sufficient bandwidth and energy constraints for the sensor nodes to maximize the sensor network's lifetime. The authors proved that ignoring bandwidth constraints on energy efficient algorithms may lead to infeasible routing solutions. They also aggregated received data in order to minimize the number of wireless transmissions between the sensor nodes. These works confirmed that the link bandwidth is also needed for efficient routing in sensor networks.Luo et al. [15] focused on optimizing both data transmission and aggregation costs by dynamically adjusting the route structure when the sensor nodes joined or leaved the network. This algorithm was slightly deviated from real network energy consumption for complex applications. Gallager et al. [16] designed a distributed algorithm that constructed the minimum-weight spanning tree. The sensor network was implemented as a connected undirected graph with distinct edge weights. The nearest neighbor tree algorithm was proposed based on the above scheme. Khan et al. [17] presented NNT algorithms ex the complete graph model where the maximum transmission range of the nodes were large enough so that any pair of nodes could communicate directly with each other. The authors proposed two NNT algorithms: Random-NNT and Coordinate-NNT based on types of ranking the sensor nodes for single hop wireless network. They also modeled UDGNNT (undirected graph NNT) for multi-hop wireless networks and proved that (1) the tree produced by such a distributed algorithm will be of low cost; (2) the NNT paradigm can be used to design a simple dynamic algorithm and (3) the time, message and work complexities of the NNT algorithms are close to the optimal energy constraint for routing.Konstantinidis and Yang [22] show that better energy efficiency can be achieved in a short period when solved in parallel as a multi objective evolutionary problem based on decomposition. The optimization problem has to be devised more problem specific depending on the given application. Molina and Alba [24] proposed a meta-heuristic technique for solving location discovery problem in the sensor network. The authors used a two-stage search procedure that combines minimization of an error norm function with maximization of a maximum likelihood function. This model could be well used to identify the location of the source sensor by which the event location could be detected (for example the location of fire could be detected in wildfire application). Huang et al. [25] discussed Limb prosthesis application using body area sensor networks. The authors exhibited the effectiveness and practicability of the proposed prosthesis training system that used RFID and tags to recognize movement disorders. Huang et al. [26] analyzed underwater sensor network application and suggested routing using forwarding tree trimming mechanism for power efficient communication. The literature study of these papers helped to know about the changes in the behavioral characteristics of the sensor network with respect to the applications for which it is deployed.The above-mentioned sensor routing algorithms that maximized the network lifetime, either assumed sufficient wireless link bandwidth or used centralized routing technique. The key objective of this paper is to provide better network lifetime by combining energy-aware routing heuristics considering bandwidth availability together with data aggregation. First, distributed NNT algorithm is used to find the next neighbor to route the sensor data that makes the network energy efficient [17]. Second, a random bandwidth (based on reserved energy) is allocated for each link between the sensor nodes in order to acquire bandwidth efficiency [18]. The proposed scheme is tested for performance improvement in wireless sensor networks using NS2 simulator. The simulated sensor network implements the data-gathering application called wildfire monitoring system. Each sensor node in the simulation receives temperature data from the neighbor nodes, performs aggregation and sends the resultant data to the next node selected by NNT algorithm. The research simulation shows that the network lifetime is improved on applying such combined heuristics.Wireless sensor network has numerous sensors that are densely deployed randomly in a remote geographic location without human intervention. These sensors are energy-scarce and bandwidth-scarce resources which are used cooperatively to monitor physical or environmental conditions. These sensors are connected to sink node via wireless links. The optimal path between the source node (sensor that generates data) and the sink node is computed using the distributed algorithm [17] that satisfies only energy constraints. This reduces the cost of constructing the minimum spanning tree, decreases the time and work complexity, and reduces the number of message transfers in the proposed work. The proposed model guarantees bandwidth efficiency of the sensor network through application of constraints formulated in [18] at every sensor node to push sufficient amount of data to the network based on available bandwidth. The data received within a time span is aggregated to avoid repetitive data forwarding (that in turn reduces the number of message transfers within the sensor network). If the deviation between the current sensor data and the received data is less, sensor node averages the values and send as a single value. If the value deviates more, then the node forwards the received data without aggregation. Hence, the proposed model reduces the number of message in the network. The modeled wireless sensor network consists of n number of nodes with wireless link bandwidth as B (bits per second). Each sensor node i has initial battery energy Ei(Joules). Each node i generates sensor data at a rate of Ribits per second (Ri>0 if node i is a source, Ri=0 if it is a pure relay node, and Ri<0 if it is a sink). The nodes consume energy on transmitting, receiving and sensing data, and their energy consumption rates are represented as Pt, Prand PsJoules per Bit respectively. Prand Psare assumed to be constants, but Ptis handled differently in the two models: in the uniform model, each node transmits at the same power level Pt; in the non-uniform model, each node can transmit at different power levels. Any node i in the sensor network uses same power to transmit the data throughout its lifetime. But the transmitting power of the sensor node i will be different from the transmitting power of the sensor node j in the network is experimented in the non-uniform model. In simple words, Ptiis not equal to Ptj. The energy-bandwidth constrained routing problem is stated as follows: suppose each node i's rate Riis known and the transmission rate from node i to node j is unknown, then the sources are preselected using NNT algorithm to find the optimal path. Let T be the total network lifetime. The rate allocation problem is to compute the data rate from node i to node j denoted as Rijon each link (i, j), given each node i's Ei, Riand link capacity B, so that the total network lifetime T is maximized and the rate allocation can be accommodated by wireless link capacity and energy reserve. The proposed work is applied in four different scenarios: single disk uniform transmission power model, single disk non-uniform transmission power model, double disk model and data aggregation model.All sensor nodes in the network in this model have symmetric links (same transmission power). The transmission power Ptiof a node i is same as the transmission power Ptjof the neighboring node say j (i.e. Pti=Ptj). The effective transmission range is same as the interference range in the single disk model. Only the strong signals are decoded in this scheme. Let Ni, denote the neighboring nodes of i excluding i itself. The packets are routed to sink node through its neighboring nodes that are calculated using distributed NNT algorithm [17]. The proposed model uses TDMA scheme in which number of time slots assigned to the link between a node i and node j is proportional to the data rate from node i to node j at the MAC layer. Hence, for any node i to be a receiver, the TDMA schedule must guarantee (1) when node i is receiving, it cannot be sending, and (2) when node i is receiving from node j, none of its neighbors except j should be sending. The proof for this sufficient condition is given in [18]. If fidenotes the indicator for receiver, then fi=1 if node i is a receiver or fi=0 if node j is not a receiver as given below(1)fi=1,if∑j∈NiRji>00,if∑j∈NiRji≤0The network lifetime T is maximized by minimizing 1/T. To minimize 1/T, the rates are allocated to each node based on the following three constraints.For any two nodes say i, j in wireless sensor networks, the flow constraint f i,j) is less than or equal to link capacity c(i,j) (i.e. f(i,j)≤c(i,j)). Rijsatisfies the flow conservation at each node as follows(2)∑j∈NiRij−Rji=Ri∀iThe energy constraint denotes the amount of energy spent at each node and is modeled as(3)PsRi+∑j∈NiPrRji+PtRij=Ei/Ti,∀iSince all the nodes transmit sensor data on the same frequency channel, the bandwidth constraint for the network is formulated so that all links in the same collision domain will have bandwidth less than B. If node i acts as a sender, then the sum of all outgoing links should be bound by B, else if node i acts as a receiver, then node i's sending, receiving, and interfering nodes total bandwidth must be utmost B, else the node i's bandwidth constraint is automatically satisfied. These constraints are represented using the given equation(4)∑j∈NiRij+fi⋅∑j∈Ni∑k∈NjRjk≤B,∀iThe constraints for the variables Rijand fiis given as(5)fi={0,1},∀i(6)0≤Rij≤B,∀i,∀jThe sensor nodes are assumed to have asymmetric links, but still use fixed transmission power. Any node i in the network can use Ptito transmit the data to its neighboring node whereas another node j in the same network can use different power Ptj(such that Pti≠Ptj) to transmit the data packets to its neighboring nodes. Hence, the energy constraint is modified as follows(7)PsRi+∑j∈Ni(PrRji+PtiRij)≤Ei/Ti,∀iThe flow constraint is remains the same as in Eq. (2) described in Section 3.2. LetNi+,denotes the neighboring nodes of i that receives from i; andNi−denotes the neighboring nodes that sends data to node i. Hence, the bandwidth constraint for the node to forward data is redefined as follows(8)∑j∈Ni+Rij+fi∑j∈Ni−∑k∈Nj+Rjk≤B,∀iIn the case of single disk model which is described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, the effective transmission range is the same as the interference range. But in reality, the interference range is usually larger than the effective transmission range. Though the nodes located out of radio's transmission range is not strong to receive the data, sometimes can cause interference at others. So, in the double disk model with uniform transmission power, the bandwidth constraint is fixed considering the neighboring nodes that are in the interference range of node i. Let Nidenote the nodes in the transmission range and NiFbe the nodes in the interference range. It is observed that, Ni⊆NiFsince the interference range is always larger than the transmission range. Hence, the bandwidth constraint is changed to(9)∑j∈NiRij+fi∑j∈NiF∑k∈NjRjk≤B,∀iSection 3.2–3.4 provide energy and bandwidth constraints for the basic routing in sensor network without aggregation. Data aggregation is the process of combining one or more data by taking mean, standard deviation, etc. thereby it is used to reduce the number of data transmissions. Simple averaging of data that is received from all the neighboring nodes in a given time span is performed and the averaged value is sent to the next node. For example, if a sensor node receives three different temperature readings like 30°C, 20°C, 40°C from the neighbor nodes, instead of forwarding all these data, the mean value 30°C is sent to the next neighboring node in the network. If sensor detects its own readings deviates more than 40°C compared to the received data from the neighboring nodes, then the sensor simply act as a relay node (Ri=0). Aggregation reduces the number of message transmissions in the sensor network thereby contributes to increase in the sensor network's lifetime. To accommodate the neighboring nodes with different data rates, the low-rate flows are combined with high-rate flows to improve the bandwidth efficiency of the sensor network. To aggregate data from different sources at a closer time frame say 5ms, the flow conservation constraint can be designed as(10)∑j∈NiRij=max{RiRji},j∈Ni∀iThe proposed work comprises of four modules: (i) Finding the shortest route from source node to sink node using distributed NNT algorithm; (ii) Dynamic link rate allocation for sending data; (iii) Maximum life time routing (Heuristics I) and (iv) Optimizing the life path of sensor node using bandwidth constraints (Heuristics II) as shown in Fig. 2. Heuristics I and II are repeated for sensor nodes with uniform transmission power, without uniform power transmission, with data aggregation and without data aggregation.The shortest route from the source node (that originates packet based on temperature value) to the sink node is calculated depending upon the constraints at each sensor node formulated using [18] in this module. The packets are forwarded to the next nearest neighbor using the distributed NNT algorithm as in [17]. The sensor nodes in the network are deployed randomly using a topology generator GenSen [19] and are implemented as a graph G. Any sensor node i possess a distinct identifier (denoted as id(i)) from the totally ordered set. Usually, in a sensor network, sink collects information from all nodes. So we designate sink to be the root of the spanning tree with highest rank in the network. Each sensor node has an omnidirectional antenna. The network is modeled as a UDG (unit disk graph), where any sensor node i can communicate directly to the neighboring node j if and only if there is an edge (link) between them. For a given transmission radius TR, there is an edge d(i,j) between two sensor nodes i and j if and only if d(i,j)≤TR(i.e. both nodes must lie inside TR). Each node in the network chooses a unique rank (random number) and connects only to the higher rank node to rule out cycles, and constructs the spanning tree. The edge is established from a node i to the node j if and only if rank(i)>rank(j). Hence, the NNT algorithm constructs the spanning tree with low complexity. Table 1shows the basic working of NNT algorithm to construct the spanning tree in a single hop network (all nodes lie within TR). In reality, TRis not sufficient to cover all sensor nodes in the network. Hence, UDG-NNT is applied to support such multi-hop outing scheme. The rank of each node i is chosen as shown in Table 2that guarantees every node is connected only to the closest node with higher rank in the network. The selection of node i's rank in the interval [rank(j)−1, rank(j)] (where j is the neighboring node of i) guarantees each node has atleast one neighboring node with higher rank in the network (i.e. rank(j)>rank(i)). Once the rank is calculated, each node i (except sink node s) selects the nearest node among the neighboring nodes and adds an edge to it in the spanning tree. To route the sensor data to sink node, each node uses three type of messages: request, available and connect to perform the algorithm. Each node begins transaction with broadcasting the request message (with its rank and id value) until it finds a neighboring node with higher rank. If the node that receives the request message has higher rank compared to the sender, then it responds the sender with available message (combination of rank and id value). The sender of request message finds the nearest higher ranked node from the rank information collected due to available messages received. Finally, the sender adds an edge to the spanning tree using the connect message (i.e. message (connect, i, j) is sent to j if j is the nearest higher ranked neighboring node of i). The details are given in Table 3.The lifetime of each sensor node in this module is calculated as in [11]. In [11], the authors proposed a distributed algorithm that maximizes the sensor network's lifetime without considering bandwidth constraints. The authors formulated equations that optimized the energy efficiency of the network lifetime without taking into account the bandwidth considerations for a sensor node. In this module, Eqs. (4)–(6) are not utilized to provide sufficient conditions on link bandwidth while forwarding sensor data. Ignoring the bandwidth constraints results in infeasible routing solutions since link bandwidth affects the routing topology and data rate on a link.Heuristic-I works on the shortest paths (in-terms of number of hops) from source to sink node and determines rate on each link using the available bandwidth. The shortest path is calculated based on the distributed algorithm; hence the sensor nodes consume minimal energy as depicted in [17]. The steps in Heuristic-I are described below(1)Calculate the shortest path from the source to sink node using distributed NNT algorithm.Assume source rate is one unit, check bandwidth constraint for each node, and find the most bandwidth contentious node i. Then compute the scale factor ‘a’ as B/LHS, where LHS denotes the required bandwidth of node i's collision domain. Set Δf=min{a/2,Ri};Push out Δf amount of flow from each source to the sink, then update the remaining input flowRi′=Ri−Δffor each source i.Repeat Steps 5–7 eitherRi′or the network is fully saturated.Find the shortest paths for nodes withRi′>0based on the current available nodes and links. Nodes that are saturated on bandwidth constraint Eq. (4) and their neighbors are not eligible for relaying. In case of a tie, give higher priority to nodes with more remaining energy; if there is still a tie, give higher priority to nodes with smaller degree.Decide the scale factor ‘a’ in a similar manner as in Step 2. Let ‘m’ be the amount of flow to the next sensor node calculated asmin{a,Ri′}. If m does not decrease the lifetime, then setΔf=min{a,Ri′};otherwise, set Δf=min{a/2,Ri};Push out ‘Δf’ amount of flow from each source withRi′>0,then update the remaining input flowRi′=Ri−Δf.This module is used to predict the feasible and infeasible routing solutions from the source to sink node. Heuristic-II works as a linear programming mathematical model based on Eqs. (1) and (4) to produce the best optimal solution. Heuristic-II can be narrated as follows(1)Set fi=1 for sink and fi=0 for all other nodes to make the problem linear and solve; update fi=1 if ∑Rji>0; if Eq. (4) is satisfied then return link rates Rij; otherwise, go to Step (2).Compute the shortest paths from sources to the sink using NNT.Set fi=1 for receiving nodes; solve the LP; if ∑Rji>0 and fi=0, update fi=1.Repeat Step (3) until there is no update for fi or the linear program becomes infeasible.If the linear problem converges, output Rijfor all links (i,j) between nodes i and j.If it is infeasible: if ∑Rji=0 and fi=1, set fi=0 and Rji=0 for all j belongs to Ni, solve the linear program again: if it is still infeasible, report infeasible.The simulation is focused to show the relative performance of the shortest path routing using distributed NNT (labeled as SPR), MaxLife routing with energy constraints (MaxLife), Heuristics-I and Heuristics-II. The sensor network is simulated in NS-2 (Network Simulator 2) [21] with 50 nodes. In the simulated sensor network, the sensor nodes are deployed randomly using a standard topology generator which is written in C++ for wireless sensor network called GenSeN [19]. GenSeN is used to perform the deployment of the entire sensor network. The simulated wireless sensor network consists of 50 nodes deployed using random deployment strategy in a 100×100 square region in order to predict the performance of the simulation in collision domain. The simulation is carried out for duration of 1000s and repeated for 15 different deployments. The physical layer selected for wireless communications is IEEE 802.15.4 with TDMA (time division multiple access) scheme at the MAC layer. In this simulation system, the performance of the sensor network is measured in terms of the network congestion and normalized lifetime parameters. The results show that combined heuristics with distributed NNT routing algorithm increases the sensor network lifetime and decreases the computing power needed since it is executed in a distributed fashion with bandwidth and energy constraints.This simulation finds out how the bandwidth constraint can change the routing decision and eventually affect the lifetime of the sensor network. The transmission range is set to 30m. In the uniform transmission power setup, each link has equal weight say 1. Four source nodes are randomly selected from the network, and increasing source rates are applied on them. Source rate is set to be a percentage of link bandwidth. The proposed schemes Heuristic-I and Heuristic-II are compared with MaxLife and the shortest path routing using NNT. The MaxLife and the NNT algorithm is chosen for comparison because it computes the maximum lifetime without considering bandwidth constraint. When there is enough bandwidth, MaxLife gives the optimal solution. SPR uses the shortest paths from sources to the sink by applying NNT algorithm, with link weight representing the transmission power of the node. The vertical lines in figures indicate after this point, increased data rate cannot be put through. Fig. 3shows the average ratio (AVG ratio) of the required bandwidth in each collision domain to the offered bandwidth for this model. It is found that when each source node's data rate Riis increased above 12% of the given link bandwidth, MaxLife starts to congest since some of the sensor nodes in the collision domain require more bandwidth than the available one. The SPR starts to congest when the source rate Riis increased above 15%. Heuristic-I can work without congestion until the load is increased to 18%, and Heuristic-II can support as much as 17%. From the result it is observed that lower the average ratio of required bandwidth; the proposed scheme shows higher bandwidth efficiency. Fig. 4shows the maximum ratio (MAX ratio) between the required and offered bandwidths. After highest maximum ratio is reached, the model stops working. The maximum throughput of the network is derived at the stop point. The results show that when there is enough bandwidth, MaxLife and Heuristic-II achieve the same optimal solution since they did not consider the bandwidth constraint. However, when bandwidth violation occurs, Heuristic-II can still push through 5% more data than MaxLife, and 2% more data than SPR. Heuristic-I can push through 6% more data than MaxLife and 3% more data than SPR, since they combine energy constraints and used NNT algorithm to find the shortest path. Heuristic-II achieves the best performance on lifetime and second best on throughput; Heuristic-I achieves the best performance on throughput, which is consistent with the observation from Fig. 5compared to other two algorithms. Networks with more nodes can achieve longer lifetime than networks with 50 nodes because the workload is shared among more nodes.Transmission range is randomly selected within the range of 25–35m in this simulation. The performance of the non-uniform transmission power model is shown in Figs. 6 and 7. With asymmetrical edges, the performance is consistent with the Uniform Transmission Power model. But the network lifetime is reduced because the disparity in energy consumption is severe. Thus, Heuristic-II can give better result than the other models as shown in Fig. 8.The transmission range in this simulation is chosen as 30m; interference range as 1.7× transmission range and the other data are the same as in Section 5.1. Figs. 9 and 10show the throughput performance of all the four compared algorithms in this model. From the figures, it is observed that when the interference range is larger, there is less chance for channel reuse; therefore the network throughput is less. Fig. 11shows that the network lifetime is increased due to the lower data rate.This simulation computes the network lifetime improvement achieved through the data aggregation method. The solution is compared with the minimum spanning tree generated using NNT algorithm. Assume each node consumes 10% of energy while sending one unit of data. From the observation of Fig. 12, it is observed that there is a dramatic improvement on the network lifetime with data aggregation. Fig. 12 shows that Heuristics-I can push data until source rate is 17% of the link bandwidth. The SPR has stopped working due to congestion when the source rates crosses 14% of the link bandwidth. This indicated a throughput gain of 3% for Heuristics I over SPR. It is observed that the proposed heuristics with data aggregation under energy and bandwidth constraints improved the network performance and reduced the congestion rate of the sensor network.Wireless sensor networks are widely used in environmental applications like wild forest fire detection. Although wild forest fires occur relatively rarely, they must be detected early in order to prevent severe damages. To minimize needless communication between the sensor nodes for this usage, data aggregation technique is used in this paper. The algorithm is experimentally evaluated for continuous wildfire application as described in [20]. In this application, the sensor nodes comprise tiny temperature measuring devices like thermometer that monitors current temperature continuously. When the input to the sensor crosses a threshold value (normally 100°C), the sensor node has to send the temperature value to the sink node. For sending the sensor data, each node utilizes SPR or MaxLife or Heuristic-I or Heuristic-II models. The application details are shown in Fig. 13. The distance between the node and the sink node has to be calculated as in Fig. 14. Figs. 15 and 16show the result of packet forwarding after applying NNT. Figs. 17 and 18depict that the proposed model Heuristic-I and Heuristic-II take less energy to route data to the sink node, thereby improving the network performance in terms of lifetime. The energy efficiency of the proposed heuristics compared to other models is given in Table 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
