@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Memetic algorithms for the job shop scheduling problem with operators

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New neighborhood structures for the job shop scheduling problem with operators (JSO) are proposed and analyzed.A new memetic algorithm is proposed for the JSO that incorporates the neighborhood structures in the local search procedure.An experimental study was conducted showing that the memetic algorithm compares favorably with the state-of-the-art.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metaheuristics,Scheduling with operators,Local search,Memetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The job-shop scheduling problem with operators (JSO) is an extension of the classic job-shop problem in which an operation must be assisted by one of a limited set of human operators, so it models many real life situations. In this paper we tackle the JSO by means of memetic algorithms with the objective of minimizing the makespan. We define and analyze a neighborhood structure which is then exploited in local search and tabu search algorithms. These algorithms are combined with a conventional genetic algorithm to improve a fraction of the chromosomes in each generation. We also consider two different schedule builders for chromosome decoding. All these elements are combined to obtain memetic algorithms which are evaluated over an extensive set of instances. The results of the experimental study show that they reach high quality solutions in very short time, comparing favorably with the state-of-the-art methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we propose some memetic algorithms (MAs) to solve the job-shop scheduling problem with operators (JSO). This problem was proposed in [1] and is motivated by manufacturing processes in which part of the work is done by human operators sharing the same set of tools. The problem is formalized as a classical job shop scheduling problem (JSP) in which the processing of an operation on a given machine requires the assistance of one operator. The number of operators is limited and so some tasks will need to be delayed until an operator is available. In [1], the authors propose a number of exact and heuristics algorithms to solve the JSO. These algorithms are outperformed by the genetic algorithm (GA) proposed in [2] and by the exact best-first search algorithm proposed in [3].Starting from the GA proposed in [2] for the JSO, we introduce herein new versions of the decoding operator, derived from the schedule generation scheme termed OG&T in [3], which allow the GA to search in different spaces. We then turn the GA into a MA by adding a local search procedure. To this aim, we propose and formalize a neighborhood structure for the JSO which is inspired in a structure for the classic JSP. The essential virtue of this structure is that it avoids moves that will not improve the current solution without computing the makespan of the candidate neighbors, thus saving a lot of computation time. This structure is exploited in two local search strategies: hill climbing and tabu search. To assess the performance of the proposed MA, we have conducted a thorough experimental study across instances of different sizes and characteristics. The results of this study show that our approach is among the best performing methods for the JSO.Summarizing, the main contributions of this paper are the following: (1) we define a number of new decoding algorithms for a previous genetic algorithm designed to solve the JSO, (2) we define and formally analyze a new neighborhood structure for the JSO, (3) we design a memetic algorithm that combines the previous genetic algorithm with a tabu search algorithm which incorporates the neighborhood structure in its core. This algorithm outperforms the current state of the art for the JSO, and (4) from the formal and experimental studies carried out on the JSO, we obtained insights that may be useful to devise new algorithms for this problem and some of its variants.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the literature on memetic algorithms and metaheuristics applied to JSP and some of its extensions, such as the JSO. In Section 3 we formally define the JSO and give a disjunctive model to represent schedules. In Section 4 we describe the OG&T schedule generation scheme. Section 5 is devoted to explain and study the proposed neighborhood structure. Section 6 describes the local search algorithms that exploit this neighborhood structure. Section 7 presents the main components of the GA and discuss how to combine the local search algorithms with the GA and the decoding algorithms. Section 8 reports the design and results of the experimental study. Finally, we summarize the main conclusions of the paper and propose some ideas for future research in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have seen that combining hybrid metaheuristics with problem specific neighborhood strategies make it possible to obtain an outstanding procedure to solve the job shop scheduling problem with operators proposed in [1]. We have defined and analyzed a neighborhood structure that was then used as the core of a memetic algorithm that combines a genetic algorithm and tabu search. We have conducted an experimental study over a number of instances of medium and large size. In this study, the proposed memetic algorithm is analyzed and proved to outperform or at least to be quite competitive with the state-of-the-art. The results of the formal and experimental studies carried out on the JSO provide us with useful insights that may help to devise new algorithms to this problem and to some of its variants as well.Therefore, as future work, we will try to devise new neighborhood structures for the JSO. To this end, we will extend other structures proposed for the JSP, which rely on changing the processing order of more than two tasks in the critical path, and we will also consider changing the operator of critical tasks to devise a new class of neighborhood structures. Moreover, we plan to investigate new versions of this problem, for example the scheduling problem with arbitrary precedence relations proposed in [35] in which the operators have different skills, or the JSO with objective functions other than makespan minimization, for example total flow time minimization which was considered in [36] where the authors proposed a partially informed depth first search algorithm. In addition to memetic algorithms, it would be also interesting to consider other hybrid metaheuristics such as, for example, scatter search with path relinking [37], which has demonstrated to be good in solving other problems, for example the JSP with sequence dependent and non-anticipatory setup times [38].