@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi document summarization based on news components using fuzzy cross-document relations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multi-document summarization based on news component.Cross document relation identification using Genetic-CBR approach.Fuzzy reasoning for sentence scoring.Proposed model performs better compared to mainstream methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi document summarization,News components,Cross-document structure theory (CST),Case-based reasoning,Genetic algorithm,Fuzzy logic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Online information is growing enormously day by day with the blessing of World Wide Web. Search engines often provide users with abundant collection of articles; in particular, news articles which are retrieved from different news sources reporting on the same event. In this work, we aim to produce high quality multi document news summaries by taking into account the generic components of a news story within a specific domain. We also present an effective method, named Genetic-Case Base Reasoning, to identify cross-document relations from un-annotated texts. Following that, we propose a new sentence scoring model based on fuzzy reasoning over the identified cross-document relations. The experimental findings show that the proposed approach performed better that the conventional graph based and cluster based approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The work on automatic text summarization can be dated back to the late 1950s [1]. Since then, the field of text summarization has witnessed continuous involvement by many researchers in the attempt to look for different strategies to automate text summarization [2–4]. The common goal of automatic text summarization is analogous to the reason why humans create summaries from text; i.e. to present a concise version of the original text to the reader. The need for automatic text summarization is even deemed necessary in the current Internet age.With the fast growing of World Wide Web (WWW), access to online information had lead to the problem of information overload. Online news surfing provides readers with many articles since it involves multiple news sources. Google News, Columbia NewsBlaster and News In Essence are some of the popular online based news clustering systems that were built to alleviate information overload faced by netizens [5]. As aforementioned, Newsblaster, which is a fully deployed online news system, was built to summarize news from the Web [6]. The system identifies news stories through Web crawling and clusters them to specific topics.One of the most common methods used in text summarization field is the feature based method. In the process of identifying important sentences, features influencing the relevance of sentences are determined. Some features that are often considered for sentence selection are word frequency, title words, cue words, sentence location and sentence length [2]. These features often increase the candidacy of a sentence for inclusion in summary. Feature based method are however commonly used for single document summarization. In the case of multi document summarization, two mainstream methods often employed are the cluster based method and the graph based method [7].In this study, the aim of our research is to produce high quality multi document news summaries by taking into account the generic components of a news story; such as who, what, when, where and how. We believe that providing such contextual information coverage would be ideal for news summary creation. In this work, we deal with news stories related to natural disaster events; for example earthquakes, hurricanes, floods and others.Since we are dealing with news stories, news documents which are related to the same topic usually contain semantically related textual units. This has motivated us to further investigate the utility of cross-document relations for identifying highly relevant sentences to be included in the summary. Radev [8] has initially proposed the idea of cross-document relations that exist in topically related documents. He came up with CST (Cross-document Structure Theory) model which describes the semantic relations between textual units such as words, phrases or sentences. In this study, we consider the semantic relations between sentences, for example, the relation between two sentences can be Identity, Overlap, Description, and etc. Complete descriptions on the CST relationship types can be found in Ref. [8].The need for automatic identification of cross-document relation is indeed necessary for task related to multi document summarization. It is not efficient to be dependent on humans to perform such task for an automated system. Therefore, in this work, we will identify the cross-document relations from un-annotated documents by incorporating a novel integration of the genetic learning algorithm and the case base reasoning (CBR) model that is tailored to the task of classification. Following that, we propose a new sentence scoring model based on fuzzy reasoning over the identified cross-document relations. Then, based the fuzzy scoring, top ranking sentences will be selected to produce the multi document summary. Details on the overall architecture will be discussed later in Section 3.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents related works to this study. Section 3 outlines the overview of the approach together with the extraction process of the news component sentences. The cross-document relation identification using the Genetic-CBR approach is given in Section 4, while the fuzzy reasoning implementation is given in Section 5. Section 6 describes the experimental setting and results. We finally end with conclusions in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
