@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A trust-based performance measurement modeling using t-norm and t-conorm operators

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study presents an efficient model for analysing the outputs of performance measurement methodologies, by means of trust.This is the first attempt to implement the concept of trust in terms of performance measurement.Comprehensive synthetic data set is generated in fifteen scenarios to the applicability of the proposed model.t-Norms, t-conorms and time series modeling are utilized for the modeling in this study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Performance assessment,Trust,Data fusion,t-Norm and t-conorm operators,Time series modeling,Auto regressive model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In today's highly dynamic economy and society, performance assessment of decision making units (DMUs) is a problem of great significance. In order to make efficient decisions and beneficial improvements, decision makers and top management need to have a comprehensive view over capabilities and performance of DMUs which could be defined as organizational units. This study presents an efficient model for analyzing the outputs of performance measurement methodologies, by means of trust that provides explicit qualitative scales rather than pure numerical data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt for implementing the concept of trust in terms of performance measurement. In order to develop the structure of our proposed framework, fifteen scenarios are established based on number of DMUs and timeslots. These scenarios form the basis of the proposed structure. The efficiency rate of current, previous and upcoming years, as well as the average efficiency and standard deviation, are five inputs for this model. The approach incorporates time series forecasting to predict the future efficiency rate. Furthermore, auto correlation function (ACF) is used as the input selection in time series context. The model utilizes t-norms and t-conorms as the final modeling tools. To show the applicability and superiority of the proposed model, it is applied to a data set which is provided by running a simulation structured by a unique logic. The results provided by this model are more user-centric and have been represented in a potentially more transparent and intelligible way for decision makers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fundamental changes in the business context have formed a competitive environment which forces companies to constantly improve their performance in order to survive. Managers are working in such a complex area in which it is vital to establish the right goals and implement the necessary improvements to achieve them [1]. When we are speaking of performance assessment of DMUs it can involve the efficiency of staff or different departments of an organization, academic performance of students in a class or other similar instances. In order to implement measurement that lead to future improvements, an in-depth analysis of the history of an organization is required that helps to predict future trends more precisely. Consequently, it appears that the performance measurement of any organization is a significant requirement for monitoring their performance [2]. Besides, with the widespread adoption of the internet, performance assessment has taken greater significance, particularly when it comes to e-transactions.Assessing the performance of all parties is highly significant in business to business and cyber transactions. Therefore trust is a key component in this area; as it provides explicit qualitative scales and thereby increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the decision makers. Trust is a crucial ingredient in any bilateral relationship and it is a broadly implemented concept that can be found in a number of areas such as sociology, business and computing.Chang et al. [3] provided a detailed and comprehensive definition for trust: “The belief that the Trusting Agent has in the Trusted Agent's willingness and capability to deliver a mutually agreed service in a given context and in a given timeslot”. Trust value could be defined as a numeric value which represents the amount of trust that the Trusting Agent has in the Trusted Agent in a specific context and timeslot.Two major trends can be considered in the case of trust modeling: ‘Trust determination’ and ‘Trust prediction’. Trust determination is the process of establishing the trust value of an entity, either quantitatively or qualitatively, either in the past or during the current point in time, and Trust prediction is the process of determining the trust value of an entity, either quantitatively or qualitatively, at a future point in time [4].Performance assessment techniques generally provide purely numerical data with little or no semantics associated with the values. They need a great deal of analysis in order to produce meaningful results for the decision makers [5]. This shortcoming can be addressed by including the concept of trust in the performance assessment. The integrated approach is able to provide more user-centric results which would be more intelligible to both decision makers and end users.It should be noted that the mentioned issue is of great significance in the field of humanities. Trust values represent human-centric information, while fuzzy and granular computing is a frontier approach to deal with human-centric problems. Therefore t-norm and t-conorm, which are important and usable fuzzy operators based on their flexibility and variability, have been used for the first time to model trust value in performance assessment area. The main objective of this study is to demonstrate efficiency score as the trust values in the field of performance assessment. In order to show the applicability of the proposed model, comprehensive scenarios have been simulated in three states: short, middle and long term data sets. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that defines efficiency score as the trust values. This model could be useful in area of human-centric information based models that transform scalar data to linguistic ones.The paper is organized as follows. In the next section the body of literature is reviewed. Section 3 describes our proposed methodology of trust determination for the performance assessment. The application of the methodology to the simulated data set is presented in Section 4. Section 5 offers conclusions and suggestions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
