@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rule induction for hierarchical attributes using a rough set for the selection of a green fleet

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Develop a solution approach to resolve the hierarchical rough set problem.Explore the most specific decision attribute level by level in the level-search procedure.Apply the proposed approach to the case in the transportation industry to select green fleets.This corporation reduces pollution emissions over the long-term by choosing the green vehicles in a desired ratio.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Green fleet selection,Rough set theory,Concept hierarchy,Decision rules,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rough set theory (RST) has been the subject of much study and numerous applications in many areas. However, most previous studies on rough sets have focused on finding rules where the decision attribute has a flat, rather than hierarchical structure. In practical applications, attributes are often organized hierarchically to represent general/specific meanings. This paper (1) determines the optimal decision attribute in a hierarchical level-search procedure, level by level, (2) merges the two stages, generating reducts and inducting decision rules, into a one-shot solution that reduces the need for memory space and the computational complexity and (3) uses a revised strength index to identify meaningful reducts and to improve their accuracy. The selection of a green fleet is used to validate the superiority of the proposed approach and its potential benefits to a decision-making process for transportation industry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rough set theory (RST) was developed by Pawlak [48] to classify imprecise, uncertain, or incomplete information or knowledge that is expressed using data that is acquired from experience. The main advantage of rough set theory is that it does not require any preliminary or additional information about data: such as statistical probability, the basic probability assignment that is required for the Dempster–Shafer theory, or the grade of membership or the value of the possibility that is required for fuzzy set theory [28], so it has become the subject of an increasing number of studies and applications in many areas.However, most of the previous studies on rough sets have focused on finding rules where a decision attribute is not hierarchical, but on the same level. In real-world applications, attributes are usually predefined hierarchically and can be represented by a conceptual hierarchy using hierarchical trees [35]. Some RS methods use two stages to generate reducts and then induce decision rules, e.g., a reduct extraction algorithm (REA) and an alternative reduct extraction algorithm (AREA) [44]. A large computational space is required to store the reducts at the first stage and the search for a solution is complex. In previous studies, the reducts often are often compared using the strength index (SI), which was introduced to identify meaningful reducts [13]. However, the use of a SI is limited to the same number of condition attributes and the results may not provide accurate hierarchical attributes. SI is a method of averaging the weights of attributes that are selected in the reducts.To address the drawbacks of previous studies, the method proposed by this paper achieves the following objectives:(1)The two stages (generating reducts and inducting decision rules) are merged, to reduce memory space and computational complexity.A revised strength index is used to identify meaningful reducts from all of the reducts, rather than from a part of the attributes that are selected in the reducts.The most specific decision attribute is determined, level by level, in the level-search procedure.The remainder of this study is organized as follows: Section 2 surveys the literature related to rough set theory. The HRS problem and the level-search procedure are detailed in Section 3. The proposed method is detailed in Section 4. A case from the transportation industry is addressed in Section 5, to show how the decision rules are inducted and to validate the superiority of the proposed approach. The decision rules that are inducted by the proposed method allow netter decision-making processes for the purchase of new fleets. Section 6 provides concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Traditional rough set theory focuses on identifying rules where a decision attribute is not hierarchical, but in the same level. This study proposes a method to induct decision rules between hierarchical attributes that are usually predefined in real-world applications. Compared to the traditional RS approach, the proposed method is more effective and accurate because it (1) merges the two stages, generating reducts and inducting decision rules, into a one-shot solution, (2) it uses a revised strength index to identify meaningful reducts from all of the reducts, rather than from the same number of attributes selected in the reducts, and (3) it explores the decision rules of the hierarchical decision attributes in different combinations of levels.A case of the transportation industry is studied and twelve practical decision rules are produced. The results show that (1) all qualified decision rules can be found, (2) the optimal level outcome is specific, rather than at the universal level and (3) there is better accuracy and coverage for each rule. Consequently, using these rules, Company ABC becomes greener as the fleets place more importance on lowering the CO2 levels of vehicles by including this as a criterion in the purchasing process. Company ABC has changed: Finance directors and vehicle users are much more forensic in their approach to assessing the impact of fleet vehicles, rather than the cost. Environmental considerations are also prevalent, not least because of Taiwanese government regulations. Consequently, Company ABC's image is improved and the profit is increased because the environmental regulations are fulfilled by using these rules when making decisions about the selection of fleets.In the future, further solid studies are required:(1)The hierarchical condition attributes andthe induction of multiple-outcome oriented rules. The evaluation of multiple outcomes is particularly important for problems concerning the selection of actions (e.g., medical treatments) based on outcomes. The Multi-Attribute Value (MAV) model addresses the ordinal scale issue and the uniform weight for evaluating multiple outcomes. The MAV methodology can define the interval scale and addresses the problem of uneven weight that is encountered in this study.Future studies might also consider the fuzzy characteristic rules in an attribute-oriented database: Current knowledge discovery techniques cannot efficiently elicit the decision (characteristic) rules from imprecise or uncertain data models. Therefore, a systematic methodology for this process must be developed.