@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of constant amplitude fatigue crack growth life of 2024 T3 Al alloy with R-ratio effect by GP

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A genetic programming approach (GP) for predicting fatigue crack growth rate (da/dN) of Al-alloy has been described.The crack growth rate has been calculated by using an exponential model from experimental crack length (a) and number of cycles (N) data which has been subsequently used as training data base for GP model formulation along with load ratio (R), maximum stress intensity factor (Kmax) and stress intensity factor rage (ΔK).The validity of the proposed GP model has been confirmed by comparing the model prediction by experimental data and also with previously proposed ANN model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Genetic programming,Artificial neural network,Fatigue crack growth life,Fatigue crack growth rate,Load ratio,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this study is to develop a genetic programming (GP) based model to predict constant amplitude fatigue crack propagation life of 2024 T3 aluminum alloys under load ratio effect based on experimental data and to compare the results with earlier proposed ANN model. It is proved that genetic programming can effectively interpret fatigue crack growth rate data and can efficiently model fatigue life of the material system under investigation in comparison to ANN model.crack length (mm) measured from the edge of the platecrack length corresponding to the ‘ith’ step/initial crack lengthfinal crack length (mm)crack length corresponding to the ‘(i + 1)th’ step (mm)specimen thicknesscrack growth rate (mm/cycle)remotely applied load (N)geometrical factorstress intensity factor (MPa√m)maximum stress intensity factor (MPa√m)stress intensity factor range (MPa√m)specific growth ratenumber of cycles corresponding to the ‘ith’ stepnumber of cycles corresponding to the ‘(i+1)th’ stepfinal (ANN) number of cyclesfinal (GP) number of cyclesfinal (experimental) number of cyclesprediction ratio of ANN modelprediction ratio of GP modelload ratioplate width (mm)thickness (mm)

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Load bearing components and structures contain defects/imperfections either at the time of manufacturing or during service. These defects ultimately lead to cracks under fatigue loading which grow to a critical size leading to catastrophic failure. Therefore, the growth of these cracks should be predictable to provide guidelines for suitable inspection intervals, which ensure that cracks will never propagate and fail prior to detection. In predicting fatigue crack growth life, stress intensity factor range (ΔK) is generally utilized as a crack driving force. However, the apparent effectiveness of ΔK is known to be affected by the load ratio R (minimum load/maximum load), crack closure, overload, crack size, environment, microstructure, geometry, temperature, etc. [1]. The primary loading parameter affecting the fatigue crack growth is the load ratio R, which quantifies the influence of mean load. It is well known that the growth rate either increases or decreases by increasing the value of load ratio under different loading conditions [2–4]. Therefore, the ability to correlate and predict the fatigue crack growth rate for different load ratios is of significant importance.Problems associated with fatigue are difficult to solve using conventional mathematical models because of non-linearity, noise, cost, time constraint and above all the associated micro-mechanisms. Soft-computing is a good alternative for handling those complex problems as it is tolerant of imprecision, uncertainty and partial truth. Till date various soft-computing methods e.g. artificial neural network (ANN) [5–7], fuzzy logic [8] and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) [9,10] have been used in the field of fatigue. However, prediction of fatigue life using genetic programming (GP) is lacking. In the present work an attempt has been made to predict fatigue life of 2024 T3 aluminum alloy under the influence of load ratio by applying genetic programming. The predicted result has been compared with experimental results as well as the results obtained from one of the authors’ previously proposed [11] artificial neural network model. The results show that GP gives better prediction than ANN.Genetic programming (GP) is a domain-independent problem-solving technique in which computer programs are evolved to solve, or approximately solve, the problems. This technique is based on the Darwinian principle of reproduction and survival of the fittest. Genetic programming addresses one of the central goals of computer science, namely automatic programming; which is to create a computer program that enables a computer to solve a problem.In genetic programming, first the initial population of random organisms consisting of the available function and terminal genes is generated. The organisms are in fact computer programs of various shapes and sizes and are represented by tree-like structure. The performance of each model in the population is evaluated by its fitness function. For example, the fitness of an individual computer program in the population may be measured in terms of the sum of the absolute value of the differences between the predicted output produced by the program and the desired output or the square root of the sum of the squares (i.e., Euclidean distance). The Darwinian principle of reproduction and survival of the fittest and the genetic operations of crossover and mutation are used to create a new offspring population of individual computer programs from the current population.After the genetic operations have performed on the current population, the new population of offspring (the new generation) is created from randomly chosen set of parents. Each individual in the new population is then measured for fitness (or error), and the process is repeated over many generations until the termination criterion is satisfied. After reaching maximum number of generations, the algorithm converges at a near-optimum for the problem model.In this research, the experimental set up and database created from the fatigue tests are based on the previous work of one of the present author [12]. In that work, material was 7020 T7 aluminum alloy and the crack growth rate prediction was done by analytical method i.e. “Exponential model”. In the present study, 2024 T3 aluminum alloy which is suitable for air-craft structure, has been selected and GP tool has been adopted to predict the crack growth rate. The chemical composition and mechanical properties of the alloy have been given in Tables 1 and 2respectively.The constant amplitude fatigue tests were conducted using single-edge notch (SEN) specimen whose auto CAD front and isometric views have been given in Fig. 1a and b respectively. The fatigue tests were performed at room temperature on a servo-hydraulic dynamic testing machine (Instron-8502) having a load capacity of 250kN with a frequency of 6Hz. Pre-cracking was done under mode-I loading (crack opening mode) with a sinusoidal wave form to an a/w ratio of 0.3. The specimens were then subjected to constant amplitude load tests (i.e. progressive increase in ΔK with crack extension) maintaining different load ratios (R) of 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 and 0.8 respectively. The crack growth was monitored with the help of a crack opening displacement (COD) gauge mounted on the face of the machined notch. The stress intensity factors at every instant ahead of the crack tip were calculated by using the following equations:(1)K=f(g).FπawBwhere(2)f(g)=1.12−0.231aw+10.55aw2−21.72aw3+30.39aw4It should be noted that in fatigue crack growth tests, the residual life of the machine components is predicted which helps in scheduling inspection interval for repair/replacements of parts to avoid catastrophic failure. For this purpose, crack growth rate (da/dN) is an important parameter which is required to calculate the number of cycles to failure, N (i.e. fatigue life). Load ratio (R) has strong influence on crack growth rate (da/dN) which increases as R value increases.The determination of fatigue crack growth rate from raw laboratory data is of course, a tedious task because of large amount of scatter. There are several methods proposed earlier, out of which the exponential equation method [13] proposed by one of the present author has been proved to be better as it is possible to fit the entire a – N data in a single equation. The same method has been adopted in this work to determine the crack growth rate which is described below.It has been already established [13] that the experimental a – N data can be well fitted by an exponential equation of the form:(3)aj=aiemij(Nj−Ni)where aiand aj=crack length in ith step and jth step in ‘mm’ respectively, Ni and Nj=no. of cycles in ith step and jth step respectively, mij=specific growth rate in the interval i–j, i=no. of experimental steps, and j=i+1.In the above equation the exponent ‘mij’ (i.e. specific growth rate) is an important parameter which can be obtained by taking logarithm of Eq. (3) as follows:(4)mij=ln(aj/ai)(Nj−Ni)The raw values of specific growth rate (mij) from experimental a–N data are calculated using the above equation. These are then fitted with corresponding crack lengths by a polynomial curve-fit which gives a 3rd order polynomial equation of ‘m’ vs. ‘a’. To get a better result, crack lengths (modified) at small increments (0.005mm) are obtained in excel sheet keeping the initial and final values (recorded from fatigue test) intact. Using the above polynomial equation the new (smoothened values) of mijare obtained which can be subsequently used to get the smoothened values of the number of cycles as per the following equation:(5)Nj=ln(aj/ai)mij+NiFinally, the crack growth rates (da/dN) are calculated directly by using the above calculated ‘N’ values and modified ‘a’ values as follows:(6)dadN=(aj−ai)(Nj−Ni)The smoothened values of a–N and da/dN–ΔK plots have been presented in Figs. 2 and 3which illustrate the respective superimposed experimental data sets of different load ratios (R=0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 and 0.8), including base line data of 2024 T3 Al alloys. These smoothened crack growth rate (da/dN) data for all the load ratios along with their corresponding crack driving forces such as maximum stress intensity factor (Kmax) and stress intensity factor range (ΔK) were taken for the development of GP model.The main aim of the present investigation was to employ genetic programming technique to predict crack growth rate of 2024 T3 Al alloy under constant amplitude loading with load ratio effect. To reach the stated goal, the whole experimental data consisting of six sets having different load ratios (R=0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, and 0.8) were divided into training and validation sets. The training set was constructed with five sets with R=0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8 while the remaining one set with R=0.5 was left for validation set. The training data set for a particular load ratio was consisted of three inputs i.e. load ratio (R), maximum stress intensity factor (Kmax) and stress intensity factor range (ΔK) and one output i.e. crack growth rate (da/dN) containing 98 experimental values each whereas, the validation data set was consisted of 65 experimental values. The limit values of input and output variables used in the GP model are listed in Table 3.The next step was to set various parameters such as population size, number of generations, function set, mutation rate, crossover rate etc. for efficient learning of GP tool. The optimum combination of values of above parameters was achieved by the performance of several trials as given in Table 4. The function set in GP model is generally selected depending on the nature of the problem being handled. In this study, the fitness functions used in the modeling were correlation coefficient (R) and mean squared error (MSE) as given by the following equations.(7)R=∑i=1n((da/dN)experimental−(da/dN)experimental′)((da/dN)predicted−(da/dN)predicted′)∑((da/dN)experimental−(da/dN)experimental′)2((da/dN)predicted−(da/dN)predicted′)2(8)MSE=∑i=1n((da/dN)experimental−(da/dN)predicted)2nwhere (da/dN)experimental and (da/dN)predicted are the experimental and predicted crack growth rates,(da/dN)experimental′and(da/dN)predicted′are their corresponding mean values and ‘n’ is the number of observations.The genetic programming was initiated with 1000 randomly generated computer programs (as expression trees). Trees initialization was performed with the ramped half-and-half method [14]. The method of selection for reproduction and crossover was tournament selection with a group size of 5. During the process, computer programs were evolved to describe the relation between the input and output i.e. output=f (input). The explicit formulation based on GP model for crack growth rate was obtained as a function of experimental parameters as:(9)dadN=f(R,Kmax,ΔK)Then, each program was evaluated by its fitness function described earlier and best individual was selected. The genetic operations of crossover and mutation were used to create next generation.After the genetic operations were performed on the current population, the new population of offspring (the new generation) was evaluated and then measured for fitness (or error). The process was repeated until the termination criterion was satisfied. In the present investigation, the termination criterion was maximum number of generations i.e. 7000 generations. After reaching maximum number of generations the best computer program (CP) was designated as the result of genetic programming. With the existing parameters (Table 4) of present GP model, the simulated evolution produced the best model for prediction of crack growth rate (da/dN) explicit formulation is given by the following equation.(10)dadN=3.4[(1−R)∗Kmax2]−(ΔK)4Fig. 4shows the final tree structure of the GP model. The above equation shows that the inputs (Kmax and ΔK) have relevance on the output (da/dN) along with load ratio (R). The dependence of stress intensity factor range (ΔK) and maximum stress intensity factor (Kmax) on crack growth rate (da/dN) has also been experimentally observed by other researchers [15,16] in fatigue crack growth study. The flow-chart describing the step-by-step procedure for prediction of crack growth rate of 2024 T3 Al alloy using GP has been shown in Fig. 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
