@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Generalized fuzzy data envelopment analysis methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We firstly revealed the necessity of sample decision making unit and improved the α-cut approach, the types of fuzzy number and the selected special point when evaluating Fuzzy DEA model.We proposed generalized fuzzy DEA methods.We proposed new evaluating methods based on vector for fuzzy DEA model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy mathematical programming,Sample decision making unit,Fuzzy data envelopment analysis,Efficiency,α-cut,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The conventional data envelopment analysis (DEA) measures the relative efficiencies of a set of decision making units (DMUs) with exact values of inputs and outputs. In real-world problems, however, inputs and outputs typically have some levels of fuzziness. To analyze a DMU with fuzzy input/output data, previous studies provided the fuzzy DEA (FDEA) model and proposed an associated evaluating approach. Nonetheless, numerous deficiencies must be improved, including the α-cut approaches, types of fuzzy numbers, and ranking techniques. Moreover, a fuzzy sample DMU (SDMU) still cannot be evaluated for the FDEA model. Therefore, the present paper proposes a generalized FDEA model which can evaluate SDMU and the traditional FDEA model. Five evaluation methods are provided and these methods not only improve the types of FDEA model, the types of fuzzy number, the α-cut approach but also firstly propose a new evaluation method based on vector. At last related algorithm and ranking methods are provided to test our new methods. A numerical experiment is used to demonstrate and compare the results with those obtained using alternative approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The data envelopment analysis (DEA) technique was introduced in the C2R paper by Charnes et al. [1] (1978). Since its introduction, DEA has been developed by numerous studies. A large number of studies on DEA assume that both input and output data are crisp and have a specific case. In more general cases, the data for evaluation are often collected from investigations employing a polling approach, where in natural language, such as good, medium, and bad, are used to represent a type of general situation of the examined entities rather than a specific case. Thus, several studies proposed the fuzzy DEA (FDEA) model for input and output data [2]. However, there are still many places that need to be improved, such as the selected special point, the types of fuzzy number, the α-cut or α-level approach and the type of the FDEA model when evaluating FDEA model. Furthermore, the target decision making units (DMUs) of traditional DEA models are limited to internal DMUs that cannot evaluate a sample DMU (SDMU). To date, only a few studies have discussed the evaluation methods for an SDMU.For the FDEA model, numerous evaluation approaches have been proposed. Meada et al. [3] formulated two DEA models. One model provides an upper limit (best case) efficiency, and the other model gives a lower limit (worst case) efficiency. Kao and Liu [4] also investigated fuzzy BCC models, and the idea behind their development is similar to that proposed by Meada et al., which falls into the parametric programming category. However, Kao and Liu called their approach the “α-cut” approach. In their approach the proposed membership function is LR fuzzy number. Guo and Tanaka [6] evaluated the fuzzy C2R model using symmetric triangular membership function. In their method three different efficiencies are provided in different h-level and parameter t and they firstly proposed center efficiency value. However, some of the DMUs efficiency values are greater than 1 in Guo and Tanaka's approach. Saati et al. [5] studied the fuzzy C2R model using asymmetrical triangular fuzzy numbers and they ranked the fuzzy DMUs according to the given α-cut. The basic idea was to transform the fuzzy C2R model into a crisp linear programming problem using an alternative α-cut technique. Same as the Guo and Tanaka approach, some of the DMUs efficiency values in Saati et al's are greater than 1. Lertworasirikul et al. [7] analyzed the Fuzzy CCR model using trapezoidal fuzzy numbers, which introduced the idea of treating constraints as fuzzy events. This approach proposed fully efficient and α-possibilistic efficient definition according to that the efficiency value of the target DMU is equal or greater than 1 and they studied more cases (best–best, best–worst, worst–best, worst–worst) compared with the method proposed by Guo and Tanaka. At the same year Lertworasirikul et al. [8] studied fuzzy BCC model with normal or convex fuzzy numbers using credibility approach. Wang et al. [9] proposed a minimax regret-based approach (MRA), which is introduced to compare and rank the efficiency interval of DMUs. Punyangarm et al. [11] proposed fuzzy stochastic DEA model based on credibility approach and summarized previous approaches. León et al. [10] investigated the FDEA model using the L-R fuzzy number. They developed certain fuzzy versions of the classical DEA model (particularly, the BCC model) using several ranking methods based on a comparison of α-cut approach. Jahanshahloo et al. [12] also studied the FDEA model using a generalized L-R fuzzy number. They proposed a ranking method using l1-norm. Wang et al. [13] studied fuzzy data envelopment analysis based upon fuzzy arithmetic and provide lower, middle and upper efficiency value of the target DMUs. Wen et al. [14] evaluated the FDEA model using a quasiconcave membership function. A fuzzy comparison of fuzzy variables was defined, and the C2R model was extended into an FDEA model based on credibility measure. Hatami-Marbini et al. [15] proposed an ideal-seeking fuzzy data envelopment analysis framework. In this study, they presented a four-phase FDEA framework based on the theory of displaced ideal. The first step determined the best and worst relative efficiency of the target DMU, the second step determined the best and worst efficiency of DMUj, the third step calculated the relative closeness of the DMUs and the last step ranked the DMUs according to their relative closeness. Furthermore, they studied more detailedly for the input and output data than other. Angiz et al. [16] proposed a four-stage approach based on DEA in the fuzzy environment to aggregate preference rankings. Angiz et al. [17] also introduced an alternative linear programming model that can include some uncertainty information from the intervals within the α-cut approach. Khoshfetrat and Daneshcar [18] studied fuzzy CCR model and proposed a new method for determining the lower bounds of fuzzy inputs and outputs. This improves the weak efficiency frontiers of the corresponding production possibility set. The author recently [19] proposed a fuzzy data envelopment analysis approach based on sample decision making units. In this paper the author firstly revealed the necessity of sample decision making unit model and improved the α-cut approach, the types of fuzzy number and the selected special point when evaluating FDEA model.Besides the above study about the evaluating method of FDEA model, a large number of studies introduced the application of the FDEA model [20–27]. However, because of the complexity of the presented method it is difficult for most of practitioners to apply the method into the practical problems.From the above analyses of the FDEA model, the following seven conclusions can be drawn:•Most of the FDEA models that the researchers studied are special DEA models, such as CCR model BCC model.The membership functions of fuzzy numbers are assumed to be special membership functions, such as triangular, trapezoidal, L-R, and generalized L-R membership functions, and often, the same membership function for one FDEA model was used. In fact, there are many fuzzy numbers [28–33] besides the above membership function.The efficiency value of the fuzzy DMU was provided after replacing all the fuzzy DMUs with one of the DMUs of this fuzzy DMU. Most of the replaced DMUs are either the best or the worst DMUs of the fuzzy DMU.The procedures that solve the FDEA model used the same α-cut or parametric programming approach.The procedures that solved the FDEA used the ranking approach.The procedures that solved the FDEA used tolerance approach.The procedures that solved the FDEA used possibility approach.The above-mentioned facts indicate that studies on FDEA models still focus on the special DEA model and fuzzy number and often apply only a single fuzzy number and the α-cut approach to one FDEA model. The ranking methods still have several limitations, and the selected DMUs, after applying α-cut, still remain as special DMUs. More important to the above conclusions is that these evaluation methods still cannot analyze a fuzzy sample DMU (SDMU). To address the above limitations of the FDEA model, the present paper proposes a generalized FDEA (GFDEA) model. The GFDEA model not only generalized the FDEA model but also contained the two key model-DEA models, which are the FDEA model with fuzzy sample target DMU and the FDEA model with sample target DMU. Five new evaluating methods are provided to both generalize the types of fuzzy numbers, the selected special point and the α-cut approach and to improve the traditional evaluating method of FDEA model. In these methods, k−λ−level (0≤k, λ≤1) efficiency methods not only contain most of the evaluating methods proposed by early study, but also firstly propose a new evaluation method based on vector. At last, related algorithm and ranking methods are proposed to illustrate our evaluating methods and demonstrate how our methods solve the practical problems.The present paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the FDEA models and their efficiencies. Section 3 discusses the proposed GFDEA model. Section 4 provides five evaluation methods for the GFDEA model. Section 5 presents the algorithm and ranking methods of GFDEA, and Section 6 gives numerical examples to demonstrate the concept. Section 7 discussed about the proposed method. Section 8 closes with the conclusion and future research directions.The most frequently used DEA model is the C2R model, named after Charnes et al. [1]. The model assumes that there are n DMUs, each of which consumes the same type of inputs and produces the same type of outputs. Furthermore, the model supposes m to be the number of inputs and r as the number of outputs. All inputs and outputs are assumed to be nonnegative and at least one input and one output are positive. The following notations will be used throughout the current paper:NotationsDMUiith DMU,ith fuzzy DMU,target DMU,target fuzzy DMU0,target sample DMU,target fuzzy sample DMU,column vector of inputs consumed by DMUi,column vector of inputs consumed by the target DMU,column vector of inputs consumed by the target SDMU,matrix of inputs of all DMUs,column vector of outputs consumed by DMUi,column vector of outputs consumed by the target DMU,column vector of outputs consumed by the target SDMU,matrix of outputs of all DMUs,column vector of a linear combination of n DMUs,objective value (efficiency) of the DEA model,column vector of input weights,column vector of output weights, and To all the above vectors, the symbol “∼” was added to indicate fuzziness. For example,represents the column vector of fuzzy inputs consumed by FDMUi.After improving the crisp input/output data as fuzzy input/output data, the following compositive FDEA model is obtained as(1)CFPmaxμTY˜0−δ1μ0,s.t.ωTX˜j−μTY˜j+δ1μ0≧0,j=1,2,…,n,ωTX˜0=1,ω≧0,μ≧0,δ1δ2(−1)δ3μ0≧0.Example 1Analyzing the FDMUs in Table 1. The universe of discourse to which the fuzzy numbers belong is considered to be a continuous closed interval.Fig. 1presents the plane graph of FDMUs. In Fig. 2, we provide four DMUs composed of the center points of FDMUs. Figs. 1 and 2 show that some differences exist between FDMUs and DMUs. For instance, the DMUs of the DEA model are limited to the point where the FDMUs of the FDEA model are domain. Therefore, DMUs and FDMUs have different efficiency definitions.A potential method for evaluating FDMUs in the FDEA model is to turn the FDEA into a crisp DEA model [3]. Afterwards, the DEA model to which the FDEA would be turned into must be determined. Specifically, the points to be used in replacing all the points of the domain should be selected. For the target FDMU, the best DMUs are hoped to be selected, and the other FDMUs are expected to select the worst DMUs for evaluation. These views are taken by those who are either pessimistic or optimistic about the FDMUs. To the decision maker, a smaller input is considered a better input, and conversely, a larger output is considered a better output. If the decision maker is optimistic about the DMU, then the point with the smallest input and largest output is selected. On the other hand, if the decision maker is pessimistic about the DMU, then the point with the largest input and smallest output is selected. In fact, in previous papers [3–7,10], most of the researchers selected both the optimistic or pessimistic points. Furthermore, if the decision maker is optimistic about the input, but is pessimistic about the output of the DMU, then the point with the smallest input and output is selected. Conversely, if the decision maker is pessimistic about the input, but is optimistic about the output of the DMU, then the point with the largest input and output is selected. However, the optimistic or pessimistic views still have several deficiencies. Thus, Guo and Lertworasirikul used the α-cut approach to limit the range of the domain.Example 2Analyzing the optimistic and pessimistic views of the FDMUs using the α-cut approach based on the FDMUs in Table 1.Based on Fig. 3, if the decision maker is optimistic about the FDMU, the triangular point c of Fig. 3 is selected. However, if the decision maker is pessimistic about the FDMU, then the square point b of Fig. 3 is selected. If the decision maker is optimistic about the input, but is pessimistic about the output of the FDMU, then the circle point a of Fig. 3 is selected. Finally, if the decision maker is pessimistic about the input, but is optimistic about the output of the FDMU, then the star point d of Fig. 3 is selected.If the α-cut approach is applied, then the range of the domain will be cut, and the range of the domain after α-cut will be related to the membership function. If the membership functions are symmetric triangular membership functions [4], the special points a, b, c, d of the original domain require shifting into the special points a′, b′, c′, d′ after α-cut, as shown in Fig. 4. Specifically, if α=1, then all the special points a, b, c, d will shift into the center point of the domain. All the points after α-cut will form a secant from point c to b. If the membership functions are asymmetric triangular membership functions [6], then the selected points after α-cut will form a polyline from point c to b. If the membership functions are L-R membership functions [11], then the selected points after α-cut will form a curve from point c to b.Example 3Evaluating the last DMU based on the former four DMUs in Table 2. Specifically, the target DMU is the last DMU, but the constraints cannot contain this DMU.After using MATLAB, the efficiency value of the last DMU in Table 2 is 1.333. If the constraints contain the last DMU, then the efficiency value of this DMU is 1. This condition indicates that if one efficient target DMU does not appear in the constraints, then the efficiency value of the target DMU will be equal to or greater than 1.Definition 1Suppose DMU is one decision making unit in a decision making problem, all the data that in which have the same input and output data with DMU is called sample decision making unit (SDMU) based on this decision making problem [34].The distinctions between an SDMU and DMU are presented as follows:•A DMU must be in the production possibility set, whereas an SDMU may be outside of the production possibility set (Fig. 5).The efficiency value of the DMU must be equal to or below 1, whereas that of the SDMU can be equal to, smaller than, or greater than 1.A DMU must appear in the constraints, whereas an SDMU can either appear within or not be among the constraints.Fig. 5 shows the SDMU of a C2R model. For the FDEA model, a number of studies found the efficiency value to be greater than 1 [5–9,17]. This condition results from the fact that all the constraints, including the target DMU, will select the worst DMUs, whereas the target DMU selects the best DMU to be evaluated. Thus, the evaluated DMU is an SDMU, not a DMU.Fig. 6shows an FC2R model with four FDMUs. The target DMU is assumed to be an FDMU1. According to the ranking approach of Saati et al. [6], all the FDMUs of the constraints will select the worst square points, a1, a2, a3, a4, and the target FDMU1 will use the best triangular point A to be evaluated. Therefore, point A is an SDMU, not a DMU.After improving FDMU0 to FSDMU0, the generalized FDEA model can be easily obtained. The generalized compositive FDEA model is shown in Eq. (2).(2)GCFPmaxμTY˜S0−δ1μ0,s.t.ωTX˜j−μTY˜j+δ1μ0≧0,j=1,2,…,n,ωTX˜S0=1,ω≧0,μ≧0,δ1δ2(−1)δ3μ0≧0.The distinctions between an SDMU and DMU are presented as follows.The reference sets in FDEA model are the efficient FDMUs, while in the generalized FDEA model, they can be the efficient FDMUs, normal FDMUs, inefficient FDMUs, special FDMUs, non-FDMUs. These five types of DMUs are called fuzzy sample DMUs (FSDMUs) (see Fig. 7).The difference between Eqs. (1) and (2) is the target fuzzy DMU (FDMU). (X˜0,Y˜0) in Eq. (1) is an FDMU, whereas (X˜0S,Y˜0S) in Eq. (2) it is an FSDMU.In this section, five efficiency measuring methods for the GFDEA model are given.Method 1. The FSDMU is replaced by one of the SDMUs of the FSDMU and FDMUiby one of the DMUis of the FDMUi. Once the model becomes a crisp DEA model, it can be solved using the appropriate software. The selected SDMU or DMUican be any point of the domain. Among these points are the following seven special points:•Best DMU: the DMU with the least input and most output (triangular point c of Fig. 3).Worst DMU: the DMU with the most input and least output (square point b of Fig. 3).Max DMU: the DMU with the most input and output (star point d of Fig. 3).Min DMU: the DMU with the least input and output (circle point a of Fig. 3).Center DMU: the center DMU of the domain (star point e of Fig. 3).1-Cut DMU: the DMU where the membership function obtains the maximum value. This DMU can be a point or a domain. If this DMU is a domain, the special point of the domain can again be selected.Vertex DMU: the DMU where the different input and output obtain the maximum or minimum value.When evaluating the target FDMU of the FDEA model, either the best or the worst DMU is selected. The remaining five special DMUs are never selected. In the proposed method, the seven special DMUs or any DMU of the domain that the decision maker prefers can be selected.Definition 2If the efficiency value of the SDMU is equal to or greater than 1 when the FSDMU is replaced by the worst SDMU and the FDMUs are replaced by the best DMUs, the FSDMU is said to be strongly efficient.If the efficiency value of the DMU is equal to or greater than 1 when the FSDMU and FDMUs are replaced by one of the DMUs, the FSDMU is said to be efficient.If the efficiency value of the SDMU is equal to or greater than 1 when the FSDMU is replaced by the best SDMU and the FDMUs are replaced by the worst DMUs, the FSDMU is said to be weakly efficient.If FSDMU is not weakly efficient, it is said to be inefficient.We can easily prove that FSDMU is efficient if it is strongly efficient and that FSDMU weakly efficient if it is efficient. However, the converse is false. All possible efficiency values of FSDMU change from strong to weak.Method 2. Replace the FSDMU with one of the SDMUs of this FSDMU and evaluate the selected SDMU using the FDMUs. Thus, the FDEA model can be obtained with a sample target DMU. The compositive FDEA model with sample target DMU is shown in Eq. (3).(3)GSFCPmaxμTYS−δ1μ0,s.t.ωTX˜j−μTY˜j+δ1μ0≧0,j=1,2,⋯,n,ωTXS=1,ω≧0,μ≧0,δ1δ2(−1)δ3μ0≧0.Here,XsandYsare the input and output data of the selected SDMU.Definition 6In the GFDEA model, the set that consists of the DMUs of the FSDMU, which have similar efficiency values, is called the equi-efficiency surface.After being evaluated by Method 1, all possible efficiency values of the FSDMU of the GFDEA model can be easily proven to be equal to an efficiency value of the line linking the best and worst DMUs of the FSDMU. Therefore, when the FSDMU of the GFDEA model is evaluated, all DMUs of the FSDMU can be replaced by the line linking the best and worst DMUs of the FSDMU and all FDMUs by the line linking the best and worst DMUs of the FDMU. Therefore, the evaluation method of GFDEA can turn into the evaluation method of the DEA model with vector DMUs. The vector length is the distance from the best to the worst DMU, and the direction is from the worst to the best DMU.Definition 7If the efficiency value of the SDMU is 1 when all FDMUivalues (i=1, 2, …, n) are replaced by the end-point DMUs of vectorV→Wi+k(V→Wi−V→Bi), the SDMU of the SFDEA model is called k-level (0≤k≤1) efficient.In the SFDEA model, the λ-level efficiency value of the SDMU is defined as the efficiency value of the SDMU when all FDMUi(i=1, 2, …, n) values are replaced by the end-point DMUs of vectorV→Wi+λ(V→Wi−V→Bi).According to Definition 7, if SDMU is k-level efficient, then for arbitrary 1≥λ>k, the λ-level efficiency value of the SDMU is smaller than 1. For arbitrary 0≤λ<k, the λ-level efficiency value of the SDMU is greater than 1.Method 3. Replace the FDMU of the GFDEA model with one of the DMUs and evaluate the FSDMU according to this DMU. Thus, DEA model is obtained with a fuzzy sample DMU (FSDEA model). The compositive FDEA model with a fuzzy sample DMU is shown in (4).(4)GFSCPmaxμTY˜S0−δ1μ0,s.t.ωTXj−μTYj+δ1μ0≧0,j=1,2,…,n,ωTX˜S0=1,ω≧0,μ≧0,δ1δ2(−1)δ3μ0≧0.Definition 9If the efficiency value of the FSDMU is 1 when the FSDMU is replaced by the end-point DMU of vectorV→W0+k(V→W0−V→B0), the FSDMU of the FSDEA model is called k-level (0≤k≤1) efficient.The λ-level efficiency value of the FSDMU of the FSDEA model is defined as the efficiency value of the FSDMU when the FSDMU is replaced by the end-point DMU of vectorV→W0+λ(V→W0−V→B0).According to Definition 9, if the FSDMU is k-level efficient, then for arbitrary 1≥λ>k, the λ-level efficiency value of the FSDMU is greater than 1. For arbitrary 0≤λ<k, the λ-level efficiency value of the FSDMU is smaller than 1.Method 4. Evaluate the FSDMU using Methods 2 and 3.Definition 11If the efficiency value of the FSDMU is 1 when the FSDMU is replaced by the end-point DMU of vectorV→W0+k(V→W0−V→B0)and the FDMUi(i=1, 2, …, n) values by the end-point DMUs of vectorV→Wi+λ(V→Wi−V→Bi), the FSDMU of the GFDEA model is called k−λ-level (0≤k, λ≤1) efficient.In particular, if the FSDMU is one of the FDMUs, then the 0−0-level efficiency value of the FDMU is the worst–worst efficiency value of Lertworasirikul and the 1−1-level efficiency value of the FDMU is the best–best efficiency value of Lertworasirikul. Moreover, the 0−1-level efficiency value of the FDMU is the worst–best efficiency value of Lertworasirikul and is still the strong efficiency value of Definition 1. The 1−0-level efficiency value of the FDMU is the best–worst efficiency value of Lertworasirikul and is still the weak efficiency value of Definition 3. Hence, all evaluation methods of Lertworasirikul are the special cases of the present method. Except for the Lertworasirikul evaluation method most of the previous evaluating method such as parametric programming approach, ranking approach, tolerance approach, possibility approach are the special cases of our evaluation methods.Example 4Evaluate the FSDMU of the GFC2R model using Methods 2–4. The data of GFC2R model are shown in Table 3.The plane figure of the FSDMU and FDMU is shown in Figs. 8 and 9.If Method 2 is used and suppose the FSDMU is replaced by (1, 4), as shown in Fig. 9, then the worst and best end-point DMUs of FDMU1 are corresponds to vectorV→W1(1.5,2.5),V→B1(0.5,3.5), soV→W1+k(V→W1−V→B1)=V→(1.5−k,2.5+k). From Fig. 9 it is easily known that 4(1.5−k)=1(2.5+k), which means the SDMU is0.7−levelefficient in SFCCR model.If Method 3 is used and suppose all the FDMUs are replaced by the center point of the domain, as shown in Fig. 10, the end-point DMU of vectorV→W0(1.4,3.7)is the worst DMU of the FSDMU. The end-point DMU of vectorV→B1(0.7,4.4)is the best DMU of the FSDMU. Hence, the coordinate of vectorV→W0+k(V→W0−V→B0)is (1.4−0.7k, 3.7+0.7k). To the selected DMUs, the production frontier is line y=3x. Hence, the end-point of vectorV→W0+k(V→W0−V→B0)is still in the production frontier. Therefore, 3(1.4−0.7k)=3.7+0.7k⇒k=5/28≈0.1786, which means the FSDMU is 0.1786-level efficient.If Method 4 is used, k or λ needs to be fixed. Afterward, the evaluation method turns into Method 2 or 3. One of the evaluation figure is shown in Fig. 11.Method 5. In the FSDMU and FDMU of the GFDEA model, α-cut approach is used and the FSDMU is re-evaluated using Methods 1–4.In this section, the algorithm and ranking methods of the GFDEA model are discussed.Step1: Description of the data.•Serial number of DMU: 0 and i represent the FSDMU and FDMUi, respectively.Input and output of DMU: 1 and 2 represent the input and output, respectively.Selected special point: 0 represents the worst point, 1 is the best point, 2 is the center point, 3 is the 1-cut point, and 4 is the other point.Description of the membership function: 1 represents the partial small type fuzzy number, 2 is the partial large type fuzzy number, 3 is the middle type fuzzy number, and 4 is the other fuzzy number.Step2: Obtaining the special point of the fuzzy input and output data.Step3: Obtaining the special SDMU and DMUs based on the data of Step 2.Step4: Obtaining the different efficiency values of the FSDMU based on the different evaluating methods.Step 5: Providing the efficiency figure, if necessary.To rank the FSDMU and FDMU, FSDMU should be equal to one of the FDMUis. The different efficiency values of FDMUican then be obtained. After identifying all the efficiency values of the FSDMU and FDMUi, not only one of the efficiency values and ranks, but also the mean of some efficiency value and rank of the FSDMU and FDMUican be selected.According to the above algorithm we can evaluate the decision making problems with fuzzy input and output data. The procedure of solving the practical problems after using our methods is shown in Fig. 12.Example 5After selecting the different FSDMU and FDMU points, the FSDUM and FDMU of the GFC2R model are evaluated using different evaluation methods. The data of the GFC2R model are shown in Table 4.Suppose the replaced DMU is worst–best, best–worst, best–best, worst–worst, max–max, min–min, center–center.After using the MATLAB software, different efficiency values of FSDMU are obtained, as shown in Table 5. The efficiency values are shown in Fig. 13.If the selected DMUs of the FSDMU are best, worst, max, min, and center, the k-level efficiency value of the FSDMU is as shown in Table 6.In Method 2, the larger the value of k, the better it is for the SDMU. If k=0, then all FDMUs will be replaced by the worst DMUs. In this situation, if the SDMU is still inefficient, then the replaced SDMU needs to be improved and the SDMU will become efficient.Suppose the selected DMUs of the FSDMU are best, worst, max, min, and center, the k-level efficiency value of the FSDMU is as shown in Table 7.In Method 3, the smaller the value of k, the better it is for the FSDMU. If k=1, then the FSDMU will be replaced by the best SDMU. In this situation, if the FSDMU is still inefficient, the replaced DMUs needs to be weakened and the FSDMU will become efficient.Example 6Evaluate the five FDMUs of Hatami–Marbini's [15] paper. The data of five FDMUs are shown in Table 8.We suppose all the FDMUs are replaced by the center DMUs when FDMUs requires replace. The efficiency value of FDMUs after using different evaluating model and evaluating methods are shown in Table 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
