@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A variable reduction strategy for evolutionary algorithms handling equality constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed equality constraint and variable reduction strategy reduces equality constraints.Proposed equality constraint and variable reduction strategy also reduces the variables of COPs.Proposed strategy eliminates equality constraints that provide variable relationships.Hence, the proposed strategy improves the feasibility of obtained solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolutionary computation,Constrained optimization,Equality constraint reduction,Variable reduction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Efficient constraint handling techniques are of great significance when Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are applied to constrained optimization problems (COPs). Generally, when use EAs to deal with COPs, equality constraints are much harder to satisfy, compared with inequality constraints. In this study, we propose a strategy named equality constraint and variable reduction strategy (ECVRS) to reduce equality constraints as well as variables of COPs. Since equality constraints are always expressed by equations, ECVRS makes use of the variable relationships implied in such equality constraint equations. The essence of ECVRS is it makes some variables of a COP considered be represented and calculated by some other variables, thereby shrinking the search space and leading to efficiency improvement for EAs. Meanwhile, ECVRS eliminates the involved equality constraints that providing variable relationships, thus improves the feasibility of obtained solutions. ECVRS is tested on many benchmark problems. Computational results and comparative studies verify the effectiveness of the proposed ECVRS.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimization plays an important role in areas of engineering, management, commercial, etc. as many problems in the real world are essentially optimization tasks. Particularly, many of these real life applications like VLSI design, structural optimization, and location problems involve difficult numerical constrained optimization problems (COPs) [1]. Mathematical programming (MP) techniques are generally the first option to solve optimization problems, which can provide, under some specific conditions to be accomplished by the problem, convergence to global optimal solution [2]. However, due to the fact that these problems may have complex constraints and objective functions characterized as multi-modality, non-continuity, non-differentiability and high dimensionality, which lead to complicated search landscapes, traditional MP methods often fail to solve such problems as they may easily get trapped in local optima.In response to this challenge, many Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), such as Genetic Algorithms (GAs) [3], Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [4], Differential Evolution (DE) [5] and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [6,7], have emerged [8]. Because of their competitive performance in solving complex optimization problems, these nature-inspired algorithms attract extensive attention in recent years. In general, EAs like DE and PSO were initially proposed to solve numerical unconstrained optimization problems, thereby they lack explicit constraint handling techniques. When solving COPs, candidate solutions may be infeasible because of the violation of constraints [9]. The search space becomes more complicated (e.g. being separated into multiple discontinuous areas) because of the impact of constraints. It is therefore of great significance to integrate effective constraint handling techniques into EAs when using them to solve COPs.The main task of a constraint handling technique is to deal with infeasible solutions to drive the search efforts to feasible solution region while maintain the diversity of the overall population. A variety of constraint handling techniques have been proposed [10–12], such as penalty function [13–15], separation of objective function and constraints [16,17], feasibility rules [18–22], stochastic ranking [23–25], ɛ-constrained method [26–28], multi-objective concepts [29–31] and ensemble of constraint handling techniques [9,32,33].Constraints of optimization problems can be categorized into inequality constraints and equality constraints. Empirical evidences show that equality constraints are more difficult to satisfy than inequality constraints [2,34,35]. In addition, it was found that the rate of feasible solutions in the search space of a COP becomes low if there are more equality constraints required to satisfy [36,37]. Previous constraint handling methods mainly focus on the effective and comprehensive evaluation of feasible and infeasible solutions. In major previous studies, an equality constraint is usually transformed into an inequality constraint with the use of a small threshold value. As a result, the real feasibility degree of an obtained solution is highly related to the selected threshold value. In some high-precision real-life optimization domain, the feasibility of the solution can be a concern. To address this issue, we need to reduce the threshold value. Nevertheless, the efficiency of EAs degrades significantly with the decrease of the threshold value. It thus remains a challenge to generate solutions with high quality and feasibility simultaneously for equality COPs.In this study, we make use of variable relationships implied in equality constraints in order to represent and determine some variables by others. Based on this idea, we propose an equality constraint and variable reduction strategy (ECVRS) to improve the efficiency of EAs in solving COPs. ECVRS can eliminate equality constraints so as to improve the feasibility of obtained solutions. Meanwhile, it is able to reduce variables, thus shrinks the solution space of COPs. As the proposed ECVRS only need to modify the original COPs, theoretically it can be integrated with any EA.A related concept in conventional optimization is called “variable elimination” [38]. Variable elimination is usually applied to constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) to support the search and pruning process [39]. In reality, since variable elimination is time and space exponential in a graph called induced width, it is not suitable to many class of problems [40,41]. In addition, variable elimination theory is specifically oriented to discrete optimization area [42,43]. ECVRS is different from variable elimination in following aspects. First, ECVRS is aimed to find variable relationships in COPs before EAs are used to solving the COPs, thus it is not dynamically used in the solution search process as variable elimination. Consequently, implementations of variable reduction and variable elimination are different. Second, it is possible to reduce variables involved in nonlinear equality constraints. As shown in experiments, we have successfully applied ECVRS to many benchmark COPs with nonlinear equality constraints. Third, ECVRS presented here is specifically oriented to continuous COPs rather than discrete ones.The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 briefly introduces the formation of COPs and reviews related works. Section 3 introduces the equality constraint and variable reduction strategy (ECVRS). Section 4 reports the experimental results and comparative studies. Section 5 concludes this paper identifying future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Equality constraints are very hard to satisfy when EAs are utilized to solve COPs. In this study, we propose an equality constraint and variable reduction strategy (ECVRS) based on the variable relationships in the equations describing equality constraints. ECVRS can reduce the equality constraints as well as variables of COPs, thereby shrink the solution space, improve the feasibility of obtained solutions and improve the efficiency of used EAs. Experiments on many benchmark COPs illustrate the effectiveness of ECVRS. When applying ECVRS, we only need to modify the considered COP itself. Therefore, it can be integrated with any EA to solve equality constraint COPs. As equality constraints can be nonlinear and complex, how to deal with general equality constraints in line with the variable reduction principle is an open problem. To facilitate to the application of ECVRS, we present some application conclusions. Particularly, we provide a general and formal ECVRS approach to tackle linear constraints.As shown in Section 4.2, ECVRS is expected to have significant potential in real world COPs. In addition, although only continuous COPs are discussed in this study, it is easy to apply ECVRS to discrete COPs (e.g. complex scheduling problems and task assignment problems), only if these problems come with equality constraints.Some future research can be carried out in the following three directions: (1) Investigate general and theoretical approaches to deal with complex and nonlinear equality constraints. (2) Design effective methods to realize ECVRS automatically by computer software. (3) Apply ECVRS to many real world COPs. In fact, we have found that ECVRS can be applied to many optimization problems in power systems, such as optimal reactive dispatch problem [32] and economic load dispatch [44].