@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Medical data classification using interval type-2 fuzzy logic system and wavelets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automated medical data classification using wavelets and interval type-2 fuzzy logic.Wavelet features reduce computational burden and enhance performance of IT2FLS.IT2FLS employs hybrid learning process by fuzzy c-means and genetic algorithm.Wavelet–IT2FLS demonstrates significant dominance against competitive methods.The approach is useful as a DSS for clinicians and practitioners in medical practice.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interval type-2 fuzzy logic system,Wavelet transformation,Genetic algorithm,Medical data classification,Breast cancer,Heart disease,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces an automated medical data classification method using wavelet transformation (WT) and interval type-2 fuzzy logic system (IT2FLS). Wavelet coefficients, which serve as inputs to the IT2FLS, are a compact form of original data but they exhibits highly discriminative features. The integration between WT and IT2FLS aims to cope with both high-dimensional data challenge and uncertainty. IT2FLS utilizes a hybrid learning process comprising unsupervised structure learning by the fuzzy c-means (FCM) clustering and supervised parameter tuning by genetic algorithm. This learning process is computationally expensive, especially when employed with high-dimensional data. The application of WT therefore reduces computational burden and enhances performance of IT2FLS. Experiments are implemented with two frequently used medical datasets from the UCI Repository for machine learning: the Wisconsin breast cancer and Cleveland heart disease. A number of important metrics are computed to measure the performance of the classification. They consist of accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve. Results demonstrate a significant dominance of the wavelet–IT2FLS approach compared to other machine learning methods including probabilistic neural network, support vector machine, fuzzy ARTMAP, and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system. The proposed approach is thus useful as a decision support system for clinicians and practitioners in the medical practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthcare data classification mechanism facilitates clinical practitioners in the diagnosis and treatment for medical diseases and conditions occurred in patients. It thus plays as a decision support system (DSS) substantially contributing to the healthcare quality improvement. The rapid development of data mining techniques enables the construction of clinical DSSs to be much more plausible than ever before.Mazurowski et al. [1] investigated two methods of neural network training including classical backpropagation and particle swarm optimization, which were then applied for breast cancer diagnosis. A method called kernel F-score feature selection is presented in Polat and Güneş [2] for data pre-processing in the classification of medical datasets.Peng et al. [3] proposed another technique for feature selection to deal with high-dimensional challenge of medical data classification. The approach integrates filter and wrapper methods into a sequential search procedure to improve the classification performance.Alternatively, Nahar et al. [4] examined several computational intelligence techniques and identified the best algorithms for heart disease diagnosis. A process based on differential evolution for classifying items in medical databases is suggested in De Falco [5]. The tool automatically extracts explicit knowledge from the database under the form of if-then rules, which combine variables by the “and” operator.Although many methods have been proposed, they can only provide nonintuitive classification results, which are not comprehensive and applicable to clinicians in the real practice, e.g. see [6,7] for applications of the black box artificial neural networks. It is therefore helpful if the behaviours of classification techniques are understood by humans via tools like linguistic rules. Moreover, the huge amount of data collected by healthcare practice is too complex and voluminous for processing and analysis.Medical diagnosis and prognosis are decision making problems that commonly involve complexity and uncertainty. The use of fuzzy logic thus has been advocated to handle uncertainty and provide clinicians intuitive classification results via linguistic rules. A number of type-1 fuzzy approaches have been introduced for medical data classification, e.g. see [8–11]. Criticism was made concerning the fact that the membership function of type-1 fuzzy sets has no uncertainty associated with it. Type-2 fuzzy sets generalize type-1 fuzzy sets so that more uncertainty can be handled. A type-2 fuzzy set allows us to incorporate uncertainty about the membership function into fuzzy set theory [12].Type-2 fuzzy logic systems (T2FLS) therefore have emerged as a more powerful tool to cope with uncertainty compared to traditional type-1 fuzzy systems. Among T2FLSs, the use of interval type-2 fuzzy logic system (IT2FLS) has demonstrated successfully in a number of applications, e.g. see [13–19]. Using fuzzy system in general or IT2FLS in particular often encounters the curse of dimensionality. The number of rules is exponentially proportional to the number of inputs of the fuzzy system. A large number of rules not only increases the computational complexity, but also limits the interpretability of the system. This problem becomes more severe as medical data are commonly assembled in high dimensions. Consequently, a dimension reduction or feature extraction tool should be implemented before the IT2FLS is executed.Wavelet transformation (WT) and principal component analysis (PCA) are popular feature extraction methods that can be applied to high-dimensional datasets. With datasets having dimensions reduced, fuzzy systems would demonstrate more powerful ability in function approximation or classification.The main caveat of PCA is that eigenvectors corresponding to the largest variance of the data are selected, but these directions do not necessarily provide the best separation of the classes being distinguished. In other words, there is a possibility that the information for separating the clusters is represented in principal components with low eigenvalues, which are often ignored. The use of WT is thus promoted in this research.To deal with uncertain and high-dimensional medical data, this paper proposes a method using IT2FLS, fuzzy c-means clustering (FCM), genetic algorithm (GA) and wavelet features for healthcare data classification. To our best knowledge, it is the first application of IT2FLS method for medical diagnosis and also the first combination of wavelet features and IT2FLS for classification. Through this study, we examine and compare performance of the proposed wavelet–IT2FLS model with other classification methods frequently applied in literature. Experiments are conducted using two benchmark medical datasets to make sure conclusions driven out of this study are valid and general.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the background of IT2FLS and its training process by FCM and GA. Wavelet transformation (WT) is described in Section 3. Section 4 is devoted for experimental results, which are followed by concluding remarks in Section 5.A fuzzy logic system (FLS) is called a type-1 FLS (T1FLS) if it is described completely using type-1 fuzzy sets (T1 FSs) whilst a FLS that uses at least one type-2 fuzzy set (T2 FS) is called a T2FLS [20,21]. A T2FLS has more degrees of freedom than does a T1FLS because it comprises more parameters. It therefore suggests that T2FLS has the potential to outperform a T1FLS in handling uncertainties because of its larger number of design degrees of freedom. If uncertainties disappear, a T2FLS reduces to a T1FLS [22]. The structure of a general T2FLS is illustrated in Fig. 1.T2FLS structure is similar to that of the T1FLS with the major differences being in the use of T2 FSs (rather than T1 FSs) in antecedent parts of fuzzy rules and the output processor. The output processor of a T1FLS transforms a T1 FS to a crisp number whilst a T2FLS has two components in the output processor. The first is a type reduction that transforms a T2 FS into a T1 FS and the second is the defuzzifier that transforms a T1 FS into a crisp number. A general T2FLS requires extensive computational cost and complicated implementation compared to a T1FLS. A special case of T2FLS, interval type-2 FLS (IT2FLS) has been widely used for reduced computational burden [23,24].T2FLSs [25] are constructed on the basis of T2 FSs. A general T2 FS is represented in three dimensions. The membership degree (MD) is not a crisp number but it is a FS. Third dimension is the value of the membership function (MF) at each point on footprint of uncertainty (FOU), which is the two-dimensional domain.Interval type-2 FSs (IT2 FSs) represent the MD by an interval rather than a FS. The third dimension value in the IT2 FS is the same everywhere so that it is ignored and only the FOU is used to describe the IT2 FS.Based on different fuzzy rule types, e.g. Mamdani, Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) or Tsukamoto, there are corresponding different IT2FLSs can be established. In this paper, the special case of TSK fuzzy rule is employed to develop an IT2FLS for medical data classification.Some variants of IT2FLS are recognized depending on the MFs used in the antecedent and consequent parts are IT2 FSs and/or T1 FSs. We implement herein the IT2FLS where antecedents are IT2 FSs and consequents are interval T1 FSs. Assume the IT2FLS consists of K rules and p antecedents in each rule, the lth rule by Rlis denoted as follows:(1)Rl:IFx1isF˜1land…andxpisF˜pl,THENYl=Clwherel=1,…,K.F˜ilis the ith IT2 FS defined by a lower and upper bound MF:(2)μF˜il(xi)=[μ_F˜il(xi),μ¯F˜il(xi)]and Clis an interval T1 FS characterized by its centre and spread cland slrespectively:(3)Cl=[cl−sl,cl+sl]Given the input vectorx=(x1,x2,…,xp), an IT2FLS inference ought to go through the following steps:-Compute the lower and upper MDs of xion the corresponding antecedent part:μ_F˜il(xi)andμ¯F˜il(xi).Compute the firing strength interval of the lth rule:Fl=[f_l,f¯l]where:(4)f_l=μ_F˜1l(x1)×μ_F˜2l(x2)×⋯×μ_F˜pl(xp)(5)f¯l=μ¯F˜1l(x1)×μ¯F˜2l(x2)×⋯×μ¯F˜pl(xp)Compute the output of the lth fuzzy rule, which is an interval T1 FS:Yl=[y_l,y¯l].(6)y_l=cl−sl(7)y¯l=cl+slThe final crisp value of output of the IT2FLS model is calculated by combining the corresponding outputs of K rules [22]:(8)Y=[Y_l,Y¯l]=∫y1∈[y_1,y¯1]…∫yK∈[y_K,y¯K]∫f1∈[f_1,f¯1]⋯∫fK∈[f_K,f¯K]1∑l=1Kflyl/∑l=1KflIn order to obtain a crisp output for the IT2 TSK FLS, a type-reduction and a defuzzifier are utilized. Experimental evaluation of defuzzification methods for general type-2 fuzzy sets can be seen in [26–28]. The most popular type reduction is that of the Karnik–Mendel iterative procedure (KMIP) [29]. This method however was found deficient and thus several other methods have been proposed in [30,31]. Wu and Nie [32] introduced a method named Enhanced Iterative Algorithm with Stop Condition (EIASC), which is an enhancement of the iterative algorithm with stop condition suggested in [33] for type-reduction.Greenfield and Chiclana [34] examined four alternative strategies for defuzzifying an interval type-2 fuzzy set including the Greenfield–Chiclana Collapsing Defuzzifier (GCCD) algorithm [35], the Nie–Tan method [36], the KMIP (in the form of EIASC [32]), and the Wu–Mendel approximation [37]. From this evaluation, the GCCD (in the form of Collapsing Outward Right-Left, denoted as CORL [38]), is shown to be superior as regards accuracy, and comparable to EIASC in regard to efficiency. This research consequently applies the CORL algorithm [38] for type-2 fuzzy set defuzzification. For comparisons with the CORL algorithm, we also implement EIASC, which represents the KMIP, for type-reduction.Various IT2 MFs can be used in the IT2FLS such as IT2 triangular, trapezoidal, Gaussian, Cauchy, Laplace, or general bell-shaped MFs. In this study, the IT2 Gaussian MF is examined for experiments:(9)μF˜il(xi,k)=exp−12xi,k−milσil=N(mil,[σi,1l,σi,2l])Once the type of MFs, the number of inputs and the number of fuzzy rules are determined, an IT2FLS can be constructed. The determination of parameters of a FLS is extremely important because its performance depends mainly on this process. Theoretically, parameters of a FLS are commonly obtained by experts. The experts’ knowledge however is limited. The more so if the number of rules increases. Zhou et al. [39] proposed a method that is able to select influential rules using ranking indexes to construct parsimonious type-2 fuzzy systems. In this paper, we construct the parsimonious IT2FLS through a hybrid process including structure learning and parameter tuning.Structure learning is an unsupervised algorithm that can be accomplished by a clustering method. We utilize the fuzzy c-means clustering (FCM) method to identify the centres of IT2 Gaussian MFs in the antecedent part and the centres of interval T1 FSs in the consequent part. The well-separated distribution of the resulting clusters from the FCM method is useful in identifying the allocation of fuzzy rules in the IT2FLS.On the other hand, parameter tuning process can be implemented using GA. The GA training often starts from a randomly initialized population and ends when it meets determined stopping criteria. The following subsections present the applications of FCM and GA for IT2FLS training.The FCM clustering method [40] is applied to initialize the GA population for training the IT2FLS. We organize the corresponding input and output data into a unique observation of p+1 dimensions where p is the number of inputs. Assume xiis the ith organized observation(i=1,…,N), xiis presented as follows:(10)xi=[inputi1,inputi2,…,inputip,output]whereinputijis the jth input of the ith observation and output is the output of the observation. By clustering the sample of N observations having the above format, we are able to derive the K resulting clusters corresponding with K fuzzy rules of the IT2FLS.Once the FCM clustering is completed, centres of the resulting clusters are assigned to centres of the IT2 Gaussian MFs, which are used in the antecedents of the fuzzy rules. The centres of the output interval of each rule are assigned equal to the output value of the corresponding cluster. The widths of the IT2 Gaussian MFs and the spreads of the output interval of each rule are initialized randomly but they are checked to ensure satisfying their corresponding constraints. Running the FCM clustering a number of times equal to the GA population size, we are able to obtain the initial population for GA.Genetic algorithm [41] is a robust evolutionary algorithm. The Darwinian principle of survival of the fittest is employed via a defined population, which evolves over evolutionary generations. GA has the capability to deal with multidimensional objective functions that may be non-differentiable, non-continuous, non-linear, or have many local minima or constraints. If these characteristics are strongly present, GA offers an effective approach to solve optimization problems.A GA is an unorthodox search or optimization technique operated on a population of n artificial individuals. Individuals are represented by chromosomes (or genomes) Sk,k={1,…,n}. The chromosome is a string of symbols, which are called genes,Sk=(Sk1,…,SkM), and M is a string length. Individuals are evaluated via calculation of a fitness function. To evolve through successive generations, GA performs three basic genetic operators: selection, crossover and mutation. The selection operator allows individuals in the current generation with the best fitness values to automatically survive to the next generation. Crossover creates children by combining the genes of a pair of two parents. Mutation functions make small random changes in the genes of individuals in the populations. They provide more genetic diversity and enable the GA to search in a broader space of solutions. Through chromosomes’ evolution, GA searches for the best solution(s) in the sense of the given fitness function. We exploit GA to train the complicated FLSs comprising many parameters. The fitness function is the accuracy measure Acc computed using the formula:(11)Acc=PNwhere N is the number of cases being predicted and P is the number of correctly predicted cases. Parameters of fuzzy models are coded into genes of the GA chromosomes/individuals. With a population of individuals, GA can simultaneously explore different parts of the training model's parameter space and thus it is able to find the global solution to maximize the Acc function to obtain optimal parameters for the IT2FLS.The proposed methodology for medical diagnosis is diagrammed in Fig. 2. The following presents a summary of WT and its usage in this paper.WT represents a signal in a time-frequency fashion [42]. Once the wavelets (the mother wavelet) φ(x) are fixed, translations and dilations of the mother wavelet can be formedφ[(x−b)/a],(a,b)∈R+×R. It is convenient to take special values for a and b as a=2−jand b=2−jk where j and k are integers. One of the simplest wavelets is the Haar wavelet, which has been used in various applied mathematics. Haar functions can uniformly approximate any continuous function. Dilations and translations of the function φ, which isφjk(x)=const.φ(2jx−k), define an orthogonal basis in L2(R). Therefore any element in L2(R) may be characterized as a linear combination of these basis functions. The scaling function in Haar wavelet is simply unity on the interval [0,1) asφ(x)=1(0≤x≤1).WT has been successfully applied to a number of problems including those of medical data analysis, e.g. see [43–45].In this paper, we investigate the four-level decomposition using Haar wavelets for feature extraction applied to processing medical data. Haar wavelets are chosen due to their compact support and orthogonality, which allows the discriminative features of data samples to be expressed with a few wavelet coefficients. Once the transformation is completed, a procedure to select coefficients that best separate the different classes is required. A conventional approach to this procedure is the maximum variance (MV) criterion. However, coefficients with the largest variance do not necessarily show the best discrimination among classes [46]. For the best discrimination, selected coefficients should have the largest deviation from normality. For this end, the Lilliefors modification of a Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test for normality is utilized. The test compares the cumulative distribution function of the data F(x) with that of a Gaussian distribution G(x) given a dataset x. Deviation from normality is measured bymax(|F(x)−G(x)|).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a combination of WT with IT2FLS for medical data classification. Medical data are often noisy and collected in a high-dimensional format. It is generally a difficult practice to select the most suitable features for an automated medical diagnosis system. The use of fuzzy system helps to handle the noisiness and complexity of the medical data. Although IT2FLS is highly capable of handling uncertainty, it has a computational burden when dealing with high-dimensional data.The contribution of this paper is two-fold. First, WT is employed to extract significant features from high-dimensional healthcare datasets. WT in this study, among other researches, exhibits a more efficient feature extraction compared to the PCA method. Selected wavelet features are a reduced form of the original data that enhances the performance of the entire classification system. Second, we introduced the use of IT2FLS for classification of healthcare data. IT2FLS learning is a hybrid approach that consists of the FCM structure learning and GA parameter tuning. Experiments are carried out not only for the proposed method but also for four other competitive methods, i.e. PNN, SVM, FARTMAP, and ANFIS. Through results of experiments on two benchmark datasets, we see the dominance of the proposed wavelet–IT2FLS method against the others in terms of accuracy, processing time and stability.While implementing IT2FLS for medical data classification application in this research, we also find that the GCCD (via its representative – the CORL algorithm) is superior to the EIASC (an enhanced version of the KMIP). This finding substantiates the conclusions of Greenfield et al. [35] as it confirms the advantages of the GCCD against the KMIP when they are used for type-2 fuzzy set defuzzification.Most of the machine learning methods investigated in this study show an enhancement when combined with wavelet features. It thus manifests that machine learning methods face a challenge when dealing with high-dimensional data. In particular, wavelet features are found effective when applied to the IT2FLS classifier. Fewer features but higher performance demonstrates a real double-win solution of the wavelet–IT2FLS for medical diagnosis. The proposed approach however has a shortcoming regarding selection of the optimal number of wavelet features or fuzzy rules for constructing IT2FLS. This is an interesting issue and would be worth a further research.