@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Meta-heuristic algorithms for optimized network flow wavelet-based image coding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing optimal multi-path selection method to provide effective multimedia transmission.Maximizing the received multiple descriptions in lossy networks.Meta-heuristic algorithms are utilized to solve multi-path selection problem.Proposing a new multi-objective cost function to obtain optimal multi-path routings.Producing multiple descriptions of color images for the available bandwidth.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Genetic algorithm (GA),Particle swarm optimization (PSO),Rainbow network flow (RNF),Multi-objective multipath optimization,Routing representation,Image transmission,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Optimal multipath selection to maximize the received multiple description coding (MDCs) in a lossy network model is proposed. Multiple description scalar quantization (MDSQ) has been applied to the wavelet coefficients of a color image to generate the MDCs which are combating transmission loss over lossy networks. In the networks, each received description raises the reconstruction quality of an MDC-coded signal (image, audio or video). In terms of maximizing the received descriptions, a greater number of optimal routings between source and destination must be obtained. The rainbow network flow (RNF) collaborated with effective meta-heuristic algorithms is a good approach to resolve it. Two meta-heuristic algorithms which are genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) have been utilized to solve the multi-objective optimization routing problem for finding optimal routings each of which is assigned as a distinct color by RNF to maximize the coded descriptions in a network model. By employing a local search based priority encoding method, each individual in GA and particle in PSO is represented as a potential solution. The proposed algorithms are compared with the multipath Dijkstra algorithm (MDA) for both finding optimal paths and providing reliable multimedia communication. The simulations run over various random network topologies and the results show that the PSO algorithm finds optimal routings effectively and maximizes the received MDCs with assistance of RNF, leading to reduce packet loss and increase throughput.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The transmission of multimedia information over communication channels/paths has become a challenging problem with the increased usage of multimedia services in networks. Transmitting original source (information) naturally requires a significant amount of bandwidth and storage. This has been a strong motivation to examine and develop an efficient optimization method in order to use less bandwidth as well as finding the optimum network routings.In multimedia transmission, original source image should be compressed for reducing redundancy in the image as well as efficient usage of bandwidth. There are two different approaches that have been applied to compress source image [1]. The first is lossless, where a compact representation of the source coding can be decoded to reconstruct the original signal without error. The second is lossy, which causes distortion in the original signal and the exact reconstruction of the original source cannot be achieved [1]. The purpose of using both techniques is to encode the source into a compressed digital representation that can be used for transmission. However, packet transmission problems such as packet dropping or congestion may occur over lossy transmission networks. For instance, there may be encounters with low capacity links, network congestion or excessive delay to deliver packets. To combat multimedia packet loss transmission problem, multiple description coding (MD coding or MDC) transmitting through multipath is preferred because even if one MDC packet is lost over a path, the lost MDC packet may be received via another path [1,2]. Thus, using this approach maximizes MDC packets over lossy networks since the probability of receiving packets at the destinations increases [3].The descriptions which carry similar information of the original source can be efficiently generated by using various quantization techniques (e.g. multiple description scalar and vector quantization) [6,7] and sampling methods (orthogonal, quincunx) [8]. Since the quantization methods are used, transformation methods such as discrete wavelet transform (DWT) [3], discrete cosine transform (DCT) [4], and embedded zero tree wavelet transform (EZW) [5] provide significant improvements in terms of preserving the important information of the multimedia source. In this work, a wavelet-based multiple description scalar quantization method has been applied to generate the MDCs of the color images since such methods are known to provide excellent rate-distortion performance [3]. Thus, the important information or energy in the sub-bands of the transformed image will be protected. The generated MDCs with acceptable quality are transmitted over multipath in lossy networks but finding the optimal paths and providing enough bandwidth capacity from source to destination are the two complex problems because of the many potential intermediate destinations an MDC packet might traverse before reaching its final destination [9]. To find an optimum solution, various algorithms have been proposed to provide greater and efficient performance of communication. For instance, Jiazi et al. [38] proposed multipath Dijkstra algorithm (MDA) to obtain multipath and they show that the algorithm gains great flexibility by employing different link metrics and cost functions. Furthermore, genetic algorithms (GAs) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) are significant approaches to resolve the communication problems [10,11]. They are used for solving different NP-hard network problems such as K-shortest paths [12], constrained shortest-path [13], multi-objective shortest path [14] and network flow [15]. In the most of routing optimization problems, only one weight or cost associated with each network link has been considered to find the optimum solution, e.g. delay or length [10,11,16,17]. Begen et al. [18,44] examined multimedia transmission over optimized lossy networks. They state that each network link has more than one cost parameter such as packet loss rate, length and bandwidth as it makes the network routing optimization problem even harder. However, they neither provide an optimization method to solve the multi constrained network routing problem nor a path selection method. In this paper, a new multi-objective cost function and an enhanced path representation are explained to solve these open problems and the performances of meta-heuristic algorithms are examined to find optimal multipath in the multi constrained network problems.The problem of simultaneously optimizing multiple weights and costs is defined as one of multi-objective network optimization. In the simulated network models, three different cost variables will be considered associated with each network link that will be used to optimize path length, bandwidth consumption and packet loss rate for receiving an acceptable quality of transmitted image. The strategies employed in [17] and [18] are used to select the numerical weights for each edge to optimize the shortest paths and packet loss rate. In this problem, the significant goal is to find optimal multi paths with minimum packet loss rate and path length as well as maximizing the average reconstruction quality of a received MDC-coded signal (image, audio or video) at the sink nodes. Meta-heuristic algorithms such as GA and PSO are employed in this work to provide an optimal trade-off between the cost values and the performances of them are compared with the MDA [38]. Three different fitness functions which are single objective shortest path, single objective minimal packet loss rate and multi-objective cost functions are employed for efficient result estimation in both finding optimal multipath and providing multimedia transmission. The simulations described in this paper consider undirected path graphs of a given node size n and edge size m. The optimization will employ a given set of MDC packet subsets and utilize the RNF algorithm, a GA and PSO. The main contribution and strength of the paper are as follows:•A new multi-objective cost function is proposed and compared with the previously used single objective cost functions in terms of finding optimum multipath as well as increasing the probability of receiving multimedia packets at the destination nodes in lossy network problems [17,18].Two meta-heuristic algorithms which are GA and PSO algorithms have been adapted with both proposed multi-objective cost function and RNF algorithm, and they are compared with MDA [38].Average quality of received images is estimated in terms of optimized network resources and statistics based on three fitness functions.The effectiveness of the proposed multi-objective cost function has been shown in transmitting the multimedia information through the optimized network. Besides, creating descriptions using the wavelet based image coding has been further improved to produce MDCs of color image for the available bandwidth between the source and destination nodes.Priority encoding method is enhanced to reduce invalid paths for corresponding multi-cost problem in terms of reducing computational time for finding multipath in networks.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: work related to MDC generation is given in Section 2, the model and analysis of the network problem is presented in Section 3, the details of meta-heuristic algorithms for solving the multi-objective network routing problem are explained in Section 4, results and discussions are provided in Section 5 and the paper is concluded in Section 6.MDC provides a good quality of received images if losses are inevitable in the network and many works have been examined to design practical MDC systems. MD scalar quantization (MDSQ) is one of the most popular techniques which have been discussed in [6]. The improvement of MDSQ which is MD vector quantization is studied and reported in [7]. The quantization methods cause loss of the information of the original image. However, there are lossless MD image coding generation methods which are implemented by using source coding and transformation methods. The wavelet and discrete cosine transformation methods are most used techniques which have been widely discussed in the literature. For example, one of the most popular algorithms called set partitioning in hierarchical trees (SPIHT) used the wavelet approach [5]. Furthermore, Servetto et al. [3] applied the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) and resulting wavelet coefficients quantized by MDSQ to generate MDCs. Wang et al. [4] used the pairwise correlating transformation to generate multiple correlated descriptions in the framework of standard DCT-based image coding. Splitting an image into the descriptions was discussed by Zhang et al. [8].This paper is focused upon two different problems, namely (i) optimizing network routings in order to get acceptable quality of received images in the lossy network and (ii) the simple generation of MDCs. Wavelets are attractive in image coding problems due to a tradition of excellent rate-distortion performance, so, we have applied MDSQ on a wavelet based colored image to generate MDCs.Even though the RGB color space can be used for pixel transmission, it has the disadvantage of illumination dependence. This means that there is a significant amount of correlation between the RGB components. If the illumination of an image changes because of packet losses in a lossy network, the achievement of high reconstructed images will be compromised.Furthermore, the chrominance coefficients can be used for enhancement of the received image rather than modeling its intensity and can be neglected for larger changes without affecting our perception of the image. So it is necessary to transform the RGB color space to one of the color spaces where the separation between intensity and chrominance is more discriminate. Because of the linear conversion between RGB and YCbCr color spaces, we use the YCbCr color space to model the transmitted image. Poynton [19] discussed the conversion from RGB to YCbCr color space and from YCbCr to RGB color space.After the RGB to YCbCr color space conversion shown in Fig. 1, a transformation method has been applied to each color space of the given image to find the energy distribution of its coefficients. This determination of the image energy distribution may be approached via several transformation approaches [3,4]. However, wavelets have gained popularity in recent years for feature extraction [20], denoising [21], compression [22], face recognition [23] and packet image transmission [24] because they offer high coding efficiency [25]. The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) procedure uses a low pass filter and a high pass filter, chosen such that they divide the frequency range equally between them and is thus a suitable tool for packetizing the image in our application.Briefly, the DWT may be explained as follows: The 2-D wavelet decomposition of an image is performed by applying a 1-D DWT along the rows of the image first and then the results are decomposed along the columns. This operation results in four decomposed sub-band images referred to as low–low (LL), low–high (LH), high–low (HL), and high–high (HH). The frequency components of those sub band images cover the frequency components of the original image. The LL band can be decomposed once again in the same manner, thereby producing even more sub bands. This can be repeated to any level as shown in Fig. 1. Loss of low level sub-band coefficients over the network effects significant distortion when image is reconstructed at the destinations. Therefore, MDSQ based MDC generation will be an efficient technique for the proposed method because most of the signal energy in the lower resolution subbands can be protected when the MDCs are generated. Further details of MDSQ for wavelet based image coding can be found in [25]. In this work, we use i.i.d. Gaussian source of variance one.The achievable rates of MDCs are denoted as:(1)R=∑i=1Li∑j=1Lj(nj(Y)Ri,j(Y)+nj(cb)Ri,j(cb)+nj(Cr)Ri,j(Cr))where Liis the number of descriptions, Ljis the number of subbands.Ri,j(Y),Ri,j(Cb)andRi,j(Cr)are the bit rate of related subband of luminance, Chrominance Blue and Chrominance Red components, respectively,nj(Y),nj(Cb)andnj(Cr)are the ratios of number of samples in layer j over that of the full resolution layer. In the case of less available bandwidth,nj(Cb)andnj(Y)are indicated as small as possible to reduce the redundancy.The achievable bit rates of the generated MDCs of color image can be different according to the capacity of the optimal paths obtained. Let k be the number of optimal paths from source to each sink.Case 1 (k=1): Single description coding (SDC) has been considered to transmit throughout only one optimal path. In SDC, each source sample is encoded with an average rate of “R” bits per sample and each codeword is placed in SDC packets to transmit through the network. Upon delivery, the SDC packets are then received by the decoder and after appropriate transformation the source sample is transferred to their destination. Furthermore, because of random or congestion losses on the path, SDC packets may be lost before reaching their final destination. Some losses may involve important information that will cause substantial distortion in the received image. In order to decrease the distortion of received color image, image interpolation methods have been applied to improve quality of received image [26]. The rate R of generated SDC will depend on the bandwidth bw of the obtained optimal path and will be denoted as follows:(2a)R=bwH×W×d(bpp)(2b)D(R)=e−2Rwhere H, W and d are the height, width and dimension of the image, respectively, and D(R) denotes the achieved average distortion at the bit rate R.Case 2 (k=2): This assumption is different from the SDC approach because two optimal paths can transmit the descriptions generated. This problem is related to a two channel/path with three receivers’ problem that multiple descriptions (MDs) can be transmitted over these channels/paths [1,3]. Even if a receiver gets only part of the descriptions, it can still reconstruct an image with acceptable quality. In the MDC model, source information is encoded by several encoders where multiple description scalar quantization (MDSQ) and index assignment methods were used in this work [1,3]. Furthermore, rates of “R1” and “R2” bits per samples are allocated to first and second encoder, respectively. Totally, a rate of “R0” bits per sample is decoded at the destination. The total rate of the generated MDC will depend on the bandwidths of the optimal paths and is estimated as follows:(3a)R0=∑i=12bwiH×W×d(dpp)(3b)Di(R)=e−2Ri,i=0,1,2Case 3 (k≥2): This problem is similar to the MDC problem but the received description is more likely than the cases of SDC and MDC but increasing number of descriptions will cause data redundancy transmission through the network. In addition, this problem is related to generation of k different descriptions of an image and is customarily referred to n-channel MDC generation; further details can be found in [27]. In this case, multiple description image coding using several multiple description scalar quantizers have been applied to the wavelet coefficients of YCbCr to create k descriptions [3,27,28]. This coding method is suitable for this case because more than two descriptions can be generated for the corresponding problem. The MDCs can be generated with achievable bit rates according to obtained bandwidths (bw) of the optimized paths. Consequently, the total rate of generated MDC and the average distortion will be:(4a)R=∑i=1kbwiH×W×d(dpp)(4b)D(bwi)=e−2∑i=1k(bwi/H×W×d)where bwiis the bandwidth of the optimized path i, and H, W and d are the height, width and dimension of the image, respectively. The quality and distortion estimation of the received images at the destination nodes are developed in the following section.The quality of the received images is estimated using several methods. Let the transmitted high resolution (HR) image Ioand reconstructed HR image Irbe of size H×W pixels and consist of three spectral bands, i.e. Y, Cb and; Cr which are first converted to R, G and; B and then, the following quantitative metrics are used to compare Ioand Ir:Correlated coefficient (CC)[29]: The correlation between each band of the reference image and the reconstructed image:(5)CC=1NB∑i=1NBSx,y(υo(i)(x,y)−υ¯o(i))(υr(i)(x,y)−υ¯r(i))Sx,y(υo(i)(x,y)−υ¯o(i))2Sx(υr(i)(x,y)−υ¯r(i))2where NBis the number of spectral bands, i.e. NB=3, (x, y) is spatial pixel coordinate,uo(x,y)=[uo(1)(x,y)uo(2)(x,y)uo(3)(x,y)]=[Io(R)(x,y)Io(G)(x,y)Io(B)(x,y)]denotes the spectral vectors of the pixel (x, y) in the transmitted original image andur(x,y)=[ur(1)(x,y)ur(2)(x,y)ur(3)(x,y)]=[Ir(R)(x,y)Ir(G)(x,y)Ir(B)(x,y)]denotes the vector obtained after reconstruction. In order to clearly analyze image quality in the optimization problem, it is beneficial to use the CC equation where the estimated values are bounded between 0 and 1. As a result, the CC value should be as close to 1 as possible in the maximization problem.Root mean square error (RMSE): The root mean square error between the original image and the reconstructed image, i.e.(6)RMSE=1NB∑i=1NBD(Io(i),Ir(i))where(7)Δ(Io(i),Ir(i))=1H×W∑x,y(Xo(i)(x,y)−Xr(i)(x,y))2The RMSE value should be as close to 0 as possible.The links or edges have associated costs that could be based on their distance, capacity, and transmission medium quality. Let G=(V, E, W, Q, B) be a connected weighted undirected graph with n=|V| nodes and m=|E| edges, setsωi,j∈W,pi,j∈Qandbwi,j∈Bindependent cost variables from each other and represent the weights of each edge(i,j)∈Ewhere the weight is restricted to be a nonnegative real number [10,11,17,18].The RNF problem collaborating with the efficient generation of MDCs to maximize the quality of received images for all sinks is an NP-hard problem [30]. RNF gives a distinct color to each optimized path to prevent receiving the same description or packet twice at a destination node because this will not increase the reconstruction quality of the received image but will increase network bandwidth consumption. RNF is a convenient way for solving NP hard network flow problems such as finding multipath between multi-source and destinations (an NP hard flow problem that has been discussed in [15]) in addition to its bandwidth saving properties. RNF was first discussed to maximize the flow in a network model and can be greatly simplified if the flow of MDC descriptions from diversity servers is optimized with respect to a single sink or multi-sinks [15]. Furthermore, for each optimized path which is colored with i, a new description is generated and colored with i that can be sent from corresponding colored path i. Assume that a number of disjoint paths k from a source to a destination can be optimized, then, there are k2 colors achieved between k number of sources and destinations. Here, a GA and PSO collaborating with RNF have been used to optimize the routings across the overall lossy network so that a different number of paths from source to destination can be obtained which was discussed with the three cases in previous section. After optimizing the routing problem, the MDCs should be transmitted through the optimized paths in order to determine the acceptable quality of reconstructed images at the sink nodes. Therefore, the network flow of MDC that achieves the maximum fidelity at the sinks must have flow paths of distinct colors and maximizing the network flow of MDC [30].A version of the RNF that is particularly relevant to our problem is defined with following inputs:1)G=〈V, E, W, Q, B〉, an undirected graph with a node set V, an edge set E and set of costs W, Q and B.S={s1}, T={t1, t2, t3, …, tr} two subsets of V representing the set of source and sink nodes, respectively.A function R: E→R+ representing the capacity of each link considered an integer in G.A setωi,j∈W,ζi,j∈Qandbw∈Bcalled the independent costs of the links.A set D⊂X called the description packet set in source.The set DR⊂Y called received description packet set in T.The descriptions are sent over the optimal colored paths and reconstructed at the destination nodes as illustrated in Fig. 2. If the network graph is reliable, the image will be the same as the transmitted image. However, if losses are present (which is inevitable) then the quality of received image will be decreased because of the smaller number of packets arriving at the destination nodes.Fig. 3(a) and (b) illustrate a small direct network with 8 nodes to discuss and analyze the RNF algorithm with independent cost values associated with each network link. The server node (s) has a description (SDC) to transmit to the sink node t. Nodes 1–6 are used as intermediate nodes. Each edge is assigned three independent cost values such as path length (ωi,j), packet loss rate (ζi,j) and available bandwidth (bwi,j). Based on the explanation of RNF, Fig. 3(b) demonstrates the different colored optimal routing solutions (shown by solid, pointed and dashed lines in the figure) to transmit the description in a lossy network of eight nodes. Each optimal routing is giving different advantages and disadvantages while the description is sent to the sink node. For example, the greatest rate of description is generated and transmitted over the path (s-1-2-5-4-t) but it is the longest optimal path. The shortest path is (s-1-4-t) but the lowest rate of description can be sent over this path. In addition, packet loss rates over the optimal paths (defined as the difference between the number of packets sent and packets received per time unit) will affect the process by determining the quality of the image at the sink node. Estimation of packet loss rate will be briefly explained in the next section. The third optimal path (s-1-3-6-4-t) provides a low packet loss rate as well as a trade-off between the cost values of bandwidth and path length. Here, to solve the complex network problem, RNF enhanced by GA and PSO methods has been applied to obtain optimal routings to reach a specific sink. Furthermore, three different fitness functions have been discussed in the GA and PSO implementations to obtain optimal routings.Packets are randomly dropped in the network and generally there will be no opportunity to look inside the packets and discriminate in terms of which are lost. The usual way to handle a packet loss is to retransmit the lost packet in a data network. Retransmission protocols such as TCP, whereby the receiver tells the sender whether a packet arrived or not facilitate end-to-end reliability despite unreliable links. However, retransmitting a lost packet will cause a network cost and will entail delivery delay. MDC can be utilized to avoid dropping a packet without retransmission. In lossy networks, packet losses can occur for various reasons which are mainly classified into three types: (1) Random losses, caused by poor channel conditions; (2) Burst losses, mainly due to link or node failure in wired systems; (3) Congestion, due to limited buffer, bandwidth and processing capability at network routers. The proposed algorithm attempts to find the optimal disjoint paths. This means that lost packets which are caused by bursting can be neglected because they generally occur on joint paths.Random losses: Transmitting packets over an individual link can be described using Bernoulli trials with a single packet loss probability over the first link is p1 and loss-free probability 1−p1. Let the set of link loss rates to be estimated be denoted as p={p1, p2, …, pL}, where pLis the packet loss rate at the link L. For the individual links of a given path, we assume that, the independent packet losses are defined by a Bernoulli loss process. The loss probability of the kth path is evaluated as follows:(8)Pk=1−∏i=1L(1−pi)Let M be the number of transmitted packets from the source node and μ1:Lis the expected packet loss over the transmitted links. In this case, the probability of successful received packets will depend on the packet loss rate of the corresponding link, i.e.(9)μ1+μ2+⋯+μL=M1−∏i=1L(1−pi)where(10)μn=Mp1n=1M∏i=1n−1(1−pi)pnn>1where L is the number of links of the corresponding path. Furthermore, the Bernoulli model can also be used for the congestion problem [31]. Packet loss probabilities over the network links are discussed in [18] and estimated in the range of 10–20%.Variations of routing problems have to be solved to achieve high throughput communication in a wide variety of network problems such as K shortest-paths [12], constrained shortest-path [13], multi-objective shortest path [14] and dynamic shortest path routing discovery [10]. Most of these problems are NP-hard and one way of solving such problems is to assign a cost metric (weight) for each link in the network [10,11,18]. To date, a range of deterministic algorithms such as Dijkstra's algorithm [45], breadth-first search algorithm [46] and the Bellman-Ford algorithm [47] have been developed to find the lowest cost or routing from a specific source to specific destination through a network. Jiazi et al. [38] improved Dijkstra's shortest path algorithm and proposed multipath Dijkstra algorithm (MDA) to find optimal multipath by using different cost functions in network topologies. They show that the proposed algorithm is flexible in obtaining multiple shortest paths. Recently, evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have drawn considerable attention as routing selection problem solvers as they provide robust and efficient approach for solving complex network routing problems [10]. EAs such as genetic algorithms (GAs) [10,48], genetic programming [49] and evolutionary programming [50] have been previously proposed for various network problems. Amongst the EAs, GA provides the best performance for optimization problems [10]. Besides the GA, particle swarm optimization (PSO) is another efficient optimization algorithm, first discussed by Kennedy et al. [39], which may be employed to search for the optimum solution based on social agent behavior inspired swarm intelligence.In this paper, two meta-heuristic algorithms are used with three different fitness functions, i.e. shortest routing path [10,11], minimum packet loss rate [18] and proposed optimal multipath selection, to find optimal multipath in lossy networks to provide effective multimedia transmission. The algorithms are compared with the MDA method [38] to obtain optimal multipath in various lossy network models to provide efficient multimedia transmission.Genetic algorithms (GAs) are becoming more widely used in many areas to find high quality solutions in optimization problems [32–36]. In the implementation, the GA starts with an initial set of chromosomes (typically random) represented as binary numbers to offer a solution for the problem. By applying the evolution operators, a new generation is formed by firstly applying tournament selection operator (TSO) which considers the fitness values of the parents, and rejection of the others so as to keep the population size constant. To perform it, new chromosomes are formed by merging two parents from the current generation using the two-point crossover operator and modifying a chromosome using a uniform mutation operator. Let's consider two different individuals with n dimensions of the given population, i.e.(11)x→i=(xi1,…,xir,…,xis,…,xin)x→j=(xj1,…,xjr,…,xjs,…,xjn)where r and s denote two randomly selected crossover points, and r≤s. After the crossover operator employed, the produced individuals or new candidate solutions are:(12)x→i=(xi1,…,xjr,…,xjs,…,xin)x→j=(xj1,…,xir,…,xis,…,xjn)Let us supposex→=(x1x2,…,xik,…,xn)where k denotes the randomly selected point in the chromosome. Thus, the kth gene of the individual can be changed or mutated to produce another individual. The best chromosome is selected to be transferred in the new population using elitism in GA. After some generations, the algorithms converge to the best chromosome, which represents the optimum or suboptimal solution to the problem. Moreover, two different stopping criteria are used, one being the achievement of the optimal fitness value and the other the reaching of a previously set iteration limit. The pseudo-code of GA is as follows (Table 1).In GA and PSO algorithms, the quality of a represented potential solution is estimated by a fitness function. The purpose of using fitness functions is to map a chromosome and a particle representation into a scalar value or a cost value. For the multi-objective network problem, the fitness function estimates a cost value for each individual that is close to global optimum or not. Thus, the strong and weak candidates can be evaluated according to the fitness values and the new population is produced based on them. The objective functions or fitness functions that involve computational efficiency and accuracy are defined with constraints as follows:(13)f1=min∑i,j∈En(ωi,j)Ii,j(14)f2=min1−∏i,j∈En(1−ζi,j)Ii,j(15)f3=min||y||2=miny12+y22wherey=y1y2=(Si,j∈En(ωi,j)Ii,j)(1−Pi,j∈En(1−ζi,j)Ii,j)s.t.∑j=1nIi,j−∑j=1nIj,i=1,i=10,i=2,3,…,n−1−1,otherwise(bwi,j)Ii,j≥εIj,i∈{0,1},∀(i,j)where c is the maximum value of weightsωi,j∈W,bwi,j∈Bis the bandwidth of the link connection indicator Ii,jand f3 is a proposed multi-objective function for finding the optimal multi paths; ɛ denotes the capacity of the transmitted data or image. Furthermore, the single objective functions f1 and f2 are used to find shortest path and minimum packet loss rate of a path in the given network topologies, respectively. Let Ii,jbe the link connection indicator between nodes i and j which plays the role of a chromosome and particle map providing information on whether the link from node i to node j is included in a routing path, i.e.(16)Ii,j=1,if the link from nodeito nodejexists in the routing path0,otherwiseThe particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm is a new optimization algorithm which is inspired by the social behavior of colony of animals in environment [39]. Like GAs, PSO is a population-based optimization method that searches multiple solutions [40–42] but it employs a different “competitive” strategy. Position and velocity of each particle i is updated if the fitness value does not provide the minimum optimum solution and the position of the following properties of an individual particle i are updated at each iteration. To find the fitness value of particle i, the PSO uses the fitness cost functions defined in Eqs. (13)–(15) to find the minimum optimum result or multipath in the lossy networks. A current position with D dimensions in search space,x→(i), a current velocity with D dimensions,v→(i), personal best position and global best position in search space,fbesti,fbestg, respectively. The personal best position,fbesti, corresponds to the position in search space where particle i had the smallest value as determined by the objective function f, aiming to minimize the task. The global best position denoted byfbestg, represents the position yielding the current global best position amongst the entire particles best positionsfbesti. Eqs. (17) and (18) define how the velocities and locations of swarm particles are updated at iteration k, respectively. In summary, PSO performs the following steps:1)Initialize the number of particles p, generation index k=0, constants c1=2.0 and c2=2.0;Randomly initialize positions of all particlesx→(i)=x1i,x2i,…,xDifori=1,…,p;Randomly initialize velocities of all particlesv→(i)=v1i,v2i,…,vDi;0≤v1i≤vmax,fori=1,…,p;While stopping criteria are not reached do:For each particle i:Evaluate the fitness valuefifori=1,…,p;Iffi<fbestithenfbesti=fi,px→(i)=x→(u)Elsefi<fbestgthenfbestg=fi,gx→k+1(i)=x→k(i)End ForFor each particle i in the swarm:Update velocity: Estimate velocityv→(i)using Eq. (17)Update position: Update positionx→(i)using Eq. (18)End ForSet k=k+1End WhileIn this work, PSO explores a D-dimensional space, using a population of particles which are initially provided with random velocities and positions which are updated by using the following equations:(17)v→(k+1)(i)=ωv→(k)(i)+c1r(k)(i)px→(k)(i)−x→(k)(i)+c2r(k)(i)gr→(k)(i)−x→(k)(i)(18)x→(k+1)(i)=x→(k)(i)+v→(k+1)(i)where c1 and c2 are two learning factors that control the influence of personal best and global best in the search process and ω is the inertia weight which is used to update velocity for increasing the convergence speed. In the PSO algorithm, both c1 and c2 are chosen between [0, 4.0] to perform good results. Inertia weight ω is selected randomly between [0, 1] at each generation [11]. Furthermore, a priority encoding method is also applied in PSO implementation to represent the valid paths.Each node in the network topology is given a unique integer index value from 1, …, n where n is the number of nodes. In addition, each index node is a gene of the chromosome for the GA and a position of the particle for the PSO and the number of nodes in the network routing topology may differ from individual to individual. An example of a fixed-length individual (e.g. chromosome or particle) and its decoded path is shown in Fig. 4. The length of the individual which is represented as a string variable in Fig. 4 should not exceed the maximum length of n. In the GA implementation, a gene in a chromosome is characterized by two factors: the position of the gene located within the structure of chromosome, and the costs between two connected genes. In the encoding method, the position of a gene is used to represent the node number and the costs of two connected genes are used to evaluate the fitness values. In the PSO implementation, the positions located within the structure of particles are used to represent the valid path.In the routing problem, representing a valid path is a critical and typical complexity problem because of the many potential intermediate nodes that can be selected as a node ID in a solution path. If the individual (chromosome or particle) decoding strategy is not well employed, the obtained path may not terminate at the destination node leading to an invalid path. Such an invalid path clearly does not provide any benefit for solving the problem because it cannot be decoded to a solution. The paths represented must aim to find a potential solution for solving the routing problem efficiently. Priority-based encoding is a very effective method to represent a path that has been applied in its basic and enhanced forms to solve shortest path routing problems [11,37]. In this work, an improved priority-based encoding method or local search based priority encoding method has been applied to represent a potential routing solution.In the GA and PSO algorithms, characterizations of individuals have been used to represent a valid path. For instance, a gene in a chromosome is characterized by two factors: locus, i.e. the position of the gene located within the structure of chromosome, and allele, i.e. the value taken by the gene. In the proposed encoding method, the position of a gene in the GA and the priority of a particle in the PSO are used to represent a candidate path which can be uniquely determined from this encoding.In terms of an undirected connection network, Fig. 4 illustrates the local search based priority encoding method and its decoding. Initially, the global priority is randomly generated and then, an attempt is made to find a connected node ID to the source node 1. Nodes 2 and 3 are eligible for the next possible node which can be easily fixed according to adjacency relations among the nodes. The node priorities are 56 and 45, respectively so node 2 has the highest priority and is incorporated into the path. The possible nodes next to node 2 are nodes 1, 4 and 5 but the first must be removed to be searched as a next node in the path by inserting a value of −N because it was chosen as a node ID in previous steps. In this case, node 5 has the largest priority value and is placed in the path. Then, we form the set of nodes available for the next position and select node 7 with the highest priority among them. These steps are repeated until we obtain a valid path from source to destination (1-2-5-7).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
