@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Support Vector Regression Model for the prediction of Loadability Margin of a Power System

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SVR methodology will estimate the loadability margin not only under normal conditions and different loading directions.It improves the accuracy of mean square error and reduces the prediction time, by choosing various kernel type and SVR parameter.The results of SVRs (nu-SVR and epsilon-SVR) are compared with RBF networks corresponding to various loading scenarios of a power system to estimate the voltage stability margin.The estimation of loading margin is achieved with least absolute error, minimum training and testing computational time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Loadability margin,Support vector regression,Artificial neural networks,Voltage stability assessment,Kernel parameter,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Loadability limits are critical points of particular interest in voltage stability assessment, indicating how much a system can be stressed from a given state before reaching instability. Thus estimating the loadability margin of a power system is essential in the real time voltage stability assessment. A new methodology is developed based on Support Vector Regression (SVR) which is the most common application form of Support Vector Machines (SVM). The proposed SVR methodology can successfully estimate the loadability margin under normal operating conditions and different loading directions. SVR has the feature of minimizing the generalization error in achieving the generalized network over the other mapping methods. In this paper, the SVR input vector is in the form of real and reactive power load, while the target vector is lambda (loading margin). To reduce both mean square error and prediction time in SVR, the kernel type and SVR parameters are chosen determined by using grid search based on 10-fold cross-validation method for the best SVR network. The results of SVRs (nu-SVR and epsilon-SVR) are compared with RBF neural networks and validated in the IEEE 30 bus system and IEEE 118 bus system at different operating scenarios. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method for on-line prediction of loadability margins of a power system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the analysis of voltage stability has become a major concern in many power system planning and operation since it has been the cause for many power system blackouts [1] around the world. The lack of new generation and transmission facilities, over exploitation of the existing facilities geared by increase in load demand especially in a deregulated environment where systems operate closer to their security boundaries makes this type of problem more likely to happen in the present power systems.Generally, loading margin determination can be achieved by two techniques namely direct method and Homotopy method. In direct methodology, the loadability margin is calculated using set of nonlinear equations includes power flow equations and constraints aimed to impose the conditions of either the saddle-node bifurcation (SNB) or the limit-induced bifurcation (LIB). The major drawbacks of direct methods are requirement of a good initial guess for determining SNB points and formulation of different set of equation for each bifurcation point. The solution does not provide whether maximum loading condition is due to LIB or a SNB and taking into account all possible bifurcations which leads to lengthy process.Another direct method is using nonlinear programming techniques as in optimal power flow method. The computational burden of an optimal power flow problem of a real power system cannot be neglected [2]. The homotopy method consist of a continuation equation whose Jacobian matrix is not singular at bifurcation points, hence they are numerically robust. The continuation power flow (CPF) approach is one of the homotopy methods and consists of predictor–corrector scheme in order to forecast the bifurcation point of PV or QV curves [3,4]. But it fails to give the accurate result if the step length is more. The loadability margin evaluation considering operating system limits, which can be associated with Hopf bifurcations [5].The comparative study of various voltage stability indices for the estimation of loadability margin is presented in ref. [6], which gives some other useful information such as identification of critical bus/line in a power system. In order to obtain a set of optimal loading parameters that maximizes system loadability an interior-point nonlinear optimization method is proposed in ref. [7]. In [8] multiple load flow solutions are proposed to obtain the “minimum” loadability margins. In [9], an energy-function-based approach is proposed to evaluate the loadability margins on a given loading direction. The authors in [10] maximize the loadability margin in a given loading direction through minimizing the reactive power losses near the critical loading point by means of linear programming.Thus various optimization techniques are used for estimating the loadability margin of power systems have been proposed related to voltage stability limits [11–13] but these are depend on size and non linearity of the problem. In [14], the fuzzy logic has been used to find the loadability limit, but this algorithm does not give global optima.ANN is a highly efficient computational tool that could be used for on-line loadability evaluation. Some research work has been devoted to NN applications to voltage security assessment and monitoring. Multilayered feed forward neural network has been used for power margin estimation associated with static voltage stability limits by means of different training criteria and algorithms. In [15–18], the active and reactive powers on load and generation buses, bus voltage magnitude and angles are used as the inputs. In [19], the authors had proposed a new methodology for loading margin estimation based on subtractive clustering and ANFIS, where various voltage stability indices are selected as inputs. This method gives good results to deal with uncertain load behaviour and can be used in a real time environment. Mostly artificial intelligence methods have failed to predict the voltage stability margin correctly because they cannot find the global minima accurately.In [20] ant colony optimization technique and [21] uses evolutionary programming for estimation of maximum loadability. Paper [22] compares the multilayer perceptron obtained using hybrid particle swarm optimization technique with the results from CPF technique.In [23] a new DEPSO algorithm which combines the advantages of DE and PSO to determine the maximum loading point has been proposed which gives more accurate results compared to other evolutionary algorithms. In general any evolutionary based technique requires large time per iteration and hence it cannot be applicable for practical large power system.From the previous observation, the problem of loadability prediction still needs further investigation for real time applications. In the operation of practical power systems, different loading scenarios may result in very different loadability margins for the same operating point, hence loadability margins should be predicted for any loading direction.Support vector machine is a powerful machine learning approach based on statistical learning theory, which has been first developed by Vapnik [24]. It has become a very interested topic of intensive study due to its successful application in classification tasks [25] and regression tasks [26], specially on time series prediction [27] and function estimation [28]. The SVM is one of the approaches to supervised learning that takes an annotated training data set as input and output a generalized model, which can then be used to accurately predict the outcomes of future events. The merits of SVM over multilayer neural network classifiers are global optimum solution and robustness to outliers [28]. Support vector regression (SVR) is the most common application form of SVMs. An overview of the basic ideas underlying support vector (SV) machines for regression and function estimation has been given in [29]. Recently, the SVR has been applied to various fields such as foreign exchange rate forecasting [30], fault diagnosis [31], particle swarm optimization [32], thunderstorm prediction [33], breast cancer diagnosis [34], aero-engine model reconstruction [35]. In [36] dynamic voltage collapse prediction on an actual power system using support vector regression is presented. The paper [37] proposed a novel transmission line fault location scheme, combining wavelet packet decomposition (WPD) and support vector regression (SVR). The hybrid load forecasting model combining differential evolution (DE) algorithm and support vector regression are used to solve the annual load forecasting problem [38], short term load forecasting problem [39]. The SVR has been widely used to solve nonlinear predicting problems such as software reliability prediction problem [40], prediction of the next day solar insolation for effective use of PV systems [41]. SVR and ANNs are both AI techniques and they are used widely in many areas of science and engineering. The paper [42] deals with ν-support vector regression based prediction model of critical heat flux for water flow in vertical round tubes and the results are compared with ANN. In paper [43] a method is used for local prediction of maximum post-contingency deviation of power system frequency using ANN and SVR learning machines. The on-line loadability margin under different loading conditions are estimated by spider-SVM and the results are compared with ANN in [44].This paper presents a new methodology for the estimation of voltage stability margin of a power system based on SVM. In this paper, we use the ν-SVR and ɛ-SVR models to predict the loadability margin under different loading scenarios. The datasets are collected from CPF results. Two different kernel functions have been used, the RBF kernel and the polynomial kernel and various SVR parameters are selected by 10-fold cross-validation method are used for SVR model. The proposed method is successfully tested on IEEE 30 bus and IEEE 118 bus systems. The predicted results of SVR models are compared with those of ANN and CPF results. The performance of SVR is compared with ANN on statistical measures like best, mean, standard deviation of results and average computation time. Results show the superiority of SVR over CPF and ANN algorithms on accuracy and consistency.The structure of the paper is as follows: In “Estimation of loadability margin” section, a summarized description of estimation of loadability margin methodology such as CPF, ANN and SVR are sketched. “SVR model design” section presents the algorithm for the design of SVR and its data generation. The simulation results of the proposed approach and the comparison of SVR result with ANN are also carried out in “Simulation results and discussions” section. Finally, conclusions are drawn in “Conclusion” section.Loadability margin is the distance with respect to the loading parameter, from the current operating point to voltage collapse point [5].Continuation power flow (CPF) is a powerful algorithm to trace the power flow solution, starting at a base load leading up to the steady state voltage stability limit, for determining the loadability margin. It employs a predictor–corrector scheme to find a solution path of a set of power flow equations that have been reformulated to include a load parameter. It starts from a known solution and uses a tangent predictor to estimate subsequent solution corresponding to a different value of the load parameter. This estimate is then corrected using Newton–Raphson method employed by a conventional power flow. The local parameterization mentioned earlier provides a mean of identifying each point along the solution path and plays an integral part in avoiding singularity in Jacobian. The purpose of continuation load-flow is to find a continuum of load-flow solutions for a given load/generation change scenario, i.e. computation direction. It is capable of producing the whole PV curve illustrated in Fig. 1. The singularity of continuation load-flow equations is not a problem; therefore, the voltage collapse point can be determined.The intermediate results of the continuation process also provide valuable insight into the voltage stability of the system and the areas prone to voltage collapse.The Artificial Neural Network (ANN) has been emerged as a powerful tool for function approximation and dynamic system control [45], because of the merits of high computational rate and unique learning capability. In order to determine the capability of the proposed technique to predict the voltage stability margin of a power system, a comparative study was conducted by developing an ANN system and used it to perform the similar task. A multilayer feedforward ANN with error backpropagation learning was developed [46]. The typical back propagation neural network consists of a three layer structure namely: input layer, hidden layer and output layer nodes as shown in Fig. 2. The hidden layer may consist of one or more nonlinear neurons and it performs continuous, nonlinear transformations of the weighted input. Nonlinear activation function transforms the weighted input of a neuron nonlinearly to an output. Popularly used activation function is sigmoidal and widely used sigmoid functions are logistic and hyperbolic tangent function, where [Pdi,1, Pdi,2, …Pdi,n] is the real power load vector of ith bus for ‘n’ number of patterns, [Qdi,1, Qdi,2, …Qdi,n] is the reactive load vector of ith bus for ‘n’ patterns.The ANN methodology has two phases namely training and testing. During the training phase, a set of real and reactive power demands at all load buses of a system is given as inputs and the model is trained to determine the loading margin of the system as shown in Fig. 3. From the trained model, the testing of the network is done which represents the relationship between the load direction and loading margin. From the predicted values of the output, the power system operator is able to know the distance to maximum loadability limit. Here the ANN model consists of the input layer of three neurons, one hidden layer of five neurons and an output layer of one neuron. The Levenberg–Marquardt backpropagation network training function is used. The network is trained for up to 300 epochs to an error goal of 0.000001.SVM has two special properties that SVMs can achieve (1) high generalization by maximizing the margin and (2) support an efficient learning of nonlinear functions by kernel trick. For the classification, the SVM tries to find the optimal hyperplane, which is expressed as a linear combination of a subset of training data (called support vectors) by solving a linearly constrained quadratic programming (QP) problem with a maximum margin between the two classes. Additionally, with the introduction of Vapnik's ɛ-insensitive loss function, the SVM has been extended to solve a nonlinear regression–estimation problem, called the SVM for regression [47].SVM regression (SVR) is a method to estimate a function that maps from an input object to a real number based on training data. Similar to SVM classification (SVC), SVR has the same properties of the margin maximization and kernel trick for nonlinear mapping [48].Fig. 4shows the structure of SVR predictor which realizes the mapping function. The basic idea of SVR is to map the data of input space into high dimensional feature space via a nonlinear mapping and to do linear regression in this space.xˆt+1=f(xt,xt−1,xt−2,…xt−(m−1))in whichxˆt+1is the predicted value andx→tis the observed value.A training set for regression is represented as follows.(1)D=x1,y1,x2,y2,…xm,ymwherexiis an n-dimensional vector, y is the real number for eachxi. The SVR function F(xi) makes a mapping from an input vectorxito the target yiand takes the form.(2)F(X)=w∗x−bwherewis the weight vector and b is the bias. The goal is to estimate the parameters (wand b) of the function that give the best fit of the data. An SVR function F(x) approximates all pairs (xi, yi) while maintaining the differences between estimated values and real values under precision. That is, for every input vectorxin D,yi−w∗xi−b≤εw∗xi+b−yi≤εThe margin isMargin=1wBy minimizingw2to maximize the margin, the training in SVR becomes a constrained optimization problem as follows.(3)Minimize:L(w)=12w2(4)Subjectto:yi−w∗xi−b≤ε(5)w∗xi+b−yi≤εThe solution of this problem does not allow any errors. To allow some errors to deal with noise in the training data, the soft margin SVR uses slack variables ξ andξˆ.Then, the optimization problem can be revised as follows.(6)Minimize:Lw,ξ=12w2+C∑iξ2i,ξˆ2i,C>0Subject to:(7)yi−w∗xi−b≤ε+ξi∀(xi,yi)∈D(8)w∗xi+b−yi≤ε+ξˆi∀(xi,yi)∈D(9)ξi,ξˆi≥0The constant C>0 is the trade-off parameter between the margin size and the amount of errors.The slack variables ξ andξˆdeal with infeasible constraints of the optimization problem by imposing the penalty to the excess deviations which are larger than ɛ.To solve the optimization problem Eq. (6), we can construct a Lagrange function from the objective function with Lagrange multipliers as follows:(10)Minimize:L=12w2+C∑iξi,ξˆi−∑iηiξi+ηˆiξˆi−∑iαiε+ηi−yi+w⋅xi+b−∑iαˆiε+ηˆi+yi−w⋅xi−b(11)Subjectto:ηi,ηˆi≥0(12)αi,αˆi≥0where ηi,ηˆi, αi,αˆiare the Lagrange multipliers which satisfy positive constraints.The following is the process to find the saddle point by using the partial derivatives of L with respect to each Lagrangian multipliers for minimizing the function L.(13)∂L∂b=∑iαi−αˆi=0(14)∂L∂w=w−∑iαi−αˆixi=0,w=∑iαi−αˆixi(15)∂L∂ξˆi=C−αˆi−ηˆi=0,ηˆi=C−αˆiThe optimization problem with inequality constraints can be changed into the following dual optimization problem by substituting Eqs. (13), (14) and (15) in Eq. (10).(16)Maximize:L(α)=∑iyiαi−αˆi−ε∑iαi+αˆi−12∑i∑jαi−αˆiαi−αˆixixj(17)Subjectto:∑iαi−αˆi=0(18)0≤α,αˆ≤CThe dual variables ηi,ηˆiare eliminated in revising Eq. (10) in Eq. (16). Eqs. (14) and (15) can be rewritten as follows.(19)w=∑iαi−αˆixi(20)±⊃Bηi=C−αi(21)ηˆi=C−αˆiwherewis represented by a linear combination of the training vectorsxi. Accordingly, the SVR function F(x) becomes the following function.(22)F(x)=∑iαi−αˆixixj+bEq. (22) can map the training vectors to target real values with allowing some errors but it cannot handle the nonlinear SVR case. The same kernel trick can be applied by replacing the inner product of two vectorsxiandxjwith a kernel function K(xi, xj). The transformed feature space is usually high dimensional, and the SVR function in this space becomes nonlinear in the original input space. Using the kernel function K, The inner product in the transformed feature space can be computed as fast as the inner productxi*xjin the original input space. Once replacing the original inner product with a kernel function K, the remaining process for solving the optimization problem is very similar to that for the linear SVR. The linear optimization function can be changed by using kernel function as follows.(23)Maximize:L(α)=∑iyiαi−αˆi−ε∑iαi+αˆi−12∑i∑jαi−αˆiαi−αˆiKxixj(24)Subjectto:∑iαi−αˆi=0(25)αˆi≥0,αi≥0(26)0≤α,αˆ≤CFinally, the SVR function F(x) becomes the following using the kernel function.(27)F(x)=∑iαi−αˆiKxixj+b1.Run the continuation power flow routine available in PSAT [49] for the test system for various loading scenarios considering:a.Increase in real and reactive power loads at all load buses,Increase in real and reactive power loads at a selected load bus,Increase in real power load alone at a selected load bus andIncrease in reactive power load alone at a selected load bus.From the CPF results, create a database for the input vector in the form of [PgPlQgQl] where Pg, Qg, Pl and Ql are the real and reactive powers in generators and load buses respectively. And output scalar lambda (loading margin) for the corresponding input vectors as shown in Fig. 5.Choose different possibilities, such as kernel type, kernel parameters and SVR parameters (C and gamma) as detailed in “Estimation of Loadability Margin” section to train the SVR network.Train the SVR network using the training data sets and from regression the network gives the output as loadability margin.Compare the results of SVR with that of ANN and convectional CPF method on the basis of testing least possible mean square error (MSE) as in Eq. (28) and training computational time.The structure of proposed support vector regression model is shown in the Fig. 5.In machine learning approaches, the data set must adequately represent the entire range of power system operating states. The input and output patterns can be generated either from real time or off line mode of simulation. In this work, a large number of characteristics of operating points are generated through off line simulation using CPF method available in PSAT software. The distance to voltage collapse in terms of the loading margin, evaluated for all the vulnerable load buses, have been used as the target output set for training the SVR. The sensitivity of the loadability margin with respect to the input variables (real and reactive power) are computed to find the real and reactive power load buses having significant effect on the voltage stability assessment. The feature set consists of only those real and reactive power load buses and for a particular scenario, the real and reactive power output of ith bus is increased by some fixed amount of ΔPdi, ΔQdirespectively. The loadability margin for original power and increased values are found. The difference between the two gives the change in loadability margin by Δλ value. Then the numerical loadability margin sensitivity of ith bus w.r.t input parameters can be written asΔλiΔPdiandΔλiΔQdi.LIBSVM, MATLAB routine [51] is for training the SVMs in both classification and regression. The training performance of the SVR module depends on proper selection of SVR parameter such as cost function C and γ and kernel types. The various kernel types considered for SVM regression are the RBF, linear, polynomial and Gaussian [52]. The SVM regression is trained with several values of C and γ to guess the combination of parameters that might be the best for a SVR model. The best model is determined through the evaluation of mean square error (MSE) value which is to be very less. The C ranges are chosen in between [1 and 1000] and γ value ranges from [0.05 to 1] for training the SVR. The epsilon tolerance value is set to be 0.0001.The estimation of loading margin is achieved by training the various types of SVR namely nu-SVR (ν-SVR) and epsilon-SVR (ɛ-SVR). To model the ν-SVR, two types of kernels namely polynomial and RBF are chosen. Several values of C, γ and ν are tried to find which combinations of SVR parameters may be used for training ν-SVR. By the combination of parameters, SVR model undergoes both training using training data instance and testing. From the result of computational time and MSE, the best SVR parameters are selected. To illustrate the proposed method for the estimation of loadability margin, two test systems viz., IEEE 30 bus systems and IEEE 118 bus system are considered.The proposed algorithm is applied to the IEEE 30 bus and IEEE 118 bus systems. These are the standard test systems used by most researchers to validate their results. The numerical data for IEEE 30 bus and IEEE 118 bus systems are taken from power system [50].In IEEE 30 bus test system, 600 patterns were generated by varying the real and reactive loads randomly from its base case value to 150% of its base case value. Power factor at all load buses are maintained constant. Out of 600 patterns generated in IEEE 30 bus system, 80% (480 patterns) are selected for training, while the left 20% (120 patterns) are used for testing. The large number of patterns/features necessitates the use of feature selection/extraction techniques. Some of the real and reactive load power buses only have major impact on the loadability margin. Based on this, the sensitivity analysis of loadability margin of the test system is estimated.There are two kinds of SVR commonly used for the non-linear cases, namely the ɛ-SVR and its extension, ν-SVR. Two different kernel functions have been used for SVR model namely the RBF kernel and the polynomial kernel. Thus the SVR type and its kernel type are selected based on trial and error approach for various SVR parameters based on computational time and best MSE.Case 1RBF kernel based ν-SVR.Fig. 6shows the result of training time of ν-SVR type with RBF kernel of IEEE 30 bus system for various C and γ values. At C=50, γ=0.45 and ν=0.5, the training time is noted as 0.194732s and at C=100, γ=0.35 and ν=0.5, the training time is observed as 0.359338s. The testing MSE of ν-SVR, RBF kernel for various combinations of C and γ values are shown in Fig. 7. The testing MSE at C=50, γ=0.45 and ν=0.5 is found to be 1.24285 and similarly at C=100, γ=0.35 and ν=0.5, MSE is obtained as 1.25877.Case 2RBF kernel based ɛ-SVR.Similar to ν-SVR model, the two kernel type's polynomial and RBF are also chosen for ɛ-SVR. Their testing mode accuracies for various SVR parameters are obtained in terms of MSE. Figs. 8 and 9shows the result of estimation of loadability margin in terms of computational time in seconds and MSE for ɛ-SVR model with different C, γ values for RBF kernel. At C=50, γ=0.45 and ɛ=0.1, the training time and testing MSE are 0.120276s and 1.30466 and at C=100, γ=0.35 and ɛ=0.1, the training time and testing MSE are 0.141846s and 1.32793. By comparing ν-SVR and ɛ-SVR, the computational time of ɛ-SVR is less for the same C and γ values. However the testing MSE in the ν-SVR for the prediction of loadability margin of a power system is slightly lesser than ɛ-SVR.Case 3Polynomial kernel based ν-SVR and ɛ-SVR.The training time and MSE of poly kernel for different values of C and γ are tabulated in Table 1for both ν-SVR and ɛ-SVR. The results show that the training time and testing MSE for ν-SVR at C=10, γ=0.5 are 155.38272s and 9.77581 and at C=100, γ=0.2 are 166.355s and 5.80031 respectively. Similarly for ɛ-SVR at C=10, γ=0.5 and ɛ=0.1, the training time and testing MSE are 54.44237s and 1.8136 and at C=100, γ=0.2 and ɛ=0.1, the training time and testing MSE are 100.6473s and 2.00475 respectively. The RBF kernel type training time is very less in value when compared to poly kernel type at the same SVR parameters for the estimation of loading margin for IEEE 30 bus system. Thus compared to poly, the performance of RBF kernel in terms of MSE and computation time is good and it is the best choice for SVR model.By using RBF kernel in ɛ-SVR type, there are two parameters associated with RBF kernels: C and γ. The penalty parameter C and the kernel parameter γ play a crucial role in the performance of SVR model. The improper selection of these two parameters can cause over-fitting or under-fitting problems. Using grid-search based on 10-fold cross-validation approach the optimal choice of C and γ parameters are determined so that the regression model can accurately predict unknown data. Based on cross-validation accuracy result of 93% the optimal parameter are selected as C=100 and γ=0.2 only. All input patterns are belong to stable/unstable class based on its stability status. Sequential forward selection is used as feature selection method to select the optimal input features for regression model. The patterns in the feature vector are split into training set (80%) and remaining for testing set.Table 3 shows the feature selection for loadability margin of the test system. Similarly the sensitivity of real and reactive power load with respect to loadability margin are shown in Figs. 10 and 11. High the value of sensitivity is more significant in the output of loadability margin.In IEEE 118 bus test system, as many as 300 patterns were generated by changing the loading at each bus randomly in wide range (±50% of base case). Thus (300×118) 35,400 data samples were used for the study. Out of 300 patterns, 80% (240 patterns) are taken for training and the remaining for testing. The training time and the testing MSE of ν-SVR model for various SVR parameters with RBF type are shown in Figs. 12 and 13. At C=10, γ=0.85 and ν=0.5 the training time 0.155936s and the testing mean square error 0.0391045 and at C=500, γ=0.55 and ν=0.5 the training time and the testing mean square error are obtained as 1.30714s and 0.0541637 respectively.Figs. 14 and 15show for ɛ-SVR which gives the result value of training time and testing MSE for the ɛ=0.1. At C=10, γ=0.85 and ɛ=0.1, the training time and testing MSE are observed as 0.074817s and 0.079731 and at C=500, γ=0.55 and ɛ=0.1, the training time and testing MSE are found to be 0.079362s and 0.0957348 respectively. The time and error of ɛ-SVR are lesser in value when to compare to ν-SVR for other SVR parameters also.The MSE values of IEEE 118 bus system are simulated for various SVR parameters of poly kernel are tabulated in Table 2. As the C parameter increases, the training computational time also increases, but depends on γ values, the time and MSE decreases. As in RBF Kernel, the same SVR parameter options are chosen. The testing error of ν-SVR for C=5, γ=0.85 is obtained as 0.15386 and for C=100, γ=0.55 is noted as 0.11020 respectively and the computational time is observed as 0.09279s and 0.11341s respectively. For ɛ-SVR, the results are lesser in value for the same SVR parameter in ν-SVR. However the results show that the RBF kernel predicts the result quickly when compared to poly kernel type and the computational time also less for the estimation of loadability margin of a power system. Based on 10-fold cross-validation accuracy result of 91.8% the optimal parameter are selected as C=100 and γ=0.55. The results of feature selection and sensitivity analysis are tabulated in the following Table 3. Similarly the sensitivity of real and reactive power load with respect to loadability margin are shown in Figs. 16 and 17. High the value of sensitivity is more significant in the output of loadability margin.Fig. 18shows the prediction of loadability margin for IEEE 30 bus system by comparing the three models: ν-SVR, ɛ-SVR and ANN in terms of loading margin for some testing data samples. The ɛ-SVR predicts the loadability margin more quickly and accurately when compared to ν-SVR and ANN. Similarly Fig. 19shows the comparison of SVR types and ANN for testing samples for IEEE 118 bus system. The total comparison of average absolute errors for training and testing of SVRs and ANN model and the computational time for both IEEE 30 bus system and IEEE 118 bus system are tabulated in Table 4. The absolute errors of SVR types and ANN are obtained by comparing the output with the actual values of loading margin (lambda) obtained from CPF. It shows that evaluated error for sample data set for SVRs is less compared to ANN. Among the SVRs, ɛ-SVR gives the better result when compared to ν-SVR because of lesser computational time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
