@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new flexible and reliable IVF-TOPSIS method based on uncertainty risk reduction in decision making process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The authors propose the concepts of uncertainty and the risk of uncertainty for the IVFNs.The authors present a measurement procedure for the risk of uncertainty related to the IVFNs.The authors enter the concepts of uncertainty and the risk of uncertainty in the IVF-MCDM problems.The authors propose an IVF-TOPSIS method based on uncertainty risk reduction in decision making process.The authors apply the proposed method for solving a real facility location selection problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MCDM,Interval Valued Fuzzy Sets (IVFSs),Type-1 fuzzy sets,TOPSIS method,Facility location selection,Municipal wet waste landfill,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the challenging and famous types of MCDM (Multiple Criteria Decision Making) problems that includes both quantitative and qualitative criteria is Facility location selection problem. For the common fuzzy MCDM problems (Type-1 fuzzy MCDM problems), the ratings of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights, are expressed by the common fuzzy numbers. However, in the majority of cases, determining the exact membership degree for each element of the fuzzy sets which are considered for the ratings of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights as a number in interval [0,1], is difficult. In this situation, the ratings of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights, are expressed by the IVFNs (Interval Valued Fuzzy Numbers) and thereby the IVF-MCDM (Interval Valued Fuzzy MCDM) methods should be used. In this paper, the authors propose an IVF-TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) method based on uncertainty risk reduction in decision making process. By using this method, the reliability of the captured decisions in an IVF decision making problem is significantly increased. The proposed method is applied for solving a real application problem related to selecting a suitable location for digging some pits for municipal wet waste landfill in one of the largest cities in Iran. The proposed method is also compared with another IVF-TOPSIS method. As a result, the authors concluded that in addition to benefits such as simplicity and ease of use that exist in the previous IVF-TOPSIS methods, the proposed method has a significant reliability and flexibility and is practical for facility location selection problems and other IVF-MCDM problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Typically, the selection of the facility location for each producing or servicing organization influences the survival and success of the organization. For each organization, the suitable facility location selection provides the optimum conditions as: production and/or service capacity, reducing the total costs related to the production and/or service operations, obtaining additional profits, increasing the customers’ satisfaction, saving and return profitability, ease of future expansion and minimizing investment in equipment. Thus, the facility location selection is usually considered as an important factor for each organization. It should be considered that the facility location selection is a famous kind of the MCDM problems so that many papers have been presented in this field.In the following, some significant researches about the use of crisp or fuzzy MCDM methods for solving facility location selection problems are presented.Isalou et al. [1] developed an integrated fuzzy logic and ANP (Analytical Network Process) method for determining a suitable location for landfilling municipal solid wastes generated in Kahak Town, Qom, Iran. They found out that the integration of the fuzzy logic and ANP method, can give the better results compared with each of the following methods: AHP (Analytical Hierarchy Process), fuzzy logic and ANP individually. Yong [2] developed a new TOPSIS method for selecting the plant location in the fuzzy environment. In order to avoid the complicated fuzzy arithmetic operations, the linguistic variables which were expressed by triangular fuzzy numbers, were transformed into crisp numbers based on the graded mean representation. He/she also used the canonical representation of multiplication operations on triangular fuzzy numbers to obtain the “positive ideal solution” and the “negative ideal solution”. The developed method was applied to a numerical example of plant location selection to illustrate the efficiency of the developed method. Wei et al. [3] developed a fuzzy ANP method for solving the dry port location selection in the uncertain conditions. Nazari et al. [4] applied the Chang's [5] fuzzy AHP-based MCDM method for selecting the best site of landfills based on a set of decision criteria. In the applied method, as the global weights of criteria were calculated by AHP, they were incorporated into the decision matrices composed by decision maker and passed to the fuzzy AHP method which was used to determine the preference order of the siting alternatives. Based on the fuzzy AHP-based MCDM method. They developed a computer program for the ranking and selecting the landfill site in the MATLAB environment as well. They applied the mentioned method for a hypothetical problem with four different areas. The results of applying the computer program showed that the precision improved in comparison with the traditional methods and the computational time required for ranking and selecting the suitable landfill site significantly diminished. Wang and Chen [6] reviewed the fuzzy AHP method and then presented the fuzzy linguistic preference relations (Fuzzy LinPreRa) method. They applied the proposed method for solving the facility location selection problem that was addressed by Kahraman et al. [8]. The results of their paper indicated that the presented fuzzy LinPreRa method was simple and practical way to provide a mechanism for improving consistency in the fuzzy AHP method. Ho et al. [7] integrated the AHP and the Multi-Choice Goal Programming (MCGP) methods as a decision aid to obtain an appropriate house from many alternative locations for the renters according to their preferences and needs. In the integrated method that was applied for the location selection problems, the weights of goals were obtained from the AHP method. According to the function of multi-aspiration that was provided by MCGP, decision makers can set the multi-aspiration for each location goal to rank the candidate locations. The results of applying the integrated method for a real application problem showed that the integrated method was both scientific and efficient in exploring a suitable location for buying or renting a house for business within a shorter evaluation time compared to the traditional methods. Kahraman et al. [8] used the four fuzzy MCDM methods i.e. the fuzzy group decision making model proposed by Blin [9], fuzzy synthetic evaluation, the weighted goal method presented by Yager [10] and the fuzzy AHP to solve the facility location selection problems under quantitative and qualitative criteria. They also presented a numerical example for each fuzzy MCDM methods and a comparative analysis between the fuzzy MCDM methods. The results of comparative analysis implied that, with respect to the data needed by these methods, Blin's fuzzy relations are only based on social preference relations, fuzzy synthetic evaluation is based on fuzzy relations between alternatives and criteria and subjective weights of criteria, Yager's weighted goal method is only based on evaluation ratings and the subjective weights of criteria and the fuzzy AHP is only based on fuzzy subjective weights of criteria. With respect to the computational complexity of these methods, fuzzy AHP has many computational steps and has the most complexity compared to other methods, fuzzy synthetic evaluation and Yager's weighted goal method have almost equal complexity and Blin's fuzzy relations have the least complexity comparing to other methods. Wibowo and Deng [11] presented a fuzzy multi-criteria group decision making approach for effectively solving the hotel location evaluation and selection problem. The proposed method was based on the pairwise comparisons and a consensus building process. They also developed an algorithm for determining the overall performance of each alternative location with respect to the criteria on which, the selection was made. In order to illustrate the applicability of the presented method, they applied the presented method for a real numerical example. Safari et al. [12] presented a fuzzy TOPSIS method to select an appropriate site for mineral processing plant for Sangan iron ore mine. Ertuğrul and Karakaşoğlu [13] used the fuzzy AHP and the fuzzy TOPSIS methods for the facility location selection problem. They applied the two methods for solving a facility location selection problem of a textile company in Turkey. They also discussed about the similarities and differences of the two methods. Mokhtarian [14] presented a new fuzzy weighted average (FWA) method based on both left and right scores. The proposed method was applied for solving a real location selection problem related to determining a suitable location for a gas oil station. The results of the presented method showed the accuracy, flexibility and the ease of use of it. Chou and Chang [15] developed a fuzzy MCDM model and applied it for evaluating the distribution center locations in China and selecting the best one for investing from a Taiwanese manufacturer's perspective. Moreover, Chou et al. [16] introduced a fuzzy simple additive weighting system (FSAWS) for solving the facility location selection problems under group decision-making conditions. The presented system integrated the fuzzy set theory, the factor rating system (FRS) and the simple additive weighting (SAW) method. The results of applying the proposed system for a numerical example proved that the proposed system was suitable for solving the location selection problems. Ertuğrul [17] presented a fuzzy TOPSIS method in which the different distance measurement methods were used and the results of applying them were compared. The proposed method was applied to a facility location selection problem of a textile company in Turkey. Vahidnia et al. [18] developed a multi-criteria decision analysis process that combined the Geographical Information System (GIS) analysis with the fuzzy AHP. They used this process to determine the optimum site for a new hospital in Tehran urban area. In the developed process, the GIS was used to calculate and classify governing criteria, while the FAHP was used to evaluate the decision factors and their impacts on the alternative sites. The results of applying the developed process showed its applicability. Mokhtarian and Hadi-Vencheh [19] proposed a new fuzzy TOPSIS method based on both left and right scores. They applied the proposed method for solving three numerical examples so that the third of them was a real application in which the selection was an industrial zone among several industrial zones for constructing a dairy products factory. They found that the proposed method was practical for solving the facility location selection problems and, it was accurate, flexible and easy to use as well. Shen and Yu [20] utilized the dynamic product–process change matrix as a map to help managers link the selection criteria with the requirements of the operations strategies for the facility location selection. They also proposed an empirical fuzzy approach containing a risk judgmental procedure to the specific decision environment and the manager authorities under group decision making processes. In order to show the efficacy of the developed system, an empirical case study was carried out. The results of their method showed the interesting managerial implications. Ka [21] considered the transportation, economic level, infrastructure facilities, trade level, political environment and cost as the important factors that influence on the dry ports location selection in China. Based on these factors, they combined the fuzzy AHP and ELECTRE (Elimination Et Choice Translating Reality) method for solving a real application problem. Due to the fact that the proposed method was considered the fuzziness and preference of the factors affecting the site selection problem, it was suitable for solving the real application problems. Lee [22] proposed a fuzzy MCDM method in order to select location for the distribution centers. Devi and Yadav [23] proposed an intuitionistic fuzzy ELECTRE method so that the ratings of alternatives with respect to each criterion and the weights of criteria were expressed by triangular intuitionistic fuzzy sets. They applied the presented method for a plant location selection problem.Due to the fact that, in more cases, it is sometimes difficult for an expert to precisely determine the membership degree for each element of the fuzzy sets that are considered for the ratings of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights as a number in interval [0,1], the values of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights are expressed by IVFNs. So, the IVF-MCDM methods should be applied for solving such fuzzy MCDM problems.In this paper, the authors propose an IVF-TOPSIS method based on uncertainty risk reduction in decision making process. The proposed method is applied for solving a real application problem related to selecting a suitable location for digging some pits for municipal wet waste landfill in one of the largest cities in Iran. The proposed method is also compared with another IVF-TOPSIS method and the related discussions are presented. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the authors briefly introduce the background related to this paper. In the third section, the authors propose some new definitions about the uncertainty and the risk of uncertainty in decision making process. The authors also propose a new IVF-MCDM method based on uncertainty risk reduction in decision making process in the form of step by step method. In the fourth section, the authors apply the proposed method for solving a real application problem and compare the proposed method with another IVF-TOPSIS method. The paper is concluded in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Facility location selection including both quantitative and qualitative criteria is a famous kind of MCDM problems. For many case in the real word situation, the ratings of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights, are expressed by the common fuzzy numbers. Due to the difficulty of precisely determining the membership degree for each element of the fuzzy sets that are considered for the ratings of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights as a number in interval [0,1], the ratings of alternatives with respect to the criteria or/and the values of criteria weights are expressed by the IVFNs. In such conditions, the IVF-MCDM methods should be applied for solving such fuzzy MCDM problems.In this paper, the authors propose the new concepts about the amount of uncertainty and the risk of uncertainty of decision making process for the IVF-MCDM problems so that the maximum amount for the uncertainty of decision making process can take values from 0 to 1. It should be noted that, regardless of these concepts, the captured decisions for an IVF-MCDM problem are unreliable and maybe incorrect.The authors also propose an IVF-TOPSIS method based on uncertainty risk reduction in decision making process so that, by using this method, the reliability of the captured decisions in an IVF decision making problem is significantly increased. The proposed method is applied to solve a real application problem related to selecting a suitable location for digging some pits for municipal wet waste landfill in one of the largest cities in Iran that called Isfahan. The authors also compared the proposed method with another IVF-TOPSIS method presented by Ashtiani et al. As a result, the authors found that the proposed method is reliable and practical for solving the IVF facility location selection problems and other IVF-MCDM problems. Due to the fact that in the proposed IVF-TOPSIS method, the decision making process is done based on the new concepts which so far have not been dealt with in any papers, the proposed method has the considerable reliability and flexibility rather than the other previous IVF-TOPSIS methods in addition to benefits such as simplicity, practicality and ease of use that exist in such previous MCDM methods.