@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development, analysis and applications of a quantitative methodology for assessing customer satisfaction using evolutionary optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Quantitative modeling of customer satisfaction for consumer vehicles is proposed.Real-world service and sales datasets of five vehicle models are used.Model sensitivity to various features of the service datasets is studied.Classification rules for identifying dissatisfied customers are obtained.Method for identifying high-priority vehicular problems is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Customer satisfaction index (CSI),Quantitative modeling,Evolutionary optimization,Customer relationship management (CRM),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Consumer-oriented companies are getting increasingly more sensitive about customer's perception of their products, not only to get a feedback on their popularity, but also to improve the quality and service through a better understanding of design issues for further development. However, a consumer's perception is often qualitative and is achieved through third party surveys or the company's recording of after-sale feedback through explicit surveys or warranty based commitments. In this paper, we consider an automobile company's warranty records for different vehicle models and suggest a data mining procedure to assign a customer satisfaction index (CSI) to each vehicle model based on the perceived notion of the level of satisfaction of customers. Based on the developed CSI function, customers are then divided into satisfied and dissatisfied customer groups. The warranty data are then clustered separately for each group and analyzed to find possible causes (field failures) and their relative effects on customer's satisfaction (or dissatisfaction) for a vehicle model. Finally, speculative introspection has been made to identify the amount of improvement in CSI that can be achieved by the reduction of some critical field failures through better design practices. Thus, this paper shows how warranty data from customers can be utilized to have a better perception of ranking of a product compared to its competitors in the market and also to identify possible causes for making some customers dissatisfied and eventually to help percolate these issues at the design level. This closes the design cycle loop in which after a design is converted into a product, its perceived level of satisfaction by customers can also provide valuable information to help make the design better in an iterative manner. The proposed methodology is generic and novel, and can be applied to other consumer products as well.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Most companies spend a considerable amount of effort in improving their products from a technical point of view. Although it is right on its own merit, today's advancement in computing algorithms and fast computing hardware enable companies to obtain a more direct feedback on their products from their own customers. When a company produces a range of products (such as a platform of designs) with different trade-offs between cost, quality, and environmental effects, the level of satisfaction of one product over the other as perceived by customers bears a wealth of information about ‘why a product is liked or not liked by users?’. Interestingly, such information, if derived from after-sale surveys or warranty data, can provide valuable information to the designers for a possible improvement of the product for the next design phase. Since this is somewhat intuitive and importantly many successful companies do collect and record warranty or other after-sales information, it is now a matter of a research study to devise a mechanism to retrieve hidden information from the data. In this paper, we make an effort in this direction using an automobile industry's warranty data to demonstrate the procedure.Customer satisfaction has been defined in the literature as ‘the state of mind that customers have about a company when their expectations have been met or exceeded over the lifetime of the product or service’ [1,2]. Customer satisfaction leads to customer retention, customer loyalty and product repurchase. Thus its measurement is an important and integral part of an effective customer relationship management (CRM). Broadly speaking, satisfaction measures involve three psychological elements for evaluation of the product or service experience: (i) cognitive, which depends on the actual use of the product or service by the customer, (ii) affective, which depends on the customer's attitude towards the product or service or the company and (iii) behavioral, which depends on the customer's view regarding another product or service from the same company [3]. An important implication of the above definition for customer satisfaction is that it is subjective. Due to its non-quantifiability, most companies resort to a survey/questionnaire based assessment for the measurement of their products’ perceived satisfaction. In this regard, years of research on customer behavior has led to specification of 10 domains of satisfaction, ranging from quality, efficiency, etc. to commitment to the customer and product innovation [4]. Surveys are designed to touch these domains. What actually to ask in the survey depends on the kind of product or service provided, the kinds of customers served, number of customers served, the longevity and frequency of customer/supplier interactions, and what is to be done with the results. The very nature of such surveys requires the customer to evaluate each statement on a psychometric scale (or a rating scale) [5]. Likert scales [6], semantic differential scales [7], smiling faces scales and percentage measures [8] are popular in that order. A typical five-level Likert item consists of a statement and asks the surveyee to choose among (a) strongly disagree, (b) disagree, (c) neutral, (d) agree, and (e) strongly agree. Several studies exist which show the merit and demerits of different rating scales and how they should be interpreted.In the automotive sector, original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) depend on reports published by various marketing information firms, like the American Customer Satisfaction Index [9], J.D. Power and Associates [10] and Consumer Reports [11] for gaining insights into vehicle quality. Quality analysis data provided are often focused on questions related to number of failures in the field (namely, incidents per thousand vehicles (IPTV) [12] and problems per hundred vehicles (PPH)) for individual components like engine, transmission, etc. Limited emphasis is placed on the assessment of individual users’ perception and satisfaction resulting from day-to-day use of the product. Moreover, survey based estimates rely on a small sample of the customers (around 200–400 per vehicle model [10]). Despite this, the surveys themselves are highly regarded and play a significant role in molding the customer's attitude towards a particular vehicle model. To some extent, the surveys also help the OEMs in identifying major problem areas. The CRM policy of OEMs should therefore be flexible enough to take into account the information contained in these survey reports published annually.For service based companies, Parasuraman et al. [13,14] proposed the ‘gaps model’ for estimating satisfaction objectively by using the gap between the customer's expectation and perceived experience of performance. Apart from these and a few other related studies, quantitative measurement of customer satisfaction has not received much attention in the literature. The main reason is as follows: there are three practical approaches to measuring satisfaction, namely, post-purchase evaluation, periodic satisfaction surveys and continuous satisfaction tracking. Post-purchase evaluation (known as initial quality study in the automotive sector) deals with satisfaction assessment shortly after the delivery of product or service. Periodic satisfaction surveys provide occasional snapshots of customer perceptions. Continuous satisfaction tracking is much like post-purchase evaluation but carried out over time. Post-purchase evaluations are very common and seem to be used across all sectors. Most products and services are however, not amenable to periodic assessment and therefore not enough data is obtained for a single customer to warrant a quantitative study.Automotive OEMs, on the other hand, provide customers a warranty period which covers repairs and mechanical faults as part of the sale. Claims can be made by the customers at authorized dealerships and service stations which keep customer-specific records of these claims. Warranty data consists of claims data and supplementary data. A review of warranty data analysis methods for identifying early warnings of abnormalities in products, providing useful information about failure modes to aid design modification, estimating product reliability for deciding on warranty policy, and forecasting future warranty claims needed for preparing fiscal plans can be found in [15]. In this paper, we go a step further and use the same warranty data for obtaining a mathematical model for predicting customer satisfaction. Typically, customer satisfaction is measured at the individual level, but it is almost always reported at an aggregate level. We ensure that this is true for our model by employing a bottom-up approach to modeling. To illustrate, Table 1shows some basic statistics of the five vehicle models considered in this study. The numbers correspond to the warranty data of all vehicles serviced between January 2008 and August 2009. For anonymity, the total number of customers and claims for each model are shown relative to those of the model with the lowest customer base (Model 5). The last row of the table shows the number of unique field failures, a common constituent of IPTV or PPH figures, that occurred in a vehicle model during the said period. A field failure refers to any vehicle-related problem faced by the customer for which he/she had to visit a dealer or service station. Each unique field failure is associated with a corresponding repair code for classification purposes. Given the limited resources available with customer relation managers, it is only prudent to prioritize these field failures for a subsequent root-cause analysis and possible reduction in the next design phase. The methodology presented in this paper allows one to prioritize these unique field failures based on a quantitative measure of their potential for improvement in the customer's perception and hence the CSI. The method begins with the building of a quantitative model of the customer satisfaction index using an evolutionary optimization technique. The present work suggests an improvement to the method in [16] and validates it against Consumer Reports ratings of the vehicle models. The resulting CSI modeling function is then used to obtain the CSI improvement potential (CIP) for different types of field failures.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the components of the dataset being used. Extraction of relevant features is described in Section 3. Section 4 describes the single-vehicle framework for the proposed satisfaction model built on these extracted features. Section 4.3 presents the bi-objective optimization problem for obtaining the satisfaction model for a given vehicle model and Section 4.4 presents the evolutionary optimization method used for solving this problem. Section 5 presents its extension to obtain a generalized satisfaction model when multiple vehicle models are involved. The results and their validation are presented in Section 6. A sensitivity analysis is also performed on the obtained CSI function. Next, Section 7 presents two applications of the quantitative CSI model, which are very relevant from the CRM point of view. Section 8 concludes the paper.As discussed above, warranty data consists of claims data and supplementary data. The datasets used in this study also contain service repairs made beyond the warranty period and hence we are referring to claims data as service data. Supplementary data does not change with time. In our case, the sales data serves as this component.Before going any further, it would be beneficial to know what attributes of vehicles contribute to satisfaction. A study by J.D. Power and Associates lists the following as critical elements of customer satisfaction [17]:1Quality and reliability (24%) with respect to problems experienced with the vehicle across different vehicle sub-systems.Vehicle appeal (37%) which includes design, comfort, features, etc.Ownership costs (22%) which includes fuel consumption, insurance and costs of post-warranty service or repair.Dealer service satisfaction (17%) with respect to service quality, service time, etc.It can be seen that, satisfaction related to quality, reliability and service contributes close to 50% towards the overall satisfaction (including some contribution from the ownership costs). In this paper, we are primarily focused on assessing quality, reliability and service satisfaction as they can be quantified through the field failure information obtained from sales and service data. Table 2shows typical fields found in the sales and service data of a vehicle that can be used to assess this satisfaction.It is not clear how the data fields in Table 2 can be used directly. Therefore, we first extract certain characteristic features x from the combined sales and service data, so that the CSI for a particular customer/vehicle can be approximated by a mathematical function f,(1)CSIvehicle=f(x).We call CSIvehicle the CSI model for predicting the customer satisfaction of a given vehicle model.From the manufacturer's point of view, a CSI model (f) which can aggregate the views of all the customers in a deterministic way is beneficial for identifying vehicle models with high perceived quality and, more importantly, for highlighting the problem areas across different vehicle models. Taking cues from literature, we can impose certain conditions on the function f so that it achieves the above stated goal. It has been hypothesized that the frequency distribution of customer satisfaction is a theoretically continuous one that is typically skewed to the left [18]. Moreover, it is also widely believed that this distribution is often the convergence of (two or) three nearly normal distributions of (two or) three statistically differing populations – dissatisfied, satisfied and extremely satisfied customers [18]. The work presented in this paper is based on this hypothesis. The direct implication is that, given a vehicle model, most of the customers will have a similar overall perception (satisfaction) of the vehicle model. This results in a CSIvehicle distribution with low variance as shown in Fig. 1. A function f which models the CSIs based on this assumption would also make more sense for averaging over all customers thus obtaining an overall satisfaction value for the vehicle model under consideration. This is what we mean by the bottom-up approach mentioned earlier. By aggregating the CSIvehicle values for all the customers corresponding to a vehicle model, a representative CSI value for that vehicle model can be obtained.The fields presented in Table 2, though representative of customer satisfaction, cannot directly be used in a mathematical function. To have a computationally tractable method for modeling the CSI, we have identified six features that can be deterministically calculated for each vehicle using the combined sales and service data. More features can be considered to make the study more elaborate. The relation between these features and the satisfaction can also be logically established as shown below:1x1: Number of visits made by a customer. The VIN or vehicle identification number is unique for each vehicle. By counting the number of times a particular VIN occurs in the service dataset, the number of visits made by the customer owning that vehicle can be determined. More visits mean lower customer satisfaction and hence the dependency can be modeled as CSIvehicle∝1/x1.x2: Total number of days for which the vehicle was unavailable to the customer. The waiting time for a customer is the calendar difference between the repair start date and the delivery date. We sum these differences over the number of visits to getx2=∑i=1x1(ei−di). Longer waiting times have a negative impact on satisfaction which can be modeled as CSIvehicle∝1/x2.x3: Sum of all service/repair costs. These costs include the labor costs, part costs and miscellaneous costs, if any. The total expenditure on a vehicle for the given period can be obtained asx3=∑i=1x1ci. And logically it follows that CSIvehicle∝1/x3.x4: Average time interval between visits. The time to first visit is the calendar difference between the earliest visit date in the service data and the vehicle sale date. Thereafter, the time interval between subsequent visits can be obtained from the service data alone. The cumulative time intervals are averaged over the number of visits. Mathematically,(2)x4=1x1(d1−d0+∑i=2x1(di−di−1)).A larger value of x4 means longer problem-free vehicle use and hence higher customer satisfaction. Therefore, we have CSIvehicle∝x4.x5: Average miles run between visits. Like the time intervals, the miles run by the vehicle without problems can be obtained from the odometer readings in the sales and service data as,(3)x5=1x1m1−m0+∑i=2x1(mi−mi−1).It is easy to conclude that CSIvehicle∝x5.x6: Sum of problem severity ratings. Each vehicle visit is associated with a repair code riwhich defines the type of failure. All repair codes are assigned a severity rating between 1 (minor problem; e.g. oil change) and 5 (major problem; e.g. engine replacement) by domain experts. Since severity rating has a negative impact on the CSI, we have CSIvehicle∝1/x6.Notice that the features x4 and x5 are averages whereas the rest of the features are simply summations. From the OEM's point of view, the cost of overestimating the CSI is usually more than the cost of underestimating it. Since both the sum of days and the sum of miles between visits positively affect the CSI, averaging them over the number of visits reduces the chance of overestimating the customer satisfaction for any particular customer.The characteristic features extracted above are still not directly usable since they vary in different ranges. A pre-processing step is needed for this purpose. In this section, we discuss the procedure for obtaining an optimized CSI function for each vehicle model one at a time, then in the next section, we shall discuss a way to come up with a multiple vehicle CSI function.Table 3shows some statistics of the features extracted from the service data of the five vehicle models that we use in this work. It is apparent that the direct use of these features for constructing f will lead to a biased CSI model, since numerically they will have varying effects on the CSI. Therefore, a normalization procedure is adopted to map the features to the range [0, 1] using,(4)xinr=xi−minjxi(j)maxjxi(j)−minjxi(j)∀i∈{1,2,…,6},j∈{1,2,…,C},where C is the total number of customers of a vehicle model. It is important to realize that such a linear normalization does not affect the frequency distribution.Second, keeping in mind different logical dependencies established earlier, we now introduce the following feature transformation for simplicity of notation, so that an increase in the value of Xileads to a better CSI,(5)Xi=1(1+xinr),fori∈{1,2,3,6},(6)Xi=(1+xinr),fori∈{4,5}.This transformation allows us to use a monotonic CSI function as a variation of each Xi. In this work, we call Xi's as the transformed features in contrast to the xi's introduced in the last section, which are called extracted features. The addition of the constant (one here) in Eqs. (5) and (6) ensures that the CSI does not approach infinity for vehicles with minimum corresponding xi.To arrive at a mathematical form for the CSI function, we now define a functional form:(7)CSIvehicle=f(X1,X2,X3,X4,X5,X6).The function f is not known a priori, except to know that it is a monotonic function of the six transformed features. However, there are certain expectations we have for the CSI function. As stated earlier, our primary goal is to obtain a CSI model which will have a low variance (as shown in Fig. 1) for a given vehicle model for the given data. Secondly, the model should be flexible enough to differentiate between two or more vehicle models which have clearly different perceived quality in the market. This is our secondary goal. We use a parametric mathematical model which allows the features to interact freely with each other. The parameters of the model are obtained using an algorithm which satisfies both the goals. Our assumed model is composed of six terms, Tl. Each term is a product of different transformed features given by,(8)Tl=∏i=16Xiαilβil∀i,l∈{1,…,6}.Here βil's are Boolean decision variables which decide the presence (when βil=1) or absence (when βil=0) of the ith transformed feature in the lth term. When βil=1, αildenotes the corresponding exponent.The six multiplicative terms can in turn be multiplied or added to each other. Again, a Boolean encoding decides which terms to multiply and which ones to add. We adopt 1 for ‘+’ operator and 0 for ‘×’ operator. These intermediate Boolean variables are represented by γl. The inverse operations (division and subtraction) are not considered since the dependency of CSIvehicle to each extracted feature xiis already incorporated into the transformed features Xi's. For the same reason the powers αil's are considered to be non-negative real numbers lying between 0 and 1. With six terms, we have five additional Boolean decision variables. The 41 (=36 β's+5 γ's) Boolean variables can be represented using a binary string. In addition, we have 36 real-variables (α's).Fig. 2shows an example of the representation scheme adopted in this paper. Every seventh bit is the variable γlwhich defines the arithmetic operation between the Tlth and Tl+1th terms. The usual order of precedence is followed for the operators (multiplication and then addition) to evaluate the CSI. Whenever a term evaluates to unity (i.e. when βil=0 ∀ i),33αil=0 ∀ i is highly improbable.it is simply ignored in further computations. The illustrated string evaluates toCSIvehicle=T1+T2×T3+⋯=X2α21X5α51X6α61+X2α22X4α42X6α62×X1α13X2α23X3α33+⋯=X2α21X5α51X6α61+X1α13X2α22+α23X3α33X4α42X6α62+⋯This modeling approach resembles a genetic programming module [19] withT={Xi∀i}as the terminal set andF={×,+}as the functional set without introducing the computational cost associated with such generic systems.For achieving a customer level CSI model we now focus on our primary goal of obtaining an optimized CSI function which, when evaluated for different customers produces a distribution with low variance. A narrower CSI distribution means better agreement among the customers thus making averaging more sensible for obtaining the overall satisfaction. It is intuitive that this can be accomplished by minimizing the variance (or standard deviation) of the CSI values of all customers. However, there are two situations which can lead to trivial solutions.Firstly, since the exponents αil's are non-negative, a simple minimization of the variance causes them to approach the lower bound of zero giving rise to severely right skewed CSI distributions after normalization. This is shown in Fig. 4, described later. To avoid this, we incorporate a second ‘helper objective’ which minimizes the skewness of the distribution. Secondly, the presence of Boolean variables may cause βil=0 ∀ i, l giving a trivial distribution of zero variance. The following set of constraints is used to prevent this situation.∑lβil≥1∀i∈{1,…,6},which basically impose that each extracted feature Xiis used in at least one of the terms. This also makes practical sense since the six extracted features are the only information that can be derived from the sales and service data and we would want the resulting CSI model to use all of them.This optimization is carried out using a genetic algorithm (GA). The binary representation of the model discussed above was designed with this in mind. Eq. (9) gives the bi-objective optimization problem formulation for finding the customer level CSI model from the sales and service data of C customers of a vehicle model.(9)MinimizeσMinimize|g|Subject to∑lβil≥1∀i∈{1,…,6},36real variables:0≤αil≤1∀i,l∈{1,…,6},36Boolean variables:βil∈{0,1}∀i,l∈{1,…,6},5Boolean variables:γl∈{0,1}∀l∈{1,…,5},whereσ=1C∑j=1C(CSIvehicle,jnr−μ)2,μ=∑j=1CCSIvehicle,jnrC,g=1C∑j=1C(CSIvehicle,jnr−μ)3σ3.whereCSIvehicle,jnris the normalized value of CSIvehicle evaluated for the jth customer. The normalization is linear between 0 and 1, performed using maximum and minimum values of CSIvehicle,j. Note the arbitrary upper bound on αil's. Any other value may also be used.Due to the bi-objective nature of the above optimization problem and due to non-linearities and non-differentiability in the definitions of the objective functions, we choose an evolutionary multi-objective optimization (EMO) method – the elitist non-dominated sorting GA or NSGA-II [20].Fig. 3shows the non-dominated solutions obtained by solving (9) for each of the five vehicle models (refer Table 1) individually using the NSGA-II procedure. All fronts are obtained using the following standard parameter settings:1Population size: 2000.Number of generations: 500.Tournament selection with size 2.Simulated binary crossover [21] with pc=0.9 and ηc=10 for α's.Polynomial mutation [22]pm=0.05 and ηm=50 for α's.Single-point crossover with pc=0.9 for binary string (β's and γ's).Bitwise mutation with pm=0.15 for binary string (β's and γ's).Each trade-off solution in Fig. 3 represents a different CSI model. The sharp kink in each of the trade-off fronts indicates the presence of a knee[23]. The knee point of a two-dimensional Pareto-optimal front is the solution which gives the best trade-off with respect to both objectives. Due to this characteristic, it is often the preferred solution. Fig. 4shows the CSI distributions corresponding to three different points on the trade-off front of Model 4. Note that the leftmost solution is a trivial solution obtained when all α's approach their lower bounds as stated earlier. On the other hand, the rightmost solution yields a relatively wide CSI distribution which makes it difficult to estimate the overall CSI rating of the vehicle model from the CSI values of individual customers, because an averaged CSI value in such cases is not representative of the entire data and hence is not meaningful. The second (helper) objective allows many such CSI models to coexist in the NSGA-II population, among which the knee solution is found to be the most favorable one. Other solutions near the knee region also yield similar distributions, making this region a potential space for obtaining good CSI models. We use the bend-angle approach proposed in [23] to identify the knee solution. Table 4shows the knee-point CSI models and their corresponding objective values for all five vehicle models obtained from the trade-off fronts shown in Fig. 3. Note that for all five models, both σ and |g| values are small.The customer level CSI modeling technique presented above fulfills our primary goals of obtaining a low variance and low skewness CSI distribution. However, as seen in Table 4 the obtained CSI models differ between vehicle models and hence do not provide a common basis for comparing or ranking them. Our secondary goal, as stated earlier, is therefore to modify the problem formulation in (9) so that a single CSI model can be used to differentiate between two or more vehicle models as distinctly as possible. For this purpose, we propose to maximize the absolute difference between the average CSI values of different combinations of vehicle models under consideration. Since this can be time-consuming, we first reduce the computational effort for obtaining a specific CSI function for each vehicle model.The results from customer level CSI models tell us that the best CSI models are obtained in the knee region. We can therefore constrain the search space to the knee regions of all five vehicle models by converting the variance and skewness objectives into additional constraints. This will then allow us to employ a single-objective optimization method. From Fig. 3, it is clear that the knee regions of all the five efficient fronts corresponding to the customer level CSI models of the five vehicle models are bounded by σ≤0.05 and |g|≤0.25. The single-objective optimization problem proposed for multiple vehicle CSI modeling can now be stated as:(10)Maximize∑{m,n|m≠n}|μm−μn|,Subject toσm≤0.05∀m∈{1,2,…,5},|gm|≤0.25∀m∈{1,2,…,5},∑lβil≥1∀i∈{1,…,6},where,36real variables:0≤αil≤1∀i,l∈{1,2,…,6},36Boolean variables:βil∈{0,1}∀i,l∈{1,2,…,6},5Boolean variables:γl∈{0,1}∀l∈{1,2,…,5}.Here, m and n represent the indices of the vehicle models considered for obtaining the multiple vehicle CSI model. σm, μmand gmare respectively the standard deviation, mean and skewness of the normalized CSI values of the mth vehicle model (having Cmcustomers). For the five vehicle models, we can use all or any combinations of them to obtain a corresponding multiple vehicle CSI model. Again, an evolutionary optimization algorithm (EA) is used to solve the above problem. The sales and service data of all the vehicle models considered are given as input.In the following discussion we refer to any combination of vehicle models as a training set (TS). For simplicity of notation, we represent a training set as TS{List of vehicle models} and the corresponding CSI model as, CSI{Listofvehiclemodels}. For example, the training set containing Models 2, 3 and 4 is TS{2,3,4} and its corresponding CSI model will be referred to as CSI{2,3,4}.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we have demonstrated how starting with vehicle service and sales data, a plethora of valuable information can be derived about perceived customer satisfaction indicators. First, a single-objective optimization procedure has been suggested to develop customer satisfaction index (CSI) models for different vehicle models as a function of six important features extracted from the service data. This customer level CSI modeling approach has given us an understanding of the objective space and difficulties associated with it. Consequently, we developed the multiple vehicle CSI modeling technique through which a single aggregate CSI function can allow us to rank different vehicle models in increasing order of customer satisfaction. The ranking of five different vehicle models obtained by our procedure has been statistically validated to be significant and also verified against the ranking obtained from published Consumer Reports reliability ratings on the same set of vehicle models.The generalizing capability of the proposed optimization approach has been tested by using a subset of vehicle models for the optimization task and testing the remaining vehicle models using the obtained CSI function. For the five vehicle models, the use of a maximum of three during optimization was found to be adequate to correctly rank all five vehicle models. This demonstrates the scalability of the proposed procedure in terms of developing the CSI model by using a few vehicle models and then applying the resulting CSI model to predict CSI values for other vehicle models which were not considered in the developmental phase.Although the above optimization-based technique for developing a mathematical CSI function is novel and has been shown to be effective on a five-vehicle database, another equally significant contribution of this study comes from two post-processing applications. The developed and tested CSI function can be used to group customers into different classes, of which ‘satisfied’ and ‘dissatisfied’ customers can be isolated for further knowledge-gathering actions. For a particular vehicle model, we have identified the relative importance of different warranty-related features. It has been observed that total cost of repair, average miles between visits and the sum of severity ratings of repairs are the most important features causing the perceived satisfaction of a customer. Contrary to general belief, average number of days between successive visits has been found to be the least important factor influencing customer satisfaction. By identifying the extremely satisfied customers and dissatisfied customers from the obtained CSI function for a vehicle model, classification rules relating to the features that are responsible for influencing the customers have been obtained by using a classification tree algorithm. These rules can help a company in easily identifying dissatisfied customers for making buy-back or other customer-winning proposals.Automobile industries are also interested in identifying field failures that are critically responsible for causing customer dissatisfaction. If such critical field failures can be identified, an effort to reduce them through future design improvements would be an indirect benefit of the CSI study. With the developed CSI function model, a number of field failures have been considered for this purpose. First, our analysis has identified a set of critical field failures that most significantly affect the CSI function and then we have demonstrated how a partial or complete removal of such critical field failures can lead to improvement in perceived customer satisfaction. All the above analyses, originating from the proposed CSI modeling approach, have been shown to provide useful insights for improving perceived customer satisfaction. But in the long run such information should also indirectly help in designing a better product.Our study clearly demonstrates the usefulness of after-sales service and warranty data in four viable ways in the design cycle: (i) rank and reveal a perceived level of customer satisfaction index for a platform of products, (ii) identify different data features and their combinations that are responsible for establishing a high (or low) customer satisfaction index, (iii) identify satisfied and dissatisfied customers for further action through customer relationship management programs, and (iv) rank different field failure events according to their criticality for a possible improvement in the customer satisfaction index of a product. Since after-sale data speaks volumes about a product's direct operational performance and its perception by real customers, the above analysis, when performed with a larger volume of customer data, is likely to bring out valuable and realistic information. The methodologies discussed in this paper are generic and can be applied to other consumer product design and development problems.