@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid approach based on an improved gravitational search algorithm and orthogonal crossover for optimal shape design of concrete gravity dams

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Utilizing orthogonal array based orthogonal crossover for increasing the global search capability of improved gravitational search algorithm.Reducing the computational time of optimization procedure of gravity dams using weighted least squares support vector machine.Finding the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams with consideration of dam–water foundation rock interaction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gravitational search algorithm,Orthogonal crossover,Concrete gravity dams,Optimal shape,Weighted least squares support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A hybrid approach based on an improved gravitational search algorithm (IGSA) and orthogonal crossover (OC) is proposed to efficiently find the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams. The proposed hybrid approach is called IGSA-OC. The hybrid of IGSA and the OC operator can improve the global exploration ability of the IGSA method, and increase its convergence rate. To find the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams, the interaction effects of dam–water–foundation rock subjected to earthquake loading are considered in this study. The computational cost of the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams subjected earthquake loads is usually high. Due to this problem, the weighted least squares support vector machine (WLS-SVM) regression as an efficient metamodel is utilized to considerably predict dynamic responses of gravity dams by spending low computational cost. To testify the robustness and efficiency of the proposed IGSA-OC, first, four well-known benchmark functions in literatures are optimized using the proposed IGSA-OC, and provides comparisons with the standard gravitational search algorithm (GSA) and the other modified GSA methods. Then, the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams is found using IGSA-OC. The solutions obtained by the IGSA-OC are compared with those of the standard GSA, IGSA and particle swarm optimization (PSO). The numerical results demonstrate that the proposed IGSA-OC significantly outperforms the standard GSA, IGSA and PSO.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Concrete gravity dams have been well-known as an important engineering structure that the economy and safety of these structures depend on an appropriate shape design. Hence, finding a proper shape design of concrete gravity dams is considered as an important problem in design approach of dams. To achieve this purpose, several alternative schemes with various patterns should be selected and modified to obtain a number of feasible shapes. Therefore, the proper shape of dam considering the economy and safety of design, structural considerations, etc. is selected as the final shape [1]. In order to reliably achieve an optimal shape for dams instead of this try and error procedure, optimization techniques have been effectively utilized.Several interesting researches on the design optimization of arch dams under static and dynamic loads have been carried out and reported in [2–9]. Although the conventional mathematical models have been utilized for analysis approximation and optimization task in these studies, the effects of arch dam–water–foundation rock interaction have been neglected. In recent years, the optimal shape design of arch dams including dam–water–foundation rock interaction has been developed by few researchers [1,10–14]. Recently, a study has also been introduced by Salajegheh et al. [15] so that the shape optimal design of concrete gravity dams including hydrodynamic effects is achieved using hybrid of gravitational search algorithm (GSA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO). A study as updated and revised version of the conference paper [15] has also been introduced by Slajegheh and Khosravi [16] so that shape optimal design of concrete gravity dams including hydrodynamic effects is achieved using the hybrid of GSA and PSO.Recently, gravitational search algorithm (GSA) as a new meta-heuristic optimization method has been proposed by Rashedi et al. [17]. In GSA, the agents as a collection of masses interact with each other based on the Newtonian gravity and the laws of motion. To find the best solution in the search space, the agents share information using the gravitational force. The high performance and the global search ability of GSA in solving various nonlinear functions have been demonstrated by Rashedi et al. [17]. The GSA method suffers from slow searching speed in the last iterations. Due to this fact, the convergence rate of GSA decreases. To eliminate this drawback of GSA, an improved gravitational search algorithm (IGSA) was introduced by Li and Zhou [18]. The IGSA method is based on the idea of memory and social information of PSO. Although IGSA has the characteristics of high accuracy and stability, it has the shortcomings of premature convergence, low searching accuracy and iterative inefficiency. When an agent in the population finds its current optimal position, the other agents will gather close to it rapidly. Thus, the IGSA algorithm traps into local optimum.This study proposes a hybrid approach based on IGSA and an orthogonal crossover (OC) operator [19], which is called IGSA-OC. This hybrid approach is introduced to eliminate drawbacks of IGSA, and improve the performance of IGSA. The optimal shape of gravity dams with consideration of dam–water–foundation rock effects is investigated using the proposed IGSA-OC. To find the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams, the interaction effects of dam–water–foundation rock subjected to earthquake loading are considered.In order to reduce the computational cost of optimization process subjected to earthquake loading, many methods of forecasting equipped with the techniques have been utilized as metamodel. Support vector machine (SVM) proposed by Vapnik [20] as an efficient metamodel has been used for modeling the high non-linear system based on small sample. This metamodel has been applied in many classification and regression problems successfully. SVM based on the structural risk minimization (SRM) rules is superior to artificial neural networks (ANNs), which have been developed the traditional empirical risk minimization (ERM) inductive principle [21]. Also, the problems as over learning, dimension disaster and local minimum are eliminated in SVM [21]. Weighted least squares support vector machine (WLS-SVM) regression was introduced by Suykens et al. [22] to decrease the training computational effort of SVM in the large-scale problem. According to the practice, WLS-SVM is more robust and precise than that of SVM and least squares version of SVM (LSSVM) [21,22]. In this study, the WLS-SVM regression is utilized to predict the time history response of gravity dams. WLS-SVM can significantly reduce the computing effort of optimization procedure.To demonstrate the high performance and the global search ability of the proposed IGSA-CO, first, four well-known benchmark functions in literatures are optimized using IGSA-CO. The results of IGSA-CO are compared with the standard GSA and the other modified GSA methods. The numerical results demonstrate the efficiency and robustness of the proposed IGSA-CO. Then, the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams is found using IGSA-CO. Furthermore, the optimal solutions obtained by the proposed IGSA-OC are compared with those of the standard GSA, IGSA and PSO. The optimal results revealed that the proposed IGSA-OC can create a robust tool for effectively optimizing concrete gravity dams.The optimization problem of concrete gravity dam subjected to earthquake loading is expressed as follows:(1)Minimizef(X)Subject togi(X,t)≤0i=1,2,…,m,t=0,…,TXL≤X≤XUwhere f, giand t are the objective function, ith constraint from m inequality constraints and the time, respectively.XLandXUare the lower bound and the upper bound of the design variables,X, respectively. T is the earthquake duration.Constraint handling approaches in conjunction with meta-heuristic optimization methods have been proposed to deal with constrained search spaces. A comprehensive overview of the most popular constraint handling approaches was presented in the literature review by Coello [23]. In the present study, the external penalty function method as one of the most popular forms of the penalty function in the structural optimization is utilized as follows [24–26]:(2)f˜(X)=f(X)(1+RpPf)wheref˜(X), Pfand Rpare the modified function (fitness function), the penalty function and an penalty factor, respectively. The penalty function is expressed as the sum of all active constraints violations as [23]:(3)Pf=∑imax(gi(X,t),0.0)2In order to assign the geometrical model of concrete gravity dams, the shape of concrete gravity dams can be defined using seven parameters. As depicted the model of concrete gravity dam in Fig. 1, a concrete gravity dam can be modeled by a vectorXthat has seven components including the shape parameters of the concrete gravity dam as:(4)X={bb1b2b3H2H4H5}whereXis design variable vector.b and H1 are two parameters required to defined crest and free board of gravity dam, respectively. H3 depends on H4 and reservoir water level (H). The upstream slope, θ1, is defined by the b1 and H4 design variables. Also, the downstream slope, θ1, is specified by the b3 and H5 design variables.In the optimization problem of concrete gravity dams, the concrete weight of gravity dam body is considered as objective function, f(X), that should be minimized. The weight of concrete gravity dam can be determined as follows:(5)f(X)=W=ρcgVwhere ρcand V are the mass density of the concrete and the volume of gravity dam, respectively. g is gravity acceleration.Design constraints, gi(X, t), consist on the behavior, geometric and stability constraints. In the present study, the principal stresses of each node in the body of gravity dam is considered as the behavior constraints, which must be satisfied for all time points of the earthquake interval as follows:(6)gk,1=σ1(X,t)σ+−1k=1,2,…,nj(7)gk,2=|σ2(X,t)|σ−−1k=1,2,…,njwhere σ1(·) and σ2(·) are the principal stresses of each node in time t, respectively. σ+ and σ− are the allowable tensional and compressive stresses, respectively. nj is the total number of nodes in the dam body which created by meshing of the dam body in finite element method (FEM) framework.The stability of a gravity dam is ordinarily expressed in terms of its factors of safety against sliding and overturning, respectively. The factor of safety against sliding is simply the ratio of the total frictional force, FV, which the foundation can develop to the force tending, FH, to cause sliding as follows [27]:(8)gs=∑FV∑FH−1.75The factor of safety against overturning about the toe is the ratio of the resisting moments, MR, to the overturning moments, MO, which is considered as stability constraint. It is given as [27]:(9)go=∑MR∑MO−1Therefore, the penalty function in the optimization problem of gravity dams is defined as follows:(10)Pf=∑t=0T∑k=1nj[max(gk,1,0)2+max(gk,2,0)2]+max(gs,0)2+max(go,0)2This function allows that for solutions with violated constraints, the objective function is always greater than the non-violated one.In order to consider the effects of fluid-structure interaction in the optimum design, FEM is utilized in this study. In the FEM framework, the discretized dynamic equations of the fluid and structure are simultaneously considered to obtain the coupled fluid-structure equation.The dam body is discretized by FEM and its equations of seismic including the effects of the reservoir and the foundation are expressed as [28]:(11)Msu¨e+Csu˙e+Ksue=−Msu¨g+QpewhereMsis the structural mass matrix,Csis the structural damping matrix,Ksis the structural stiffness matrix,u¨e,u˙eandueare the vector of the nodal accretions, velocities and displacements relative to the ground,u¨gis the vector of the ground acceleration,Qperepresents the nodal force vector associated with the hydrodynamic pressures produced by the reservoir.Due to the ground motion of the rigid dam, the hydrodynamic pressure, p, of a compressible and inviscid fluid satisfies the following wave equation [29,30]:(12)∇2p=1c2∂2p∂t2where c is the velocity of sound in water; and ▿2 is the Laplacian operator in two dimensions.By neglecting the effects of surface waves and the viscosity of the fluid, the following boundary conditions are defined. Some boundary conditions shown in Fig. 2may be imposed on the fluid domain as follows:(i)At the fluid–solid interface (S1)At the bottom of the fluid domain (S2)At the far end (S3); a Sommerfield-type radiation boundary condition can be implemented, namely:At the free surface (S4)Therefore, Eqs. (12)–(17) can be discretized to get the matrix form of the wave equation as [29,30]:(18)Mfp¨e+Cfp˙e+Kfpe+ρwQT(u¨e+u¨g)=0whereMf,CfandKfare the mass, damping and stiffness matrices of fluid, respectively; andpeandu¨eare the nodal pressure and relative nodal acceleration vectors, respectively. The termρwQTis also often referred to as coupling matrix.The effects of gravity dam–water–foundation rock interaction are considered using Eqs. (11) and (18) that can be written in an assembled form as [29,30]:(19)Ms0MfsMfu¨eP¨e+Cs00Cfu˙ep˙e+KsKfs0Kfuepe=−Msu¨g−Mfsu¨gwhereMfs=ρwQTandKfs=−Q. Eq. (19) expresses a second order linear differential equation having unsymmetrical matrices and may be solved by means of direct integration methods.In this study, the finite element model of gravity dam–water–foundation rock system is considered using the above mentioned theory and assumptions. In the analysis phase of gravity dams, a static analysis of gravity dam–water–foundation rock system is initially implemented under a gravity load and a hydrostatic pressure, and then the linear dynamic analysis of the system is performed using Newmark-Beta integration method [28]. After that, the principal stresses at the center of dam elements are evaluated using nodal relative displacement of the gravity dam.Gravitational search algorithm (GSA) was introduced by Rashedi et al. [17] as a new stochastic population based search algorithm based on the law of gravity and mass interactions. In GSA, each agent of the population represents a potential solution of the optimization problem. The ith agent in tth iteration is associated with a position vector,Xi(t)={xi1,…,xid,…,xiD}, and a velocity vector,Vi(t)={vi1,…,vid,…,viD}. D is dimension of the solution space. Based on Rashedi et al. [17], the mass of each agent is calculated after computing the current population fitness for a minimization problem as follows:(20)Mi(l)=fiti(l)−worst(l)∑j=1N(fitj(l)−worst(l))where N, Mi(l) and fiti(l) represent the population size, the mass and the fitness value of agent i at lth iteration, respectively; andworst(l)is defined as the worst fitness of all agents.To compute the acceleration of an agent, total forces from a set of heavier masses applied to it should be considered based on the law of gravity (Eq. (21)). Afterwards, the next velocity of an agent is calculated as a fraction of its current velocity added to its acceleration (Eq. (22)). Then, its next position could be calculated using Eq. (23):(21)aid(l)=∑j∈kbest,j≠irandjG(l)Mj(l)Rij(l)+ε(xjd(l)−xid(l))(22)vid(l+1)=randivid(l)+aid(l)(23)xid(l+1)=xid(l)+vid(l+1)whereaid,vidandxidare the acceleration, velocity and position of ith agent in dimension d, respectively. randiand randjare two uniformly distributed random numbers in the interval [0, 1]; ɛ is a small value; and Ri,j(l) is the Euclidean distance between agent i and j. Kbest is the set of first K agents with the best fitness value and biggest mass, which is a function of time, initialized to K0 at the beginning and decreased with time [17]. Here, K0 is set to N and is decreased linearly to 1. G is a decreasing function of time. It must be pointed out that G(t) is important in determining the performance of GSA and is defined as:(24)G(l)=G0exp−βllmaxwhere G0 and β are the initial value and a constant, respectively. lmax is the maximum iteration number.Recently, Li and Zhou [18] have been introduced an improved gravitational search algorithm (IGSA) based on the idea of memory and social information of PSO. In IGSA, a new moving strategy in the searching space was proposed by obeying the law of gravity and receiving guide of memory as follows [18]:(25)vid(l+1)=randi,1vid(l)+aid(l)+c1randi,2(pbestid−xid(l))+c2randi,3(gbestd−xid(l))where pbestiis the best previous position of the ith agent; and gbest is the best previous position among all the agents. c1and c2are variables in the range [0, 1], respectively [18]. It was shown that IGSA outperforms the standard GSA in terms of high accuracy and stability [18].Orthogonal array based orthogonal crossover (OC) as efficient means has been incorporated into evolutionary algorithms (EAs) to solve global optimization problems [19,32,33], multi-objective optimization problems [32,34], and constrained optimization problems [35]. The researches have shown that OC outperform standard and existing crossovers in EAs. In OC, an orthogonal array is integrated into the classical crossover operator so that two parents can be used to generate a set of sampling points, to be children based on the orthogonal array. An orthogonal array for K factors with Q levels and M combination is often denoted by LM(QK). The more details for constructing the orthogonal array can be found in [37].In this study, a new version OC based on combination of the quantization technique and the OC operator, called QOC, proposed by Leung and Wang [19] is used. In QOC, it is assumed that the search space defined by any two parents, i.e.,P1={p11,p12,…,p1D}andP2={p21,p22,…,p2D}.P1 andP2 define a search range[min(p1i,p2i),max(p1i,p2i)]for ith variable of the design variable vector,X. First, the search range is quantized into Q levels, li,1, li,2, …, li,Q, for variable xias follows [19]:(26)li,j=min(p1i,p2i)+j−1Q−1(max(p1i,p2i)−min(p1i,p2i)),j=1,2,…,QTherefore, QDpoints are produced after quantization since each factor has Q possible levels. Since D is often much larger than K, one cannot directly apply LM(QK). To overcome this problem, Leung and Wang [19] was proposed that QOC divides {x1, x1, …, xD} into K sub-vectors as:(27)H1={x1,x2,…,xn1}H¯2={xn1+1,…,xn2}⋮H¯K={xnK−1+1,…,xD}where n1, n2, …, nK−1 are randomly generated such that 1<n1<n2<⋯<nK−1<D. QOC trears eachH¯ias a factor and defines the following Q levels forH¯i:(28)Li1={lti−1+1,1,lti−1+2,1,…,lti,1}Li2={lti−1+1,2,lti−2+2,1,…,lti,2}⋮LiQ={lti−1+1,Q,lti−2+2,Q,…,lti,Q}Then, LM(QK) is utilized onH¯1,H¯2, …,H¯Kto construct M solutions (i.e., combinations of levels).However, IGSA shows significant performance in the initial iterations, drawbacks still exit in IGSA. When an agent in the population finds its current optimal position, the other agents will gather close to it rapidly. Due to locating the position in a local optimum, the agents will not be able to search over again in the solution space. Hence, the algorithm traps into local optimum. Accordingly, this study proposes a hybrid of IGSA and OC, called IGSA-OC, to resolve the aforementioned drawback.In order to eliminate the drawback of IGSA and explore promising regions in the search space, the QOC operator is utilized in this study. The QOC operator as local search can improve the best previous position among all the agents (gbest) in each iteration of IGSA. The general framework of IGSA-OC is depicted in Fig. 3.Assuming {pbest1,pbest2, …,pbestN}, the process of the improving the best previous position among all the agents (gbest) using the QOC operator is executed in the following steps:Step 1: Randomly select three different numbers r1, r2 and r3 from {1, 2, …, N}.Step 2:U=pbestr1+rand(pbestr2−pbestr3).Step 3: CombinegbestandUby using QOC based on LM(QK) to generate M trial vectors.Step 4: Evaluate the fitness function values,f˜, of the M trial vectors.Step 5: Select the one with the smallest fitness function to beUg.Step 6: Iff˜(Ug)<f˜(gbest), set gbest=Ug.The QOC operator applies on both the mutant vector (U) and the target vector (gbest) to search the region defined by these two vectors, which can be a promising area in the search space. Thus, this procedure can increase the global search capability of IGSA. The steps 2 and 3 is depicted in Fig. 4, which based on L9(34) in a two-dimension search space.WLS-SVM is described as the following optimization problem in primal weight space [21]:(29)minJ(w,e)=12||w||2+12γ∑i=1nv¯iei2Subject to the following equality constraints:(30)yi=wTφ(xi)+b+ei,i=1,2,…,nwhere{xi,yi}i=1nis a training data set of n points;xi∈Rnand yi∈R are input and output data, respectively. Operator φ(.): Rn→Rdis a function which maps the input space into a higher dimensional space, also named feature space, where they can be separated by a hyper-plane with low training error. The vectorw∈Rdrepresents weight vector in primal weight space. The symbols ei∈R and b∈R represent error variable and bias term, respectively. γ is an adjustable constant. Weightsv¯kare estimated using relationships proposed by David [36].By the optimization problem (29) and the training set, the model of WLS-SVM is defined as follows:(31)y(x)=wTφ(x)+bIt is impossible to indirectly calculatewfrom (31), because the structure of the function φ(x) is unknown in general. Therefore, the dual problem shown in Eq. (29) is minimized by the Lagrange multiplier method as follows:(32)L(w,b,e;x)=J(w,e)−∑i=1nαi(wTφ(xi)+b+ei−yi)Based on the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions, eliminatingwandethe solution of the problem (29) can be converted to a set of linear equations in the dual space [21]. According to Mercer's condition, a kernelK(x,x¯)=φ(x),φ(x¯)His selected. So, the resulting WLS-SVM model for the prediction of functions becomes:(33)y(x)=∑i=1nαiK(xi,x)+bwhere αiand b are the solution to the linear system.In this study, radial basis function (RBF) is selected as the kernel function of WLS-SVM. The kernel function is defined as follows:(34)K(xi,xj)=exp−||xi−xj||22σ2where σ is positive real constant, and is usually so-called kernel width.In meta-heuristic optimization methods great number of function evaluations is required to achieve the optimal solution. To find the optimal shape of a gravity dam–water–foundation rock system subjected to earthquake loading, evaluation of dam requires a dynamic analysis of FEM framework. The dynamic analysis of gravity dam with consideration of dam–water–foundation rock effects has high computational effort. Furthermore, the stochastic nature of evolutionary search technique with finite element analysis (FEA) makes the convergence of the process slow. Hence, the structural dynamic responses of a gravity dam are predicted using WLS-SVM instead of directly performing it using a time consuming FEA. Therefore, the WLS-SVM regression is utilized in the optimization process that can efficiently accelerate the optimal shape of concrete gravity dams and reduce the computational cost. In this study, the 10-fold cross-validation (CV) is used to find the optimal values of γ and σ for training WLS-SVM [21]. Therefore, according to Suykens et al. [21], WLS-SVM based on RBF kernel function for predicting of the penalty function (Eq. (2)) is performed using the following procedure:Step 1: Assign training data{Xk,Pf,k(Xk)}k=1Ntot, set L=Ntot.Step 2: Find an optimal (γ, σ) combination on the total number of Ntot training data by 10-fold CV and solving linear system (32), giving the model (31).Step 3: Sort the values |α|.Step 4: Remove a small amount of M points (typically 5% of the L points) that have the smallest values in the sorted |α|.Step 5: Retain L−M points and set L=L−M.Step 6: Go to 2 and retrain on the reduced training set.In order to demonstrate the effectiveness and performance of the proposed IGSA-OC, this method is tested using the four representative standard benchmark functions reported in [38]. These functions have been extensively utilized to evaluate the performance of optimization algorithms. The functions, dimension, the admissible range of the variable and the optimum are summarized in Table 1. All the functions are to be minimized. The first three functions are unimodal functions whereas the last function is multimodal optimization problems with a considerable amount of local minima.The functions presented in Table 1 are solved using both IGSA and IGSA-OC. For both algorithms the population size is set to 50 (N=50) and G0 and β are considered equal to100 and 20, respectively. These parameters are selected based on the general recommendations given in the literature [17]. The maximum iteration (lmax) is selected 500 based on the authors’ experience and the recommendations of Ref. [38]. Furthermore, the QOC operator in IGSA-OC is performs based on L9(34).Recently, the functions have been examined using modified GSA (MGSA) proposed by Khajehzadeh et al. [38]. In order to consider the stochastic nature of the optimization process, 30 independent optimization runs have been performed, and the results have been reported [37]. The results of IGSA-OC are compared with those of the standard GSA, IGSA and MGSA. For each method, the worst, mean, best and standard deviation are calculated from the 30 independent runs and shown in Table 2.According to the results of Table 2, IGSA-OC provides better solution compared with GSA, IGSA and MGSA in a few iterations. Furthermore, the standard deviations of the results calculated by IGSA-OC in the 30 independent runs are smaller than those of GSA, IGSA and MGSA, which indicate the more stability of the proposed IGSA-OC. The results indicate that for four functions the mean fitness evaluated by IGSA-OC in 500 iterations is much lower than those computed by IGSA in 500 iterations and GSA and MGSA in 1000 iterations. Therefore, the results of Table 2 demonstrate the capability and robustness of the proposed IGSA-OC. For the four benchmark functions the convergence histories of the mean best solutions of IGSA-OC and IGSA in the 30 independent runs are shown in Figs. 5–8. The figures demonstrate that the convergence rate of the proposed IGSA-OC is better than that of IGSA. Because the QOC operator applies on both the mutant vector and the target vector to search the region defined by these two vectors, this procedure can increase the global search capability of IGSA. Also, the IGSA-OC tends to find the global optimum faster than IGSA and hence has a higher convergence rate.Furthermore, in order to show the distinction of the computation cost between IGSA and IGSA-OC, the time spent for every run of the functions is shown in Table 3. It is noted that the optimization procedure are performed by a core™2 Duo 2GHz CPU and the computational time is measured in terms of CPU time.As given in Table 3, the difference of the time spent for every run between IGSA and IGSA-OC is trivial. Therefore, the proposed framework of the QOC operator in IGSA does not impose the serious computational burden on the time spent for the implementation of the IGSA method.In order to investigate the competence of the proposed IGSA-OC for the shape optimization of concrete gravity dams, Pine flat dam located on King's River near Fresno, California is considered as a real-world structure. The properties of the dam structure are 400ft height with a crest length of 1840ft and its construction about 9491.94 kip concrete [39,40]. The S69E component of Taft Lincoln School Tunnel during Kern country, California, earthquake (July 21, 1952) is selected as the excitation for analyses of Pine Flat dam [39,40]. This component of the recorded ground motion is shown in Fig. 9. The optimal shape of this dam is found subjected to this recorded ground motion.In the present study, the seven design variables defined in Section 2.1 are considered to find the optimal shape of the Pine flat dam. To achieve this purpose, the lower and upper bounds of these design variables utilized in the optimization process are shown in Table 4[40]:To investigate the optimal shape of the selected dam, two cases related to various conditions of dam–water–foundation rock interaction problem are considered and compared as follows:Case 1Dam with full reservoir and rigid foundation.Dam with full reservoir and flexible foundation.The prepared FEM of Pine Flat gravity dam–water–foundation rock system for full reservoir is depicted in Fig. 10.The properties of concrete, water and foundation are shown in Table 5[40]. In order to validate FEM with the employed assumptions in this study, the first natural frequency of the symmetric mode of the gravity dam for two cases are determined from the frequency response function for the crest displacement. The results are compared with those reported by Chopra and Chakrabarti [39] as given in Table 6.As observed from the results of Table 6, a good conformity has been achieved between the results of the present work with those reported in the literature.To generate a database for training and testing WLS-SVM, design variable vector of the gravity dam defined in Eq. (2) is considered as the input vector of WLS-SVM, and the sum of all active constraints violations given by Eq. (10) is taken as the output of WLS-SVM. In this study, Latin Hypercube Design (LHD) [41] is used for generating 200 combinations of the design variables. The effective responses of all gravity dam samples are determined using FEA. The samples are selected on a random basis and from which 150 and 50 ones are employed to train and test the performance generality of WLS-SVM. A mean absolute percentage error, MAPE, relative root-mean-squared error, RRMSE, and the absolute fraction of variance, R2, are used to evaluate the performance of the WLS-SVM regression as follows:(35)MAPE=1nt∑i=1nt100×yi−y¯iyi(36)RRMSE=nt∑i=1nt(yi−y¯i)2(nt−1)∑i=1ntyi2(37)R2=1−∑i=1nt(yi−y¯i)2∑i=1nty¯i2where y andy¯are actual value and predicted value, respectively; and ntis the number of testing samples. The smaller RRMSE and MAPE and the larger R2 are indicative of better performance generality.The statistical values and the optimal values of γ and σ for predicting the effective responses of dam samples found from testing modes are obtained and the results are listed in Table 7.As shown in Table 7 performance generality of WLS-SVM is good and therefore it can be incorporated into the optimization process as a powerful tool for predicting the time history responses of the structures. Also, the comparison of the exact responses and the predicted responses using WLS-SVM is shown in Fig. 11for two cases related to various conditions of dam–water–foundation rock interaction problem.The optimal shape of Pine Flat gravity dam for two cases is utilized by using PSO, GSA, IGSA and the proposed IGSA-OC based on WLS-SVM as approximate analysis. In order to consider the stochastic nature of these optimization methods, the best results are calculated from the 10 independent optimization runs and compared. The best results are shown in Tables 8 and 9.As revealed from the results of Tables 8 and 9, IGSA-OC performs better solution compared with PSO, GSA and IGSA in the same number of iterations. In addition, the standard deviations of the results by IGSA-OC in 10 independent runs are also smaller than those computed by PSO, GSA and IGSA, which indicate the more stability of the proposed algorithm. The convergence histories of the best solutions of PSO, GSA, IGSA and IGSA-OC for two cases are shown in Figs. 12 and 13.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
