@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Model checking probabilistic social commitments for intelligent agent communication

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present PCTLC, a modal logic for probabilistic commitments and their fulfillments.We introduce a new model checking technique for PCTLC.We propose a set of reduction rules to formally reduce the problem of model checking PCTLC to the problem of model checking PCTL.We implement the proposed technique on top of the PRISM model checker.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Model checking,Social commitments,Multi-Agent Systems,Autonomous reasoning,Probabilistic logic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Interaction among autonomous agents in Multi-Agent Systems (MASs) is a key aspect for agents to coordinate with one another. Social approaches, as opposed to the mental approaches, have recently received a considerable attention in the area of agent communication. They exploit observable social commitments to develop a verifiable formal semantics through which communication protocols can be specified. Developing and implementing algorithmic model checking for social commitments have been recently addressed. However, model checking social commitments in the presence of uncertainty is yet to be investigated.In this paper, we propose a model checking technique for verifying social commitments in uncertain settings. Social commitments are specified in a modal logical language called Probabilistic Computation Tree Logic of Commitments (PCTLC). The modal logic PCTLC extends PCTL, the probabilistic extension of CTL, with modalities for commitments and their fulfillments. The proposed verification method is a reduction-based model checking technique to the model checking of PCTL. The technique is based upon a set of reduction rules that translate PCTLC formulae to PCTL formulae to take benefit of existing model checkers such as PRISM. Proofs that confirm the soundness of the reduction technique are presented. We also present rules that transform our new version of interpreted systems into models of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) to be suitable for the PRISM tool. We implemented our approach on top of the PRISM model checker and verified some given properties for the Oblivious Transfer Protocol from the cryptography domain. Our simulation demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach in verifying and model checking social commitments in the presence of uncertainty. We believe that the proposed formal verification technique will advance the literature of social commitments in such a way that not only representing social commitments in uncertain settings is doable, but also verifying them in such settings becomes achievable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, the use of distributed environments to solve complex real world problems using entities called agents is on rise [44,8]. Communication is a fundamental aspect for these autonomous agents to coordinate with one another to solve fuzzy problems that are difficult for an individual agent to tackle [43]. This communication has been recently modeled by means of communicative social commitments [3,17]. As opposite to the mental approaches such as [64]—which focus on the minds of interacting agents—, social commitments proved to be a powerful representation for agent interactions. They, in fact, provide a social semantics that abstracts away from the agents internal states and offers social and observable meaning to agent messages exchange. Social commitments are agreements between two agents, namely debtor and creditor, in which the debtor engages towards the creditor to bring about a certain property [53]. Commitments result from communicative actions between the interacting parties. That is, agents create commitments and manipulate them through the protocol they use [10]. The manipulation of commitments via some operations (or actions) such as creation, discharge, cancellation, and delegation is indeed a vital element that captures the systems dynamics.In order to represent and reason about social commitments, commitment logics that extend CTL (Computation Tree Logic), LTL (Lineal Temporal Logic), and CTL* (superset of CTL and LTL), have been proposed [52,26,48,57,6]. However, current logics are merely related to specifying and verifying social commitments in MASs where there is no use of randomization, and no presence of stochastic behaviors. That is, they assume an absolute, non-probabilistic running of the system. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Heterogeneous and autonomous intelligent components in agent societies make it challenging to precisely analyze random or unreliable agent behaviors because their actions are based on observing the environment changes and in many situations, agents cannot observe all the changes in the environment as each agent can only have a partial view of other agents’ behaviors [40]. In such cases, agents make estimations about the observable world as part of their autonomous decision making processes. Therefore, when the system being modeled is an open system, i.e., interacts with an environment, then uncertainty in the transitions may arise due to imperfect information about the environment [58,39,32]. Consequently, the problem of verifying social commitments is made more complicated by the presence of transition uncertainty which makes agents uncertain about the effects of their actions on their peers and not fully aware of the situations other agents are encountering. Moreover, from the communication perspective, commitments themselves are likely to be subject to probabilistic events. Xuan and Lesser [65] have highlighted some sources of uncertainty that make a commitment between two agents probabilistic:1.The first source of uncertainty is related to the committed agent's action(s). That is, debtor's action(s) might not always lead to the fulfillment of the commitment.The second source comes from the agent decision process. Debtors beliefs and desires might change such that continuing to pursue fulfilling the commitment for others becomes irrational. Committed agents beliefs about the commitment context include, for example, the degree that the agent to whom the commitment was made is still relying on its fulfillment. To the creditor, this can cause problems because its action(s) may depend on the honoring of the commitment by the debtor.The third form of uncertainty comes from the incomplete knowledge of the debtor about the creditor or about the environment within which the agent interacts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
