@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Matlab-based tool for ECG and HRV analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A software tool was developed for detection and classification of heartbeats.Flexible usage with selection criteria-based automated selection of ECG segments.Visual aid for screening and correction of detections and classifications.Quick and reliable performance, tested on ECG signals from Long-Term ST database.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electroporation-based treatments,Electrocardiogram analysis,QRS detection,Heartbeat classification,Heart rate variability,Software tool,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Delivery of electroporation pulses in electroporation-based treatments could potentially induce heart-related effects. The objective of our work was to develop a software tool for electrocardiogram (ECG) analysis to facilitate detection of such effects in pre-selected ECG- or heart rate variability (HRV) parameters.Our software tool consists of five distinct modules for: (i) preprocessing; (ii) learning; (iii) detection and classification; (iv) selection and verification; and (v) ECG and HRV analysis. Its key features are: automated selection of ECG segments from ECG signal according to specific user-defined requirements (e.g., selection of relatively noise-free ECG segments); automated detection of prominent heartbeat features, such as Q, R and T wave peak; automated classification of individual heartbeat as normal or abnormal; displaying of heartbeat annotations; quick manual screening of analyzed ECG signal; and manual correction of annotation and classification errors.The performance of the detection and classification module was evaluated on 19 two-hour-long ECG records from Long-Term ST database. On average, the QRS detection algorithm had high sensitivity (99.78%), high positive predictivity (99.98%) and low detection error rate (0.35%). The classification algorithm correctly classified 99.45% of all normal QRS complexes. For normal heartbeats, the positive predictivity of 99.99% and classification error rate of 0.01% were achieved.The software tool provides for reliable and effective detection and classification of heartbeats and for calculation of ECG and HRV parameters. It will be used to clarify the issues concerning patient safety during the electroporation-based treatments used in clinical practice. Preventing the electroporation pulses from interfering with the heart is becoming increasingly important because new applications of electroporation-based treatments are being developed which are using endoscopic, percutaneous or surgical means to access internal tumors or tissues and in which the target tissue can be located in immediate vicinity to the heart.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electroporation is a phenomenon resulting in transient increase in the cell membrane permeability due to exposure to an electric field during delivery of short, high-voltage electric pulses, i.e., electroporation pulses [1–4]. Increased membrane permeability allows molecules with intracellular targets, which under physiological conditions cannot cross the cell membrane, to enter the cell and exert their cytotoxicity [5]. Electroporation can be either reversible or irreversible, depending on electrical conditions and tissue characteristics, and both have been used in biomedical applications [6–11]. These applications include electrochemotherapy [12–18], electrotransfer for gene therapy and DNA vaccination [19–24], transdermal drug delivery [25–29], cell electrofusion [30–34], and tissue ablation [35–39]. Electroporation is also used in biotechnology and other areas [11,40].Some of electroporation-based treatments, like electrochemotherapy, gene electrotransfer for gene therapy and DNA vaccination and non-thermal irreversible electroporation, are being successfully introduced into clinical practice. But when electroporation pulses are applied to visceral or other internal tumors and tissues there is an increased risk of inducing heart-related effects, especially when the treatment area is in vicinity of the heart [15,38,41–48]. These heart-related effects can be detected by analyzing electrocardiogram (ECG) signals recorded before, during and after the therapy.A software tool for reliable and effective analysis of potential side-effects of electroporation pulses on ECG or heart rate variability (HRV) parameters is therefore needed. A software tool should provide selection of ECG segments from ECG signal according to a user-defined selection criteria; detection of prominent heartbeat features, such as Q, R and T wave peaks, and classification of individual heartbeat either as normal or abnormal; and displaying, screening and possible correction of detected and classified heartbeats from analyzed ECG signal. Several software tools for HRV analysis that include calculation of various HRV parameters exist (such as Kubios, SyneScope, Biopac, Nevrokard HRV system) but none of them provides all required functionalities listed above. The objective of our study was therefore to develop a software tool that does.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We tested the performance of a newly designed software tool for reliable and effective detection and classification of heartbeats and calculation of ECG and HRV parameters. This tool will serve in clarification of issues concerning patient safety during the electroporation-based treatments used in clinical practice, such as electrochemotherapy, electrotransfer for gene therapy and DNA vaccination and non-thermal irreversible electroporation. Electric pulses used in electroporation-based treatments are of very high intensities (voltages up to several kilovolts, currents up to several tens of amperes) and can potentially induce heart-related effects in spite of their very short durations [44,46,52]. Safety considerations are becoming increasingly important because new applications of electroporation-based treatments using endoscopic, percutaneous or surgical means to access internal tumors or tissues are being developed. Due to relatively large electrical conductivity of internal tissues and organs [62] and pronouncedly nonlinear tissue characteristics [63,64], electroporation pulses in these new treatment modalities might have an increased probability of affecting cardiac muscle and thus greater potential of inducing heart-related effects, especially when the application zone is in immediate vicinity of the heart [15,38,41–48]. Our software tool represents a significant improvement over the existing practice of evaluation of changes in functioning of the heart due to electroporation-based treatments. This software tool can of course also be used for evaluation of changes in ECG or HRV parameters in other applications where the effects of clinical interventions (e.g., effects of drugs) or different physiological conditions (e.g., effects of anxiety or stress) are investigated.Authors declare no conflicts of interests.