@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal and receding horizon control of tumor growth in myeloma bone disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Optimal control of myeloma bone disease.Open-loop optimal control turned into feedback action by a receding horizon strategy.Recovery of bone mass accelerated by a PI controller.Sensitivity study of the optimal controller with respect to model parameters errors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal control,Receding horizon,Tumor,Bone remodeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article addresses the problem of designing therapies for the myeloma bone disease that optimize in a systematic way a compromise between drug toxicity and tumor repression. For that sake, the techniques of optimal control are applied to the dynamics of tumor growth, and the necessary conditions of Pontryagin's minimum principle are solved using a numerical relaxation algorithm. A therapy to accelerate bone mass recovery is applied in parallel, based on a PI control rule. Since the optimal controller provides an open-loop control, it is turned into a feedback law by following a receding horizon strategy. For that sake, an optimal manipulated variable profile is first computed over a time horizon, but only the initial part of this function is applied. The whole optimization procedure is then repeated starting at a time instant that corresponds to the end of the previously applied control.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The micro-structure and evolution of the bone tissue depends of a complex process in which different cells interact through biochemical signaling substances [1]. The bone is continuously being degraded (resorption) and rebuilt, in a process called remodeling. In a healthy young human adult, bone formation and resorption are equilibrated along time.The cells that are responsible for these two processes are osteoclasts and osteoblasts. Osteoblasts produce new bone by collagen synthesis and making it calcify. Opposite, osteoclasts are responsible for bone degradation. In the healthy body, the number of both types of these cells must be properly coordinated. For that sake, an important inducer of osteoclast differentiation is RANKL ( [2], p. 706). When an osteoclast precursor comes in contact with RANKL molecules, this results in the maturation of an osteoclast. On the other way, osteoblasts produce also OPG that inhibits RANKL and prevents osteoclast maturation. The balance between RANKL and OPG signaling determines the degree of activation of osteoclasts and settles bone remodeling.Cancer disrupts this balance and causes both bone disturbances and the emission of substances that favor the occurrence of metastases ( [2], pp. 703–709). In particular, multiple myeloma is an hematological disease characterized by the unrelenting proliferation of plasma cells that causes destructive osteolytic lesions associated with severe pain and pathological fractures due to decreased osteoblastic and increased osteoclastic activity [3,4].This article addresses the problem of designing therapies for the myeloma bone disease that are based on control techniques. It is stressed that the problem addressed has, as a consequence of the above remarks, an interest to cancers other then multiple myeloma. The use of optimal control allows to embed, in a systematic way, a compromise between drug toxicity and tumor repression. Furthermore, a therapy based on a PI control rule is applied in parallel to accelerate bone mass recovery.Although optimal control provides a powerful tool to link clinical requirements to mathematical objectives, the resulting control law is open-loop, with all the inherent drawbacks. Since, in addition, some optimal drug administration profiles are such that, for a long period, the drug dose is kept at a minimum level, being only increased close to the end of the optimization time interval, this means that the patient will remain with little or no treatment at all for a significant period of time. To circumvent this problem [13], proposes to split the optimization interval in two parts.To tackle the above problems, this article examines the possibility of using a receding horizon (RH) strategy [17], in which, at a given time t, an optimal control problem is solved in the time horizon between t and t+T, called the prediction horizon. Of the resulting control function, only the part between t and t+δ is actually used, with the whole procedure being repeated starting at t+δ. This procedure has the advantage of performing a feedback action every δ units of time. Usually, RH control is considered in the framework of discrete-time predictive control [18]. Since the samples of the manipulated variable along the prediction horizon are left free, in nonlinear problems they can be stuck atlocal minima. In this paper, instead, Pontryagin's minimum principle is used to select them. Although the idea of using Pontryagin's principle together with RH control is not new [19,20], this approach is rather unexplored, and has not been previously considered for tumor growth control.The contribution of this article consists therefore of the application of a receding horizon controller based on optimal control to the design of therapies for cancer that involves an interaction between bone remodeling and tumor growth.The paper is organized as follows: After this introduction, a brief literature review is made in Section 2, and the tumor growth models considered are described in Section 3. Pontryagin's minimum principle (PMP) is reviewed in Section 4, together with a numerical solution algorithm for optimal control problems and application examples related to the control of tumor growth. Section 5 formulates the RH algorithm based on PMP and shows results on tumor growth, and in Section 6 the PI controller for the bone mass regulation is designed. Finally, Section 7 draws conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The combination of optimal and receding horizon control provides a natural framework to obtain therapies for tumor growth, that was complemented with a PI controller for bone therapy. Optimizing the therapy can be readily formulated as an optimal control problem, whose solution yields a time profile for drug administration. This open-loop solution can be transformed into a feedback control law, with all the inherent advantages, by using the receding horizon strategy. In the example provided, RH improves control performance with respect to the open-loop optimal control in the presence of disturbances.A number of important issues were not addressed in this paper. The first one is drug resistance and multi-drug treatment.Other aspects are related to improving the model in what concerns drug administration, and they comprise the inclusion of pharmacokinetic drug models, modeling the fact that drugs have no effect below some threshold, and the fact that drugs are not continuously perfused in the patient but instead are administered in concentrated time doses that are best represented as a sequence of impulses.Although the above aspects are essential when modeling a realistic therapy of cancer, they exceed the objective of this paper that was circumscribed to make a first illustration of how the receding horizon can be applied to cell-kill strategies to turn an optimal profile into a feedback control law, and complement it with a PI controller to moderate osteoclast excessive action and speed-up bone mass recovery.