@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Deceleration Capacity of heart rate: Two new methods of computation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose two new methods for computing Deceleration Capacity: DCsign and BBDD.These methods do not produce negative values as the original method does.DCsign improves filtering and selects decelerations based not only on anchor points.BBDD is based on physiology.The value of the methods is shown theoretically, experimentally, based on physiology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Deceleration Capacity,Heart rate dynamics,Electrocardiogram (ECG),Holter,Parasympathetic nervous system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Deceleration Capacity (DC) expresses the property of the neural control of the heart extrinsically to decelerate its rate. For the computation of DC a mathematical method has been proposed and used. Although this method was proved of significant prognostic value, it may produce meaningless negative values for DC, something in contradiction with the principle of inter beat deceleration. In this paper we propose two new methods of computation, DCsgn(DC sign) and BBDC (Beat to Beat Deceleration Capacity), which not only give positive values for DC but could also improve the original method. DCsgnmodifies the filtering procedure by totally excluding from computation segments that include possible artifacts. It also uses information of four successive beats in order to detect deceleration (acceleration) segments and not only from the anchor points. BBDC bases all computations on two and not on four successive beats, detecting in this way shorter-term relationships. In order to evaluate the proposed methods, a dataset of 20 young and 20 elderly subjects, all healthy, has been used. Experimental results verify our theoretical claims and show that the proposed method can discriminate more efficiently healthy young and elderly subjects than the original method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Heart rate variability (HRV) [1] originates as a physiological consequence of the Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) extrinsic control of heart rate on sinus node level. Parasympathetic Nervous System (PNS) and Sympathetic Nervous System (SNS) activity on sinus node level determine inter-cardiac cycles durations and its variations generating HRV. HRV reflects ANS influences on the heart and it is clinically applied on studies investigating mortality and arrhythmia prognosis in post myocardial infarction and heart failure patients. It is also used for detecting dysautonomia in diabetics.Deceleration Capacity [2] was proposed as a metric focusing on quantifying the decelerations of heart rate. Heart rate beat by beat regulation is achieved through the rapid vagus nerve activity which can change the heart rate substantially, even within one cardiac cycle [3]. As the PNS cardio protective role was proved experimentally a reduced vagal activity reflected from impaired DC values was linked to increased post myocardial infarction mortality [2].Only a few published papers related to DC discuss the method itself while the rest of them applies the method in various problems. In [4] sinusoidal analysis is applied to elucidate the rationality of the improved PRSA (Phase Rectified Signal Averaging) and the validity of the modified DC is verified using databases of chronic heart failure patients and a control group. In [5] the threshold of the filter is discussed and experiments have been made with filters with thresholds 5% and 10%, showing that 5% is the optimal filtering level. We also think that the work in [6] should be mentioned here, where monotonic runs or acceleration and decelerations are examined. Since 2006 the method has been used and evaluated several times. No significant changes have been proposed in the method all these years.In this paper we propose some modifications on the original method. Our motivation was our previous work [7], in which we observed that the original method was producing negative values for some patients. This was a paradox, since the method calculates the deceleration of a cardiac cycle compared to the previous one. The physical meaning of a negative value is that the heart accelerates and does not decelerate as assumed. Having that in mind, we modified the original method in the way with which four consecutive beat intervals are characterized as acceleration or deceleration. We also modified the way the filter is applied. According to the original method, some points are excluded from what is defined as anchor since they are considered as artifacts. However, these points are not totally excluded from the computations. We totally exclude these points and computations are based only on points that cannot be considered as artifacts. We also study the Beat to Beat Deceleration Capacity (BBDC) focusing on the period in which the maximum effect of the vagus is expected. BBDC considers two instead of four beats and computations are done on successive beats only. This decision is based on physiology. From the physiology of the ANS we know that the variability of the heart rate mainly depends on the frequency with which the PNS releases acetylcholine to the sinus node. The maximum effect of this function of the vagus is expected in a short time period, less than 400ms. We also compare the proposed modifications experimentally with the originally proposed method in order to support our theoretical claims.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2.1 describes the original method. Section 2.2 describes the first of the two proposed methods while Section 2.3 the second one. Experimental evaluation is presented in Section 3 while the discussion and conclusions sections follow.A method for the computation of DC has been proposed in [2]. Anchor points are defined as RR intervals which are shorter than their preceding interval, when Acceleration Capacity (AC) is computed, or longer than their preceding intervals when DC is computed. For convenience and without loss of generality we will consider that we examine DC. In Fig. 1we can see anchor points for a small part of a real signal.Anchor points are marked with the symbol x. Line segments before the x marks always increase since the heart decelerates its rhythm at this moment (shown with solid lines in the figure).In order to avoid artifacts, intervals which differ more than 5% from their preceding intervals are excluded from computation. Fig. 2shows anchor points and their preceding line segments for the same signal after excluding possible artifacts.The line segments around anchor points are used for the computation of DC. We align those segments according to the anchor points (phase rectification [8,9]). Aligned segments are then averaged.Suppose X(0) is the average for all anchor points. X(1) is the average of all points following an anchor point and X(−1) and X(−2) the corresponding average of the points preceding anchor points. Deceleration Capacity is given by the following formula [2]:(1)DCorig=X(0)+X(1)−X(−1)−X(−2)4while Acceleration Capacity is computed in a similar way.We examine here a variation of the method aiming to act complementary to the original proposed method. We propose two modifications (i) in the way we apply the filter which identifies possible artifacts and (ii) in the way we characterize series of consecutive intervals as deceleration or acceleration series.Suppose the timeseries of RR intervals:RRi=RR1,RR2,…,RRNWe define the series of vectors:xi=(RRi,RRi+1,RRi+2,RRi+3)where 1≤i≤N−3, i.e. we group consecutive RR intervals into quads, aligning, from the beginning, the line segments as done in [2] at a later stage.In analogy to the definition of DC the four elements of vector xiare referred as xi(1), xi(2), xi(3), xi(4). We define a vectorvias valid if:(2)xi(4)−xi(3)xi(3)≤0.05,xi(3)−xi(2)xi(2)≤0.05,xi(2)−xi(1)xi(1)≤0.05and we assign the value 1 to valid vectors:vi=1,xi(4)−xi(3)xi(3)≤0.05,xi(3)−xi(2)xi(2)≤0.05,xi(2)−xi(1)xi(1)≤0.050,otherwiseIn other words, we exclude from computation all quads for which the criterion of 5% does not hold at least for one pair of consecutive elements. This is a simple generalization of the filter proposed in [2] where the filter is applied only to anchor points, i.e. only using the second inequality of inequalities (2). By using only the second inequality the criterion of 5% is applied only between anchor points and their preceding intervals, allowing a segment for which the criterion does not hold to participate in the computation of X(1), X(−1) and X(−2) in Eq. (1). In Fig. 2 the segment marked with A corresponds to an anchor point and satisfies the criterion of 5%, allowing the segment marked with B to participate in the computation of the averaged signal, even though this segment does not satisfy the criterion. For the filter proposed in this paper the line segments participating in the computation of the averaged vectors for Deceleration Capacity are shown in Fig. 3.Next, we compute acdcifor each vector as:(3)acdci=xi(4)+xi(3)−xi(2)−xi(1)4and then we characterize each vector as acceleration or deceleration period:aci=1,ifacdci<00,otherwise(4)dci=1,ifacdci>00,otherwiseWe also compute the averaged vectors:dc¯=(dci*vi*xi(1)¯,dci*vi*xi(2)¯,dci*vi*xi(3)¯,dci*vi*xi(4)¯)and:ac¯=(aci*vi*xi(1)¯,aci*vi*xi(2)¯,aci*vi*xi(3)¯,aci*vi*xi(4)¯)and finally we calculate AC and DC with formulas similar to Eq. (1):(5)DCsgn=dc¯(4)+dc¯(3)−dc¯(2)−dc¯(1)4(6)ACsgn=ac¯(4)+ac¯(3)−ac¯(2)−ac¯(1)4Please note that DCsgnreveals different information than DCorig. DCorigcharacterizes a set of consecutive beats as deceleration based on the anchor and its preceding interval. Then it checks if the anchor point is shorter (accelerates) or longer (decelerates) than its preceding interval and takes averages of successive differences. This could lead to negative values for Deceleration Capacity. Negative values indicate that the signal accelerates at this point, even though it was expected to decelerate based on the anchor point. DCsgnlooks directly at the four beat window and decides if the signal accelerates or decelerated considering all four beats. Then it characterizes the four beat sequence as acceleration or deceleration. The information extracted from these two metrics is different and seems that both should be taken into consideration and not the one replace the other, something also verified by the different but similar experimental results collected by the two methods and presented in Section 3.Looking deeper in the above paragraph, one could see that there is some more information which has not been studied. What happens if we characterize a period as acceleration or deceleration using two beats, but without checking if the preceding and succeeding intervals follow or not? Let us see the next section which introduces BBDC.We consider in this section one more method which could act complementary to the methods presented in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. It is a variation of those methods which computes the Beat to Beat Deceleration Capacity (BBDC). BBDC is based on Eq. (1) (suggested in [2]) limiting the window in two beats. This measure also corresponds to DC(1,1) that has been reported in [10]. However, in both papers it has not been suggested clearly that this measure is of special interest or even investigated experimentally. We move one step ahead and base it on the physiology.The BBDC metric describes different information than DCorigand DCsgn. The effect of sympathetic stimulation on heart rate starts with a latency of approximately 5 seconds with the maximum response within 20–30s [11]. In contrast, the maximum effect for the vagal stimulation occurs rapidly, within 400ms [12]. In other words parasympathetic control of heart rate is faster than sympathetic control of heart rate. The information extracted from a window of two beats analyzed in this section with BBDC probably reflects more accurately the instant PNS influences on sinus node than a longer window of four beats. In the four beats window multiple vagal discharges may occur. Thus, there is much information hidden in a window of two beats and this information is different than that extracted from a window of four beats.The procedure is similar to that presented in Section 2.1. Anchor points are defined as RR intervals longer than their preceding ones, excluding those differing more than 5% from their preceding intervals as possible artifacts. Next, the difference between the anchors and their preceding intervals is averaged and the BBDC is given by the formula:(7)BBDC=X(0)−X(−1)2where X(0) is the average of all intervals selected as anchors and not excluded by the filter, and X(−1) the average of their preceding intervals.Please note that the segments participating in the computation of BBDC are always ascending and all differences between anchors and their preceding points are always positive. Please also note that the filter of 5% is applied only to line segments between the anchor points and their preceding intervals and is not necessary to decide about the participation of other segments as happens in the computation of DCorigand DCsgn.Anchor points before and after filtering are the same with those selected by DCorigand are shown in Figs. 1 and 2.Beat to Beat Acceleration Capacity (BBAC) can also be defined in a similar way.We used a public dataset from physionet to evaluate all three methods: DCorig, DCsgnand BBDC. For the computation of DCorigwe used and analyzed the software kindly provided to us by Prof. Georg Schmidt.We also used the fantasia[13,14] dataset, which consists of 40 recordings, 20 from young subjects (21–34 years old) and 20 from elderly (68–85 years old), all were healthy. Each subgroup includes equal numbers of men and women. All subjects remained in a resting state in sinus rhythm during recording while watching the movie Fantasia (Disney, 1940) to help maintain wakefulness. The continuous ECG signals were 120min long and digitized at 250Hz. Each heartbeat was annotated using an automated arrhythmia detection algorithm, and each beat annotation was verified by visual inspection.Since the heart of a younger subject is expected to be able to accelerate and decelerate more effectively than that of an elderly subject, we expected to observe a statistical significant discrimination when using Acceleration and Deceleration Capacity in order to discriminate the two groups of subjects, for all examined metrics. The results are presented in Table 1. In the first column we present p-values for the achieved discrimination, while in the rest two columns the means and standard deviations for each group of subjects. We can observe that all three measures present remarkable discrimination power. We can easily see that both methods proposed in this paper present lower p-values than the original method. For the estimation of p-value ttest and anova tests were used after checking that the distributions are normal using the Shapiro–Wilk test for normality. The same results, from another perspective can be seen in the box plots of Figs. 4 and 5for Deceleration Capacity and Acceleration Capacity respectively. These figures show graphically the discrimination achieved by each one of the three applied metrics. We can see that the proposed methods present less (almost no) overlap between the boxes representing the subjects of the two groups. Finally Figs. 6 and 7compare all three methods using ROC curves. We can see that both DCsgnand BBDC seem to discriminate the two groups more successfully. The area under ROC curve (AuC) is a quantitative measure of the discrimination achieved and is shown in Table 1 for both Deceleration Capacity and Acceleration Capacity. ACsgn, providing the maximum area under the ROC curve, has the best discrimination power.We also performed a bootstrap test to check the stability of our results. Since the number or recordings are relatively small, we performed bootstrap test repeating the experiment 1000 times, each times using 35 out of 40 recordings. The results are shown in the last column of Table 1 and show the mean values and the standard deviations of the results of all experiments. For completeness, we also present in Table 2p-values and the corresponding AuC indices for the most common statistical measures of HRV analysis. The discrimination power of all measures is lower than those of the methods examined in this paper with the exception of pNN50 which is something larger. pNN50 is a widely used method expressing the probability of two successive beats to differ more than 50msec and is an index of fast (beat–beat) RR changes and of parasympathetic activity.All necessary software for analyzing the signal or statistical analysis has been developed by our team in Matlab.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
