@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mathematical modelling of sleep fragmentation diagnosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assume that sleep fragmentation can be diagnosed from three sleep characteristics.We mathematically model the sleep fragmentation diagnosis of three kind of clinicians.We measure the agreement between each model and each clinician's diagnosis.We obtain a substantial to almost perfect agreement (Cohen's kappa).We consider each model as validated a posteriori.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sleep fragmentation,Sleep stages shifts,Micro-arousal rate,Intra sleep awakenings,ROC curves,Principal Component Analysis,Cohen's kappa,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Polysomnography (PSG) is the recording during sleep of multiple physiological parameters enabling to diagnose sleep disorders and to characterize sleep fragmentation. From PSG several sleep characteristics such as the micro arousal rate (MAR), the number of sleep stages shifts (SSS) and the rate of intra sleep awakenings (ISA) can be deduced each having its own fragmentation threshold value and each being more or less important (weight) in the clinician's diagnosis according to his specialization (pulmonologist, neurophysiologist and technical expert). In this work we propose a mathematical model of sleep fragmentation diagnosis based on these three main sleep characteristics (MAR, SSS, ISA) each having its own threshold and weight values for each clinician. Then, a database of 111 PSG consisting of 55 healthy adults and 56 adult patients with a suspicion of obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS), has been diagnosed by nine clinicians divided into three groups (three pulmonologists, three neurophysiologists and three technical experts) representing a panel of polysomnography experts usually working in a hospital. This has enabled to determine statistically the thresholds and weights values which characterize each clinician's diagnosis. Thus, we show that the agreement between each clinician's diagnosis and each corresponding mathematical model goes from substantial (κ>61%) to almost perfect (κ>81%), according to their specialization and so, that the mean value of the agreements of each group is also substantial (κ>73%) despite the existing variability between clinicians. It follows from this result that our mathematical model of sleep fragmentation diagnosis is a posteriori validated for each clinician.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Polysomnography (PSG) consists in study of concurrent biophysiological electric signal shifts such as the electroencephalogram (EEG), electro-oculogram (EOG) and electromyogram (EMG) that occur during sleep. The PSG is commonly used as a diagnosis tool for the investigation of the sleep disorders and to characterize sleep fragmentation and sleep-disordered breathing such as sleep apnea (Obstructive Sleep Apnea/Hypopnea Syndrome, OSAHS). At the end of the sixties, Rechtschaffen and Kales [1] established a system of standardized rules and a scoring system for sleep stages of human subjects which enables the visual recognition by clinicians and technical experts of different sleep stages. Very recently, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine has updated these rules and technical specifications [2,3] up to five: wakefulness, non-rapid eye-movement (NREM) sleep stages 1, 2 and 3, and rapid eye-movement (REM) or paradoxical sleep (PS). Thus, the sleep stages are subsequently scored by sleep specialists every 30-s epoch. This graphic representation of the variations of the stages of sleep as a function of time leads to a temporal distribution called hypnogram (see Fig. 1).Because the PSG depicts the micro and macro-architecture of sleep, it has enabled to define many indicators called sleep characteristics used to assess sleep quality and so, to quantify sleep fragmentation. Then, from these characteristics and from their corresponding thresholds’ values, clinicians decide whether the patients’ sleep is fragmented or not. So, for mathematically modelling the sleep fragmentation diagnosis, a questionnaire has been sent to nine clinicians (three pulmonologists, three neurophysiologists and three technical experts) asking them to answer the following questions:-What are the three main sleep characteristics enabling to diagnose a fragmented sleep?What are the thresholds values for each of them?What is the importance (weight) of each of them in their diagnosis?It seems to be a consensus for the following three main sleep characteristics:-the micro arousal rate (MAR),the number of sleep stages shifts (SSS) during the night recording,the number of intra sleep awakenings (ISA) by hour of total sleep time (hTST).Concerning the thresholds values and the weights of these sleep characteristics from which the sleep can be considered as fragmented we observe some differences depending on each clinician's specialization (pulmonologist, neurophysiologist and technical experts). So, the clinician's diagnosis can be modelled according to three sleep characteristics (MAR, SSS, ISA) each having its own threshold and weight values.In their seminal works, Lusted and Ledley [4–6] proposed many models from symbolic logic, probability, and value theory as a mathematical basis for logical analysis and in the use of machine aids to diagnosis. In the beginning of the eighties, Lezotte and Scheinok [7] discussed “The Role of Modelling Methods in Medical Diagnosis” using mathematical approaches which include cluster analysis, discriminant analysis, Bayesian methods, computer approaches, game theory, information theory, stochastic representations, stepwise procedures, decision analysis, and pattern recognition techniques. They pointed out some limitations of modelling methods in health care due to the complexity of the proposed model and also due to the sensitivity of the methodology to extract the informational content of the input parameters. Though mathematical models have been used in medical diagnosis since the sixties, it was only in the early nineties that they have been applied for analyzing the human sleep as exemplified by the article of Achermann and Borbély [8] who proposed a mathematical model for sleep regulation based on a continuous time dynamical systems. More particularly, it wasn’t until the last decades that several indicators of sleep quality were defined including the sleep fragmentation index (SFI) [9], the weighted-transition sleep fragmentation (WSFI) [10] and the sleep diversity index (SDI) [11]. Very recently, Swihart et al. [12] proposed a modelling of sleep fragmentation in sleep hypnograms based on the extension of current approaches of multivariate survival data analysis to clustered, recurrent event discrete-state discrete-time processes. Along with these mathematical approaches, the computational modelling of human sleep using Artificial Neural Networks for sleep stage scoring has been also developed since the nineties [13]. Thus, it appears that mathematical models of medical diagnosis and mathematical models of sleep fragmentation have been performed with the help of probabilistic methods, statistical methods, dynamical systems, artificial neural networks and sleep indicators. However, it does not seem, to our knowledge, that there exists any mathematical model of sleep fragmentation diagnosis. Actually, the modelling of a clinician's diagnosis is not an easy task if we take into account all the factors involved in such a process. Nevertheless, following the remark concerning the limitations of modelling methods highlighted by Lezotte and Scheinok [7], the aim of our work is to propose the most simple and consistent model of sleep fragmentation diagnosis. Our model, presented in Section 3, involving three sleep characteristics (MAR, SSS, ISA) each having its own threshold and weight values is thus based on the definition of a weighted arithmetic mean that we call below Mathematical Diagnosis’ Index. Statistical methods are then used for these parameters’ estimation. Thresholds are deduced from Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves [14,15] while weights are computed with the help of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [16,17], while. Hence, from a database of 111 PSG, a mathematical model of sleep fragmentation diagnosis is built for each clinician while taking into account its own specialization and which is a posteriori validated.This retrospective and observational study (Protocol No. CH-2013-02) was conducted with the sleep laboratory of the Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Toulon la Seyne (CHITS). One hundred and eleven PSG under spontaneous breathing were selected in the sleep laboratory of the CHITS database: 55 from healthy adults and 56 from adult patients with a suspicion of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). The signals were recorded by a polysomnograph (Medatec®, Belgium). All the recordings were analyzed by nine clinicians (three pulmonologists, three neurophysiologists and three technical experts) and the sleep stages were encoded according to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine recommendations[2,3].Starting from our database, each polysomnographic (PSG) signal recording leads to the representation of the temporal distribution of sleep/wake stages with an hypnogram from which three sleep characteristics: Micro-Arousal Rate (MAR), Sleep Stages Shifts (SSS) and Intra Sleep Awakening (ISA) can be deduced among many others such as sleep latencies for example.The micro-arousal rate (MAR) aka micro-arousal index, has been introduced by Guilleminault et al. [18] and is defined by the total number of micro-awakenings divided by the total sleep time (TST) in hour. A micro-arousal is an abrupt shift in EEG frequency, which may include theta, alpha and/or frequencies greater than 16Hz during 3 to 15s. It is a change in the sleep micro-architecture that cannot be visualized on the hypnogram because it occurs during a sleep stage [19]. Thus, the micro-arousal rate has been introduced as the ‘gold standard’ to detect sleep fragmentation [19] and since it has been commonly considered as sleep characteristics reflecting sleep fragmentation.The number of sleep stages shifts (SSS) is defined as the number of transitions between the five sleep stages. According to Norman et al. [20] sleep fragmentation may be characterized with sleep stages shifts analysis.An intra-sleep awakening is a stage encoded as an awake that occurs between the first and the last sleep stages. The total number of ISA and their duration are specified in the PSG report. Then, we can deduce the rate of intra-sleep awakenings (ISA) which is defined by the total number of intra sleep awakenings divided by the total sleep time (TST) in hour. According to Norman et al. [20], the number of intra sleep awakenings captures various potentially fragmenting behaviours which might impair continuity and has been shown to correlate with daytime sleepiness.From a clinical point of view, sleep is considered as fragmented when there is a disorder of sleep continuity [20]. Subjectively, such a disorder can be revealed by intra-sleep awakenings unusually long or frequent. Objectively, on the PSG recordings, it can be also highlighted by the presence of many micro-arousals, frequent sleep stage changes, or abnormalities of the general architecture of the hypnogram. Moreover, detection of sleep fragmentation is of great importance because of its effect on the daytime function as pointed out by Stepanski et al. [21].To diagnose sleep fragmentation, the clinician has to read the PSG recording, to encode the various sleep stages and to define the various events occurring on micro-architecture such as micro-arousals and the breathing events such as apneas and hypopneas [1–3]. At the end of the analysis, a PSG report is provided with all the sleep and breathing characteristics (some are presented in Table 1) and the hypnogram. For one polysomnography it takes about 1h for the clinician to read and to make a diagnosis. During the patient consultation, the clinician will decide whether the sleep is fragmented or not starting from the various data included in the PSG report such as the main sleep fragmentation characteristics (MAR, SSS, ISA) and the hypnogram. This will take about 3min.The choice of these three main sleep fragmentation characteristics is essentially based on an empirical knowledge of this sleep pathology which depends on the clinician specialization. The neurophysiologists focus on the sleep micro-architecture (micro-arousal rate) because their patients suffer from sleep disorders and neurological pathologies while the pulmonologists focus on breathing troubles and so, they will first analyse the macro-architecture, i.e., the hypnogram in which sleep stages shifts and intra-sleep awakenings can be visualized. This is generally when the diagnosis of sleep fragmentation cannot be clearly established that pulmonologists focus on micro-arousal rate as a second step.Clinical and sleep characteristics of the healthy subjects and the patients from our database of 111 PSG are presented in Table 1.Concerning the thresholds values from which the sleep can be considered as fragmented, the result of our questionnaire for each group of clinicians is presented in Table 2.Concerning the importance, i.e., the weight of each sleep characteristic in the diagnosis of each clinician the result of our questionnaire is presented in Table 3.Thus, the proposed mathematical model of sleep fragmentation diagnosis is mainly based on a set of three variablesX,Y,Z=MAR,SSS,ISAeach having two parameters:τX,wX,τY,wY,τZ,wZwhich are respectively the thresholds and weights values for the MAR, the number of SSS and the rate of ISA. The comparison between the thresholds’ values provided by the clinicians themselves (Table 2) and those found in the literature highlights, of course, a quite good consistency. Indeed, by studying anonymous nocturnal polysomnograms from 10 normal subjects and 10 subjects with mild sleep disordered breathing, Norman et al. [20] found that the mean value of MAR for normal subjects is 14.8±5.1, while for subjects with mild sleep disordered breathing they found 23.9±11.7 with a p-valuep<0.001. In the same work, Norman et al. [20] provide for normal subjects a mean value of the threshold for ISA equal to 3.0±0.9 with a p-valuep<0.004. In a study on the effect of an antiepileptic on sleep including 10 healthy adults and 9 control subjects, Foldvary-Schaefer [22] found that during the baseline PSG the mean value of SSS for control subjects is 69.11±12.82 while during the follow-up PSG the mean value of SSS for control subjects is 78.78±20.78 with a p-valuep=0.21.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
