@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Noise reduction in intracranial pressure signal using causal shape manifolds

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A probabilistic denoising framework for quasi-periodic biosignals is introduced.The framework relies on a manifold generated from exemplary signal pulses.Noisy pulses are projected onto the manifold in a beat-by-beat fashion.Regression algorithms are used to track the progression of pulses on the manifold.A denoised estimate is made in the input space by defining an inverse mapping.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ICP,Intensive care,Traumatic brain injury,Manifold learning,Noise reduction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present the Iterative/Causal Subspace Tracking framework (I/CST) for reducing noise in continuously monitored quasi-periodic biosignals. Signal reconstruction of the basic segments of the noisy signal (e.g. beats) is achieved by projection to a reduced space on which probabilistic tracking is performed. The attractiveness of the presented method lies in the fact that the subspace, or manifold, is learned by incorporating temporal, morphological, and signal elevation constraints, so that segment samples with similar shapes, and that are close in time and elevation, are also close in the subspace representation. Evaluation of the algorithm's effectiveness on the intracranial pressure (ICP) signal serves as a practical illustration of how it can operate in clinical conditions on routinely acquired biosignals. The reconstruction accuracy of the system is evaluated on an idealized 20-min ICP recording established from the average ICP of patients monitored for various ICP related conditions. The reconstruction accuracy of the ground truth signal is tested in presence of varying levels of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and Poisson noise processes, and measures significant increases of 758% and 396% in the average signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Intracranial pressure (ICP) is defined as the pressure inside the skull and is a marker of the brain's ability to compensate for cerebral pathophysiological changes. Although intraventricular catheters and intraparenchymal sensors are widely used for ICP monitoring, their invasiveness presents considerable risk to the patient, and therefore are only used when the risks associated with a pathological increase in ICP outweighs those associated with its invasive monitoring. Clinically, ICP is a fundamental physiologic parameter that, if elevated, can lead to a pathological reduction in cerebral blood flow and possible herniation of the brain, resulting in irreversible brain damage or death if left untreated. Currently, the ICP signal is used to diagnose dangerous increases in average pressure (computed using a moving average) and helps guide treatment with recommendation based on ICP greater than 20mmHg for more than 5min [1]. Although the average ICP is monitored in modern clinical environments, subsequent higher-order analysis on the ICP pulse waveform often requires complex processing, expert annotations, and corrections due to egregious noise introduced during measurement from electronic equipment, electrode transients, displacement of the sensor, or even the patient shifting their posture. Such conditions make it difficult for real-time monitoring software to properly interpret ICP waveform data (Fig. 1).The conventional approach to noise reduction is to filter the input signal. When noise is constrained to particular frequencies, such as 60Hz tonal noise, we can retrieve most of the desired signal by applying bandstop (notch-type) filters. In the general case, when a model of the desired signal's spectral content is known, along with an estimate of the noise distribution, adaptive filtering may be used to construct a mean-square optimal filter [2]. However, the problem is more challenging when noise has a spectral density which overlaps significantly with that of the desired signal. Channel estimation is fickle in this application, because biosignals are not easily constructed from band-limited primitives. Specifically, it is increasingly difficult to identify a generic noise-floor when the relevant spectral content of the signal is not entirely known.Another popular approach to the broadband noise problem is to estimate the original signal by assuming some stochastic mixing process. A mixture model uses knowledge of the expected degradation to estimate the most likely values for the originally transmitted signal [3]. When the number of possible source-transmitted symbols is relatively low and discretized, expectation maximization (EM) and maximum a posteriori estimation (MAP) algorithms can be used to estimate the most likely source-transmitted symbol, although an initial characterization of both the source and noise distributions is required.In the case of ICP waveform, the number of possible pulse shapes is not finite and assigning a discrete estimate from a bank of reference signals is not an optimal solution to preserve patient-specific features. Moreover, a static characterization of the noise distribution is not always possible in clinical environments, since degradations may vary between sites and may be introduced from a combination of sources (including patient movement, sensor displacement, electronic noise, type of sensor) in varying proportion. To tackle this problem, we present a method for reducing noise in continuously monitored quasi-periodic biosignals without prior knowledge of the noise distribution. Noise is reduced by reconstructing an estimate of the original signal from a mixture of reference signals. The references are selected by searching the closest neighbors of an input sample in a reduced dimensional space. By tracking the position of consecutive samples in the subspace, causal correction transformations can be iteratively applied to the collected data stream.There has been significant interest in modeling the morphology of the ICP waveform  [4–9]. One of the main findings of those studies is to characterize the relationship between the average ICP value and the signal morphology (up to the beat level). By clustering the morphology of the waveform for various levels of ICP, as we will illustrate later in this paper, it can be observed that the ICP waveform at the beat level has shape features that vary along with the ICP. Based on this strong correlation between the ICP value and signal morphology, we introduce a modified nonlinear subspace learning algorithm to accent this correlation by warping the learned subspace to reflect constraints about time, morphology, and average ICP. The intuition behind the algorithm is that the level of ICP implicitly constraints the possible waveform morphologies which can be used to refine the denoising process.The structure of this paper is as follows: we first present the dataset and the ground truth used during our experimental evaluation in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. The mechanics of the Iterative/Causal Subspace Tracking (I/CST) is presented in Section 2.3, ending with the formulation of a simple I/CST implementation (Algorithm 1). The performance of this implementation is evaluated for ICP signals in Section 2.4 and the results presented in Section 3. This work results in a noise reduction framework capable of real-time performance, which enables a more reliable analysis of continuous waveform characteristics, as discussed in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
