@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Suppression of interference in continuous wave Doppler radar based respiratory measurements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Demonstrated non-contact measurement and analysis of human respiration.Respiration measurement using microwave Doppler radar under the influence of motion artefact are discussed.The use of EMD-ICA for respiration signal reconstruction and interference suppression.Automated components selection using approximate entropy measures.Achieved high correlation in comparison with conventional respiration strap.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Respiration pattern,Doppler radar,EMD,FastICA,Approximate entropy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Microwave Doppler radar has received considerable attention as a non-contact form of measuring human respiration; in particular for long term monitoring. One of the main challenges in converting this into a viable application is to suppress or separate the artefacts and other interfering signals from the desired respiration signal using a less complex and practically feasible design for regular and potentially real time use. Existing systems either require complex experimental setups or multiple Doppler radar modules to achieve this. In this paper, we propose an approach based on EMD-ICA and approximate entropy ideas to systematically separate received Doppler shifted signal into distinct components and reconstruct the desired respiration pattern pertaining to respective physiological activity. Indeed this allows suppression of the undesirable artefacts and interference from other competing signals. Practical experiments confirmed comparable performance of the proposed method to the measurements obtained through chest straps which are widely used clinically for monitoring respiration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The relevance of respiratory patterns to certain medical conditions has not received sufficient attention in the past particularly due to practical limitations in collecting such information. Respiratory information such as long term trends of subjects in their natural environment is currently not available in practically and economically viable forms. Chest straps and spirometers are commonly used in such studies and, as wearable devices, these are not only uncomfortable, but also interfere with the physiological process of respiration; hence the captured information (measurements) is inherently influenced.Human respiration sensing in a non-contact form [1–4] is made possible with the recent developments in microwave Doppler radar technology. With respiration rates and signal patterns considered as key predictors for certain medical conditions [5,6], the suppression or separation of motion artefacts are essential to increase the accuracy and reliability of measurements captured by the Doppler radar. Involuntary motions such as small head movements to large movements such as jerking of the arm during sleep can cause interferences in observations. Despite certain artefacts generally being considered as noise or interference, these could also be considered to extract vital information in relation to specific conditions. For instance, the jerking of a limb considered as an artefact in breathing signals can be a useful activity to monitor in patients with periodic limb movement disorder [7]. Thus, the separation of these signatures are essential to understand the strength and the frequency of these movements and refine diagnostic procedures in addition to capturing more accurate respiration patterns. As the Doppler radar by nature is sensitive to any form of movement, in general, more spatially distributed sensors are required to separate different sources from the observations as demonstrated by Vergara et al. [8] and Pathirana et al. [9]. In this paper, we present an approach to reconstruct the respiration patterns as well as to separate the artefacts using only one observation channel. We utilise the ideas of approximate entropy to select corresponding sources (respiration source and artefact source) in the pre-processing stage of empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and independent component analysis (ICA).In Doppler radar, the transmitted signal is modulated by the motion of the abdomen during the inhalation and exhalation activities where the change in phase can be derived from the received signal. Using a continuous wave (CW), the modulated signal at the receiver can be approximated asR(t)≈cos2πft−4πd0λ−4πy(t)λ+ϕt−2d0cwhere ϕ is the phase noise of the signal source, y(t) is the time varying displacement of the chest or abdominal wall due to respiration activity at a nominal distance d0.The received In phase (I) and Quadrature Phase (Q) signal at the Radar quadrature output are denoted asIB(t)=cosθ+4πy(t)λ+Δϕ(t)andQB(t)=sinθ+4πy(t)λ+Δϕ(t). Using arctangent demodulation, I and Q output data can be combined as follows:(1)x(t)=tan−1QB(t)IB(t)=4πy(t)λ+ΔϕThe measurement of humans respiration signals using a non-contact Doppler radar was approved by the Faculty of Science and Technology Ethics Sub-Committee HEAG (Faculty Human Ethics Advisory Groups), Deakin University. No film recordings of subjects were made in this study and all the subjects provided their written informed consent for their participation in the experiments.The Doppler radar module [10] was used where it transmits a 2.4GHz continuous wave at 0dBm (1mW) and was attached to the patch antennas (a transmitter and a receiver) connected to a data acquisition module (NI-USB6009) to be further processed in a MATLAB environment. The Doppler radar module used in this work adopts the direct-conversion radar architecture where the receiver chain on the RF board includes a low noise amplifier (LNA), a balun, a gain block, and an operational amplifier [11]. An external respiration strap (MLT1132 Piezo Respiratory Belt Transducer) attached to PowerLab (ADInstruments) was used as a reference signal.To further evaluate the sensitivity and accuracy of the Doppler radar in capturing human respiration under minimum interference/artefact, few experiments were performed on three subjects. From the results shown in Table 1, an average correlation factor (Corr) of 0.96 and mean square error (MSE) of 0.018 were obtained which indicate that the measurements from Doppler radar are highly correlated to the respiration belt. Additionally, as reported in [12], a sub-millimetre measurement accuracy was also demonstrated in respiration sensing using continuous wave Doppler radar.Later, respiration signals of two subjects in two different positions (seated and supine – approximately 1m away from the antennas) under the influence of motion artefact were acquired in this study. In the seated experiment, subject moved the right arm back and forth approximately a minute of duration while in supine experiment, the other subject performed an involuntary limb movement to resembles the jerking of the limb in a period of approximately 6min.The overall signal processing approach is shown in Fig. 1. Here, we used EMD in combination with fastICA for source separation using a single channel for measurements. Multiple channel signals h or IMFs formed by the EMD process are passed into the fastICA source separation algorithm and approximate entropy (ApEn) is used as the quantitative measure in selecting the relevant IMFs (pre-filtering for IMFs that purely corresponds to noise – stage 1). Subsequently (stage 2), at the source separation stage, the sources deemed to be motion artefacts are identified using approximate entropy estimation where the corresponding columnsS˜are assigned to zero. From the un-mixing matrix of W−1, the remaining respiration sources were then recovered which are expected to be free from motion artefacts. Lastly, the respiration signal is reconstructed by simply adding all the corresponding IMFs.The received I and Q signals were sent to the data acquisition module where it is then re-calibrated to eliminate DC offsets using the curve fitting technique in [13]. Subsequently, the I and Q signals are recombined using arctangent demodulation given in Eq. (1) and further analysed using EMD-ICA approaches.Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) [14–16] was first detailed in 1998 specifically for non-linear signal processing as well as for non-stationary data distributions. The algorithm actually decomposes a time series into multiple modes known as intrinsic mode functions (IMF). Given the arctangent signal of radar denoted by x(t), take c0(t)=rj(t) and let cKsatisfy the standard deviation condition [15](2)∑t=0T(cK−1(t)−cK(t))2cK−12(t)<ϵ,where cn(t)=cn−1−mn(t),mn(t)=Un(t)+Ln(t)2with Un(t) and Ln(t) are the upper and lower envelope of cn(t). h0(t)=0, r0(t)=x(t), Now we take hj+1(t)=cK(t). rj+1(t)=rj(t)−hj+1(t).The shifting process steps are then repeated till the residual rj+1(t) becomes a monotonic/constant function. The original arctangent signal of radar can be reconstructed by summing up all the IMFs given asx(t)=∑i=1Nhi(t)+rN(t).Although the EEMD (Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition) [17] approach is more robust and less sensitive to noise, it requires additional information such as the noise level and the ensemble size. Further, Mijovi’c et al. also proposed using wavelet-ICA which heavily relies on the prior knowledge of the signal of interest. This process involves selecting a mother wavelet (types and orders) and also a number of decomposition levels. Without this prior knowledge and the relevant signal processing information, the entire process would be complicated as it involves a wide range of parameter selections.Therefore, in this paper, EMD-ICA with approximate entropy was proposed due to its simplicity and also as a conceptual means of automatically suppressing the interference from Doppler radar based respiratory measurements. Nevertheless, future work will includes more advanced signal processing schemes such as automated EEMD–ICA and wavelet-ICA in refining the underlying approach.Independent component analysis (ICA) is a blind source separation (BSS) technique used in separating mixed signals into their independent constituent sources [18]. ICA is used to find the un-mixing matrix W, which is used to approximate the unknown independent source,S˜=Whwhere h is the matrix of the selected IMF (via ApEn) in this paper. In this work, we have performed the source separation using fastICA. FastICA is a scheme that is based on fixed-point iteration to separate the underlying sources from a given set of measurements by computing their maximum of the non-Gaussianity,wTh[18].In estimating several independent components (IC), the basic form of one unit fastICA is extended using several weight vectorswi,i=1,2,…,nwhere the output ofw1Tx,…,wnTneed to be decorrelated to prevent vectors from converging to the same maxima, i.e using Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization for the decorrelation. When the p IC or p-vectorsw1,…,wpwere estimated, one unit FastICA is performed forwp+1and after each iteration, the projections ofwp+1Twjwj,j=1,...,pof the previously estimated p vectors are re-normalize. The complete process can be represented aswp+1=wp+1−∑j=1pwp+1Twjwjandwp+1=wp+1/wp+1Twp+1.We use ApEn generally as a component selector. ApEn measure quantifies the proximity of patterns within each window (size m observation). Patterns close in this sense remains close on subsequent comparisons [19]. Here, higher likelihood denotes regularity and smaller value of ApEn and conversely. The two input parameters, namely m and r must be designated for approximate entropy computations where m is the length of the compared runs and r is the effectivity filter.Given N data points {u(i), …, u(N)}, a sequence of vectors x(1), …, x(N−m+1) can be constructed where x(i)=[u(i), u(i+1), …, u(i+m−1)], i.e. using m consecutive values of u with the starting point at i. Taking the distance d[x(i), x(j)] as the Euclidean distance (L2 norm) between the two vectors x(i) and x(j), for i, j⩽N−m+1, let A={j:d(x(i), x(j)⩽r}. ThenCim(r)=∥A∥/(N−m+1)[19] measure the regularity to a tolerance value, r, or on the frequency similarity of patterns to a given pattern of window length, m. Approximate entropy, ApEn is given asApEn(m,r)=limN→∞[Φm(r)−Φm+1(r)]whereΦm(r)=(N−m+1)−1∑i=1N−m+1ln(Cim(r))with ln denoting the natural logarithm.Now we compute the approximate entropy, ApEn for IMFs (ApEnτE(m,r)) as well as for each estimated source components (ApEnτF(m,r)). Here τ∈[1, …, a] forApEnτE(m,r)and τ∈[1, …, b] forApEnτF(m,r)corresponds to the instances of IMFs and estimated sources respectively with a and b denoting the number of components in each decomposition. After estimating ApEn, the selection of the appropriate components of IMFs (or estimated sources) are based on selecting appropriate thresholds αeand αfas shown in Eq. (3). The respective value of the αeand αfcan be determined by relevant applications and are discussed in Section 4.(3)ϑE={τ:ApEnτE<αe}ϑF={τ:ApEnτF<αf}.Reconstruction of respective source signals were conducted by following the reverse process to the aforementioned decomposition. We calculateh=W−1Sˆand sum all the relevant h (IMFs) and obtain the refined respiratory pattern. Here, in selectingSˆ, we set the ith (i∈ϑF˜) row ofS˜to zeros to ensure only the selected sources are accounted. In applications where the information of artefacts are useful, for instance sleep and behavioural studies, the artefacts can be reconstructed using the same procedure by selecting the relevant sources. This can potentially provide information on the type, severity and also the frequency of such moments of interest.We evaluated the performance of the proposed method via two experiments. Both experiments are similar in terms of subjects exhibiting jerking movement while breathing normally and the variation was due to seated or supine position. The experimental results are shown in Figs. 2and 3for seated and supine positions respectively. Using the captured Doppler data, multi-channel IMFs were created in the first stage (EMD), from a single measurement channel. In the pre-filtering stage, a selection of decomposed channels were characterised via approximate entropy so that the channels corresponded to a lower approximate entropy were chosen as shown in Fig. 3(a). Later, the selected channels were used as inputs to fastICA for the source separation process where the approximate entropy is used to select the appropriate respiration signal as shown in Fig. 3(b). Indeed, components with lower values of the entropy is of interest in constructing the refined respiratory signal.In the experimental evaluation of stage one (creation of multichannel signals via EMD), the chosen αevalue is 0.025 and irrespective of the subject posture (seated or supine). The constant 0.8e−3 is used for αffor the second stage (ICA). In our application, both the values were chosen empirically to minimize the mean squared error and also to maximize the correlation factor in comparison to the external respiration strap. The numerical value of α can be selected to further refine the signal reconstruction process based on the specific application. The corresponding sources are then reconstructed into desired respiration patterns as shown in Fig. 3(c) and (b). Further, the graphical description in Fig. 4illustrates variation of the reconstructed respiratory waveform in comparison (in terms of MSE and Correlation coefficient) to the variations from the respiratory straps(bench mark) against the cumulative summation of the components.The αfvalue is chosen so that the appropriate number of components are included based on the ApEn. From the graphs representing the datasets acquired from the seated and supine position, it is clear that by selecting the number of components below a certain ApEn thresholding value (i.e αfvalue of 0.8e−3), a highly correlated (lowest MSE) reconstruction can be achieved in comparison to the reference respiration strap. The same process is followed in reconstructing the artefact signatures as shown in Fig. 3(c). The filtered respiration pattern achieved a high degree of correlation (a factor of 0.9798) and a mean squared error of 0.01 in comparison to the respiration strap reference signal. As for the measurements conducted in the seated position, the correlation factor was 0.9366 with a mean squared error of 0.0023 compared to the respiration strap.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
