@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multichannel EEG compression based on ICA and SPIHT

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PCA-based ICA is proposed to exploit the inter-channel correlations.1-D signal is arranged in the form of matrix to exploit the intra-channel correlations.SPIHT algorithm is used to compress the signals in matrix form.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multichannel EEG compression,ICA,SPIHT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for the compression of multichannel electroencephalograph (EEG) signals. The method assumes that EEG signals are the linear mixture of several independent components (ICs). To retain the ICs, the proposed scheme first applies an independent component analysis (ICA) with a preprocessing step of principal component analysis (PCA) to EEG signals. Then the compression scheme is composed of two parts: the ICs compression part and the residue compression part. Each IC is arranged in the form of matrix and then compressed with the algorithm of set partitioning in hierarchical trees (SPIHT). The residue signals are compressed in the same way as ICs, but with a higher compression ratio (CR). The appropriate combination of compression ratios of the ICs and the residue is explored to achieve desired performance. The compression scheme is tested with eight datasets sampled at two different frequencies. The experimental results demonstrate the high compression performance of the proposed approach and its potential usage in the EEG related telemedicine applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electroencephalograph (EEG) is the recording of electrical activity, as recorded from multiple electrodes placed on the scalp. EEG provides a non-invasive interface to the brain and it is therefore a key tool for understanding neurophysiological properties of the brain. EEG is used as an essential tool for diagnosing brain disorders (e.g., epilepsy) [1], and it is also used in brain computer interfaces (BCI) frequently [2,3].Wearable EEG systems which are as unobtrusive as possible are the current technological trend in telemedicine applications. A portable EEG system can record multichannel EEG data for an extended period of time (hours, days, or potentially even months) at relatively high sampling frequencies, which can easily generate over 1GB of data per day. As for portable systems, power consumption is a major concern and storage of data is required under some circumstances. However, wireless transmission is the major consumer of power in portable systems [4]. Power consumption and space for storage can be reduced significantly by compressing the data before transmission. To efficiently manage the transmission and storage of EEG data, finding efficient and flexible compression algorithms is a priority for all.Many excellent EEG compression algorithms have been put forward so far in the literature. In general, they can be categorized as lossless, near-lossless, and lossy schemes. There exist many inter-channel and intra-channel correlations among EEG signals. Lossless compression schemes discard the redundancies present in the signals by exploiting the inter or intra-channel correlations, thus achieving a modest compression ratio (CR) and giving a perfect reconstruction of the original EEG. On the other hand, by discarding the least significant information, lossy compression schemes can achieve a higher CR. In some specific scenarios, certain amount of accuracy degradation can be acceptable if sufficient diagnostic information is retained [4,5]. Nevertheless, lack of related legislation and approved standards makes clinicians prefer exact data reconstruction than better compression performance [6]. As an alternative, near-lossless compression is an attractive compromise between lossless and lossy compression: it can achieve a much higher CR than lossless compression with a negligible and tolerable reconstruction distortion to ensure sufficient accuracy for specific applications. Table 1is a summary of the existing typical compression algorithms applied to EEG with respective typical compression performance.EEG compression schemes can also be categorized as single-channel schemes and multichannel schemes. Many excellent single-channel compression schemes have been put forward in the literature. Prediction-based compression algorithms are very competitive when lossless and near-lossless reconstruction is needed. However, none of the prediction-based algorithms reported can be used for progressive transmission. The progressive transmission scheme generates an embedded bit stream, which means that it can be truncated at any point by the decoder to yield the best corresponding reconstructed signal. Hence, they are of limited utility in such scenarios where progressive reconstruction is required. It is of much significance to find efficient compression algorithms which support progressive transmission and have acceptable reconstruction distortions. Single-channel compression algorithms exploit only the intra-channel correlations and the inter-channel correlations remain unutilized. There exist few multichannel compression schemes that exploit both the inter-channel and intra-channel correlations.In this paper, we propose a progressive, multichannel EEG compression algorithm which exploits both the intra-channel and inter-channel correlations. EEG can be regarded as a linear mixture of underlying sources [19], which are mutually independent. Independent component analysis (ICA) is a commonly used blind source separation method. In the proposed scheme, we apply FastICA to the multichannel EEG signals to make them more structured and more compressible. Moreover, we use principal component analysis (PCA) as a preprocessing step before ICA to improve the performance of ICA. Afterwards, each independent component (IC) is arranged in the form of matrix and then compressed with set partitioning in hierarchical trees (SPIHT) algorithm which is originally proposed as an excellent image compression algorithm. The residual signals, which are the differences between the original signals and the signals approximated by the reconstructed ICs, are compressed in the same way as ICs. By exploring the compression ratios of the ICs and the residue, a high compression performance is achieved. Experimental results show the proposed compression scheme is very competitive compared to other lossy or even near-lossless compression schemes.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the arrangement of EEG signal in matrix form, briefly explain FastICA and SPIHT algorithms and give a detailed description of the proposed compression scheme. In Section 3, we detail the selection of the key parameters in our compression scheme and discuss the experimental results. We present concluding remarks and some future directions in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
