@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysing the effects of cold, normal, and warm digits on transmittance pulse oximetry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Investigated the effects of temperature on pulse oximeter signal quality in 20 healthy adults.Signal quality may vary at normal site temperature, and is subject dependant.Cold site temperature significantly degrades signal quality in general.Warm site temperature significantly improves signal quality in general.Warm site temperature (about 33°C) should be maintained for reliable pulse oximetry.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pulse oximetry,Non-invasive,Photoplethysmograph,Arterial blood oxygen saturation,Signal processing,Sensor,Thermocouple,Perfusion,Vasoconstriction,Vasodilation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Non-invasive estimation of arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) and heart rate using pulse oximeters is widely used in hospitals. Pulse oximeters rely on photoplethysmographic (PPG) signals from a peripherally placed optical sensor. However, pulse oximeters can be less accurate if the sensor site is relatively cold. This research investigates the effects on PPG signal quality of local site temperatures for 20 healthy adult volunteers (24.5±4.1 years of age). Raw PPG data, composed of Infrared (IR) and Red (RD) signals, was obtained from a transmittance finger probe using a custom pulse oximeter (PO) system. Three tests were performed with the subject's hand surface temperature maintained at baseline (29±2°C), cold (19±2°C), and warm (33±2°C) conditions. Median root mean square (RMS) of PPG signal during the Cold test dropped by 54.0% for IR and 30.6% for RD from the baseline values. In contrast, the PPG RMS increased by 64.4% and 60.2% for RD and IR, respectively, during the Warm test. Mean PPG pulse amplitudes decreased by 59.5% for IR and 46.1% for RD in the cold test when compared to baseline, but improved by 70.1% for IR and 59.0% for RD in the warm test. This improvement of up to 4× in signal quality during the warm condition was associated with a closer match (median difference of 1.5%) between the SpO2 values estimated by the PO system and a commercial pulse oximeter. The differences measured in RMS and mean amplitudes for the three tests were statistically significant (p<0.001). Overall, warm temperatures significantly improve PPG signal quality and SpO2 estimation accuracy. Sensor site temperature is recommended to be maintained near 33°C for reliable transmittance pulse oximetry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pulse oximeters are ubiquitous devices in hospital wards, operating rooms, and intensive care units (ICU). They are used to non-invasively estimate arterial blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) and monitor heart rate (HR), and are a standard of care for patient oxygenation monitoring [1–3]. Pulse oximetry uses photoplethysmographic (PPG) signals acquired by an optical sensor, typically mounted on a finger, toe, or ear-lobe to optically detect blood volume changes in the tissue. Conventional pulse oximetry relies on the pulsatile nature of arterial blood and differential absorption of oxyhaemoglobin and de-oxyhaemoglobin at red (RD) and infrared (IR) wavelengths to estimate SpO2 and HR [4,5].Typical transmittance pulse oximeter probes consist of two high output RD and IR light emitting diodes (LEDs) and a sensitive photo-detector (PD). Light energy transmitted through tissue is detected by the PD, which generates the PPG signal. From the PPG signal, the slowly changing (DC) and rapidly changing (AC) signals are extracted. The DC signal predominantly captures the unchanging light scattering and absorption, whereas the AC signal predominantly captures the varying absorption due to pulsatile arterial blood and is synchronous with HR. By taking the appropriate AC/DC ratios and calibration, SpO2 can be reliably estimated [5,6]. Hence, the quality of pulse oximeter SpO2 estimation is directly dependent on the quality of detected PPG signals.While the predominant application of pulse oximeters has been to estimate arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2), the raw PPG signal (PPGRaw) is rich with physiological information. The PPGRaw signal contains a complex mixture of the influences of arterial, venous, autonomic and respiratory system responses on the peripheral circulation [7–9]. For example, non-invasive assessment of blood flow changes in muscle and bone using PPG was previously reported, showing that the AC component of the PPG corresponds to blood flow, while the DC component corresponds to the blood volume change [10–12]. Thus, application of PPG is not restricted solely to SpO2 estimation.A number of factors have been reported to limit pulse oximeter accuracy. These factors include motion artefacts, environmental noise, skin tone, gender, nail polishes, and ambient light [13–16]. Poor peripheral perfusion triggered by clinical conditions, such as hypovolaemia, hypothermia, and vasoconstriction during surgery, may also result in pulse oximeter error or failure [17]. These clinical conditions often arise due to administration of anaesthetic agents and/or muscle relaxants [18].Temperature is another, often overlooked, limiting factor for pulse oximetry. It is generally accepted that cold digits may provide inaccurate pulse oximeter readings [19,20], and simple solutions like rubbing the hands together may solve the problem. However, people with naturally cold fingers or ICU patients with poor perfusion, where room temperature is typically maintained at 20±2°C [21], are examples of cases where this problem can be exacerbated.Previously, Njoum and Kyriacou [22] investigated the effects of local sympathetic tone on healthy volunteers using a custom built pulse oximeter with a finger based reflectance sensor. They used cold pressor test to induce a drop in temperature of the right hand for 30s. Their research showed that PPG signal pulse amplitude degraded significantly (up to 73%) in both hands during the ice water immersion, with an increase in pulse repetition time and heart rate. Budidha and Kyriacou [23] conducted similar cold pressor test investigation, but also included an ear canal based reflectance sensor. Their finger based PPG devices reported a substantial drop in PPG signal pulse amplitude (up to 58%) and reported inaccuracy in SpO2 estimation at low temperatures (8°C). However, neither of these studies investigated the effects on PPG in naturally cold fingers, nor they presented any subject specific data. They also did not provide any advice to improve PPG signal quality derived from the finger in such cases. Finally, neither study considered transmittance PPG.Poor PPG signal quality can produce erroneous readings in pulse oximeters that can result in false alarms [3]. This study investigates the effects of temperature on PPG signal quality in finger based transmittance PPG. The initial hypothesis is that PPG signal quality is severely degraded in cold digits, resulting in inaccurate SpO2 readings and thus, limits the application of PPG. Use of a continuous heat source close to the sensor site was tested to assess improvement in PPG signal quality and reliable SpO2 estimation as a function of temperature.A standard transmission mode sensor (model: 320701001, Biometric Cables, Guindy, Chennai, India) was used for PPG data acquisition. The sensor uses 660nm and 940nm wavelength light for the RD and IR LEDs, respectively. Finger sensor control and PPG data acquisition was accomplished through a custom-built pulse oximeter (PO) development system, shown in Fig. 1. The PO system is based on the CY8CKIT-050 PSoC® 5LP Development Kit (Cypress Semiconductor, San Jose, CA, USA). This custom equipment enabled direct control over LED intensity, signal conditioning, and sampling frequency.Feedback control of the PO system incrementally increased the LED intensity up to a certain level and then adjusted it automatically for each subject. This procedure was to maximise PPG amplitude without saturating the photo-detector. This procedure also maximises the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) received by the photo detector. The signal from the photo-detector was time demultiplexed so that the RD and IR PPG signals can be processed independently. Analog PPG signals were sampled at 50Hz by the 16-bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC) on the development board. Sampled data were sent to a PC via serial communication and saved as text files for offline signal processing in MATLAB (R2014a, MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA).A Nellcor NPB-75 (Covidien, Minneapolis, MN, USA) pulse oximeter was employed for comparison with the PO system. This hospital grade commercial pulse oximeter can provide continuous SpO2 and HR readings. In addition, this device can display the real-time PPG for qualitative comparison.A Type-T surface mount thermocouple probe (Omega, Stamford, CT, USA) was taped to the surface of the skin, next to the pulse oximeter sensor, to obtain skin surface temperature data. The probe was nominally accurate to ±0.5°C above 0°C [24]. Temperature data was continuously logged using a PC running LabVIEW via an NI cDAQ-9172 (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) multifunction data acquisition device.Twenty healthy adults (24.5±4.1 years of age) with no pre-existing medical conditions were recruited for this study. Subjects were asked to refrain from smoking, caffeinated hot drinks, and strenuous physical activities for at least 2h prior to the experiment. This study and use of data were approved by the Human Ethics Committee, University of Canterbury (HEC 2015/04/LR-PS).The experiment was conducted inside an air-conditioned room regulated at 20±2°C (typical ICU room temperature). During the study, subjects were comfortably seated while resting their left or right hand on a flat surface, at approximately the same height as their heart, with minimum movement. Subjects were asked to breathe normally for the duration of the experiment. The following three protocols were then implemented, with 5min intervals, as shown in Fig. 2.Two minutes of baseline PPG readings, at normal digit temperature (29±2°C), were recorded using the PO system at the beginning of the experiment. At the same time, temperature data was logged from the sensor site. NPB-75 measurements were taken at the same time from an alternate finger of the same hand.Subjects immersed their hand up to the wrist in an ice–water bucket maintained at a temperature of ∼0°C for approximately 2min, resulting in a skin temperature of 19 ±2°C. After 2min, subjects were asked to take their hands out of the bucket and quickly dry their hands. PPG, temperature, and NPB-75 data were then logged for approximately 2min.Subjects rested their palm facing downwards on a hot water bottle maintained at a temperature of ∼55±2°C for approximately 5min, resulting in a skin temperature of 33±2°C. PPG, temperature, and NPB-75 data were then logged for 2min. During PPG acquisition, subjects kept their hand on the hot water bottle, but not the fingers, to prevent rapid temperature drops during PPG data acquisition.A two-stage filter was implemented for offline processing of raw PPG signals. Stage 1 consisted of a finite impulse response (FIR) low-pass Equiripple filter with a cut-off frequency of 10Hz to remove high frequency noise from PPGRaw. Stage 2 composed of two parallel infinite impulse response (IIR) filters to extract AC and DC signals from the filtered PPGRaw. Zero phase filtering was applied at each filter stage to prevent any phase distortion.In Stage 2, one of the IIR filter was a low-pass Butterworth filter that extracted the slowly changing DC signals, below a cut-off frequency of 0.67Hz. The lower threshold of 0.67Hz was chosen because the HR of any individual will not typically be less than 40 beats per minute (bpm). Therefore, pulsatility effects due to the heart's pumping will be excluded from the DC signal. The second parallel IIR filter was a band-pass Butterworth filter that extracted rapidly changing AC signals, such as the cardiac frequencies, with pass band frequencies 0.67–4.5Hz. The upper threshold of 4.5Hz captured HR and harmonics to a maximum of 135bpm, which is well above expected HRs for this study.A peak-trough detection algorithm was applied to the extracted AC signals to determine the amplitudes relating to each heartbeat, |AC|. Additionally for each heart beat the corresponding mean DC value was also determined, DCMean. The ratio of these values for each of the RD and IR was used to calculate R for each heartbeat [9]:(1)R=|AC|/DCMeanRD|AC|/DCMeanIRInstantaneous oxygen saturations were estimated using Webster's empirical calibration equation [25], for each R value, applied to a given section of a signal:(2)SpO2=110−25×RThe median of these instantaneous saturation estimations from Eq. (2) was calculated over a 2-min window to estimate SpO2, for this study. Eq. (2) is also used to calibrate Nellcor commercial pulse oximeters [26,27] and is a linear approximation of empirical data obtained from volunteer studies [26].The PPGAC signal is synchronous to the heart rate and is directly correlated to pulsatile blood flow [10–12,28]. This variation in pulse amplitude for the IR signal over a period of time can be used as a marker to monitor the trend in relative blood flow changes [10–12]. Therefore, subject-specific mean amplitude of the IR channel PPGAC signal, at intervals of 20s, was calculated to provide an indication of the blood flow trend pattern in the PPG site during the three tests.In this study, the AC portion of the raw IR and RD PPG signals were analysed. This choice is based on the fact that PPGAC is the primary signal of interest in conventional pulse oximetry, dominates the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and is directly related to arterial blood flow [10–12,28]. PPGAC is thus most affected by any temperature induced change in perfusion. PPGDC is filtered and therefore noise is filtered out. Additionally, no apparent changes were observed in the DC portion of the PPG in this study.The root mean square (RMS) value of the PPGAC signals was calculated for each subject to provide a measure of signal quality and SNR for each protocol. Low energy signals resulted in low RMS values, thus provided a measure of poor SNR. The subject specific RMS data for each protocol test were fit to a linear line. This procedure generated a tri-linear model of RMS, and thus SNR, as a function of temperature. As a result, the overall trend in signal RMS over temperature can be seen for each test.In addition to RMS, average PPGAC pulse amplitude was calculated for each subject for each test. The mean of subject specific mean PPGAC amplitudes were calculated to give a measure of the overall PPG pulse magnitude for each test condition (Protocols 1–3). Kruskal–Wallis one way analysis of variance on ranks was performed on the PPG data from the Cold, Baseline, and Warm tests to determine any statistically significant difference for the RMS values and mean PPG amplitudes across these three test conditions. Significance level was set at p<0.005. Non-parametric test was used for PPG signal analysis, since some of the data were not normally distributed. All statistical analysis was performed using MATLAB.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
