@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A survey on the magnetic resonance image denoising methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Aim of this survey is to provide an overview of the available MRI denoising methods.Help the researchers to develop a new denoising method for MR images.Helps to choose the best denoising method for further image processing methods.Like segmentation, registration, classification used in computer aided diagnosis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anisotropic diffusion,Contourlets,Curvelets,Denoising,Magnetic resonance imaging,Nonlocal mean,Wavelets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Over the past several years, although the resolution, signal-to-noise ratio and acquisition speed of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology have been increased, MR images are still affected by artifacts and noise. A tradeoff between noise reduction and the preservation of actual detail features has to be made in the way that enhances the diagnostically relevant image content. Therefore, noise reduction is still a difficult task. A variety of techniques have been presented in the literature on denoising MR images and each technique has its own assumptions, advantages and limitations. The purpose of this paper is to present a survey of the published literature in dealing with denoising methods in MR images. After a brief introduction about magnetic resonance imaging and the characteristics of noise in MRI, the popular approaches are classified into different groups and an overview of various methods is provided. The denoising method's advantages and limitations are also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a notable imaging technique to provide highly detailed images of tissues and organs in the human body. MRI is primarily used to demonstrate the pathological or other physiological alterations of living tissues [1,2]. It provides information that differs from other imaging modalities such as ultrasound and computed tomography (CT). Its major technological advantage is that it can characterize and discriminate among tissues using their physical and biochemical properties. MRI produces sectional images of equivalent resolution in any projection without moving the patient. The ability to obtain images in multiple planes adds to its versatility and diagnostic utility and offers special advantages for radiation and/or surgical treatment planning. MRI is limited only by its spatial resolution and long imaging times. The inherent flexibility of MRI also permits its application in many clinical tasks other than imaging static anatomy. Recently, the important applications have been proposed including imaging blood vessels without contrast agents, measuring diffusion in tissue, measuring tissue temperature, cardiac imaging, dynamic imaging of the musculoskeletal system, liver and reticuloendothelial system.The visual quality of magnetic resonance images plays an important role in accuracy of clinical diagnosis which can be seriously degraded by existing noise during acquisition process. In a single channel signal acquisition, the MR image is commonly reconstructed by computing the inverse discrete Fourier transform of the raw data. The signal component of the measurement is present in both real and imaginary channels. Each of the orthogonal channels is affected by additive white Gaussian noise [3]. Most commonly, the magnitude of the reconstructed MRI image is used for visual inspection and automatic computer analysis. Since the magnitude of the MRI signal is the square root of the sum of the squares of two independent Gaussian variables, it follows Rician distribution [4]. In multichannel signal acquisition, the MR image is reconstructed by combining complex images and the noise distribution can be described by noncentral Chi distribution [5,6]. Moreover, in case of parallel imaging, the noise amplitude varies according to the spatial location of the image and can follow Rician or Chi distribution according to the reconstruction technique [7].The noise affects both the medical diagnostic tasks and the ability of automatic computerized analysis, such as segmentation of important features, classification, three dimensional image reconstructions and registration. The denoising is an important MRI preprocessing step used for regularization process, such as in voxel-based morphometry (VBM) [8] to reduce anatomical inconsistencies. In order to analyze the functional MRI (fMRI) data, like detecting brain activity from fMRI data, parametric hypotheis-driven methods are used. Statistical parametric mapping (SPM) [9] is one of the most popular approach for this type of analysis. Its main characteristics are the preprocessing of the data by a fixed Gaussian filter and the application of Gaussian random field theory to control the multiple hypothesis testing problem. And later, wavelet based statistical parametric mapping (WSPM) [10] framework was developed for this analysis which combines adaptive denoising of the parametric maps in the wavelet domain with statistical testing at the voxel level. Therefore, denoising techniques are of great interest in MR imaging.In general, there are two typical ways to reduce the noise in the images. One way is to acquire the data several times and average them. However, it increases the acquisition time. Another way is to denoise the images by using the post processing methods. In the literatures, numerous approaches to denoising MR images have been proposed including the classic spatial and temporal filters [11], approaches based on anisotropic diffusion filter [12–24], the nonlocal means algorithm [25–38], bilateral and trilateral filters [39–44], the wavelet transform [45–67], the curvelet and the contourlet transforms [68–72], maximum likelihood approach [74–82], linear minimum mean square error estimation [83–86], nonparametric neighborhood statistics/estimation [88–94] and singularity function analysis [95,96]. The aim of this paper is to summarize these literatures on MRI denoising.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the magnetic resonance imaging techniques and parallel imaging MRI. Section 3 describes the characteristics of noise in MR images and the estimation of noise. The techniques for denoising MR images are discussed in Section 4. In Section 5, the MRI denoising methods are compared with one another. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section 6.MRI system is working on the principles of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), to map the spatial location and associated properties of specific nuclei or protons in a subject using the interaction between an electromagnetic field and nuclear spin [1,2]. It detects and processes the signals generated when hydrogen atoms are placed in strong magnetic field and excited by a resonant magnetic excitation pulse. The human body is largely composed of fat and water molecules. Each water molecule has two hydrogen nuclei or protons. These hydrogen protons are usually imaged to demonstrate the physiological or pathological alterations of human tissues.Hydrogen atoms have an inherent magnetic moment as a result of their nuclear spin, when placed in a strong magnetic field, the magnetic moments of these hydrogen nuclei tend to align. The nuclei have a resonant or larmor frequency determined by their localized magnetic field strength. Proper simulation by a resonant magnetic or RF field at the resonant frequency of the hydrogen nuclei can force the magnetic moments of the nuclei to partially, or completely, tip into a plane perpendicular to the applied field. When the applied RF excitation field is removed, the magnetic moments of the nuclei precess in the static field as they realign. This tipping generates an RF signal at a resonant frequency. This signal is detected by the MR imaging system and for image reconstruction, this MR signal's both frequency and phase data are collected in k-space. A two dimensional inverse Fourier transform of this k-space is computed to produce a gray scale image. Frequently, the main limitation of MRI is the acquisition time [97]. Usually an MR scan takes at least 20min and can go on for an hour or more sometime. To reduce the acquisition time, the gradient is increased to scan the k-space faster. However, in practice these performances are limited. Another idea is to undersample the k-space and compensate by using multiple coils.Parallel imaging is a recently developed family of techniques that takes advantage of the spatially sensitive information inherent in phased-array radio frequency coil receivers to reduce acquisition times in MRI. MRI system uses the multiple receiver coils for simultaneous acquisition of MR signals and maintaining a large field of view. The need, however, for detailed maps of the sensitivity and phase shift factors of the RF field for most of these algorithms led to the employment of the sum-of-squares (SoS) algorithm as the most practical for use in MR imaging systems [98]. In this algorithm, the signal in each pixel in the composite image is the square root of the sum of the squares of the pixel values from the images from individual coils in the array. That is, samples of distinct information content can be obtained at one time by using distinct receivers in parallel, implying the possibility of reducing scan time in Fourier imaging without having to travel faster in k-space.In parallel imaging, the number of sampled k-space lines is reduced, often by a factor of two or greater, which significantly shorten the acquisition time. In parallel MRI, data collected by each receiver element in k-space is subsampled data. Therefore, individual aliased images are obtained for every coil. These images are either unfolded in the image domain to yield the final image or the missed k-space lines are reconstructed using a priori information in the form of the spatially varying coil sensitivity distribution. Parallel reconstruction algorithms can be divided into two main groups: image domain based reconstruction and k-space based method. In the first method, reconstruction is done by unfolding every image using the coil maps, e.g., SENsitivity Encoding (SENSE) [99], Partially Parallel Imaging with Localized Sensitivities (PILS). In the second method, reconstruction is done by regenerating the missed k-space lines either for the ideal image or for individual coil images, e.g., SiMultaneous Acquisition of Spatial Harmonics (SMASH), Autocalibrating SMASH (AUTO-SMASH), GeneRalized Autocalibrating Partially Parallel Acquisitions (GRAPPA) [100].One of the most important advantages of parallel imaging is its wide applicability. It can be applied to nearly any pulse sequence, and the gains in acquisition speed can be used in a number of different ways, it can often reduce the distortions due to artifacts like susceptibility, chemical shift, flow and motion artifacts by averaging, it often offers better temporal resolution and also it alters SNR in MR images.MRI, even if the scanner technology has undergone tremendous improvements in spatial resolution, acquisition speed and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the diagnostic and visual quality of MR images are still affected by the noise in acquisition. However, MRIs contain varying amount of noise of diverse origins, including noise from stochastic variation, numerous physiological processes, eddy currents, artifacts from the magnetic susceptibilities between neighboring tissues, rigid body motion, nonrigid motion and other sources [101,102]. Identifying and reducing these noise components in MR images is necessary to improve the validity and accuracy of studies designed to map the structure and function of the human body.The main noise in MRI is due to thermal noise that is from the scanned object. The variance of thermal noise can be described as the sum of noise variances from independent stochastic processes representing the body, the coil and the electronics [103]. Such a noise degrades the acquisition of any quantitative measurements from the data. The signal-to-noise ratio depends on static field intensity, pulse sequence design, tissue characteristics, RF coil and sequence parameters, such as voxel size (limiting spatial resolution), number of averages in the image acquisition and receiver bandwidth. In this section, the noise distribution in MRI for both single coil and multiple coils acquisition are explained.The raw data obtained during MRI scanning are complex values that represent the Fourier transform of a magnetization distribution of a volume of tissue. An inverse Fourier transform converts these raw data into magnitude, frequency and phase components that more directly represent the physiological and morphological features of interest in the person being scanned. Therefore, noise in the k-space in MR data from each coil is assumed to be a zero mean uncorrelated Gaussian process with equal variance in both real and imaginary parts because of the linearity and orthogonality of the Fourier transform [3,4]. However, it is common practice to transform the complex valued images into magnitude and phase images. Since computation of a magnitude (or phase) image is a non-linear operation, the probability density function (PDF) of the MR data changes. In single coil MRI systems, magnitude data in spatial domain is modeled as the Rician distribution and the so-called Rician noise (the error between the underlying image intensities and the measurement data) is locally signal dependent [4].(1)pM(M|A,σn)=Mσn2e−(M2+A2)/2σn2I0AMσn2u(M)whereI0(⋅)is the modified zeroth order Bessel function of the first kind,σn2the noise variance, A the noiseless signal level, M the MR magnitude variable andu(⋅)is the Heaviside step function. In high SNR i.e., high intensity (bright) regions of the magnitude image, the Rician distribution tends to a Gaussian distribution with meanA2+σn2and varianceσn2given as(2)pM(M|A,σn)≈12πσn2e−(M2−A2+σn2)/2σn2u(M)In the image background, where SNR is zero due to the lack of water proton density in the air, the Rician PDF simplifies to a Rayleigh distribution with PDF(3)pM(M,σn)=Mσn2e−M2/2σn2u(M)The MR images acquired using parallel imaging with multiple coil system, noise is highly inhomogeneous. The acquired signal in the complex spatial domain in each coil may also be modeled as the original signal corrupted with complex additive Gaussian noise, with zero mean and equal varianceσn2. If no sub-sampling is done in the k-space, the composite magnitude image may be obtained using methods such as the sum of squares (SoS) [104]. Assuming the noise components are independent and identically distributed (IID), the envelope of the magnitude signalML(x)will follow a noncentral Chi distribution with PDF [104](4)pML(ML|AL,σn,L)=AL1−Lσn2MLLe−(ML2+AL2)/2σn2IL−1ALMLσn2u(ML)where L is the number of coils. Eq. (4) reduces to the Rician distribution forL=1. In the background, this PDF reduces to a central Chi distribution with PDF [104](5)pML(ML|σn,L)=21−LΓ(L)ML2L−1σn2Le−ML2/2σn2u(ML)and Eq. (5) will become to Rayleigh whenL=1.This statistical model is the usual one for the magnitude signal in phased array of coils and parallel imaging assuming that no subsampling is done in the k-space data in each coil. In these cases, reconstruction methods have to be used in order to suppress the aliasing and underlying artifacts created by subsampling, such methods are SENSE and GRAPPA. From a statistical point of view, the reconstruction will affect the stationarity of the noise in the reconstructed data, i.e., the spatial distribution of the noise across the image [7]. As a result, the statistics of the composite magnitude signal are not strictly stationary. When reconstructed with GRAPPA, the noise variance is homogeneous enough across pixels and coils, data are usually considered to follow a noncentral Chi distribution [5,6]. In SENSE reconstructed images, however, the noise varies spatially according to the geometric factor and reduction factor. So, here the noncentral Chi distribution reduces to Rician [99].In MRI, there is an intrinsic trade-off between the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and resolution i.e., high resolution, low SNR and low resolution, high SNR. Human visual system is highly effective in recognizing structures even in the presence of a considerable amount of noise. When the SNR is too small or the contrast too low, it becomes very difficult for human visual system to detect anatomical structures. Noise reduction can be categorized in two groups: acquisition based noise reduction methods and post acquisition image denoising. The method for improving the SNR during the acquisition of an image is either increasing acquisition time (i.e., time averaging over repeated measurements) or decreasing spatial resolution (i.e., enlarging voxel volume). However, the acquisition time is limited in practice due to constraints such as patient comfort and system throughput and by physical limitations arising in dynamic applications such as cardiac imaging and functional MRI. Therefore, there is a practical limit on the SNR of the acquired MRI data in most applications. Hence, post acquisition image denoising is an inexpensive and effective alternative.The aim of a post processing MRI denoising algorithm is that of reducing the noise power while maintaining the original resolution of the useful features. In fact, in a diagnostic image, edge preservation is important in maintaining the original clinical significance. It is also important to reduce noise without introducing artifacts. This paper focuses on the post acquisition image denoising methods, and reviews the various methods for denoising MR images presented in the literature. The denoising methods can be grouped based on filtering approach, transform approach and statistical approach. In filtering approach, the linear or non-linear filters are used to denoise the MRI. In transform approach, the transforms such as wavelet transform, curvelet transform are used for denoising MRI. In statistical approach, the estimation of noise based on Maximum likelihood approach, linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE) estimation, Markov random process, Empirical Bayes approaches are used for denoising MRI. Fig. 1gives an overview of the denoising methods of MR images.McVeigh et al. [11] proposed the spatial filter and temporal filter for reducing Gaussian noise in MR images. Spatial filter is one method by convolving an image with a filter in spatial domain. This technique reduces the variance in the image but blurs sharp edges by an amount related to the shape of the function used in the convolution. This process is equivalent to reduce high spatial frequencies in the image. MR imaging is particularly amenable to convolution filtering, since the data obtained in frequency domain, can simply be multiplied by a filter function which reduces higher spatial frequencies. This type of filter smoothen the final image, but the signal-to-noise ratio as a function of frequency is unaffected because both the noise and the signal are reduced by the same factor. With this type of image smoothening, there is a compromise between the reduction of noise and artifact, and the loss of spatial resolution. Temporal filter must be chosen in appropriate relation to the sampling interval in order to avoid the aliasing artifacts. This filter at best would work only on spin echo images. A temporal filter with too narrow a frequency response diminishes the signal at the edges of the image, too broad a frequency response introduces additional noise through aliasing.Perona and Malik [12] developed a multiscale smoothing and edge detection scheme called anisotropic diffusion filter. This would overcome the drawback of spatial filtering and significantly improve the image quality by preserving object boundaries, efficiently removing noise in homogeneous regions and edge sharpening. This filter based on casting the problem in terms of a heat equation which is based on second order partial differential equation (PDE) in an anisotropic medium. Smoothening is formulated as a diffusive process, which is suppressed or stopped at boundaries by selecting the local gradient strengths in different directions. In this approach the imageuis only convolved in the direction orthogonal to the gradient of the image which ensures the preservation of edges. The iterative denoising process of initial imageu0can be expressed as(6)∂u(x,t)∂t=div(c(x,t)∇u(x,t))u(x,0)=u0(x)where∇u(x,t)is the image gradient at voxelxand iterationt,∂u(x,t)/∂tis the partial temporal derivation ofu(x,t)and(7)c(x,t)=g||∇u(x,t)||=e−||∇u(x,t)||/K2where K is the diffusivity parameter. This filtering technique is successfully applied to 2D and 3D MR images denoising by Gerig et al. [13]. Even though the performance of the noise filter is excellent, the underlying image model is piecewise constant or slowly varying. As a result, the edge sharpening causes a region with a constant gray value slope. Here, image noise is assumed to be zero mean and Gaussian distributed.The edge sharpening property is not retained in the approach of adaptive anisotropic diffusion filter [14]. Here, instead of using the local gradient strength as a means of controlling, the adaptive anisotropic diffusion filter used the local intensity orientation of level contours and its curvature to control the shape and the extent of the filter kernel, which ensured that edges and corners are well preserved throughout the filtering process. Sijbers et al. [15] adopted this filter and modified for the filtering of magnitude MR data by incorporating the Rician distribution into the maximum likelihood estimation of the filter parameters. Murase et al. [16] used the anisotropic diffusion filter for denoising the dynamic susceptibility contrast-enhanced MR images. Tang et al. [17] proposed an improved anisotropic diffusion filter which is an extension of work done by Gerig et al. [13] which is robust to noise. It uses adaptive threshold selection and a new gradient computation method based on the average of four direction gradients for reducing Rician noise in MR images.Krissian and Aja-Fernández [18] proposed noise driven anisotropic diffusion filter to remove Rician noise from MRI. This filter relies on a robust estimation of the standard deviation of the noise and combines local linear minimum mean square error filters and partial differential equations for MRI. The parameters of the filter are automatically chosen from the estimated noise. The partial derivative equation of the filter is extended to a new matrix diffusion filter which allows a coherent diffusion based on the local structure of the image and on the corresponding oriented local standard deviations. This filter combines volumetric, planar, and linear components of the local image structure, which can improve the convergence rate of the diffusion while preserving contours, leading to more robust and intuitive filtering. Zhang and Ma [19] introduced the anisotropic coupled diffusion equations for MRI denoising. In the coupled partial diffusion equations, one equation contains an anisotropic diffusion term, which controls the diffusion direction, a fidelity term, which assures the filtered image is not far from the initial image, and a diffusion gene, which controls diffusion speed of each pixel and connects with another diffusion equation. This will provide good noise reduction and details protection capability.You and Kaveh [20] proposed the use of fourth-order PDE as a technique to avoid blocky effects in the processed image of anisotropic diffusion. This is derived by minimizing energy functional of the image Laplacian. Lysaker et al. [21] used this technique for denoising MR images in space and time. Lu et al. [22] extended the approach in [21] for denoising on MRI. This method has the ability to process signals with a smooth change in the intensity value and preserve edges. Fourth-order complex diffusion based denoising MR images was proposed by Rajan et al. [23] which is derived by combining the standard diffusion equation with the free Schrodinger equation.Each technique described above is based on the assumption that the noise intensity in an image is relatively invariable i.e., spatially uniform noise distribution. With recent advances in parallel imaging (PI) in MRI, noise has not become spatially uniform due to sensitivity irregularity correction processing for a surface array coil used for PI and PI unfolding processing. Fig. 2shows the noise distribution in MRI. Samsonov and Johnson [24] proposed the noise adaptive non-linear diffusion method for filtering MR images with spatially varying noise levels. By using the receiver coil sensitivity profiles, the priori information regarding the image noise level spatial distribution is obtained and it is utilized for the local adjustment of the anisotropic diffusion filter.Buades et al. [25] proposed the nonlocal means (NLM) filter. Most of the existing denoising methods mainly rely on local pixels within a small neighbor to remove the noise. As a result, large scale structures are preserved while small structures are considered as noise and are removed. The NLM filter exploits the redundancy of information contained within the images to remove the noise. The restored intensity value of the voxel is calculated as the weighted average of all the voxel intensities within the image. In the nonlocal means Buades et al. [25], Given a discrete noisy imageu={u(i)|i∈I}, the estimated valueNL[u](i), for a pixel i, is computed as a weighted average of all the pixels in the image,(8)NL[u](i)=∑j∈Iw(i,j)u(j)where the family of weights{w(i,j)}jdepend on the similarity between the pixels i and j, and satisfy the usual conditions0≤w(i,j)≤1and∑jw(i,j)=1.The similarity between two pixels i and j depends on the similarity of the intensity gray level vectorsu(Ni)andu(Nj), whereNkdenotes a square neighborhood of fixed size and centered at a pixel k. This similarity is measured as a decreasing function of the weighted Euclidean distance,||u(Ni)−u(Nj)||2,a2, wherea>0is the standard deviation of the Gaussian kernel. The application of the Euclidean distance to the noisy neighborhoods raises the following equality:(9)E||u(Ni)−u(Nj)||2,a2=||u(Ni)−u(Nj)||2,a2+2a2This equality shows the robustness of the algorithm since in expectation the Euclidean distance conserves the order of similarity between pixels. The pixels with a similar gray level neighborhood tou(Ni)have larger weights in the average. These weights are defined as,(10)w(i,j)=1Z(i)e−(||u(Ni)−u(Nj)||2,a2)/h2whereZ(i)is the normalizing constant(11)Z(i)=∑je−(||u(Ni)−u(Nj)||2,a2)/h2and the parameterhacts as a degree of filtering. It controls the decay of the exponential function and therefore the decay of the weights as a function of the Euclidean distances. Buades et al. [25] used this filter for removing Gaussian noise in 2D natural images. In natural images, the redundancy exists because they usually contain textured and smooth regions. In the case of medical images, however, similar textures in two distant areas of the image may have different meanings. Several variations on the NLM algorithm have been proposed for denoising MR images [26–37]. Manjon et al. [26] modified the original NLM algorithm to denoise the multispectral MRI. In the multispectral sequences, the similarity measure can be obtained by combining information of various channels. Manjon et al. [27] proposed the unbiased NLM approach for MRI denoising. According to Nowak [48], in the squared magnitude image, the noise bias is equal to2σ2. The unbiased NLM is obtained by subtracting the noise bias from the squared value of NLM. This filter used to increase SNR of MR images without affecting noticeable structures in the image.The main drawback of the NLM algorithm is computational burden due to its complexity especially on 3D MRI data. To overcome it, Coupe et al. [28] proposed an optimized and parallelized (multithreading) implementation of the NLM filter for denoising 3D MR images. This filter considerably decreases the computational time up to the factor of 50. Later, the authors extended their work for developing fully automated and optimized blockwise NLM filter [29] for denoising 3D MRI. This is achieved by the following steps: an automatic tuning of the smoothing parameter, a selection of the most relevant voxels for NL means computation, a blockwise implementation and a parallelized computation. Compared to the original NLM filter, this approach considerably decreases the computational time up to the factor of 60. In order to enhance the performance in terms of image quality and computational time, Coupe et al. [30] proposed fully automatic 3D optimized blockwise NLM filter with wavelet subbands mixing (WSM) for denoising MR images. Wiest-Daessle et al. [31] proposed the new variants of the NLM filter for denoising diffusion weighted and diffusion tensor MRI. Wiest-Daessle et al. [32] modified the NLM algorithm for Rician noise removal in diffusion tensor MRI. This filter outperforms the original NLM filter [25] and unbiased NLM filter [27].Gal et al. [33] proposed the dynamic nonlocal means (DNLM), for denoising Dynamic Contrast Enhanced MR images. It was a variation on the NLM algorithm, and exploited the redundancy of information in different volumes of the data acquired at different time points. In particular, it exploited the redundancy along the temporal axis but limited exploitation of spatial information redundancy to avoid eliminating diagnostically important details/structures. Liu et al. [34] proposed an enhanced NLM filter with pre-processing (PENLM) for removing Rician noise in 3D MR images. In this filter, the squared magnitude image is first denoised by the NLM filter, and then unbiased correcting is performed to remove the bias deviation. When performing the NLM filter, the weight is calculated based on the Gaussian-filtered image to reduce the disturbance of the noise. This filter outperforms the original NLM filter [25] and unbiased NLM filter [27]. Hu et al. [35] proposed a method for denoising MR images by combining the NLM filter with the discrete cosine transform (DCT). In this method, the similarity weights of the NLM filter are computed in the DCT subspace of neighborhood rather than using the gray level information directly. This accurate estimation of weights enhances the denoising effectively.Manjon et al. [36] proposed the adaptive NLM filter for denoising MR images with spatially varying noise levels, such as those obtained by parallel imaging and surface coil acquisitions. The information regarding the local image noise level is used to adjust the amount of denoising strength of the filter. Such information is automatically obtained from the images by using the local noise estimation method. This method does not require the prior knowledge of the coil sensitivity profiles in the MRI scanner. Manjon et al. [37] proposed the denoising methods for three dimensional MR images by exploiting the sparseness and self-similarity properties of the images. These methods are based on a three dimensional moving window cosine transform hard thresholding and a three dimensional rotationally invariant version of the NLM filter. Coupe et al. [38] proposed an adaptive multiresolution of the blockwise nonlocal means filter for denoising 3D MRI. Based on an adaptive soft wavelet coefficient mixing, the proposed filter implicitly adapts the amount of denoising according to the spatial and frequency information contained in the image and hence improves the performance of the NLM filter.Tomasi and Manduchi [39] proposed the bilateral filter as a non-iterative alternative to anisotropic diffusion filter. In both these approaches, images are smoothed while edges are preserved. Unlike anisotropic diffusion, bilateral filtering does not involve the solution of PDE and can be implemented in a single iteration. This filter is a combination of two Gaussian filters i.e., domain and range filters. The weights of the domain filter are proportional to the spatial distance (geometric) of a pixel around its neighborhood. The coefficients of range filter are proportional to the photometric (intensity) distance around the neighborhood of a pixel. The filtered image is obtained by replacing the intensity value of each pixel with an average value weighted by the geometric and photometric similarities between the pixels with in a spatial window. Walker et al. [40] and Xie et al. [41] applied this filter for MRI and Hamarneh and Hradsky [42] used this filter for reducing noise in Diffusion Tensor MRI.Wong et al. [43,44] proposed the trilateral filter for reduction of noise in medical images which works along similar lines to bilateral filtering. It is not only taking the geometric and photometric similarities into account, but also makes use of the local structural similarity to smooth the images. By using the local structural information, the non-homogeneous regions in the images have been identified. In the homogeneous region, only low pass filtering is performed, where as in the non-homogeneous region, the intensity value at each pixel is replaced with an average value weighted by the geometric, photometric and local structural similarities between the neighboring pixels within a spatial window. It uses narrow spatial window to smooth an image while preserving the edges.Wavelets are mathematical functions that decompose data into different frequency components that can be studied with a resolution matched to their scale. Wavelet transforms are multiresolution representations of signals and images. They decompose a signal into a hierarchy of scales ranging from the coarsest scale to the finest one. Wavelet coefficients of a signal are the projections of the signal onto the multiresolution subspaces. Since the work of Donoho and Johnstone [45,46], over the last two decades, there are many wavelet based noise reduction schemes for MRI [47–66]. The main advantage of the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is that it can describe local features either spatially or spectrally, which makes it to filter out most of noise while at the same time preserving the edges and fine details.Typically, a wavelet based denoising technique includes the following steps:1.Transform the original image into wavelet domain and acquire the wavelet coefficients.Process the wavelet coefficients. This step typically involves thresholding the wavelet coefficients to minimize the contribution of noise in the wavelet domain.Take inverse wavelet transform on the processed coefficients to produce the denoised image.The simple wavelet based noise reduction was proposed by Weaver et al. [47]. The main drawback of this filtering method was that any small structures that are similar in size to the noise are eliminated. Nowak [48] proposed the wavelet domain filter for denoising MR images specifically designed to handle the Rician noise. Due to the signal dependant mean of the Rician noise, both wavelet and scaling coefficients of a noisy MR image are biased estimates of their noise free counterparts. So this method can effectively overcome this problem by filtering the squared magnitude image (sum of the squared real and imaginary components) in the wavelet domain. In the squared magnitude image, data are noncentral Chi-square distributed and the wavelet coefficients are no longer biased estimates of their counterparts. The bias still remains in the scaling coefficients, but it is not signal dependant and it can be removed easily.Wood and Johnson [49] proposed an MR image denoising method based on the wavelet packet denoising method. The method comprises three elementary steps: wavelet packet transformation, best-basis selection, and coefficient thresholding. The method is particularly suited to images which are contaminated by Rician noise with low SNR. Wavelet packets tend to provide a more compact signal representation compared to the single basis wavelet decomposition. Complex denoising of MR images using wavelet was proposed by Zaroubi and Goelman [50]. Alexander et al. [51] also used this method for improving SNR and contrast in MR images. In [50,51] wavelet denoising algorithm is directly applied to the complex image obtained as the Fourier transform of the raw k-space data. It preserves edges better by using Haar wavelet.Pizurica et al. [52] proposed an alternative for denoising MR images with Rician noise using low complexity joint detection and estimation method. In the squared magnitude of the MR image, introduce an analytical model for the probability of signal presence, which is adapted to the global coefficients histogram and to a local indicator of spatial activity (locally averaged magnitude of the wavelet coefficients). Subtract the constant bias from the scaling coefficients, and subsequently compute the square root of the denoised squared-magnitude image. Bao and Zang [53] proposed a MR image denoising method based on an adaptive multiscale products threshold which incorporates the merits of interscale dependencies into the thresholding technique for denoising. The multiscale products are obtained by multiplying the two adjacent wavelet subbands, which is used to amplify the significant features and dilute noise. Thresholding is applied to the multiscale products of instead of the wavelet coefficients to better differentiate edge structures for noise. The distribution of the products analyzed and an adaptive threshold is formulated to remove most of the noise. It is a good edge preserving denoising method.Placidi et al. [54] combined the wavelet denoised method based on the calculation of the correlation factor between wavelet coefficients on different scales and edge detection scheme based Sobel operator for denoising MRI. This is reducing noise power while maintaining the greater degree of spatial resolution of the useful features. Yu and Zhao [55] proposed an iterative scheme based on wavelet shrinkage for reducing Rician noise in the MR images. By using the local wiener shrinkage function in the wavelet domain the signal wavelet coefficients are estimated from the noisy observation. Tan and Shi [56] proposed a directional neighborhood thresholding scheme based on multiwavelets to incorporate the merits of spatial dependencies and translation invariance (TI) with multiwavelets into the filtering technique for removing the Rician noise from MR images. This directional wiener filter based on TI multiwavelets applied to the squared magnitude of the MR images and subsequently compute the square root of the denoised squared-magnitude image. Wu et al. [57] proposed a wavelet based Rayleigh background noise removal method for MRI, which used the existing denoising methods to improve their effectiveness.Mrazek et al. [58] proposed a denoising method by combining wavelet transform and anisotropic diffusion to reduce the pseudo-Gibbs artifacts which occur due to the thresholding of some of the transform coefficients to zero. Ashamol et al. [59] used [58] for denoising MR images. Anand and Sahambi [60] proposed an undecimated wavelet transform (UDWT) based bilateral filtering for Gaussian noise removal in magnitude MRI. It yielded better denoising results than image denoising based on wavelet thresholding and also effectively preserved the relevant edge features. The authors extended their work for denoising magnitude MR images corrupted by Rician noise [61]. Yang and Fei [62] proposed the wavelet multiscale denoising method for the Rician nature of MR data. In this method, Radon transform is applied to the original MR images and the Gaussian noise model is used to process the MR sinogram image. A translation invariant wavelet transform is employed to decompose the MR sinogram into multiscales in order to effectively denoise the image.Luisier et al. [63] developed Chi-square unbiased risk estimation (CURE) for denoising squared-magnitude MR images which is based on the concept of linear expansion of thresholds (LET). First, this estimator is applied to the coefficients of an arbitrary undecimated filter bank transform and then considered the specific case of the unnormalized Haar wavelet transform, a multiscale orthogonal transform allowing for the derivation of subband-dependent CURE denoising strategies. Unser et al. have proposed the fast wavelet transform that uses fractional spline wavelets [64,65]. Fractional splines are splines of a real valued degree, which can be used to produce wavelet bases, used for denoising fMRI data [66].Delakis et al. [67] proposed wavelet based denoising algorithms for images acquired with parallel MRI having spatially varying noise levels. This method extracts the edges from the original image and then generates a noise map from the wavelet coefficients at finer scales. Therefore, it does not require prior knowledge of the coil sensitivity maps or other data used in the image reconstruction. This method overcomes the drawback of the noise adaptive nonlinear diffusion denoising method proposed by Samsonov and Johnson [24]. It is suitable for improving image quality on clinical MRI scanner.The denoising methods based on wavelet transform, are not suitable for describing the signals which have high dimensional singularities such as edges. To overcome the shortcomings of the wavelet transform, and to detect, represent and process high dimensional data, Candès and Donoho [68] proposed the concept of curvelet transform based on the theory of multiscale geometric analysis. Curvelet possess directionality and anisotropy for representing directions of the edges in image. In this transform, the frame elements are indexed by scale, position and orientation parameters. The localization ability provides the Curvelet frame with the properties as: it is an optimally sparse representation for singularities supported on curves in two dimensions; it forms an optimally sparse basis for pseudo differential operators and Fourier integral operators. The idea of curvelet is to represent a curve as a superposition of functions of various lengths and width obeying the scaling lawwidth≈Length2. This can be done by first decomposing the image into subbands i.e., separating the object into a series of disjoint scales. Each scale is then analyzed by means of a local ridgelet transform which is also a multiscale transform to efficiently describe signal with straight line singularity. Curvelets are based on multiscale ridgelets combined with a spatial band pass filtering operation to isolate different scales.Starck et al. [69] firstly used the curvelet transform for image denoising. Following steps are involved in the denoising algorithm of curvelet transform:1.Compute all thresholds for curvelets.Compute norm of curvelets.Apply curvelet transform to noisy image.Apply hard thresholding to the curvelet coefficients.Apply inverse curvelet transform to the result of step 4.This curvelet transform based image denoising method was used by Latha and Subramanian [71] for denoising MR images. Ma and Plonka [72] proposed a diffusion based curvelet shrinkage for discontinuity-preserving denoising using a combination of a tight frame of curvelets with a nonlinear diffusion scheme. This is used to suppress the pseudo-Gibbs and curvelet-like artifacts. Ashamol et al. [59] used this method for denoising MR images and also, they combine anisotropic diffusion along with hybrid denoising method which involves curvelet and wavelet transforms for denoising MR images.The wavelet transform is powerful in representing images containing smooth areas separated with edges. However, it cannot perform well when the edges are smooth curves. The contourlets have the property of capturing contours and fine details in images. The Contourlet transform by Do and Vetterli [70] is a geometrical image transform, which represents images containing contours and textures, and provides sparse representation at both spatial and directional resolutions. It offers a flexible multiresolution and directional decomposition for images, since it allows for a different number of directions at each scale. It is constructed by combining two distinct and successive decomposition stages: a multiscale decomposition followed by a multidirectional decomposition. The first stage uses a Laplacian pyramid (LP) scheme to transform the image into one coarse version and a set of LP bandpass images. The second stage applies directional filter bank (DFB) and critical subsampling to decompose each LP bandpass image into a number of wedge shaped sub-bands, thus capturing directional information. Finally, the image is represented as a set of directional sub-bands at multiple scales.The steps involved in the denoising algorithm of contourlet transform are described below:1.Perform multiscale decomposition of the image using contourlet transform and determine the number of scales and directions.Apply thresholding at each direction in each scale of contourlet coefficients.Reconstruct the denoised image from the modified contourlet coefficients by applying inverse contourlet transform.For MR images denoising, Latha and Subramanian [71] used this contourlet transform based image denoising method.A few works have been reported in the literature for MR images denoising based on statistics/estimation methods. Estimation of the noise variance on MR images is a necessary step in noise removal for several reasons. Firstly, it gives a measure of the quality of the MR data and used to measure the SNR. Furthermore, knowledge of this noise variance is useful in the analysis of MRI system. Finally, it is a crucial parameter in image denoising, image segmentation and image registration. One of the first attempts proposed to estimate the magnitude MR image from a noisy image is due to Henkleman [3] who investigated the effect of the noise on MR magnitude images. He showed that the noise leads to an overestimation of the signal amplitude and proposed a correction scheme based on image intensities. The conventional approach (CA) was proposed by McGibney and Smith [73] utilizing the noise properties of the second order moment.Sijbers et al. [74–76] estimated the Rician noise level and performed signal reconstruction using maximum likelihood (ML) approach for reducing bias that appears in the conventional approach. A similar method is used by Jiang and Wang [77]. Sijbers et al. [78] used this approach to estimate the image noise variance from the background mode of the histogram of MR image which is known to be Rayleigh distributed. He and Greenshields [79] used the nonlocal maximum likelihood (NLML) estimation method for Rician noise. This method is based on deploying maximum likelihood estimator on the nonlocal neighborhood in order to predict the underlying noise. Rajan et al. [80] used the ML based estimation of the local variance for each pixel of the image using a local neighborhood when no background information is available, like cardiac and lung images. Rajan et al. [81] proposed the MRI denoising for spatially varying noise levels based on ML estimation using restricted local neighborhoods. Recently, Rajan et al. [82] presented the nonlocal maximum likelihood estimation for denoising multiple coil MR images.Aja-Fernandez et al. [83,84] used the linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE) estimator for Rician noise. This method uses information of the sample distribution of local statistics of the image such as the local variance, the local mean and the local mean square value. That is, in this method, the true value for each noisy pixel is estimated by a set of pixels selected from a local neighborhood. Golshan and Hasanzadeh [85] have developed a nonlocal processing of the LMMSE method for Rician noise removal in the 3D MRI which is using the hard threshold value of control parameters. And later, Golshan et al. [86] modified this by changing the control parameters according to the noise level. This method takes the advantage of the high degree of redundancy in the contents of 3D MR images and provides a suitable similarity measure to find the similar patterns within the given MR data and the required parameters are automatically chosen with respect to the estimated local SNR values.Tisdall and Atkins [87] proposed the phase error estimation scheme for MRI denoising. While denoising MR images using wavelet thresholding or anisotropic diffusion, there is the risk of over smoothing fine details particularly in images with lower SNR. The phase-corrected real reconstruction relies on an estimate of the phase error to correct the phase of each pixel so the imaginary component contains only noise and can be discarded. This approach offers the potential for image denoising without the risk of over-smoothening. The phase error estimation scheme is based on iteratively applying a series of non-linear filters, each used to modify the phase estimate into greater agreement with one piece of knowledge about the noise corrupted image, until it converges at the desired phase error estimate. This method is useful for displaying inversion recovery MR images, spin echo images and in partial k-space imaging MR images.The nonparametric neighborhood statistics method for denoising MR images was proposed by Awate and Whitaker [88]. This method model images as random fields and uses reduction coupled with the Rician noise model as a means to recover higher-order statistics of image neighborhoods from noisy image. Nonparametric neighborhood density estimation is used for characterizing neighborhood structure. It exploits such statistics for optimal Bayesian denoising of MR images. Awate and Whitaker [89] extended their work on nonparametric empirical Bayes approach for feature preserving denoising of MR images that bootstraps itself by inferring the prior, i.e., the uncorrupted image statistics, from the corrupted input data and the knowledge of the Rician noise model. This method relies on principles from empirical Bayes (EB) estimation. It models the prior in a nonparametric Markov random field (MRF) framework and estimates this prior by optimizing an information-theoretic metric using the expectation-maximization algorithm. The generality and power of nonparametric modeling, coupled with the EB approach for prior estimation, avoids ill-fitting prior models for denoising. This method preserves most of the important features in the brain MR images.Lopez-Rubio and Florentin-Nunez [90] proposed a MRI denoising method builds an estimation of the noiseless image and its gradients by means of non-parametric second order kernel regression. This information is supplied to a zeroth order kernel regression filter in the form of a feature vector which is used to guide the weight computation.Wong and Mishra [91] proposed a MRI denoising method which the estimation of the noise free signal is formulated as a general Bayesian least-squares estimation problem and solved using a quasi Monte-Carlo estimation (QMCE) approach that takes into account the statistical characteristics of the underlying noise and the regional statistics of the observed signal in a data-adaptive manner.Monir and Siyal [92] proposed a denoising for functional magnetic resonance imaging time-series using anisotropic spatial averaging. Anisotropic averaging treats different regions of the brain differently and smoothing kernel adapts the averaging according to the properties of the underlying voxels. This method effectively suppresses the noise while preserving the shapes of the active brain regions.Coupe et al. [93,94] used an object-based method which is based on the adaptation of the Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) estimator in the wavelet domain for Rician noise. The adaptation for Rician noise is performed by using only the wavelet coefficients corresponding to the object and by correcting the estimation with an iterative scheme based on the SNR of the image.Luo et al. [95,96] proposed the singularity function analysis (SFA) denoising method of MR images, which is based on the spectrum of the images. In the spectral domain, the observed image has a higher SNR at lower frequencies and a lower SNR at higher frequencies. The spectral energy density of the noise is uniformly distributed in the whole spectral domain, and the spectral energy density of the original noise-free image decreases quickly with its frequency increasing. The wavelet denoising methods, discard least significant wavelet coefficients (hard thresholding) or shrink less significant wavelet coefficients more than significant coefficients (soft thresholding) to achieve noise reduction [47–67]. All these methods, however, exhibit the same shortcoming of losing significant high-frequency components contained in the original noise-free image.To cope with the problem of distorting or altering the original noise-free image in denoising process, Luo et al. [95] proposed the averaging reconstructed images based denoising method for MR images. The reconstruction can reduce noise while preserve useful information: the averaging of the reconstructed images allows by mimicking time averaging mechanism, the reconstruction errors and noise to be further reduced, the approach first divides the spectrum of the image to be denoised into different parts. From every such partial spectrum is then reconstructed an image by using two dimensional SFA model. By expressing each of the reconstructed images as the sum of the same noise free image and a different smaller noise, the denoising is achieved through averaging these reconstructed images. This approach can efficiently denoise while maintaining high quality image. Luo et al. [96] also proposed a denoising approach which is based on a spectral data substitution mechanism through using a mathematical model of one dimensional singularity function analysis (1-D SFA). The method consists of dividing the complete domain of the noisy signal into two sets: the preserved set where the spectral data are kept unchanged and the substitution set where the original spectral data having lower SNR are replaced by those reconstructed using the 1-D SFA model. The preserved set containing original spectral data is determined according to the SNR of the spectrum. The singular points and the singularity degrees in the 1-D SFA model are obtained through calculating finite difference of the noisy signal. This method allows more efficient denoising without any distortion.A survey of the noise estimation methods is given by Aja-Fernandez et al. [105]. In [105], the authors proposed the noise estimators for noncentral Chi and central Chi distribution which is suitable for multiple coil imaging without subsampling and it can be also extended to GRAPPA reconstructed parallel imaging MRI. So far, the MRI denoising techniques are discussed in detail and the summary of the limitations and/or disadvantages of MRI denoising methods for spatially uniform and non-uniform noise distributions are tabulated in Tables 1 and 2respectively.Performance of denoising algorithms is measured using quantitative performance measures such as peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the structural similarity index (SSIM), the quality index based on local variance (QILV), mean square error (MSE), contrast to noise ratio (CNR), contrast-invariant PSNR (CIPSNR), mean to standard deviation ratio (MSR), root mean square error (RMSE), Bhattacharyya coefficient (BC), mutual information (MI) as well as in terms of visual quality of the images.The spatial filter eliminates high frequency noise at the expense of blurring fine details and sharp edges in the MR images i.e., these filters are inadequate in suppressing truncation artifacts. For a temporal filter, proper selection of frequency response is a difficult task. McVeigh et al. [11] concluded that using these two filters, after filtering there was no improvement in the image without reducing the source of noise.According to the result of Gerig et al. [13], nonlinear anisotropic filter overcome the drawbacks of spatial and temporal filtering, but also clearly illustrate the efficient noise reduction in homogeneous regions. Object contours, boundaries between different tissues are not only preserved and even enhanced. Such filtering usually erases small structures and transforms image statistics due to its edge enhancement effect resulting in an unnatural image. The traditional filters like spatial, temporal and anisotropic diffusion filters are sensitive to Gaussian noise. However in the MR image, noise is modeled as Rician noise [4]. So, the improved anisotropic filter with adaptive threshold selection and a new gradient computation method [17] is robust to noise and also this is proved by the result.The noise driven anisotropic filter [18] performance is compared based on the metrics such as SSIM, QILV and MSE. Even though the second-order PDE based anisotropic filters achieve noise removal and edge preservation, they tend to cause the processed image to look blocky i.e., staircase. The result of [21,22] shows that the fourth-order PDE and fourth-order adaptive PDE overcome this blocky effect by comparing with anisotropic diffusion filter in terms of SNR. In fourth-order complex diffusion denoising method [23] SSIM and PSNR parameters are used to evaluate the performance.Diffusion methods average over extended regions by solving partial differential equations, and are inherently iterative. Iteration may raise issues of stability and depending on the computer architecture, efficiency [39]. Bilateral filter (BF) [39–42] is a non-iterative filter, which smoothes images while preserving edges by means of enforcing both geometric and photometric locality and it prefers nearby value. Trilateral filtering (TF) [44] takes local structural information along with geometric and photometric similarities. Wong and Chung [43] compared TF results with BF and Gaussian spatial Filter (GF) in terms of CNR. The result shows that TF is capable of producing greater noise reduction and smoothing the MR images without over-smoothing the edges as compared to BF and GF.Noise filtering using the wavelet transform is mainly depending on the wavelet type, thresholding technique and threshold estimation. Prinosil et al. [106] compared the wavelet transform for MRI denoising using three different wavelets such as Haar, 2nd order Daubechies and 4th order Coiflet; four thresholding techniques like Hard, Soft, Semi-soft and nonnegative Garrote thresholds with two threshold estimators are Universal and Bayesian risk minimization threshold. The evaluation of the techniques performed according to the parameters SNR, contrast and linear slope edge approximation. The result shows that contrast parameter of MR image not significantly change across all the techniques. The parameters SNR and slope edge were in balance, i.e., when the SNR increased the slope edge decreased and vice versa. The Bayesian risk minimization threshold estimator better preserved the slope edges than the universal threshold estimator for the phantom MR images corrupted with additive Gaussian noise. But MR images are modeled with Rician noise, so wavelet domain filtering of magnitude MR image is used for the reduction of Rician noise [48].Bao and Zhang [53] compared soft thresholding and hard thresholding with their own adaptive multiscale products thresholding (AMPT) of wavelets for Rician noise removal in terms of CNR and MSR. The result shows that AMPT not only achieves high MSR and CNR measurements, but also preserves more edge features. Tan and Shi [56] compared the performance of multiwavelets based denoising of MR images with AMPT [53] and Pizurica's versatile wavelet noise filtration techniques [52] by means of RMSE, SNR and CNR. The result shows that multiwavelet denoising outperforms other denoising methods in terms of quantitative performance measures as well as visual quality of the image.Modern wavelet based filtering for MRI denoising [48–57] may introduce characteristic artifacts that can be quite problematic [27]. The nonlocal mean (NLM) algorithm for MRI denoising will overcome this problem [25,27]. Manjon et al. [27] compared the unbiased NLM with anisotropic diffusion filter [12] and wavelet based denoising [52] by using RMSE and the result shows that this method outperforms both methods. The optimized blockwise nonlocal mean filtering method [29], Bhattacharyya coefficient (BC) and mutual information (MI) are used as the performance metrics. Gal et al. [33] presented the dynamic NLM algorithm for denoising dynamic susceptibility contrast enhanced MRI. The authors compared this algorithm with Gaussian smoothing filter [11], wavelet AMPT [53] and NLM [27] and the result shows that the performance of Dynamic NLM is better than all of the other algorithms.MRI denoising by averaging reconstructed images proposed by Luo et al. [95] outperforms wavelet based denoising techniques. However, the efficiency of this method can be influenced by the choice of frequency domain, pollution of noise on the estimated singularity degree and determination of singular points. Awate and Whitaker [89] compared nonparametric empirical Bayes approach (NEBA) of MRI denoising with anisotropic diffusion filter [12] and versatile wavelet based denoising [52] in terms of RMSE and SNR. The values show that NEBA is better than the other methods.Latha and Subramanian [71] compared the curvelet based denoising with wavelet based denoising of MR images and it shows that the curvelet transform enjoys superior performance in terms of MSE over wavelet transform; the curvelet reconstructions display higher sensitivity than the wavelet based reconstructions. The paper [71] also compared the MR image denoising of contourlet and wavelet transforms. It shows that the contourlet transform is found to be more efficient in recovering smooth contours both visually as well as in terms of PSNR value compared to wavelet transform. Ashamol et al. [59] compared the hybrid denoising (curvelet and wavelet) method based on anisotropic diffusion with wavelet denoising, wavelet denoising with diffusion, curvelet denoising and curvelet denoising with diffusion. The results have shown better performance when compared with denoising methods using wavelet and curvelet alone. The anisotropic diffusion has shown to reduce the pseudo-Gibbs artifacts quite significantly and thus resulting in a better image.In parallel imaging MRI denoising, Samsonov and Johnson [24] methodology of spatially adaptive nonlinear diffusion filtering requires the calculation of the image noise from the receiver coil matrix which is available with MRI scanner manufacturer. Wavelet based denoising of Delakis et al. [67] calculated the noise distribution from the image's wavelet decomposition high frequency subband after discarding edge pixels i.e., avoiding blurring edges and details in the periphery may result loss of information. Adaptive NLM proposed by Manjon et al. [36] estimated the noise using the neighboring pixels in the image, but it has the computational complexity.The accuracy and efficiency of the existing denoising methods for diagnosis are based on the values of the quantitative performance measures. Some of the existing MRI denoising methods are compared based on the quantitative performance metrics such as PSNR and SSIM [107]. For the sake brevity, the denoising methods and their optimum parameters suggested by authors are tabulated in Table 3. The experiments were conducted on simulated MR images obtained from the Brainweb database [108]. The data set consists of T1 weighted, T2 weighted and PD weighted Axial volumes of 181×217×181 voxels (voxels resolution is 1mm3), which are corrupted with 9%, 11% and 15% of Rician noise respectively and the values are tabulated in Table 4. The MATLAB source code for LMMSE based filters is available on http://staff.guilan.ac.ir/pakrezaei, for kernel based regression method http://www.lcc.uma.es/∼ezeqlr/ukr/ukr.html. And, several NLM-based methods are available on http://personales.upv.es/jmanjon/denoising/.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
