@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Employing linear prediction residual signal of wavelet sub-bands in automatic detection of laryngeal pathology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An automatic detection algorithm for detection of pathologic voices is suggested. Residual signals extracted by applying linear prediction on wavelet sub-bands provide a highly reliable vocal disorders detection scheme. By employing linear discriminant analysis and support vector machine, a great classification is achieved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An automatic voice pathology detection scheme based on the processing of speech signal is introduced that is highly reliable in detecting various vocal folds impairments. Using linear prediction (LP) analysis to accurately keep track the variations of glottal signal from speech signal is the key element of our proposed method. The linear prediction-based residual signal estimation is employed to monitor the irregularity of glottal signal with the aim of providing information about vocal folds status. The procedure is done by decomposing a voiced signal (/a/) selected from Kay Elemetrics databases using 1-D discrete wavelet decomposition in four levels, and then applying linear prediction (LP) analysis on achieved coefficients of wavelet sub-band to capture a time-frequency representation of vocal folds vibrations. Support vector machine is finally used to make a decision about the existence of any abnormality in the vocal folds of the analyzed sample. Experimental results indicate that the extracted residual signals from wavelet sub-bands provide highly reliable features especially where there are a variety of abnormal voices that are applicable for assessing voice quality and the effectiveness of the prescribed rehabilitation medicine.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automatic screening of voice disorders in order to monitor the health condition of the relevant organs has been widely taken into account by researchers over the last decades. Vocal folds which are located in the larynx (voice box) play a significant role in human speech production system [1]. Nowadays, the increase of daily activities involves speech organs more frequently, and as a result the incidence of voice diseases is more probable. Roughly 9% of world populations are suffering from voice pathologies caused by lesions on the vocal folds [2]. Although changes in voice parameters are minor such as hoarseness, breathiness, harshness, the origin of these diseases can be diverse from the common cold to a malignant tumor. Assessing the vocal folds can be done using invasive endoscopy procedures such as laryngostroboscopy or surgical microlaryngoscopy which provide laryngologist with images containing elaborate information from vocal folds. However, these diagnostic tools are invasive and costly. Also, diagnosis from patient's speech can be done by expert otolaryngologist whereby detection rate is about 60–70% [2]. Computer-based diagnostic tools can aid these procedures and determine whether a voice originated from impaired vocal folds or not. These tools provide a non-intrusive diagnosis without complaint through analyzing the recorded speech. Therefore, establishing an intelligent system to provide early detection of pathologies in the human vocal folds seems essential in improving the quality of our life.In normal voice, the mucosal wave is regular and the loudness is in the normal range. People with normal voice are able to produce a voice with normal pitch characterized with rapid and precise patterns. Almost there is no sign of “hoarseness”, “nasality”, “breathiness”, and “harshness” in normal voices. The term “voice disorder” indicates to impairments and abnormalities in the vibratory system which may result in abnormal outcome voices containing harshness, breathiness, or hoarseness [1]. The abnormality of voice resulted from the impairments in the vocal folds are modeled with different metrics which attempt to introduce a distinctive representation of normal voices from pathological cases in temporal and spectral domains. Fundamental frequency (f0) [3], pitch perturbation (jitter) and amplitude perturbation (shimmer) [4], harmonic to noise ratio (HNR) [5], low to high energy ratio (LHR) [6], glottal to noise excitation ratio (GNE) [7], linear prediction cepstral coefficient (LPCC) [8–10], and Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) [11,12] are founded upon a linear system that is not an accepted assumption. The voice production system has non-linear characteristics that are the result of non-linear dynamic of airflow propagation through human's vocal tract [13]. Laryngeal disorders make this problem worse due to the presence of abnormalities in the vocal folds. Voice signals are qualitatively categorized by Titze into three distinct sections [14]: (1) Type I signals in which there is no qualitative changes in the analysis segment called nearly-periodic signal. (2) Type II signals that includes signals with qualitative changes in the analysis segment, or signals with sub harmonic frequencies or modulating frequencies. (3) In type III signals where there is no apparent periodic structure. Normal voices can be classified as either Type I or Type II, while pathologic voices depending on the type of pathology can be categorized in any of these three classes. Consequently, it can be concluded that as speech production is a highly nonlinear process, proposing an appropriate linear model is not helpful especially where pathology is present.To find a suitable representation of pathologic incidents in vocal folds, voice signal has been analyzed in different domain such as time, frequency, and time-frequency domain. The goal was to model the impact of irregularities in the vocal folds as well as possible. Among different suggested schemes, those methods based on time-frequency analysis such as wavelet transform [9,15,16] and nonlinear methods such chaos have led to better recognition performance. An efficient feature set was suggested by Umapathy and Krishnan [17] that propose a signal subspace using local discriminant bases (LDB) algorithm and wavelet packet decomposition. The result was significant and led to discriminatory characteristics of normal and pathologic speech signals. Using entropy and energy of wavelet packet decomposition, Schuck et al. [18] developed an automatic voice pathology detection algorithm. The best basis algorithm (BBA), and neural network are utilized to detect dysphonic voices with recognition of 84.3% [18]. Many different works focused on using wavelet analysis to detect or classify disordered voices that the results were satisfying.Moreover, the ability of chaos theory in analyzing non-linear systems has been exploited to model the degree of non-linearity in pathologic voice. The most common chaotic features are the correlation dimension (CD) and the largest Lyapunov exponent (LLE) that provide sufficient discrimination for nonlinear analysis of time series. The correlation dimension is a measure of the complexity of voice that shows the dimensionality of the space occupied by a set of random points in the feature space. The Lyapunov exponent of a dynamic system is a quantity that shows the rate of separation of infinitesimally close trajectories. Three types of speech signals are classified using CD by the algorithm proposed in [19]. This work demonstrated that for sustained vowels, jitter and shimmer can discriminate between pathological and healthy voice, however, in the case of running voice, non-linear features led to more accurate results. Matassini et al. have deployed nonlinear characteristics in addition to linear features to expose the separation between healthy and disordered voice samples in a multidimensional feature space [20]. Researchers have suggested various voice disorders detection based on chaos analysis [21]. All these works have attempted to represent a feature that well match the characteristics of pathogens in vocal folds using the correlation dimension (CD) and the largest Lyapunov exponent (LLE) [2,21].In this article, a novel LPC-based voice pathology detection algorithm has been proposed which utilizes mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis of linear prediction error signal along with parameters that are directly extracted from wavelet decomposition of analyzed voice as features. These features will act as a functional unit that transform the input signal into a set of measures that supposedly is sensitive to the presence of abnormality in voice signal. The metrics extracted from the error signal resulted from linear prediction (LP) analysis look for the measures that reflect the effect of abnormalities such as noisy components, local discontinuities, abrupt change, and friction in pathological voices. Compared to previous studies, this work is basically designed to consider a variety of voice disorders in pathologic dataset and attempts to propose an efficient algorithm which is able to detect pathologic voices specially where the distribution of disordered samples are fairly diverse. In fact, there are no unique patterns for different types of voice disorders. Therefore, as much as the types of studied pathologic voices increase, the detection will be more difficult. This study attempts to find a more general detection algorithm for identifying disordered voice samples by studying a dataset including vast variety of pathologic voices.This paper has been organized as following sections: Section 2 presents the materials and methods of the proposed algorithm and the proposed scheme. In Section 3, experimental results are presented and discussed. A conclusion is provided in section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
