@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting the intelligibility of noise-corrupted speech non-intrusively by across-band envelope correlation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ABECm may efficiently and non-intrusively predict speech intelligibility in noise.High correlation was obtained between ABECm values and intelligibility scores.The computation of ABECm does not need access to the clean reference signal.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Speech perception in noise,Intelligibility prediction,Across-band envelope correlation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent psychoacoustic studies found that across-band envelope correlation (ABEC) carried important information for speech intelligibility. This motivated the present work to propose an ABEC-based intelligibility measure that could be used to non-intrusively predict speech intelligibility in noise using only temporal envelope waveforms extracted from the noise-corrupted speech. The proposed ABEC-based metric (denoted as ABECm) was computed by averaging the correlation coefficients of mean-removed envelope waveforms from adjacent frequency bands of the noise-corrupted speech. The ABECm measures were evaluated with intelligibility scores obtained from normal-hearing listeners presented with sentences corrupted by four types of maskers in a total of 22 conditions. High correlation (r=0.96) was obtained between ABECm values and listeners’ sentence recognition scores, and this correlation was comparable to those computed with existing intrusive and non-intrusive intelligibility measures. This suggests that across-band envelope correlation may work as a simple but efficient predictor of speech intelligibility in noise, whose computation does not need access to the clean reference signal.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Temporal envelope has been long identified as an important acoustic cue for speech perception [1,2]. The role of temporal envelope to speech perception is extensively studied via vocoder simulation, whereas the speech signal is first decomposed into multiple spectral bands and the envelope waveform from each band is extracted, for instance, by wave rectification and low-pass filtering. It is revealed that envelope cues from four bands are sufficient to yield a high intelligibility of speech perception in quiet [1]. In addition to studying the perceptual contribution of envelope cues, some studies investigated perceptual information carried by across-band envelope correlation (ABEC).Studies hypothesized that the ability of human listeners to use envelope information may be based on the correlation of long-term amplitude envelope information between spectral bands [3–5]. Crouzet and Ainsworth found that the envelope of speech signal was highly correlated between spectral bands, and the correlation coefficient was stronger for close spectral bands [3]. Noise-vocoded speech is often regarded as conveying phonetic information primarily through temporal-envelope cues rather than spectral cues. However, listeners may infer the formant frequencies in the vocal-tract output (a key source of phonetic detail) from across-band differences in amplitude when speech is processed through a small number of bands [4]. Roberts et al. found that across-band comparisons of amplitude envelopes in noise-vocoded speech could provide phonetically important information about the frequency contours of the underlying formants [4]. Healy et al. found that when the correlations between the fluctuating envelopes of the acoustic stimuli were calculated, the rate at which acoustic correlation fell as a function of between-band asynchrony closely matched the rate at which intelligibility fell for normal-hearing (NH) listeners [5].The above studies suggested that the amount of temporal asynchrony (i.e., across-band envelope correlation) carried important perceptual information for speech intelligibility. Therefore, the present study hypothesizes that across-band envelope correlation may potentially be used as a predictor for speech intelligibility. The purpose of this study is to develop a speech intelligibility index based on across-band envelope correlation to predict speech intelligibility in noise, and compare its performance with several existing intrusive and non-intrusive intelligibility indices. Note that, as ABEC itself carries intelligibility information, the ABEC-based intelligibility index proposed in this study only requires computation of the processed (e.g., noise-corrupted) speech and does not need access to the input (clean) reference signal, which is required in most intrusive intelligibility indices (see more on this in Section 2.2).The proposed across-band envelope correlation based intelligibility metric (i.e., ABECm) is computed as follows. The noise-corrupted speech signal is first decomposed into N spectral bands spanning the signal bandwidth (300–7600Hz in this study) by using a series of fourth-order Butterworth filters, whose bandwidths space the cochlear frequency map in equal steps [6]. The −3dB cut-off frequencies (f) of the filters are computed according to the cochlear frequency-position function asf=165.4×100.06⋅d−1,where d denotes the distance (in millimeter) along the cochlea partition [6]. The center frequencies and bandwidths of the N Butterworth filters are given in Table 1. The temporal envelope of each band is computed by using Hilbert transform, anti-aliased using low-pass filtering, and then down-sampled to 2×fcutHz, thereby limiting the envelope modulation frequency to fcut Hz (e.g., fcut=20Hz). The anti-aliasing filter is designed with a linear-phase FIR filter, whose filter order n is selected as n=10·fs/fcut, where fsis the sampling rate. The correlation of the two mean-removed envelope waveforms from adjacent bands is computed, yielding a total of N−1 correlation coefficients for the N bands. Note that a large correlation coefficient (i.e., approaching 1) denotes that the two envelope waveforms from adjacent bands are very similar to each other; while a small correlation coefficient (i.e., approaching 0) indicates that there is little similarity between the two envelope waveforms from adjacent bands. Theoretically, the correlation coefficient may approach -1, suggesting that the envelope waveforms from bands i and i+1 are counter-phase; however, it is found that this case seldom happens, as the two envelope waveforms from adjacent bands are similar to each other. Fig. 1exemplifies the N=8 envelope waveforms of a noisy sentence [corrupted by speech-shaped noise (SSN) masker at 5dB SNR, and fcut=20Hz] and the values of 7 correlation coefficients of two mean-removed envelope waveforms from adjacent bands. Note that Butterworth filter does not have linear phase response. However, as the original band-pass filtered (with Butterworth filter) signal (at a sampling rate 25,000Hz) was anti-aliased and down-sampled to a lower sampling rate (e.g., fcut=20Hz), we presumed that the time alignment of the further down-sampled signal would not be significantly affected by the lack of linearity in the phase.The ABECm is defined as the average of the N−1 correlation coefficients. Note that the upbound of the ABECm value is 1. Fig. 2shows the range of ABECm value computed when sentences are corrupted by four types of maskers [i.e., babble, car, speech-shaped noise, and street masker] used in this study at various signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). It is seen that high SNR consistently leads to a large ABECm value in all panels in Fig. 2.For the purpose of comparison, this study also predicted the intelligibility of the noise-corrupted speech by using two intrusive measures, i.e., the normalized covariance measure (NCM) [7] and the middle-level coherence-based speech intelligibility index (CSIImid) [8]. The underlying hypothesis of the intrusive intelligibility measures was that measures assessing temporal-envelope (i.e., NCM) or spectral (i.e., CSIImid) distortion should correlate highly with the intelligibility of noise-corrupted speech. Recent studies found that the NCM and CSIImid measures well predicted the intelligibility of noise-corrupted and/or noise-suppressed sentences [9]. The subscript ‘mid’ in CSIImid means that the CSII measure is computed by using only mid-level region consisting of segments ranging from the overall root-mean-square (RMS) level to 10dB below (i.e., RMS−10dB). More details regarding the definition and implementation of the NCM and CSIImid measures can be found in [9]. These measures need access to the clean reference signal to predict speech intelligibility. For the computation of the NCM index, for instance, the clean reference signal is needed in order to compute the SNR in each frequency band, and for the CSII measure, the reference signal is needed in order to compute the signal-to-distortion ratio [9].In certain realistic applications (e.g., quality of service monitoring), however, we do not have access to the clean reference signal, but only the noise-corrupted signal. This presents a challenge with existing intelligibility indices, and there are few known measures that can predict non-intrusively or blindly (i.e., with no access to the reference signal) speech intelligibility in noise. This study also implemented two non-intrusive intelligibility indices, i.e., SRMR (speech to reverberation modulation energy ratio) and ModA (modulation-spectrum area). Falk et al. proposed the non-intrusive measure SRMR for predicting the subjective quality of reverberant and dereverberated speech [10,11]. The SRMR measure was implemented in the modulation spectrum domain and compared against three standard and commonly used intrusive/non-intrusive measures (i.e., ITU-T PESQ, ITU-T P.563, and ANSI ANIQUE+) on tasks of predicting three effects of coloration, reverberation tail and overall quality. In addition to quality assessment, the SRMR measure was also evaluated indirectly for intelligibility prediction by correlating the output of other speech transmission index (STI) based measures with the output of their measures.Chen et al. recently developed a non-intrusive intelligibility index (denoted as ModA) for predicting the intelligibility of reverberant speech [12]. The proposed measure was rooted in basic principles of STI theory. In general, STI predicts that intelligibility drops with reduction in speech envelope modulations, irrespective of the nature of that reduction, i.e., whether it is caused by additive (steady) noise or reverberation. Adding noise to speech, for instance, causes a reduction in modulations across all modulation frequencies, while the effect of reverberation is modulation-frequency dependent and acts like a low-pass filter on the modulation spectrum. The non-intrusive ModA measure was found to successfully predict the intelligibility, for instance, of reverberant speech [12].A total of 8 NH subjects participated in the listening tests. All subjects were native speakers of American English, and were paid for their participation. The subjects’ age ranged from 18 to 27yr, with the majority being undergraduate students from the University of Texas at Dallas.IEEE sentences were used as test material [13]. All sentences were produced by a male talker, and were taken from the CD in [14]. The masker signals included speech-shaped noise, and three real-world recordings from different places: babble (cafeteria), car, and street. The sentences and four maskers were sampled at 25kHz. Segments randomly selected from the maskers were added to the IEEE sentences at different SNR levels (see Table 2). Different SNR levels were chosen with each type of masker, based on pilot data collected from one subject, to avoid ceiling effects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
