@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Respiratory mechanics in children with cystic fibrosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate respiratory mechanics in diagnosed patients with cystic fibrosis (not many works available in literature on this specific group, so it has a high incidence).We proposed to look at the nonlinear distortions coming from the respiratory tissue (as opposed to the ‘classical’ approach of looking into linear effects only).We find that the proposed index is able to classify and ‘see’ the differrences with healthy respiratory tissue (a novel discovery).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Respiratory system,Recurrent anatomy,Frequency response,Ladder network,Fractional order impedance,Cystic fibrosis,Detection lines,(Non)linear analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When a nonlinear biological system is under analysis, one may employ linear and nonlinear tools. Linear tools such as fractional order impedance models have not been previously employed to characterize difference between healthy volunteers and patients diagnosed with cystic fibrosis (CF). Nonlinear tools such as detection lines from nonlinear contributions in frequency domain have also not been employed previously on CF patient data. CF is an irreversible inflammatory disease, of genetic origin. The forced oscillation technique (FOT) is a non-invasive, simple lung function test suitable for this class of patients with breathing difficulties, since it does not require any special maneuvre. In this work we bring additional evidence that the FOT method combined with both linear and nonlinear tools reveals important information which may be used as complementary to the standardized lung function tests.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When extracting information from complex nonlinear biological systems, it is important to decide whether a linear or a nonlinear analysis is envisaged. The respiratory system is a complex nonlinear system, which changes its properties with disease, i.e. the nonlinear behavior may become more pronounced. A combination of both linear and nonlinear tools may be beneficial for extracting the maximum amount of information. In this work, we employ linear impedance extraction and detection of nonlinear distortions in the impedance signals from patients diagnosed with cystic fibrosis (CF). Additionally, we employ a parametric model of fractional order which is directly linked to mechanical properties in the lungs, to identify quantitative differences between healthy volunteers and CF patients.Biological systems modeled by fractional order impedance models have received significant interest in the research community [1,9,10,23,33]. Initial characterizations of the lungs mechanical properties have been reported in several invasive animal studies, showing the necessity of a fractional order (FO) integral [11,12]. Recent studies led to the conclusion that a FO model outperforms most of the integer-order models for characterizing the frequency-dependence in human respiratory input impedance. The major advantage of the FO models over the integer order counterpart is not only their low number of parameters, but also their intrinsic capability to characterize the viscoelastic properties and the recurrent structures of biologic materials [2,7,16,17,32].Fractional order models have been employed previously in both healthy subjects group [15] and various pathologies, such as asthma [19], Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) [18]. The respiratory impedance poses several resonant frequencies [22] and the validity of one fractional order impedance model is restricted to the frequency range where its parameters have been identified [26]. As soon as the frequency range, in which the lung function is evaluated, changes, important variations in the frequency-dependence of the respiratory impedance may occur and the structure of the model must be revisited.Hitherto, to our knowledge, there is a lack of information on CF patients from the linear and nonlinear tools employed in this work. The forced oscillation technique is a non-invasive, simple lung function test suitable for this class of patients with breathing difficulties, since it does not require any special maneuvre. In this work we show that the forced oscillation technique (FOT) combined with both linear and nonlinear tools revels important information which may be used as complementary to the standardized lung function tests (e.g. spirometry). The only work which uses FOT in CF patients are those reported in [4,13,24]. There, the authors showed the ability of FOT to distinguish between various values of respiratory resistance in asthma and cystic fibrosis.The work presented in this paper aims to provide the reader with a proof of concept on the added value of using FOT as a complementary lung function test to the standardized spirometry test and particularly suited for measurements in children [6,27]. The added value is shown by means of linear non-parametric identification of the respiratory impedance, further parameterization with a FO model. The FOT data is also processed for the detection of nonlinear contributions from the lungs in the measured air-pressure.The paper is organized as follows: the methods, patients and measurement protocol are described in the next section. Third section presents the results and a fourth section discusses these results. A conclusion section summarizes the main outcome of this work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper reported the evaluation of a fractional order impedance model applied to respiratory data in patients diagnosed with cystic fibrosis. A novel concept, that of detecting and evaluating nonlinear contributions originating from the lung parenchyma and lung structure, has also been introduced and evaluated on the same group of patients. The results indicate that the methods have great potential to offer complementary information to the clinical practice, next to standardized lung function tests such as spirometry.