@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hilbert marginal spectrum analysis for automatic seizure detection in EEG signals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The method of HMS analyzing based on HHT is employed for EEG signal processing.The HMS based entropy and energy features are extracted for SVM classification.The classification accuracy using10-fold cross-validation can reach 99.85%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electroencephalogram (EEG) signal,Empirical mode decomposition (EMD),Hilbert marginal spectrum (HMS) analysis,Support vector machine (SVM),Seizure detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present a new technique for automatic seizure detection in electroencephalogram (EEG) signals by using Hilbert marginal spectrum (HMS) analysis. As the EEG signal is highly nonlinear and nonstationary, the traditional Fourier analysis which expands signals in terms of sinusoids cannot appropriately represent the amplitude contribution from each frequency value. The HMS is derived from the empirical mode decomposition (EMD) which decomposes signal into a collection of intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). Since this decomposition is based on the local characteristic time scale of the signal, it can be well applied to nonlinear and nonstationary processes. In this work, the spectral entropies and energy features of frequency-bands of the rhythms using HMS analysis are extracted and fed into the support vector machine (SVM) for seizure detection of EEG signals. A final comparison between the results obtained with the developed technique and results adopted by Polat and coworkers using Fourier analysis with the same database is given to show the effectiveness of this technique for seizure detection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epileptic seizure is a group of brain disorder characterized predominantly by recurrent and unpredictable interruptions of normal brain function. Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders, 0.6–0.8% of the world's population suffers [1]. Electroencephalogram (EEG) is a valuable measure of the brain's electrical function and generated by the cerebral cortex's nerve cells, it has been a valuable clinical tool for epilepsy evaluation and treatment. Generally, a continuous recording of the EEG lasts as long as one week for epilepsy detection. Since the seizures are episodic in their occurrences, detection of epileptic seizure by visual inspection of EEG signal is very time consuming and maybe inaccurate. For this reason, automatic detection of EEG signals is highly useful and required for the diagnosis of this disease.Recently, many signal analyzing and processing techniques have been proposed for studying EEG signals [2–10]. Among these methods, traditional Fourier spectral analysis has been used to extract features of EEG signals for detection of seizure [2,3]. However, the EEG is a highly nonstationary process, and the Fourier analysis which expands signals in terms of sinusoids cannot appropriately represent the amplitude contribution from each frequency value. To address this problem, several joint time-frequency analysis based methods have been proposed and applied for detection of epileptic seizure from EEG signals [4–8]. The short time Fourier transform extracts several frames of the signal to be analyzed with a window that moves with time and was used to calculate the power spectrum density of each segment of EEG signals [4]. The wavelet transform is similar to the windowed Fourier transform and the values of approximate entropy derived from the wavelet coefficients were used to characterize the predictability of the EEG data [5,6]. The Wigner-Ville distribution and its improved version, smoothed pseudo Wigner-Ville distribution (SPWVD) have received considerable attention in recent years as an analysis tool for nonstationary signals [7,8], and sub-band frequencies of the sub-band signals of SPWVD based time-frequency spectrum have been used as features for detection of seizure [7].Above mentioned time-frequency analysis methods have their own advantage in nonstationary signal processing indeed, but they are all based on Fourier theory and have not given a new definition of frequency mathematically. Hilbert–Huang transform (HHT) makes creative improvement of frequency definition for the first time, which is proposed by Huang et al. in 1998 [11]. This new signal analyzing method does not handle the signal processing problems from the view that the basic component of signal is sinusoid, instead of signals called intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). The IMF is generated by empirical mode decomposition (EMD) method which is intuitive, direct, and adaptive for signal decomposing. The EMD method has been successfully applied in signal analyzing and processing [12–22]. The IMF can be both stationary and nonstationary, while the sinusoid is the very special situation of IMF. Hence, HHT has well solved the contradiction of imperfectness of nonstationary signals processed by Fourier transform and established the foundation in analyzing signals of time-varying frequency and amplitude.Hilbert marginal spectrum (HMS) analysis is based on HHT, and possesses the advantage of HHT. Recently, the method of HMS combined with k-Means was used and acquired good performance in epileptic seizure detection [23]. In this paper, we present a new method for automatic detection of seizure in EEG signals by using HMS analysis. Fig. 1illustrates the block diagram of the proposed method. We propose spectral entropy and energy features corresponding to the frequency-bands of the rhythms in EEG signals for seizure detection. A hypothesis testing is conducted for feature selection. The features with lower p-values are used and fed into support vector machine (SVM) with radial basis function (RBF) for classification of seizure and nonseizure EEG signals. We also make a comparison with the method of traditional Fourier spectrum analysis. The experimental results show that the HMS analysis based method provides better classification than the Fourier spectrum analysis method conducted in this paper and also in Polat's research [3].The rest of the paper is organized as follows: a description of the EEG dataset used in this work, the HHT and its marginal spectrum analysis method, comparison with Fourier spectrum, feature extraction and SVM classifier are presented in Section 2. The experimental results and discussion are given in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper.The EEG data used in this work are taken from a public accessible signals database [24]. The dataset is composed by five subsets (denoted as A, B, C, D and E) and consists of 100 signals of EEGs with 4097 samples for each one of the signals. Each of these signals lasts 23.6s with a sampling frequency of 173.61Hz. Datasets A and B consisted of segments acquired from surface EEG recordings of five healthy volunteers with eyes open and closed. Samples in dataset C and D were recorded from the hippocampal formation of the opposite hemisphere and epileptogenic zone of the brain, respectively. Sets C and D contained activity measured during seizure free intervals from epileptic patients. The subset E only contains seizure activity. Typical EEG signals are shown in Fig. 2.The HHT consists of two components: EMD and Hilbert spectral analysis [11]. As the key part of HHT, the method of EMD to decompose signal is intuitive, direct and adaptive. This decomposition method is based on local characteristic of local time domain of data. Based on this characteristic, any nonlinear and nonstationary signal can be decomposed into a set of IMFs which are amplitude and frequency modulated signals.The definition of IMF is proposed mainly to get the physical meaning of the instantaneous frequency. Each IMF should satisfy two basic conditions [11]: (1) The number of extreme points and the number of zero crossings must be either equal or differ at most by one; (2) At any time point, the local mean value of the envelope which defined by the average of the maximum and minimum envelopes is zero. The first condition is similar to the narrow-band requirement for a stationary Gaussian process. The second condition modifies a global requirement to a local one, and is necessary to ensure that the instantaneous frequency will not have unwanted fluctuations as induced by asymmetric waveforms [11]. The intrinsic mode functions are obtained by using the EMD decomposition algorithm and denoted ci(t). At the end of the algorithm, the original signal x(t) can be represented as:(1)x(t)=∑i=1nci(t)+rn(t)where n is the number of intrinsic modes, ci(t) is the ith IMF, and rn(t) is the final residual which can be interpreted as the DC component of the signal.For any real IMF c(t), its Hilbert transform cH(t) is defined as:(2)cH(t)=1πP∫−∞+∞c(τ)t−τdτwhere P is the Cauchy principal value of the singular integral. Then the analytic signal of the c(t) can be defined as below:(3)z(t)=c(t)+jcH(t)=a(t)ejϕ(t)The amplitude of pre-envelope a(t) and instantaneous phase ϕ(t) are defined as:(4)a(t)=c(t)2+cH(t)2(5)ϕ(t)=arctancH(t)c(t)The instantaneous frequency can then be written as the time derivative of the phase, as shown below:(6)w(t)=dϕ(t)dtThus the original signal can be expressed in the following form:(7)X(t)=Re∑i=1nai(t)expj∫wi(t)dtIt enables us to represent the amplitude and the instantaneous frequency as functions of time in a three-dimensional plot. This frequency-time distribution of the amplitude is designated as the Hilbert–Huang spectrum, H(w, t).Last, with the Hilbert–Huang spectrum defined, the marginal spectrum h(w), would then be defined as:(8)h(w)=∫0TH(w,t)dtThe marginal spectrum offers a measure of total amplitude (or energy) contribution from each frequency value [11].In most cases, the HMS in energy is very similar to Fourier in case the data from stationary and linear process. However, as pointed out by Huang et al. [11], the frequency in either H(w, t) or h(w) has a totally different meaning from the Fourier spectral analysis. The same data if expanded in Fourier representation can be expressed as:(9)X(t)=∑i=1∞aie(iwit)where aiand wiare constants. Compared with Eq. (7), it is clear that the IMF obtained by EMD method represents a generalized Fourier expansion. In the Fourier representation, the existence of energy at a frequency means a component of a sine or a cosine wave persisted through the time span of the data, while the HMS describes the probability that a frequency exists at some local time point in the signal [11].Considering the case of the sum of two sine waves with 1kHz sample rate as(10)x(t)=4sin(2π×100t)+2sin(2π×150t),t∈[0,1]Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the HMS and Fourier spectrum of above finite-duration sinusoidal signal with the same frequency resolution. It can be clearly observed from Fig. 3(a) that the two spectral lines of HMS are clearly separated, which means that it has the higher resolution ratio. For the Fourier spectrum in Fig. 3(b), each spectral line has more than one, which means there exists severe energy leakage and the resolution ratio is lower. Besides, the height of the spectral line represents the possibility of the relative frequency existence, the higher the spectral line is, the greater possibility the relative frequency exists [11]. Hence, compared with Fourier spectrum, the HMS can reflect the frequency components of signals more accurately.To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, extracting adequate features from EEG signals is important and required. In this paper, the entropy and energy features of the HMS are extracted and discussed.Entropy is the measure of disorder in physical systems and related with the amount of information that may be gained by observations of disordered systems. It is a convenient way of quantifying the distribution of spectral power. Data with a broad, flat probability distribution will have high entropy, while data with a narrow, peaked, distribution will have low entropy [26]. The Fourier spectrum based entropies have been studied and successfully applied in many fields [25,26]. As applied to EEG, entropy is the statistical descriptor of the variability within the EEG signal. As mentioned in above sections, HMS has excellent property in nonstationary signal processing, so the HMS based entropy may provide a good performance in EEG signal classification. In this work, the spectral entropy of Shannon, Renyi and Tsallis are discussed.In order to calculate the entropy, the spectrum should be converted into a probability mass function by normalizing the spectrum firstly. Eq. (11) is used for normalization.(11)pi=Pi∑i=1nPiwhere Piis the energy of the ith frequency component of the spectrum and piis the probability mass function of the spectrum.Then, the Shannon entropy can be written as [27]:(12)SEN=−∑i=1npilogpiwhere piis the probability of occurrence of an event, here it refers the probability density of the spectrum and∑i=1npi=1.The Renyi entropy is defined as [28]:(13)RENα=11−αlog∑i=1npiαwhere the additional parameter α is used to make it more or less sensitive to the shape of probability distributions.Another generalized entropy which is defined by Constantino Tsallis [29], is given by(14)TENα=1α−11−∑i=1npiαRenyi and Tsallis entropies reduce to the Shannon entropy in case of α=1. In this work, the parameter α of Renyi and Tsallis entropy are both set to 2.The energy features are effective features for epileptic seizure detection [30,31]. The energy features based on the frequency-bands of the rhythms in EEG signals (namely delta: 0–4Hz; theta: 4–8Hz; alpha: 8–12Hz; beta: 12–30Hz; gamma: 30–50Hz) are extracted [32]. The energy distribution between seizure and nonseizure EEG signal is quite different [31]. The energy of a normal EEG signal is contained mostly in the delta wave, while the same wave in the seizure one accounts for a small proportion of total energy. Thus, it is distinctive to use sub-band energy for classification of EEG signals. It should be noted that the energy of HMS has different meaning with Fourier spectrum. The sub-band energy is defined as the summation of the magnitude of squared spectrum components [11]:(15)ei=∑f=0k−1hi2where hiis the ith sub-band of the spectrum and k is the total number of frequency in each band. Thus, the energy feature vector can be formed with the five features as E=[e1, e2, e3, e4, e5].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The HHT is a creative and useful method in signal analysis, especially the marginal spectrum analysis method. The paper proposes signal analysis and feature extraction for seizure detection in the Hilbert marginal spectrum domain. The marginal spectrum analysis is quite different from Fourier spectrum analysis, as the frequency in the marginal spectrum indicates only the likelihood that an oscillation with such a frequency exists. In this paper, the spectral entropies and sub-band energy features have been extracted from the Hilbert marginal spectrum and the efficient ones have been used as input of the SVM to classify seizure and nonseizure EEG signals. The classification results indicate that the method of marginal spectrum provides higher classification accuracy than that of Fourier spectrum analysis. Although from the results, it seems that the proposed method is not significantly better than the Fourier one. However, because the classification results relate to dataset, feature extraction and learning algorithm apart from the signal analyzing methods, we still think it is a potential method to detect seizure in EEG signals. In addition, it should be worth to mention here that the proposed technique could also be applied in other environments involving EEG signals, such as sleep stage classification and brain-computer interface (BCI) application where significant improvements in classification accuracy may be possible.