@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic identification of dysprosody in idiopathic Parkinson's disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze dysprosody in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease using a sentence repetition task.We perform an automatic analysis of speech signals.PD patients exhibit longer pauses between each sentence repetition.PD patients show a lower percentage of “speech time” during a whole repetition period.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parkinson's disease,Dysprosody,Objective parameters,Automatic acoustic analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Parkinson's disease (PD) involves impairments of voice and speech (hypokinetic dysarthria). Dysprosody is one of the most common features of PD speech that includes alterations of rhythm and velocity of articulation. The aim of this study is the evaluation of dysprosody patterns in Parkinsonian patients during a sentence repetition task by means of a fully automated tool.Twenty PD patients (14 male and 6 female) and 19 healthy controls (9 male and 10 female) were tested. Results show significant differences between the two groups as far as the time interval between each sentence repetition (Tinter), the percent of speech time with respect to sentence duration (D%) and the Net Speech Rate (NSR – defined as the number of syllables of the sentence divided by the effective speech time) are concerned. In particular, Tinter is larger in PD patients while D% is higher in the control group. These results show that PD patients may exhibit longer pauses between each sentence repetition and a lower percentage of “speech time” during a whole repetition period. Thus, the decrease of D% leads to an increase of NSR. Other acoustic parameters (noise and F0 variability) did not show any significant difference. This study confirms that speech in PD patients is characterized by short rushes followed by unorthodox pauses. These results may lead to the development of a system for the automatic acoustic analysis which could significantly reduce the processing time in particular during pre-processing, that to date is a time-consuming and operator-dependent step especially in case of recordings of long duration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative illness that involves neurons in the zona compacta of the substantia nigra of the midbrain and other pigmented nuclei [1–3]. This pathology is associated with a wide range of motor (tremor, stiffness, bradykinesia, postural instability) and non-motor (depression, cognitive impairments, sleep and mood disorders) symptoms that significantly reduce the quality of life of patients [4,5]. Impairments of voice and speech (hypokinetic dysarthria) are among the main signs of the disease. They affect about 70% of PD patients [6].PD patients may present alterations related to all speech dimensions (i.e., the four subsystems of speech production): respiration, phonation, articulation and prosody. Therefore, they might exhibit reduced variability of pitch and loudness, hoarseness, reduced stress, imprecise consonant articulation, unorthodox speech silence and speech rate alterations [7].This work is focused on the study of prosody in PD patients. The aim is the identification of dysprosodic patterns during a sentence repetition task. To this end we developed a new fully automated procedure that allows the extraction of significant parameters related to prosody from audio recordings.The non-invasiveness of acoustic measures, along with the debut of speech impairments in the early stage of the disease [8], has made this field very attractive towards researchers. Many authors tried to detect features of voice and speech belonging to the aforementioned speech dimensions (in particular phonation, articulation and prosody) that could discriminate PD patients from healthy subjects. Such features could provide an aid to an early diagnosis of PD, but could also help tracking the disease progression and testing the efficacy of drug therapy.Phonation is the production of sound at the level of the larynx due to the vibration of vocal folds. The most widespread task for studying this speech dimension is based on the acoustical analysis of a sustained vowel emitted by the patient at comfortable pitch and energy. Rusz et al. [9,10] showed that significant differences exist between PD patients and healthy subjects concerning some acoustic parameters: jitter, shimmer, HNR (Harmonics to Noise Ratio) and PPE (Pitch Period Entropy, a parameter related to the inefficiency of voice frequency control [11]). Specifically HNR, a parameter related to voice roughness and breathiness, was proven useful by Tsanas et al. [12] whose results confirm that PD patients tend to have a harsher voice as compared to healthy subjects.Articulation includes the set of movements of the articulatory organs (tongue, lips and jaw) that, by modifying the vocal tract resonant cavities, allow modelling the sound coming out from the vocal folds. Thus, most of the studies on speech articulation are based on the first two formant frequencies F1 and F2. Recently, Rusz et al. [13] showed that articulatory impairments in PD patients can be detected from F2u where FKj is the K-th formant for vowel j, tVSA (triangular Vowel Space Area, defined as: abs(F1i×(F2a−F2u)+F1a×(F2u−F2i)+F1u×(F2i−F2a))/2), F2i/F2u and VAI (Vowel Articulation Index (F2i+F1a)/(F1i+F1u+F2u+F2a)). In particular, differences are enhanced by specific tasks such as sentence repetition, reading a passage and monologue. Walsh et al. [14] showed a reduction of the F2 transition during the emission of a diphthong within a sentence in PD patients. This alteration reflects the undershooting of tongue and/or jaw motion. Other studies [15–17] compared different acoustic parameters related to articulation, highlighting that VAI is more accurate than VSA in discriminating PD from healthy controls. Moreover, Sapir et al. [17] proposed a novel parameter (FCR – Formant Centralization Ratio) and demonstrated that FCR and F2i/F2u are not gender-sensitive.These results on speech articulation highlight the hypokinetic characteristics of speech impairments typical of PD, since the reduction of articulatory movements is reflected in the alterations of parameters derived from the formant frequencies.One of the most common speech impairments in PD is dysprosody that includes alterations of rhythm and speed of speech, articulation, speech/pause ratio, pitch intensity and its variations [7]. Many authors carried out studies on prosodic patterns of voice in PD patients, assessing parameters related to speech rate. Skodda et al. [18] found a speech rate variation (number of syllables per second) closely related to the progression of the disease. This modification is characterized by articulatory acceleration in the early stages of the disease, followed by slowdown in advanced stages. Speech rate measures were also used to test the dopaminergic therapy effects on Parkinsonian voice. However, no significant differences were found during this pharmacological treatment [19].Another widespread task used to evaluate speech rhythm disorders is the syllable repetition task (oral diadochokinetic test). It was shown that PD patients tend to have less control on rhythm stability during this task, with a tendency to increase the pace of repetition. These results reflect a dysfunction at the level of basal ganglia that control the temporal regulation of a motor sequence [20]. Rhythm alterations derived from the oral diadochokinetic test were also found by Rusz et al. [10], who found that PD patients have fewer syllables per second with respect to healthy control subjects. Furthermore, PD patients showed a reduction in fundamental frequency (F0) modulation and intensity and an increase of the number of pauses per second within a monologue or when reading a text. A reduction of F0 variability was also found in other works [21], as well as a reduction of pauses within polysyllabic words.These results demonstrate that rhythm variation, pause alterations and the reduction of F0 variability are relevant parameters to detect dysprosody patterns in PD.Other tests consist in the repetition of a short sentence, as reported in [13,14], although these studies considered only the articulatory dimension of speech.Most of the works on acoustic analysis in PD patients make use of freely available software tools like PRAAT [22] or commercial tools like the Multi Dimensional Voice Programme (MDVP by Kay Elemetrics Corp. [23]).However, these tools are not provided with a pre-processing step that allows analyzing different parts of an audio recording in a completely automatic way. Specifically, as said above, the repetition of a standardized sentence is a commonly performed test in PD patients. With MDVP or PRAAT a manual selection of each sentence from the whole recording has to be made first. Then the tool is applied sentence by sentence for the estimation of the acoustic parameters. Therefore the automation of manual segmentation would be desirable, being a time-consuming and operator-dependent step, especially in the case of long recordings.Few attempts have been made in order to solve this technological challenge for the acoustic analysis in Parkinson's disease. Cmejla et al. [24] proposed a Bayesian autoregressive change point detector (BACD) for the evaluation of speech disfluency and articulation impairment. Tsanas et al. [25] used the AHTD (At Home Testing Device by Intel Corp. [26]) for telemonitoring PD patients, in order to track the disease progression at home. However, the audio processing (concerning sustained vowels only) is made offline, as the voice records are sent to a server located in the medical centre. Moreover, the analysis of sustained vowels, albeit providing useful parameters for the distinction between PD and healthy subjects, does not allow studying articulatory and prosodic alterations.Therefore it is relevant to develop a robust method for a complete automation of the process. This would be essential also for the implementation of an analysis system to be used at home for monitoring and rehabilitation of PD patients. In particular, in the framework of speech therapy it is of basic importance for the patient to get an immediate feedback from the system in order to improve articulation.Although the monologue is the most accurate task for revealing speech alterations in PD patients [9,13], the use of this task to develop and standardize an automatic analysis procedure is not straightforward. For this reason, in this paper we choose the repetition of a sentence to study dysprosody in idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
