@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Study of phase synchronization in multichannel seizure EEG using nonlinear recurrence measure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Phase synchronization in brain using recurrence plot based technique is studied.A novel application of the technique to multichannel seizure EEG data is made.Contour plots of Correlation between Probability of Recurrence (CPR) matrix show clear contrast between seizure and pre-seizure signals and a classification accuracy of 100% has been achieved.CPR could identify the focus of epilepsy and the identification is much better than that obtained using linear correlation.The paper has shown the utility of a nonparametric nonlinear model in studying synchronization in the brain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Recurrence plot,Phase synchronization,Correlation between probabilities of recurrence,Multichannel EEG,Linear correlation,Epileptic seizure,Brain headmap,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Complex biological systems such as the human brain can be expected to be inherently nonlinear and hence difficult to model. Most of the previous studies on investigations of brain function have either used linear models or parametric nonlinear models. In this paper, we propose a novel application of a nonlinear measure of phase synchronization based on recurrences, correlation between probabilities of recurrence (CPR), to study seizures in the brain. The advantage of this nonparametric method is that it makes very few assumptions thus making it possible to investigate brain functioning in a data-driven way. We have demonstrated the utility of CPR measure for the study of phase synchronization in multichannel seizure EEG recorded from patients with global as well as focal epilepsy. For the case of global epilepsy, brain synchronization using thresholded CPR matrix of multichannel EEG signals showed clear differences in results obtained for epileptic seizure and pre-seizure. Brain headmaps obtained for seizure and pre-seizure cases provide meaningful insights about synchronization in the brain in those states. The headmap in the case of focal epilepsy clearly enables us to identify the focus of the epilepsy which provides certain diagnostic value. Comparative studies with linear correlation have shown that the nonlinear measure CPR outperforms the linear correlation measure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
EEG signals, a record of electrical potentials obtained from the human brain, are complex and random looking signals, which can be analyzed as output of a stochastic process, i.e. system driven by unknown input. Based on this approach, spectral estimation and several other techniques have been developed for analyzing these signals. Several models have also been developed. However, one limitation of this approach is that it bears little or no consideration to the nonlinear process that generates the signal. Another limitation is that the models developed for these sophisticated biological systems do not represent the biological system to any reasonable extent. Hence, there is a need to analyze these signals with a different perceptive. In this work, we are concerned mainly in applying certain nonlinear techniques, which are also nonparametric, for the analysis of EEG signals.One of the most common neurological disorders is epilepsy which is characterized by sudden and large neuronal discharges in the brain [1]. Epilepsy is an indication of excessive synchronous activity of neurons in the brain [1] and it clinically manifests as seizure. Generalized seizures involve almost entire brain, whereas focal seizures are localized to a particular region of the brain (called epileptic focus). Clinical neurophysiologists have to review the EEG recordings and look for seizures that may have occurred during the monitoring session. However, reviewing a continuous EEG recording for seizures is a time consuming task, which is also prone to human error. Thus a computer based seizure detection system can be of great value for automatic identification of seizure EEG segments. In this paper, we deal with a novel application of a recurrence based synchronization measure for seizure detection and characterization using EEG recordings.It has been observed that biomedical signals could be generated by a nonlinear dynamical system [2]. In our work EEG signals are analyzed as the output of a chaotic system rather than stochastic system particularly in view of new developments in nonlinear dynamics and chaos. Chaos is the unpredictable long time behavior of a deterministic dynamical system which is highly sensitivity to initial conditions. In case of chaotic systems, it is observed that the system's trajectory starting from a specific initial condition in state space is different from another trajectory starting from a slightly different initial condition. In a chaotic system, these two trajectories will soon start to diverge.Since EEG signals are generated by complex nonlinear dynamical biomedical systems like brain, the number of state variables required to define these systems are not small and hence the number of data points to be considered becomes very large. In order to overcome this problem, we have used recurrence plot [3] based synchronization measure for analyzing EEG signals which come under the category of nonlinear dynamical techniques. Since we compute a distance matrix between points of the trajectory of given time series in a RP based technique, the measure permits the utilization of any kind of data and hence very useful for applications where the data could be nonstationary, or nonlinear.EEG signals recorded under various experimental conditions have been analyzed using many nonlinear techniques. In particular, measures such as correlation dimension and Lyapunov exponents [2], which are based on nonlinear dynamical systems and chaos theory, have been used to describe the complex EEG signal. For computing invariants from the reconstructed attractors, chaos based approaches make certain general assumptions. It is assumed that the signal possesses a non-evolving low-dimensional attractor and it is also assumed that the signal is long, stationary and noiseless. To relax these assumptions, the Recurrence Plot (RP) method has been employed in the literature which also helps in visualizing the behavior of trajectories of dynamical systems in phase space [3]. The advantage of this method is that RPs have an apparent simplicity of implementation and interpretation, and do not require an understanding of system's dynamical attractor. In view of these facts, a recurrence based phase synchronization technique, which is both nonlinear and non-parametric, has been employed in this paper.The technique of RPs for data analysis is not only a useful tool for visualization but also for quantifying even for data sets with short length [4]. Furthermore, a set of quantification measures obtained from what is known as recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) quantify systematically the different structures found in RP [5]. One of the advantages of RQA resides in its elegant independence from constraining assumptions and limitations plaguing other analyses. Since recurrence structures are simply tallied within the signal (or between signals), there is no need to pre-condition the data. Recurrence analysis is not limited by signal non-stationarity and transients. Hence RQA has proven to be ideally suited for the study of numerous real-world systems encompassing a multitude of disciplines. RQA has found numerous applications in diverse fields [6–8] and its use in studying various biological systems [9,10] including brain [11] has been reported in literature. RQA can also deal with signals from nonlinear systems of any nature in quantifying the activity of system and is model-free. Thus, for analysis of physiological signals like EEG which are often nonstationary and depict nonlinearity, this tool is particularly suitable. Hence, RQA is a good choice to reveal changing dynamics of biomedical systems. RQA quantifies the activity of a system independent of its dynamical nature as also deals directly with the signal without the need for system identification. Even though nonlinear dynamical technique has been applied to study epileptic EEG [12], the application of RQA to study EEG signals appears very promising for the reasons mentioned above.Phase synchronization takes place between two signals when their respective frequencies and phases are locked. We are concerned here with the application of synchronization to seizure analysis. We would like to observe that phase synchrony does not imply seizure. However, during seizure we observe synchrony in the brain and the waveform patterns are characteristics of seizure. Also our interest in phase synchronization is due to the fact that many biological systems exhibits phase synchronization. It is well known that alpha band increases in synchrony in the occipital region of the brain when eyes are closed. It is also observed that many cognitive tasks involve synchronization. Synchronization patterns measured from EEG in many psycho physiological experiments have also been reported in literature [13] Synchronization is a universal phenomenon with global importance with its applications for chaotic oscillators being recognized [14,15] and subsequently studied by many researchers [16,17]. Literature contains several applications of this phenomenon to natural systems like magnetoencephalography [18], neuronal systems [19,20], cardiorespiratory systems [21] and ecological systems [22]. Efforts have been made in the application of nonlinear phase synchronization in seizure analysis. Lachaux et al. [23] have proposed a method for the quantification of synchronization using phase locking statistics to investigate recordings from an epileptic patient who is performing a visual discrimination task. Chavez et al. [24] have discussed about the estimation of phase synchronization from EEG signals recorded from an epileptic patient. Mormann et al. [25] have presented a technique for detection of pre-seizure state using mean phase coherence as a measure of phase synchronization. Le Van Quyen et al. [26] have discussed ways of characterizing neurodynamic changes in preictal state using nonlinear analysis of brain signals. EEG signals three groups viz. control, seizure and mania have been studied by Bhattacharya [27] to investigate the effect of these pathologies on the degree of phase synchronization between cortical areas. Studies have also been made on the multichannel seizure analysis using nonlinear measures. McSharry et al. [28] have introduced a nonlinear measure, multidimensional probability evolution, for multichannel seizure analysis. Gupta et al. [29] have shown that tracking changes in phase synchronization of narrow band activity of multichannel EEG can be useful for seizure onset detection and prediction. Bianchi et al. [30] have studied multichannel EEG synchronization by evaluating the mutual synchronization among several EEG channels using a measure called cross conditional correlated entropy. This paper discusses the application of a measure called Correlation between Probability of Recurrence (CPR) [31] which uses the concept of probability of recurrences in phase space. The definition of CPR has been extended here to study multichannel seizure EEG signals. The utility of nonlinear recurrence measure CPR has been demonstrated for both focal and global epilepsy cases using surface and contour plots of CPR matrix as well as through brain headmaps. The method employed here, being nonparametric, makes very few assumptions, making it suitable for studying brain function in a data driven way.It is of interest to observe that many of the synchronization studies are based on linear correlation which has rather limited interpretability in the broader biological context. Specifically, it has been recognized that phase synchronization can be studied using distributed information processing in the brain occurring for many higher order brain processes [32]. While linear correlation can be used for detecting zero-lag first order phase synchronization, it cannot detect higher order and lagged synchronization [32,31]. Thus for a massively interconnected nonlinear complex system such as human brain, nonlinear methods seems better suited for synchronization studies in EEG. Hence the use of a nonlinear measure like CPR seems more appropriate for characterizing phase synchronization in the brain. This paper has validated this by showing that the nonlinear correlation measure CPR is superior in performance to the linear correlation measure. Here synchronization analysis of multichannel EEG signals has been made through a novel use of a nonlinear and non-parametric recurrence based phase synchronization measure.We give an account of the multichannel EEG data used in this paper. 16 channel EEG was recorded from 16 subjects who had been diagnosed with epilepsy. The data was recorded at 128Hz sampling frequency for 45s per subject. The 10–20 international system of electrode placement was used as the recording montage. Information about the seizure focus is obtained from the patient's clinical diagnostic data. Data was collected with patient's informed consent and after clearance from the Ethics committee.The patients were recorded for clinical purpose on the requisition of the neurologist for approximately of 45min to 1h duration. During EEG recording, direct signal digitization were carried out from the real panel of Nihon Khoden Machine (Neurofax-21) using DT2841 ADC coupled with DT2740 Array processor to an IBM i386/387 PC. The DT 7020 array processor carried out online filtration and base line corrections. We have randomly taken 8 generalized and 8 focal epilepsy cases for this study. All 16 data records were visually screened off line on a computer. Only artifact free and clearly discernible seizure components were visually identified and then segmented for analyses. The identification of artifact both on paper and on digital data is performed by the treating neurologist by visual inspection.A signal is associated with a state space trajectory specific to it. In natural systems we often do not have access to all the state variables of the system from which the phase space trajectory is constructed. According to Takens [33], the procedure for mapping of a discrete signal x into phase space is as follows. Given a signal with Ns terms,x1,x2,⋯xi,⋯xNsis mapped into phase space by constructing vectors yiof dimension D with lag (delay) d defined as(1)yi=xk,xk+d,xk+2d,…xk+(D-1)dD≥1, d≥1, i=1 to Ns, k=i mod Ns−(D−1)dWe call this as embedding the signal in phase space of dimension D with lag d. The variable y gives the trajectory of the signal in D dimensional phase space and it completely represents the original state space topologically and thus it preserves all its properties. A recurrence occurs when two points yiand yjin phase space, corresponding to time instants i and j, are close to each other based on a certain pre-defined norm. Since recurrence is a topological property of state space, it is preserved by phase space and hence further analysis on such a trajectory can be performed.In order to visualize the recurrence of states in a phase space, Eckmann et al. [3] have introduced a tool called recurrence plot (RP). Usually, a phase space has higher dimensions and hence it can only be visualized directly by projection into two or three dimensional sub-spaces, which will not provide a global representation. However, the D-dimensional phase space trajectory can be investigated through a two-dimensional representation of its recurrences by an N×N matrix whose elements take values 0 or 1. Each element of the matrix is mapped to a unit black or white pixel at the corresponding location, where black and white pixels represent the presence and absence of recurrences respectively. Thus we calculate an N×N matrix(2)Ri,j=θ(∈−||yi−yj||)where ||.|| is a norm, ɛ is the recurrence threshold and θ is the Heaviside step function forcing Ri,jto be either 0 or 1. Euclidean norm has been used throughout this work.Choice of D, d and ɛ are important. The value of D should be selected such that it is high enough to capture all state variables but it must be kept in mind that higher value of D increases the computation time. Many issues have been discussed on the applicability of nonlinear techniques to short non-stationary data like EEG. However, nonlinear techniques and computational procedures have been improved (e.g. false nearest neighbors and mutual information lag) to take care of many of these issues [34]. Many papers discuss the choice of these parameters [35,36]; we have chosen the values of D and d accordingly.The value of threshold, ɛ has to be chosen properly. To do this, we perform the calculations at the smallest ɛ, say 0.1, and then increase it in steps of, say, 0.1, to get a plot of number of recurrences versus ɛ. The value where the percentage of recurring points begins to rise sharply off the noise floor is selected as the threshold. In our work, we have experimented as described above for EEG signal to choose a proper value of ɛ.Qualitative analysis alone may not be sufficient in practical applications since RP often contains subtle patterns that are not easily established by visual inspection. To address this issue, Zbilut and Webber [5] brought in the concept of recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) to quantify RPs. Additional measures have been proposed by other researchers thereafter [37]. Many efforts have been made to apply RQA to seizure EEG. Thomasson et al. [38] have shown that RQA variables are capable of distinguishing preictal from background activity. Li et al. [39] and Rabbi et al. [40] have studied the changes in dynamical characteristics of epileptic EEG in rats using RQA.Considerable literature exists on RQA and its applications to seizure EEG. However our concern here is not on RQA but more on the probability that each of the samples of the trajectory returns to its own neighborhood after some delay. Further, phase synchronization (PS) between any two signals can be detected by using this probability of recurrence. In fact, a measure called Correlation coefficient between Probabilities of Recurrence (CPR) [31] can be derived from that. It is a Cross Recurrence Quantification Analysis measure. Such a cross recurrence measure is suitable for the analysis of multichannel EEG signals. The value of CPR in our studies lies in the fact that it gives the degree of phase synchronization between two signals. The details of calculation of CPR are given below.The case of R(i,j)=1 with j=i+τ corresponds to the trajectory that returns to the neighborhood of I after a delay τ. Considering such occurrences for all (i, i+τ), one can get an estimate of the probability P(τ) of the system returning to a pre-defined state after a delay τ. Then one can estimate the probability P(τ) that each of the samples of the trajectory returns to its own neighborhood after τ samples delay as(3)P(τ)=1Ns−τ∑i=1Ns−τRi,i+τ=1Ns−τ∑i=1Ns−τΘ(∈−||yi→−yi+τ→||)P(τ) has been used to estimate the dynamical invariants of the system by means of recurrences in phase space without embedding [41] and has found applications to geophysical data [6].Phase synchronization (PS) between any two signals can be detected by using the probability of recurrence, P(τ) of two signals[31]. The coincidence of the positions of the maxima of P(τ) for both signals is of value since we can quantify the degree of phase synchronization by looking at it. In fact, a measure called Correlation coefficient between Probabilities of Recurrence (CPR) [31] can be derived from that. Evaluation of phase synchronization may be made by first computing the probabilities of recurrence P1(τ) and P2(τ) for the signals 1 and 2 respectively and then computing the correlation coefficient between probabilities of recurrence(4)CPR=∑τ=τeτm−1P1(τ)−m1P2(τ)−m2σ1σ2where m1 and m2 are the mean, and, σ1 and σ2 are the standard deviations of P1(τ) and P2(τ) respectively. τ ranges from τe to τm where τe is the value of τ for which P(τ)=1/e. We usually choose the value of τm to be half the length of the longer signal.The degree of phase synchronization (PS) between two signals is given by CPR. If two signals are in perfect PS, the probability of recurrences has peaks for some delay, τ1, and CPR∼1. In contrast, if the signals are not in PS, the peaks of the probability of recurrences do not coincide and CPR will then have a low value. The nonlinear recurrence measure CPR does not seem to have been applied for the analysis of seizure EEG signals.In this paper, the definition of CPR has been extended to study the overall synchrony of multichannel signals. EEG is recorded simultaneously using electrodes placed at various locations on scalp to obtain multichannel seizure EEG signals (16 channels in this paper). CPR is calculated between all pairs of 16 channels. We thus obtain a 16×16 matrix, CPRN×N.(6)CPRN×N=CPR1,1⋯CPR1,N⋮⋱⋮CPRN,1⋯CPRN,N;CPRi,j=CPRbetweensignalsofchannelsiandjThe overall synchronicity of the brain is represented by mean value of all the 240 elements of the matrix (excluding principal diagonal elements). Application of CPR for the case of multichannel seizure EEG signals has been discussed in this paper for the cases of both global epilepsy and focal epilepsy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
