@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comparative evaluation of neural network classifiers for stress level analysis of automotive drivers using physiological signals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We modeled the affective state of automotive drivers under real-time driving.Total 39 features were extracted from physiological signals.Statistical significance and selection of features have been discussed.Total 7 NN classifier configurations were evaluated.The LRNN classifier modeled the problem optimally.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wearable driver assist systems,Physiological signals,Stress level,Neural network,Driver safety,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automotive driving under unacceptable levels of accumulated stress deteriorates their vehicle control and risk-assessment capabilities often inviting road accidents. Design of a safety-critical wearable driver assist system for continuous stress level monitoring requires development of an intelligent algorithm capable of recognizing the drivers’ affective state and cumulatively account for increasing stress level. Task induced modifications in rhythms of physiological signals acquired during a real-time driving are clinically proven hallmarks for quantitative analysis of stress and mental fatigue. The present work proposes a neural network driven based solution to learning driving-induced stress patterns and correlating it with statistical, structural and time-frequency changes observed in the recorded biosignals. Physiological signals like Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) and Photoplethysmography (PPG) were selected for the present work. A comprehensive performance analysis on the selected neural network configurations (both Feed forward and Recurrent) concluded that Layer Recurrent Neural Networks are most optimal for stress level detection. This evaluation achieved an average precision of 89.23%, sensitivity of 88.83% and specificity of 94.92% when tested over 19 automotive drivers. The biofeedback inferred about the driver's ongoing physiological state using this neural network based inference engine would provide crucial information to on-board safety embedded systems to activate accordingly. It is envisaged that such a driver-centric safety system will help save precious lives by way of providing fast and credible real-time alerts to drivers and their coupled cars.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Safe-driving requires a relaxed mind and good concentration on part of the driver apart from a good reflex response [1]. Unacceptable levels of stress, fatigue and on-road distractions deteriorate driver's performance and may lead to temporal loss of concentration, risk assessment capability and vehicular control, often inviting road accidents. Researchers have identified that this issue of ever increasing fatality rate and economic losses can be addressed through development and deployment of context-aware driver assistant systems capable of predicting accidents and alert the driver proactively [2]. In 2010, European Union in the Information and Communication Technology for Mobility (ICT for Mobility) programme for Intelligent Vehicle Systems identified the Strategic Research Agenda for future research on Intelligent Vehicles “…should focus on highly integrated and price worthy solutions for driver assistance systems to reach wide deployment and achieve increased traffic safety and efficiency and reduce environmental impact…” [3].Researchers in the past have extracted parameters from biosignals to measure emotion [4,5], stress level [2], fatigue [6] and the affective state [7] for driver assistance. They have interchangeably used the term “affective state” or “emotional state” or the “sentic state” to assess the mental and physical stress experienced by vehicular drivers [8]. For instance, [2] envisaged the development of an integrated vehicular or body-worn sensor configuration which might be able to calculate in real-time the driver's stress level, which can improve his safety and manage in-vehicle information systems cooperatively with him. In an approach towards affective state recognition in automotive drivers using on-road experimentation they investigated the use of bioelectric signals to give dynamic indications of driver's internal state. During driving, drivers are prone to instantaneous stimuli which arise due to various distractions like unanticipated pedestrian crossing, abrupt lane change by another vehicle, etc. Schmidt et al. [9] in a study on electrodermal activity based techniques for para-psychological analysis presented that syntactic features extracted from GSR signals make a good indicator for distress and mental exhaustion. Linder et al. [10] investigated into the morphology of PPG signal and concluded the usefulness of extracted structural features in the study of body-postures.Continuous monitoring of driver affective state in a real-time driving scenario has been a challenging task that involves physiological data collection, preprocessing, feature extraction coupled with selection/transformation and finally classifying these features to a related stress/fatigue state using classification methods. Healey and Picard [2] developed an automatic stress recognition algorithm using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) with the features extracted from physiological data as inputs. They achieved over 97% recognition rate and a good correlation rate with the video stress metric developed for their application. Ji et al. [6] developed a real-time non-intrusive fatigue monitor based on information collected from physiological sensors and the subject's environment. Their Bayesian dynamic network accounted for both temporal and dynamic aspects of human fatigue. Katsis et al. [5] designed a wearable system for assessing the emotional state of car racing drivers using physiological signals collected in simulated environments. The maximum predictive ability of their system was 79.3% when they used support vector machine (SVM) for classification. Lisetti and Nasoz [4] and Haag et al. [11] successfully employed ANNs in classification of emotions, valence and arousal states of subjects with over 90% classification rate. To optimally model the associated decision making system using non-linearities observed in the extracted features accurately it is required that we perform a comprehensive analysis of the machine learning paradigms available and choose the one with optimal predictive ability and sensitivity. Solutions derived for driver safety related problems using such soft-computing methodologies offer high degree of sensitivity and specificity required over other heuristic decision making approaches.Researchers at University of California, San Diego, while investigating the human centred design aspects of driver monitoring systems identified that there is a need to develop an algorithm capable of understanding the driver's intent and attention [12]. It is to be noted that if a human centric design approach is not adopted the system runs into the risk of ending up as a product that is not only unusable but also potentially dangerous. The human centric factors which should be considered while designing such driver assist systems include the driver's social environment, the country's norms, driver behaviour, etc. It can also be concluded that in such systems if the decision making modules were trained on the basis of naturalized data collected from real-time driving scenarios the above complex human centric factors may be incorporated into it. This work is a part of the BITS-LifeGuard research initiative at the Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, India which aims to enhance driver safety by designing a custom wearable computing fabric which can save loss of precious lives by the way of providing fast yet credible real-time alerts to the drivers and their coupled cars [13].In this paper, we present our analysis based on the statistical, structural and spectral features extracted from the collected GSR and PPG signals using soft computing techniques. These features have been used to model the relationships between the inferred physiological state of the subject and his stress proneness using Neural Network classifiers. The outcome of this analysis will in turn be used to train the wearable driver assistance system to identify alarmable situations online. The following are the primary contributions of the paper (i) an annotated physiological signal database from 19 Indian automotive drivers was created for stress level analysis containing relaxed and real-time driving data, (ii) 39 features (statistical, structural and spectral) were extracted and subsequently a 30 features were selected using feature selection methods, (iii) a minimal mean squared error based model was developed using artificial neural network (ANN), and (iv) a comparative analysis was performed using 7 Neural Network configurations which were trained using the selected features for stress level classification and evaluated to find the most optimal configuration for further deployment.In rest of this paper, Section 2 gives a glimpse of the techniques for physiological data acquisition, driving scenario design and corresponding labelling of stress level of drivers. Section 3 discusses the physiological signal processing methods adopted. Section 4 deals with the feature extraction routines for the collected signals and the statistical significance of features. A comparative analysis and evaluation of Neural Network classifiers towards stress level recognition has been discussed in Section 5 and results of this analysis has been presented in Section 6.We have collected data from drivers, majorly belonging to Pilani located in the semi-arid zone of Shekhawati region in the desert state of Rajasthan, India using body-mounted physiological sensors during multiple fixed route segmented on-road driving experiments [14]. Majority of the studies by researchers were based on simulated environments, but advantages of real-time data collection with respect to classifier training and accurate correlation of stressful events is required for the present application. As emphasized in the introduction, the driving environments of developed countries over developing countries like India differ significantly in road structure, driving style, the degree of adherence to traffic rules and most importantly on the emphasis on road safety. The drivers considered were predominantly male because of non-availability of female professional drivers in Pilani who consented for the study. This is partially justified due to the fact that the driver workforce of professional female drivers and their exposure to roads in India is less than 3%, which is very low [15]. The experimental protocol and the associated stress level analysis on female subjects will be incorporated upon availability in future experiments. For successful deployment of any decision making system onto a particular traffic environment, it needs to be trained using data collected from that particular environment. Therefore, we chose to train and test our algorithms by using physiological data collected from drivers practising in the intended area of deployment (in our case: Semi-Urban India). It however must be emphasized that the proposed methodology can be adapted to any country if the initial training data is representative of driver population in that particular country.In a real-time driving scenario, it is important to detect the incremental changes in the emotions as well as the fatigue and stress level of the driver. For such sensitive situations, a carefully designed multimodal sensor-compute infrastructure is required. The setup used for data acquisition for the present work (shown in Fig. 1) involved a body-worn clip-on Nonin Pulse Oximeter (Device B) for PPG and SpO2 signals, Abdominal Respiration belt (Device C) and GSR Velcro electrodes (Device D). GSR signal is an induced signal that is triggered as a result of occurrence of stressful events [16]. Morphological changes were existent during the duration of stimulus and the signal gradually decade baseline subsequently [9]. However, PPG, in contrast to GSR, is a permanent signal [16]. It exhibits versatility because of its ability to extract multiple parameters like HR, SpO2, Respiration Rate, etc. [17]. It must be noted that despite the applicability of ECG and RSP in such applications the drivers reported discomfort due to sticky nature of electrodes and pain during removal (ECG) and limited manoeuvrability due to the abdominal respiration (RSP) belt sensor. The ECG and RSP signals collected were corrupted beyond recovery by motion artefacts and ambulatory noise. Hence for the present application only GSR and PPG signals were utilized.The PPG signals were collected at a sampling frequency of 128Hz and GSR at 32Hz. PPG was further down sampled to 32Hz for inter-signal compatibility during the offline processing stage. The collected signal samples were communicated wire-line to a body worn data acquisition unit (Mind media B V's Nexus-10 device–Device E) [18]. After initial noise filtering this data was wirelessly transmitted through a Bluetooth link (IEEE 802.15.1) to an associated research workbench on a HP Compaq Tablet PC (Device A). The collected signals were displayed in run-time for the experimenter's reference using Biotrace+, a bio-feedback monitoring software.In the initial phase of our work we invited 9 consenting drivers to participate in the relaxed and driving scenario based data collection experiment; however we continued our experiments with 11 more drivers (total 20 drivers) to increase the statistical power of the subsequent analysis and stress classification procedures. However in this study only 19 drivers data is considered for analysis as we had lost some data of a driver in a particular scenario due to equipment malfunctioning. It must be noted that for a desired statistical power level of 0.75 under the anticipated effect measure of 1.0 for probability level of 90% (p<0.1); the minimum total sample size was calculated as 16 and thus the subject size considered for the present application is deemed sufficient. The data collected from these selected drivers had minimal sensor errors, motion artefacts and corrupt data segments due to an initial signal processing algorithms implemented in the Biotrace+ software. Subsequently, we also performed necessary signal processing on the PPG and GSR signals discussed in subsequent sections. The total drive time for each driver lasted for nearly 24min covering a distance approximately 11.5km. The segmented driving approach adopted involved data collection in five well defined scenarios described subsequently in this section. The timeline chart and different parameters of external driving environment including traffic density, pedestrian density, traffic congestion and pollution are presented in the timeline chart (shown in Fig. 2). Fig. 3shows data collection under pre-driving and relaxed driving scenario.Physiological data referring to the driver's initial affective state was collected for about 10min before the commencement of the drive, as shown in Fig. 3(a). In this scenario drivers were first asked to relax for few minutes before the actual data collection started. Finally the data was collected by mounting the sensors at appropriate locations. This data also acts as a baseline measure for normalizing data collected under further scenarios.This is the initial phase of driving, lasting for 8–10min, where the driver drives in an intra-university campus route (Fig. 3(b)). Due to low traffic volume and familiarity of the terrain, the drivers were usually relaxed and comfortable. However, it must be noted that initial anxiety and discomfort due to the body-worn sensor network was observed in some subjects.This refers to an off-campus drive through busy intersections in a semi-urban setting at the town of Pilani. The route was carefully chosen to include a busy market area, sandy patches, busy four-way crossings and un-tarred country roads. These, in addition to high traffic density, congestion and pollution caused a considerable build up in driver stress level. This drive lasted for about 7–9min and covered a distance of approximately 4km.Upon return to the university campus, a different route towards the experiment start point was selected. This 3–4min span of additional drive data would give us useful insights in the kind of dynamic changes exhibited by drivers during transition from a high stress to a low stress scenario.At the end of the drive, data was collected for about 5–6min for analysing the post driving effects on the driver and the consequent global stress build-up.Prior to the commencement of experiments all the drivers were made to feel comfortable by the experimenter by familiarizing the subject with the task at hand, the wearable sensing and data acquisition equipment, primer on the driving route and style and associated safety instructions. Drivers and experimenter both were available either in evening hours or morning hours. We presumed that during morning hours (8AM–11AM) the drivers will be comparatively relaxed whereas during evening hours (3PM–7PM) they will have a certain degree of stress due to several work routines. This difference was however not considered for the present study.No restrictions were levied on the prior sleep, alcohol and caffeine factors but were considered as lifestyle parameters influencing the driver's state. These factors contribute to the GSR and PPG baseline signals and their influences were however normalized out in the GSR and PPG normalizing procedures explained in Section 3.1. Following set of instructions were given to the driver:•Drivers should inform the experimenter about any kind of prior substance abuse.Drivers were instructed to handle sensors and the data acquisition equipment carefully as sudden hand movements would lead to inclusion of motion artefacts especially during the left and right movement of steering wheel.Drivers should maintain a speed between 30 and 35kmph inside the university campus (maximum permissible limit 40kmph) while during busy driving they had to maintain the speed between 40 and 45kmph.Drivers should preferably maintain a calm driving style however the experimenter has to observe his behaviour and carefully track down any instances of non-compliance to these instructions during the experiment.The experimenter seated next to driver seat and would give appropriate instructions about the driving routes to follow.Other relevant instructions whenever required.Upon complete agreement of the driver to perform the experiment, a Subject Consent Form was signed and a confidentiality statement was issued.The drivers were asked certain questions as given in Table 1to understand how they feel about the experiment and in which driving scenarios they were stressed or comfortable. Their responses were recorded in the response form which was further processed to assess the stress levels of individual scenarios. The stress levels were decided on the basis of a maximum voting scheme where the driver's were asked to rate the stress they experienced in the driving scenarios based on a 6-point Likert Semantic Scale (1- Least Stress to 6- Most Stress). The observations of the 20 drivers are tabulated in Table 2illustrating the individual fractions of responses and the scheme to decide the stress state and are tabulated. It must also be noted that a 6-level classifier would be statistically weak because of less representation of the data of each individual class; therefore a 3-class scale was derived from the 6-point scale as shown in Table 2.As per the scenario-wise stress assessment scheme illustrated in Table 2, for affective state recognition, we have classified the data collected under Pr-dr and Po-dr as Relaxed (R) affective state, under Rx-dr and the latter half of Rt-dr as Moderate (M) affective state and under By-dr and the first half of Rt-dr as Stressed (S) affective state. Further, major stress-inducing driving events like sudden brakes, sharp turns, rough road-patches, etc. were annotated simultaneously by a secondary experimenter during real-time data collection. The data collected under these scenarios was converted into a compatible data format for necessary signal processing procedures in an offline workstation using MATLAB®.To remove subject-specific physiological signal baselines and life-style dependent factors influencing it, min-max normalization has been suggested in [19] as a possible pre-processing step. The data collected was, therefore, min-max normalized (Eq. (1)) using the minima and the maxima of the physiological signals recorded in between 30 and 60s of the Pre-driving scenario (First 30s avoided as time for driver to get accustomed with the setup).(1)Signal normalized=Signal−SignalrestminSignalrestmax−SignalrestminThe normalized physiological signal prior to feature extraction are filtered and pre-processed for removal of signal noise, motion artefacts and sensor errors. Further, signal spikes and impulse noise were removed using a one-dimensional median filter of size 3. The normalized and filtered signals after this stage are further processed for extraction of physiologically relevant features and derived signals as described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3.GSR is a bio-electric physiological signal controlled by the sympathetic nervous system. It is a function of the sweat gland activity. Changes in GSR signal morphology has been associated with startle response, sudden fear, anxiety, etc. which often lead to stress under real-time driving.The GSR signal comprises of two components: phasic and tonic. The tonic component is related to an activity continued over a period of time and reflects the skin conductance level (SCL). Whereas the phasic component reflects the skin conductance response (SCR) due to a stimulus measured over a short duration of time [9]. The tonic component was extracted by low pass filtering the normalized signal using a Butterworth filter of order 3 with a cut-off frequency of 0.16Hz. The phasic component comprised of frequency components belonging to the band of 0.16Hz and 2.1Hz and were extracted using a Butter-worth band-pass filter of order 3 and was appropriately time delay corrected.It is observed that whenever ions fill the skin's sweat glands, a sudden rise in the skin conductance is recorded due to the sympathetic nervous system activity [2]. This rise was characterized using skin conductivity features calculated from the extracted phasic GSR. The calculation of the same in our work requires the algorithm to detect the response onsets and peaks. The peak detection algorithm uses the 1st and the 2nd derivatives of GSR signal calculated using Ktonas’ 7- point Lagrangian interpolation algorithm as used by Zhai et al. [20]. At the ith time instance the corresponding 1st derivative is given by Formula in Eq. (2) and the 2nd derivative by formula in Eq. (3), where the GSR signal is given by gsr and fs corresponds to the sampling frequency.(2)gsrder1[i]=gsr[i+1]−gsr[i−1]2×fs(3)gsrder2[i]=2gsr[i−3]+gsr[i−2]−2gsr[i−1]−2gsr[i]−2gsr[i+1]−2gsr[i+2]+2gsr[i+3]20×fs2In our algorithm, each GSR segment was divided into 5 sub-segments (2-s; 64 sample points) and points whose second derivatives were minimum in each sub-segment and corresponded to a zero-crossing in the 1st derivative signal were analyzed for possible peak-coordinates. In addition to this, if the GSR phasic value in the points being considered exceeded a threshold of 0.4μSiemens and if the absolute value of GSR exceeded the adaptive threshold of GSRthresh (Eq. (4)), calculated from the 10-s window, the point was classified as a peak.(4)GSRthresh=12(GSRmean+GSRmax)Furthermore, after detection of peak, the 1st point in the range of 3.2s to the left of the peak, where the GSR 1st derivative just crossed a threshold of 0.002 (close to zero-crossing) was classified as the Point of Onset. After detection of peaks the algorithm checks for multiple peaks (peaks less than 0.5s away) and eliminates them keeping only the highest one based on GSR absolute value as they are believed to be similar stimuli and stress level.PPG signal has gained acceptance as an alternative signal to the ECG signal in both the clinical and non-clinical applications due to its non-invasive property. Certain clinically significant parameters like pulse, HR and heart rate variability (HRV), etc. have been successfully obtained from the morphology of the pulsatile component of PPG signal [10,17]. The time-series of instantaneous heart rate obtained from the PPG signal is further used to derive additional spectral and statistical features relevant to human stress.The pre-processing of PPG signal involved removal using a one-dimensional median filtering with an order of 4 samples, followed by geometric reconstruction of lost peaks by sub-segment replacement using cross correlation detection method as used by Weng et al. [21]. Further, the reconstructed PPG signal is de-trended to remove any sensor base-line drifts.Extraction of instantaneous heart rate requires an adaptive detection of systolic peaks and diastolic troughs from the filtered PPG signal. Peaks are local maxima of the PPG signal and correspond to the systolic values whereas troughs are local minima and correspond to the diastolic values [10] which corresponds to zero-crossing of the 1st derivative of the PPG signal. This was followed by a multiple peak elimination setting the minimum peak-to-peak interval and trough-to-trough as 16 samples (0.5s). The extracted peak and trough coordinates are utilized further to extract PPG syntactic features as explained in Section 4.3. Further, the heart rate (HR) signal required in heart rate variability (HRV) analysis was obtained indirectly from PPG signal using techniques utilized by Linder et al. [10]. In this method, the instantaneous heart rate time series is estimated from the peak-to-peak interval as given by the formula in Eq. (5), using the consecutive peak-to-peak difference in time coordinates (digital).(5)Instantaneous HR=60×sampling rate(32Hz)Peak-to-peak coordinate differenceSince in our study, we are relying on the inherent characteristics of the features extracted due to their clinical significance and use in identifying stressful events, we extracted (a) statistical–characterizes stochastic nature of physiological signals (b) syntactic–derived from geometry of signals and provide contextual structural information and (c) transform based–derived using signal transformation techniques [22] features. Although the transform based feature extraction methods are computationally heavy, we have used them to derive heart rate based features from PPG signal as they reflect stress level. This resulted in a total of 39 features as listed in Table A.1. The table also delves into the clinical significance of the derived features.Physiological signals can be classified as random signals as there is always some degree of uncertainty involved in their occurrences. Hence their statistical characteristics in pattern recognition are of importance [23]. Six statistical features, which characterize the properties of random signals, extracted from both the GSR and PPG are shown in Table 3.The peaks and point of onset are estimated using the method explained in Section 3.2.2. These are further used to extract syntactic features characterizing the signal's morphology as described in Table 4with the corresponding mathematical formulations. The clinical significance of these features is discussed in Table A.1 [2,9,24]. Some of the features extracted from a GSR signal segment corresponding to busy driving scenario are shown in Fig. 4.The following syntactic features were extracted from each 10-s segment as shown in Table 5. The clinical significance of these features tabulated in Table A.1 was investigated by [10,21,25–27]. Fig. 5shows the syntactic features extraced during relaxed driving scenario.Both physical and mental workload related stress contributes significantly to changes in heart rate whose variability can give us useful statistical measures to measure stress. A decreasing HRV indicates abnormality in the autonomic nervous system function and is a sign of inability of a subject to react to stress-trends. It has been proven by Zhai et al. [20] that spectral features of HRV are more robust for short durations of time as compared to statistical features. Since in the present application a 10-s segment is considered, calculating spectral features in addition to time domain statistical analysis would yield more robust results.The instantaneous heart rate time series calculated from the PPG was used to calculate the heart rate power spectrum. The lomb periodogram based spectral features [2] as shown in Fig. 6, was chosen because of its robustness to missed heart beats [28].This band reflects parasympathetic (vagal) tone and fluctuations. The parasympathetic nervous system modulates heart rate effectively between the frequencies of 0–0.5Hz. Whereas the sympathetic nervous system modulates only frequencies below 0.1Hz [26]. The frequency range for HFP is 0.15–0.4Hz.This band reflects both sympathetic and parasympathetic tone. The frequency range for LFP is 0.04–0.15Hz.For short duration observations VLFP is observed to fairly represent various negative emotions, worries, rumination, etc. But ususally a long period of mesurement is required for proper analysis of the band [29]. The frequency range for VLFP is 0.003–0.04Hz.The TP is a net effect of all possible physiological parameters contributing in HR variability that can be detected in 10-s recordings, however sympathetic tone is considered as a primary contributor.It is an indicator of the balance between sympathetic and parasympathetic activity. A decrease in this ratio might indicate either increase in parasympathetic or decrease in sympathetic activity. As observed in Healey and Picard [2], increased stress causes an increase in sympathetic activity and hence the ratio.Partin et al. [29] observed that an increased mental stress condition resulted in increased HR and respiration rate. The point of maximum power in frequency range of 0.10–0.25Hz corresponds to the frequency of the respiratory cycle which is an indicator of driver mental stress caused by strenous driving tasks.For analyzing the interbeat changes in the HR and emotions like frustration, boredom, etc. [30] we have extracted time domain statistical features of HRV as shown in Table 6.After these feature extraction routines each signal segment produced an array of 39 features which constitute the feature vector for that particular time segment. The concatenated matrix (feature vector matrix) of all feature vectors extracted during the drive time was used for further analysis described in the sections below.To ensure that the features extracted represent a significant relationship for recognizing the stress-level of drivers and also establish that they just do not represent a chance population, we performed the between-scenario all-subject Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) significance test on the extracted features. The objective of the test was to compare the individual feature's statistical significance in distinguishing the individual stress levels. Table A.2 (Appendix A) shows the degrees of freedom (df), the F-value (F) and their corresponding Significance value (p-value) for all the 39 features considered in the analysis. It was observed that majority of the features (except GTD, GFDA, PPGFM and PPFTD) showed statistically significant results for the subjects included in the analysis at the significance level p<0.05. It must however be noted that this section established only the statistical significance of the features and that the final feature subset for classifier training is selected using a hybrid feature selection method discussed in Section 5.1.Several classifiers have been used in pattern recognition systems varying from decision trees (DTs), discriminant analyzers, bayesian networks (BNs), support vector machine (SVMs), artificial neural networks (ANNs), etc. It has been established that Artificial Neural Network based models closely emulate the decision making paradigm used by the human brain. It has been a preferred classifier in applications where the training features exhibit non-linear nature and the decision boundary is best modelled as a non-linear function in the feature space. ANN works reliably with noisy data and has been proven to be useful for both categorical and continuous features [31]. In our case, real-time data collected was subjected to noise, sensor errors and motion artefacts. Although necessary signal processing and filtering was undertaken, but it is possible that certain degree of noise may be present due to the dynamic nature of the data collection environment (real-time driving scenario) and close interaction with human body (body-worn physiological signal sensor systems). It is hence inferred that to handle such noisy dynamic systems with acceptable classification rate and training speed, ANNs are among the best available alternative.The stress graph (Fig. 2) of the corresponding scenarios of data acquisition enunciates qualitatively the amount of stress experienced by the driver and hence is hypothesized to reflect his affective state. The stress level faced by drivers under each of scenarios was decided on the basis of a maximum voting scheme (discussed in Table 2). Thus the data collected was categorized under Pr-dr and Po-dr as Relaxed (R) affective state, under Rx-dr and the latter half of Rt-dr as Moderate (M) affective state and under By-dr and the first half of Rt-dr as Stressed (S) affective state.A stress classification neural network aims to use an adaptive interconnection of artificial neurons, bound by a computational model, considering selected features as inputs and classifying the instance into one of the target classes: Relaxed, Moderate and Stressed. This models our classification problem into a multiclass classification problem instead of a binary class [32]. It employs a connectionist approach to compute the interconnection weights and bias parameters. The neural network architecture consists of an input layer, which takes in an input vector of selected features representing the affective state of the automotive driver, a hidden layer, introduced to model non-linearities in data and an output layer consisting of the possible outcome of the classification process, i.e. the predicted affective state of the automotive driver [33]. In the present stress-classification problem, supervised learning approach is adopted because of its compatibility in modelling and controlling dynamic systems. It has also been proven to be a good classification and prediction method for noisy data [34].It is imperative to select those features (or attributes) from a feature set that are critical and relevant to fit in a regression or classification model. The features which produce lesser mean square errors (for regression models) or misclassification rates (for classification models) satisfy the criterion for selection [34]. In this paper, we preferred feature selection methods over transformation alternates as it was observed by Kim and Andre [35] that in such an application it is important to preserve their origins of analysis domain and value, but dimensionality reduction would lead to loss of their affective relevance. We decided to use the filter and wrapper based feature selection methods for faster execution without affecting the intrinsic properties of the collected data and at the same time achieving a better recognition rate avoiding problems of overfitting [36]. The filter based feature selection method used comprises of a variance filter and an entropy filter whereas the wrapper based feature selection method was a combination of sequential forward selection (SFS) and sequential backward selection (SBS).Features with entropy lesser than 15 percentile were removed by the entropy filter. The variance filter used removed features with profile variance lower than 10 percentile. The feature vector matrix was passed through both these filters separately; the resulting feature masks were subsequently ANDed together to get a list of new feature sets. This process was repeated for all the 19 driver's data considered in this study. Features selected for all the drivers were tabulated and 26 features were picked up whose score were 70% and above out of the total 39 features.In the wrapper based approach, both the SFS and SBS feature selection approach resulted in a number of features which were again compared with the 26 features computed from filter based approach and finally we were able to select 27 features which had a score of again 70% and above. In addition to the above results to, ensure that no clinically significant feature was lost; we added an ad-hoc feature mask based on our literature survey. The final decision was taken by ORing the feature masks obtained from the above processes. This feature selection process resulted in a total of 30 features, which were used for classification, are tabulated in Table A.1.Neural network training involves selection of (a) the input, hidden and output layers in a particular architecture (b) a learning method (c) training method and (d) a stopping criterion. For the present work we evaluated 7 neural network architectures which are used in analysis of time series, prediction and classification domains. The Levenberg-Marquadt Backpropagation algorithm was selected as the learning function whereas the Gradient descent non-linear optimization search method and bias leaning function was used as the training algorithm. The stopping criterion was based on mean squared error (MSE) with a threshold of 0.05 or the least value observed during the training. The neural network architectures evaluated are divided under 2 categories viz.Neural networks with one-way connections from input to output layers. They are used in prediction and pattern recognition problems [33]. The feed-forward networks evaluated include the following:The first layer is the input layer to which the feature vector is fed. Each subsequent layer is connected to the previous layer and the next layer. The feed forward network is also capable of handling non-linear mapping problems like the affective state recognition.The MLP's fully-connected network structure enables the pattern of activation in a particular layer at each time step to influence its behaviour in the next time step. Due to inherent overlap observed between medium and high affective states data of drivers, the classifier should be capable of handling non-linearities. The MLP with sufficient number of neurons in the hidden layer is proven to be capable of training itself in any kind of non-linearly separable classification problems like the present one [33].These are similar to MLPs, but have connections from the input layer to every previous layer. These networks are trained faster because each neuron is trained independently but suffer from over fitting problems when the training data used is noisy [37]. The choice of this network for evaluation was made to achieve faster training time with acceptable classification rate.These are similar to feed forward MLPs but differ in the fact that the inputs to a node contain not only immediate outputs of previous nodes but also some previous time steps realized using tapped-delay lines. Such a network has a finite dynamic response to time series input data but suffers from a very high training time requirement [38]. These networks were chosen for evaluation to account for the latency in response to the stimuli which are observed while driving. The influence of the past observations on the present affective state of the driver can be accounted for by using the delay elements embedded in this network.These are context-aware neural networks with dynamic neurons, memory and recurrent feedback connections. It is used in time series prediction and non-linear dynamic problems. The recurrent networks evaluated include the following:Elman Networks are feed-forward networks with a recurrent layer. Such a recurrence simplifies the learning process for complicated networks because it allows the networks to remember states from the past. In addition to the hidden layer, the context layer of the network copies the output of the layer and uses it as an extra input signal in the next time step [39]. They were chosen to check if a reduced complexity in the design significantly affects the predictive ability for the present problem or not.Layer recurrent Networks are similar to feed-forward networks but each layer has a recurrent connection with a tapped delay associated with it. Such a feedback provides moving window analysis and is useful in evaluating the instance correctly because the output of such networks depend not only on the current input but also on previous states [40]. The recurrency involved in the design of such a network would enable the design of a dynamically stable stress classifier. As explained in the case of distributed time delay network in the section above, the delay elements can account for the latency in response observed, when the driver is subjected to stressful situations during the driving task.NARXNN are capable of learning to predict one time series values, given past values and the feedback inputs and also another time series called the exogenous time series. It is found to be less sensitive to long-term dependencies and maintain a good learning rate and generalization performance. Here the hidden units from previous states are considered as additional inputs to the next state [33]. The choice of this network for evaluation was made to enable faster learning rates for the present application.The neural networks configurations enunciated above utilize back propagation technique for learning. This method utilizes the gradient of error criterion with respect to weights for a given input by propagating through the networks. It is a variation of gradient search which employs the least squares criterion for optimization. An activation function in a neural network calculates the layer's output from its net input. This output is fed into subsequent layers as input [33]. The activation function used in the present application is the tan-sigmoid function (Eq. (6)). For a very high value of x, the node sends maximum excitation, i.e. 1.(6)tansig(x)=2(1−e−2x)−1;where x=combined input to the node.The complete flow of the present work from data collection, preprocessing, feature extraction till classification has been depicted in Fig. 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
