@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel center-of-mass method to measure fluid velocity with MRI

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dynamic contrast enhanced MRI is used to study diffusion–convection transport phenomena of a magnetic resonance contrast agent.We develop a non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging method to quantitatively study the distribution of drug surrogate and to measure fluid flow velocity in the region of interest.The center-of-mass points are calculated in a series of time points in order to determine fluid flow velocity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging,Center-of-mass,Quantitative MRI imaging analysis,Convective flow,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Major obstacles in effective local drug delivery to a target site include non-invasive measurement of the concentration distribution after local administration. Herein, the development of a non-invasive in vitro magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) method is described to quantitatively study the distribution of drug surrogate and to measure fluid flow velocity in the region of interest (ROI). Dynamic contrast enhanced MRI was used to study diffusion–convection transport phenomena of a magnetic resonance contrast agent, Gd-DTPA, in 1% agarose gel. The relationship between the concentration of Gd-DTPA and T1 relaxation time was determined using an inversion recovery MRI technique. The concentration distribution of Gd-DTPA images was estimated from a calibration curve relating T1 relaxation time and the concentration of Gd-DTPA. Using the estimated concentration profiles, center-of-mass points were calculated in a series of time points in order to determine fluid flow velocity, which correlated well with the real volumetric flow velocity at early time points. In this study, we developed a method to analyze MR images quantitatively and to determine fluid flow velocity through a tissue in vivo.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The primary goal of drug delivery is to administer and maintain therapeutic drug concentrations to a target site while minimizing non-target tissue drug exposure to avoid adverse side effects [1]. One approach has been local sustained drug releasing devices, which deliver therapeutics via diffusion and convection [2]. It is important to be able to non-invasively measure the in vivo concentration profiles of applied therapeutic agents in the development and evaluation of new drug delivery methods. Two conventional techniques, autoradiography and immunofluorescence, are commonly used to measure the concentration distribution of applied drugs [3,4]. However, these conventional methods cannot offer in vivo information, as animals are typically sacrificed at a number of time points following drug administration and tissues are dissected and sectioned to perform the analyses. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive imaging technique that can be used to tract the distribution of small molecules in vivo. Previous MRI studies investigated the diffusion in a polymeric system, to measure cell densities in bioreactors, and to determine the metabolite of small molecules in tissues [5–7]. Several reports have demonstrated the utility of measuring drug diffusion with MRI; however, few have also measured convection. In this study, we used a T1-weighted spin-echo MRI to determine the concentration distribution of an applied contrast agent, Gd-DTPA, in an in vitro proof of concept study. We also developed a novel center-of-mass method, to determine the convective flow velocity in a region of interest in the MIR images. MRI quantification and the center-of-mass method will be able to be applied to determine the flow velocity of the bodily fluid through an extracellular space or a cavity such as in the vitreous humor of the eye.An inversion recovery MRI technique was used to determine T1 relaxation time of a range of Gd-DTPA concentrations. The principle of inversion recovery is based on the blank model of spin dynamics. This inversion recovery experiment is typically a spin echo sequence with an additional application of a 180° radio frequency pulse prior to the initial excitation pulse. The inversion time, which is the time between the 180° pulse and the initial excitation pulse, determines the amount of T1 relaxation that occurs between the two pulses [8]. The signal intensity in an MR inversion recovery of spin echo image is approximated by [6]:(1)M=|M0×[1−(1−F)×exp(−TI/T1)−F×exp(−TR/T1)]|×exp(−TE/T2)where, M is the observed signal intensity; M0 is the magnetization in the completely relaxed voxel; F is the cosine of the flip angle; TIis the inversion time; T1 and T2 are the magnetic spin–lattice and spin–spin relaxation times; and TEis the echo time; TRis the repetition time.When TE≪T2 and TRis greater than 5×T1, the Eq. (1) can be simplified to(2)M=|M0×[1−(1−F)×exp(−TI/T1)]|Gd-DTPA transport data were generated with an MRI spin echo sequence. The signal intensity, M, resulting from a single spin echo pulse sequence can be obtained by the following equations [8]:(3)M=M0×|1−2×exp[−(TR−TE/2)T1]+exp(−TR/T1)|×exp(−TE/T2)In a T1 weighted sequence, TEis very small in relation to T2 and TR. And Eq. (3) can be simplified to be following equation:(4)M=M0×[1−exp(−TR/T1)]From Eq. (4) and known experimental MR parameters, T1 value in the voxel can be expressed as(5)T1=−TRIn[1−(M/M0)]Finally, the concentration of Gd-DTPA in the voxel was calculated from the relationship between the concentration of Gd-DTPA and its corresponding T1 relaxation time.The movement and velocity of the injected tracer, Gd-DTPA, through a gel media can be determined and calculated by tracking the center-of-mass points. We calculated the center-of-mass points of Gd-DTPA in MR images with the following equations(6)(a)Xcm=1M×∑imixi(b)Ycm=1M×∑jmjyj(c)Zcm=1M×∑kmkzkWhere M is the total mass of the system, miis a mass of Gd-DTPA per unit volume, and xi, yj, and zkare x, y, and z coordinates of each pixels from an arbitrary origin. The velocity of the center-of-mass could be calculated by the following equations:(7)Velocity=(xcm1−xcm2)2+(ycm1−ycm2)2+(zcm1−zcm2)2/timeA calibration curve relating MRI signal intensity and Gd-DTPA concentration was determined from known Gd-DTPA concentrations in 1% Trevi gel (TrevisGel™ 500 powder, Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). One weight percent gel solution was made by adding 1g of Trevi gel powder in 100ml of PBS (pH 7.4). 0.5M Gd-DTPA original solution (Magnevist®, Berlex, Richmend, CA, USA) was added to the gel solution, in order to make 1.0×10−3M, 5.0×10−4M, 2.5×10−4M, 1.0×10−4M, 5.0×10−5M, 2.5×10−5M, 1.0×10−5M, 5.0×10−6M, and 2.5×10−6M concentration solutions. The solutions were poured into 15ml plastic vials and stored at room temperature in the dark. MRI was performed with a 4.7Tesla magnet equipped with a Bruker Avance console (Bruker-biospin, Billerica, MA, USA). The standard solutions were placed in a 15cm diameter volume coil. To determine T1 relaxation value in each concentration solution, fifteen different inversion times, TI, were evaluated: 20, 30, 50, 70, 100, 200, 300, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 1200, 1500, 2000, and 2500ms. MR scanning parameters included TR/TE=6000/8.5ms with 10cm×10cm field of view (FOV) and 128×64 acquisition matrix size. Gray scale images of the standard solutions were processed using MATLAB (version 6.5, Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) and the ROI intensity average of each concentration was determined using ImageJ software (version 1.27z, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA). Intensity values of each concentration at several inversion times were regressed with the Eq. (2) to estimate T1 of each Gd-DTPA concentration (PSI-PLOT version 7.0, Poly Software international Inc.) and the relationship between the concentration of Gd-DTPA in 1% Trevi gel and T1 relaxation time was investigated by the following equation:(8)1T1=m×C+bwhere m is the molar relaxivity (slope), C is the concentration of Gd-DTPA in 1% gel, and b is the magnetic relaxation rate of the water inside 1% gel with no Gd-DTPA [6].A plastic apparatus was fabricated to study the diffusion–convection transport phenomena with Gd-DTPA in 1% Trevi gel. The model was constructed with planar surface to permit optical views through flat window. Left and right portions of the model contained recessed cavities that contained water to confirm that water flowed homogeneously through the gel. The center of the chamber was filled with 1% gel. The gel and fluid chamber were separated by 0.45μm Millipore membrane (Durapore® membrane filters, Millipore, MA, USA). One percent gel solution was poured into a diffusion–convection chamber and the water chambers were filled with distilled water. Before MRI experiment was performed, a velocity of water through the gel was established and calculated by measuring the time required for 0.1ml of fluid water. It was assumed that the pressure change for a flow of 0.1ml had no effect on the flow velocity since the meniscus in a water reservoir tube dropped very little. After steady state water flow was established, 0.1×10−3M Gd-DTPA solution was injected as narrow column of fluid in the center of the gel. The spin echo parameters used were TR/TE=200/9.0 millisecond, 10cm×10cm Field of View, and a 256×256 acquisition matrix size. MR images of the gel were acquired every 20min for 5h. All MR images developed with MATLAB from 16bit signed integer raw data. Four thousand millisecond repetition time was used to obtained the totally relaxed MR images. The center-of-mass measurements were determined at each time point to predict convective flow velocity of water through the gel in MR images. The signal intensity of Gd-DTPA distribution in gel was processed with MATLAB. An arbitrary origin was assigned and center-of-mass points at each time were determined with Eq. (6) and the velocity of Gd-DTPA movement was calculated by the Eq. (7).The variation of signal intensity of 0.001M Gd-DTPA at different inversion times is shown in Fig. 1. Using an ImageJ software, average and standard deviation of intensity values at each inversion time were determined and plotted in Fig. 2(A). Since the intensity values in MR images of negative signals are positive, the change of sign was determined by the cusp point in the relaxation time to yield the real magnitude at each intensity image. Intensity values earlier than the cusp point in Fig. 2(A) is multiplied by −1 and fitted with the Eq. (2) to calculate T1 relaxation time of each concentration of 0.001 Gd-DTPA in 1wt% gel solution was found to be 203.47±11.961 millisecond (Fig. 2(B)). With the same process of the each of 0.001M Gd-DTPA, T1 relaxation times of different Gd-DTPA concentration were determined and regressed to be T1 relaxation time (ms−1)=4.71×concentration (M)+4.26×10−4 (R2=0.986) between 1.0×10−6M and 1.0×10−3M (Fig. 2(C)).The intensity MR images, which show the distribution of injected Gd-DTPA in a gel at different time points, were developed from raw data (Fig. 3). Fig. 3(G) is the totally relaxed MR image providing M0 values in Eqs. (4) and (5). The intensity images, Fig. 3(A)–(F), were translated into T1 images using the Eq. (5) (Fig. 4(A)). Finally, Gd-DTPA concentration images (Fig. 4(B)) were obtained from T1 images with the relationship between T1 relaxation time and the concentration of Gd-DTPA. Fig. 5(A) shows the distribution of Gd-DTPA in the gel from the left edge of the gel through the injection site to the right edge of the gel. In Fig. 5(A), it is clearly seen the concentration distribution of Gd-DTPA was shifted to the right because of the convection flow of water. We estimated theoretical concentration distribution of injected Gd-DTPA with a FEMLAB software (version 3.0, Comsol, Inc., Burlington, MA, USA) with solving the following equation:∂C∂t+u∂C∂x+ν∂C∂y−D∂2C∂x2+∂2C∂y2=0where, u and v are the convective flow velocity in x and y direction, respectively. In this simulation, u and v were set to be 2.6×10−5cms−1, respectively because one direction water flow was assumed in the experiment. D means the diffusion coefficient of Gd-DTPA and was found to be 4.0×10−6cm2s−1 by comparing the simulation data to the experiment data with trial and error. Fig. 5(A) shows a reasonable match (R2=0.86) between the experimental concentration distribution and the simulation data except the injection site. In the right side of Fig. 5(A), the image shows the concentration distribution of Gd-DTPA at 3hours post injection in simulation study.Before the MRI experiment, the experiemtnal estimate of velocity by volumetric measurement was determined to be 2.62±0.160×10−5cms−1. To determine the convective flow of Gd-DTPA through the gel based on MR images, the center-of-mass points were calculated to be 2.3±0.20×10−5cms−1 for 100min (Fig. 5(B)). In Fig. 5(B), it is evident that the calculated flow velocity with the center-of-mass points decreased with time after about 100minutes post injection. We hypothesized that this decrease occurred as some portion of applied Gd-DTPA began to exit the region of interest at around 100min post injection. We did a computer simulation study with the FEMLAB software to verify the hypothesis. Diffusion coefficient and convective flow velocity were set to be 3.8×10−6cm2s −1[6] and 2.6×10−6cms−1 based on the volumetric measurement, respectively in order to make diffusion and convection same order. The fluid velocity in the simulation was estimated with the center-of-mass points and compared to the set convective flow velocity, 2.6×10−6cms−1 (Fig. 6(A)). The image at the upper right side in Fig. 6(A) shows the concentration distribution in the simulation study. The estimated velocity was found to decrease with the time same as the MRI experiment. The concentration at the right edge in the simulation study was determined (Fig. 6(B)). In this simulation, we found that the disagreement between the set convective flow velocity and the calculated flow velocity with the center-of-mass increased with the concentration at the edge.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
