@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Singularity detection in human EEG signal using wavelet leaders

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To learn the fundamental concepts about singularity and discontinuity.To imbibe the different Wavelet transform approaches WTMM, ISWM and WL.To understand the characteristics EEG signal with different noise environment.To savvy the statistical data processing, determine the sensitivity and specificity values from predicted and observed LE value.To discriminate different methods using Receiver operating characteristics curve.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Singularity,Lipschitz exponent,Wavelet transform,Wavelet maxima,Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A proliferation of signal processing community, the dynamic behavior and the singularity detection are key steps, because dynamics and singularities carry most of signal information. Wavelet zoom is very good at localization of singularities. The Lipschitz Exponent (LE) is the most popular measure of the singularity characteristics of a signal. The singularity, by mean of an LE of a function, is measured by taking a slope of a log-log plot of scale s versus wavelet transform modulus maxima (WTMM). In this paper, we measured the singularity using WTMM, Inter Scale Wavelet Maximum (ISWM) and Wavelet Leaders (WL) by adding white Gaussian noises to the human EEG signal. The statistical performances are assessed (Mean, Standard Deviation (SD), Skewness, SD/Mean, Number of singular points (NSP)) and compared by means of non-parametric hypothesis test (Mann–Whitney U-test). Highly significant differences have been found between WTMM, ISWM and WL using Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve. WL method provides good performance of singularity measure when the more prominent noise influenced the EEG signal. The result of experiments demonstrated that a Wavelet leader is more precise and robust.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The electroencephalography is a noninvasive tool for measuring the electrical activity in the brain. Singularities are signal parts in which discontinuities of some regularity occur. Dynamic behavior refers to descriptions of changes over time in signals. If the singularities and dynamics are present in the EEG signal, they provide important information about the health of the central nervous system (CNS), particularly in the human brain. In clinical aspects, detection of the singularity points in human EEG signal was commonly performed inefficiently by the doctor's eye inspection. Time and Frequency domain methods were introduced subsequently for the detection of singularities. Singularities often carry the most useful information in signals, from electrocardiogram to radar signal; the interesting information is given by transient phenomena such as peaks. In physics, it is also important to study the singularities to infer properties about the underlined physical phenomena [1–3].In 1980, the singularity was measured at the asymptotic decay of its Fourier Transform. Given a pure sinusoidal signal, the Fourier transform gives a unique frequency characterization. This method is global and provides a description of the overall regularity of a signal. However, when confronted with signals with different frequencies in two adjacent time intervals, the Fourier transform runs into a problem: it obtains several different frequencies without any knowledge of when each frequency changes or occurs (i.e. the singularities). Due to this, the Fourier transform is not well adapted for finding the location and the spatial distribution of singularities. Consequently, we need a time–frequency characterization of a signal.In 1992, Mallat and Hwang proved in [4] that by decomposing a signal into elementary building blocks that are well localized both in time and frequency, the wavelet transform can characterize the local regularity of signals. In mathematics, the regularity is usually measured with Lipschitz exponent (LE). It is a real number that can characterize the local regularity or smoothness in a signal. The definition of LE is given in [4]. This furthered and proposed to estimate the LE regularity by tracing its WTMM curves across scales inside the so-called ‘Cone of Influence’ (COI). On the other hand, a widely used method to characterize the dynamic behavior of a signal is using fractal dimensions [5]. Fractal dimensions are very useful to represent non-stationary (transient) behavior, e.g., distinguishing noise from chaos, and finding a degree of freedom of chaotic systems [6–8].The multifractal formalism, originally introduced for singular measures, to fractal signals. Even though the structure function (SF) method [9] can give some conspicuous information on the multifractality of self-affine signals, generally it does not allow a complete characterization of the distribution of singularities. In 1993, Muzy [10] proclaimed that WTMM approach does not introduce any bias in the estimate of the singularity spectrum from the direct comparison with SF approach. He pointed out that the efficiencies of the WTMM method originate from two-main ingredients; on the one hand, the partition functions are based on discrete scale-dependent summations: the skeleton of the wavelet transform defined by the local maxima of its modulus provides a practical guide to achieve a scale-adaptive partition; on the other hand, one uses sufficiently smooth and localized analyzing wavelets, with an arbitrary large enough number of vanishing moments, which makes the entire range of singularities accessible to this method, even in the presence of regular behavior in a signal.In 1995, some researchers suggested the other methods to estimate an irregular signal component from its WTMM representation [11,12]. The WTMM representation of a signal records the values and location of local maxima of its wavelet transform modulus (WTM). Although the WTMM-based algorithms give a promising performance in many aspects, the irregular sampling nature of the WTMM complicates the reconstruction process. Furthermore, the WTMM representation cannot uniquely characterize a signal. It implies that the reconstruction of signals from its WTMM may not be consistently stable [13]. However, the reconstruction method is still iterative, which leads to the high computational complexity of these kinds of approaches. LE is considered to be the maximum slope of WTMM curves in the log-log plot of scale s versus WTMM[14]. This method is derived from Theorem 4 in [4]. After that, in 1999 and 2000, some researchers used this method as a tool to measure LE and achieved some good results [14–16]. If WTMM curves influence scale space due to, for example, COI's of these singularities having common support, or the signal being contaminated by noise, the accuracies and robustness of the estimated LE by Mallat's method will be degraded in 2002 [17].In 2005, Tu introduced an improved Mallat's method in [18] by using the least median of squares regression as the objective to find constant A and Lipschitz exponent (α) of theorem 4 of [4]. This method set more accurate and robust results, but because of lacking a priori knowledge of the two variables, the algorithm highly depends on the initialization of A and α. In 2006, Abel used the asymptote slope of WTMM curve in [19]. Theoretically this is the best estimate of LE when scale goes to zero. But due to the vanishing moment property and the compact support of wavelets, most of a signal energy, after wavelet transform, is supposed to be clustered in a few wavelet coefficients, whereas noises do not. The thresholding or shrinkage on the wavelet coefficients with a proper threshold [20] can then significantly reduce the noise.In very recent findings, Jaffard et al. reported in [21,22] it indicated that an accurate multifractal analysis should be based on WL rather than on wavelet coefficients. Indeed, the former enables to estimate exactly the entire multifractal spectrum and to analyze accurately processes containing oscillating singularities when the later do not [23]. In 2007, Wendt et al. demonstrated that the use of WL instead of wavelet coefficients brings significant improvement in multifractal estimation using nonparametric hypothesis test [24].In this paper, we have reported the systematic comparison between WTMM, ISWM and WL for the detection of singularities presented in the human EEG signal. In the present work, we have used the nonparametric Mann–Whitney U-test for obtaining null distributions of test statistics and precise construction of the p-value acceptance region is analyzed and compared. The results show that, the WL instead of other two methods brings substantial improvement in singularity detection performance using Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve. The wavelet transform and its main properties are presented in Section 2.1, a theory of singularity detection with wavelets is presented in Section 2.2, a brief review of ISWM is given in Section 2.3, and WL are defined in Section 2.4. In Section 3, we have constructed a function with four singularities and compared by adding white Gaussian noises to the simulated signal. Experimental results are presented in Section 4. Discussion and conclusion are summarized in Section 5.In this section, a review the fundamental concepts about continuous wavelet transform, singularity detection with wavelet, ISWM and Wavelet Leaders is done.The continuous wavelet transform was first introduced by Grossmanm and Morlet [25]. To estimate the LE of a singularity by tracing it wavelet transforms coefficients across scales. For this purpose, the continuous wavelet transform used. The most natural way is to define a mother wavelet, ψ, which is a fixed function as the simple waveform. The mother wavelet can be any real or complex continuous function satisfying the following properties [26]:•the total area under the curve of the function is zero, i.e.,(1)∫−∞+∞ψ(t)dt=0the total area of |ψ(t)|2 is finite, i.e.,(2)∫−∞+∞ψ(t)2dt<+∞The continuous wavelet transform of a function f ∈ L2(R) with respect to the wavelet ψ is defined as(3)Wf(u,s)=∫−∞+∞f(t)1sψ*t−us⋅dtwhere ψ*denotes the complex conjugate of ψ.The wavelet ψ(t) is said to have n vanishing moments if and only if for all positive integers k<n, it satisfies(4)∫−∞+∞tkψ(t)⋅dt=0The standard Haar wavelet (db1) is defined by(5)ψ(t)=+1−10for0≤t<0.5for0.5≤t<1otherwiseA popular wavelet in practice is the nth derivation of the Gaussian function(6)ψn(t)=−dndtne−t2/2When performing the wavelet singularity analysis, the number of vanishing moments is very important, as it provides an upper bound measurement for singularity characterization [14].The wavelet theory proves that this LE can be computed from the evolution across scales of the WTMM. A function f(t) is said to be Lipschitz α, for 0≤α≤1, at a point t0, if and only if there exists a constant A such that for all points t in a neighborhood of t0(7)f(t)−f(t0)≤At−t0αThe function f(t) is uniformly Lipschitz α for any t0 ∈]a,b[and t ∈]a,b[. We say that a function is singular at t0, if it is not Lipschitz 1 and t0. If a function f(t) is Lipschitz α, for α>0, then it is continuous in t0. If f(t) is discontinuous in t0 and bounded in a neighborhood of t0, then it is Lipschitz 0 in t0. The Lipschitz regularity α0 gives an indication of the differentiability of f(t) but it is more precise. If the Lipschitz regularity α0 of f(t) satisfies n<α0<n+1, then we know that f(t) is n times differentiable at t0 but its nth derivative is singular at t0 and α0 characterize this singularity. We suppose that the ψ has a compact support, is n times continuously differentiable and is the nth derivates of a smoothing function. The Theorem 4 of [4] can be rewritten as:Theorem 1Let f be a tempered distribution whose wavelet transform is well defined over (a,b) and let u0∈ (a,b). We suppose that there exists a scale s0>0, and a constant C, such that for u ∈ (a,b) and s<s0, all the modulus maxima of |Wf(u,s)| belong to a cone defined byThen, at all points u1 ∈ (a,b), u1≠u0, f is uniformly Lipschitz n in a neighborhood of u1. Let α<n be a noninteger. The function f is Lipschitz α at u0, if and only if there exists constant A such that at each modulus maxima (u,s) in the cone defined in(9)Wf(u,s)≤Asαwhich is equivalent to(10)log2Wf(u,s)≤log2(A)+α.log2(s)Eq. (10) gives an asymptotic relation between the wavelet transform and the Lipschitz exponent (α). A lot of methods have been proposed to estimate α, hence by substituting sjand sj+1 into Eq. (11), throughout the simple derivation [27], Lipschitz exponent α can be expressed in the following form(11)α=log2Wf(u,sj+1)Wf(u,sj)log2sj+1sjIn mathematics, singularities are generally characterized by their LE's. Based on the LE value capable to discriminate the singularity is either local or global variatuions.Wavelet coefficient dependencies exist not only within but also across sub-bands. The adjacent wavelet scales are strongly correlated in general. It can be observed that small magnitude coefficients at coarser scales are more likely to yield the insignificant descendants at a finer scale. In contrast, large magnitude wavelet coefficients produced by the signal at finer scales are more likely to have significant parents at coarser scales. The Steps for the ISWM algorithm [28] are as follows:Step 1. Find all positive wavelet maximums (WMs) at fine to coarse scales from the local maxima of |Wf(u,sj)|, j=1,2,3…N.Step 2. Apply thresholding to suppress WMs that are regarded as noise. A threshold at each scale has been selected such that most of the WM associated with noise are removed while most of the WM corresponding to sharp rising edges are preserved.Step 3. Associate the local maxima rising component with WM propagation across scales. In multiscale analysis, it is represented at each scale by one WM. A fine-to-coarse scale algorithm associates the WMs across scales that correspond to the same rising component. This fine-to-coarse scale processing uses a weighting function to associate each WM at a fine scale (high-frequency) with only one WM at the next coarser scale (lower-frequency). The weighting function used is a cubic B-spline, which is similar to a Gaussian function [29], but much easier to manipulate computationally.Step 4. Calculate the propagation effect Tp,qfor all propagated WMs using (6) in [28] – the highest value indicates the propagated WM.Step 5. Compute the ISWM. Each scale consists of one or more WM. If λ is the number of WM coefficients that belong to particular WM at scale 2j, this group Gjis defined by(12)Gj={mλ=[xλ,W2jf(xλ)],λ=1…Nj}The λ wavelet coefficients are summed, i.e., ∑mλ, λ=1, 2, 3, …Nj. A similar summation is done for all the other scales and the ISWM value is the summation that has the highest value(13)ISWM=max∑jmλThe amplitude of an ISWM and the scale at which it occurs depend on the gradient and the frequency content of the associated rising edge.Step 6. Each LE value is found from the WMs along a WM line from scales s ∈[2j,2j+1]. From (10), the LE value can be estimated the following:(14)α≈log2wf(u2j+1v,2j+1)−log2wf(u2jv,2j)whereu2jvis the WM point at scale 2jassociated with the time point v of the input signal.Let us now further assume that ψ0(t) has a compact time support and let us introduce the indexing λj,k=[k2j, (k+1)2j) and the union 3λj,k=λj,k−1∪λj,k∪λj,k+1. The Wavelet Leaders LX(j,k) are defined as(15)LX(j,k)=supλ′⊂3λj,kdλ′where the supremum is taken on the discrete wavelet coefficients dX(j,k) in the time neighborhood 3λj,kover all finer scales 2j′<2j.The following proposition allows to characterize the pointwise regularity by a decay of the dX(j,k) when j→+∝.Proposition 1Let f∈L∞(Rd) and α>0. The conditionIn this work, we constructed a function with four singularities which will be used for testing the capabilities of the wavelet methods to determine the singularity.(17)f(x)=0ifx<−11e−0.75(x+0.75)+1or−1≤x<−0.51or−0.5≤x<0.50or0.5≤x<1.91−2x−1.95or1.9≤x<20or2≤x<3e−4(x−3.5)2or3≤x<40otherwiseThe sampling interval N must be small enough to measure α accurately. The sampling frequency of real time EEG signal is 500Hz. For our convenient, two second simulated data (N=1000) analyzed and db1 or Haar wavelet used due to limited number of vanishing moments. The simulated signal in Fig. 1(a) is defined by N=1000 samples. Between x=−1 and x=−0.5 f has steep gradient, at x=0.5 a discontinuity, at x=1.95 f has a sharp peak (oscillation) and a smooth maximum at x=3.5. The simulated signal f(x) with four singularities shown in Fig. 1(a).The Haar wavelet has the shortest support among all orthogonal wavelets and it has only one vanishing moment. Hence, the Haar wavelet function is used to determine the wavelet coefficients Wf(u,s) shown in Fig. 1(b). Practically, wavelet transform is a separate convolution of the signal is question with a family of functions obtained from a basic one- basic wavelet – by shifts (parameter u) and dilations (parameter s) or scaling. In Fig. 1(b) the high-amplitude wavelet coefficients are in the cone of influence of each singularity. Black, gray and white points correspond to positive, zero and negative wavelet coefficients. Singularities create large-amplitude coefficients in their cone of influence (COI). It is similar to cone shape for compact support and width of the wavelet. The largest scale 2jshould be smaller than the distance between two consecutive singularities to avoid having other singularities influence the value of Wf(u,s).The modulus maxima of the wavelet transform shown in Fig. 1(c). The absolute values of wavelet coefficients and form tree structure from top to bottom to determine the maximum value in different scales. It is a connected component of wavelet maxima line. The solid lines indicate the position of the modulus maxima in the scale – space. Moreover, the decay of the wavelet transform is bounded by the decay of these modulus maxima, and we can thus measure local uniform Lipschitz regularity from this decay. A singularity at abscissa −0.92, 0.5, 2 and 3.5 shown in Fig. 1(a) and their corresponding LE values are 2.449, 0.0047, −0.1669 and 2.3635, respectively. In particular, Dirac type of singularity not able to connect more points when the scale value is low. In Fig. 2gives the value of log2|Wf(u,s)| as a function of log2(s) along the two maxima lines that converge to the point of abscissa 3.5 and the value of u=896 and u=912. At fine scales, the slope of these two maxima line is different and is approximately equal to 0.9809 and 2.4523. The Lipschitz regularity of f(t) at 3.5 is 0.9809 which is the smallest slope of the two maxima lines. The pattern at abscissa 3.5 is smooth variation.A coarse-to-fine approach has been used to create WM line structures. Fig. 3shows a ISWM of simulated signal. Each scale have different threshold specified by low scale – higher percentile threshold and high scale – lower percentile threshold is used. The wavelet maximum with amplitude greater than the 100* β th percentile threshold at each scale is selected. Where β varies between zero and unity. The signal has been decomposed at four scales, thresholded (β) with the scale-dependent value. The ISWM algorithm, explained above, was applied. A threshold β at the coarsest scale is chosen whereby the absolute value of a local maximum point must be greater than β percent of the absolute value of the whole wavelet coefficient in the scale. In Fig. 3, there are three WM singularity points found at scale 24 using a threshold β=55% and WM lines were constructed from scale 21 to 24. These three WM lines were associated with three singularity points more prominent in the signal.The simulated function f should be bounded, so that the Wavelet Leaders are finite. Wavelet Leaders LXare calculated from the continuous wavelet coefficients dX(u,s) by taking the supremum in the time neighborhood 3λj,kover all finer scales 2j′<2j. Fig. 4shows that the decrease along scales j of the wavelet leaders correctly characteristize the Holder exponent sharp singularities. The decrease along scales j of the wavelet leaders does accurately characterize all type of singularities as in (16). In Fig. 4 in the neighrhood of x=0.5, the maxima values of |W2jf(t)| remain constant over a large range of scales. Eq. (9) implies that the Lipschitz regularity α is equal to 0 at that point, which means that this regularity is a discontinuity.The singularities in Fig. 1(a) by adding white Gaussian noises to the simulated signal in such a way that the signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) of the resultant signals vary from 40dB to 10dB shown in Fig. 5(a)–(d). We used the methods WTMM, ISWM and WL to characterize the LEs at abscissa −1.45, 0.5, 1.5 and 3.5 in different noise environment, respectively. The adopted wavelet ψ (x) is the second derivative of a Gaussian function. For all methods, we do 12 experiments and record the averages and variances of α, which are shown in Fig. 6. The SNRs vary from 40 to 10dB. The results of the method of WTMM, ISWM and WL are indicated by *, •, ♢, respectively. Each statistics was measured by 12 experiments. The horizontal lines give the values measured in clean signal. The subfigures from (a) to (d) correspond to the singularities from the first to the fourth.In all the subfigures of Fig. 6, the Wavelet Leaders method has the minimum variance and the variance of other two methods are large, especially when the SNRs are small, which means the results of the WTMM and ISWM methods will fluctuate in noise environment. This is the pivotal point for us to pursue our research for singularity detection in human EEG signal with different SNRs.Wavelet Leaders method characterize the trend of LEs in Fig. 6(a), (b) and (d) correctly. In contradiction, WTMM and ISWM methods lose the values, because the smaller the SNRs are, the larger the maxima slopes of WTMM curves are. For Fig. 6(c), the averages of all the methods almost remain invariable. This is because the White Gaussian noise is singular almost everywhere and it does litter impact on the singularity of a Dirac.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
