@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of 2D-gel images for detection of protein spots using a novel non-separable wavelet based method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A 2D gel image is modeled using the inter-scale ratio of wavelet coefficients.The image is divided into three distinct parts: spot regions, edges and background.A single threshold is enough to extract the protein spots from the 2D gel image.The proposed method provides more accurate segmentation than available methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
2D gel image,Image segmentation,Non-separable wavelet,Protein spot,Quincunx,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
2D-gel electrophoresis (2DGE) is an important technique in proteomics for analyzing the protein expressions. However, the analysis of 2DGE images is still a cumbersome and tedious task. One of the main reasons is the presence of a large amount of the inhomogeneities in the foreground and the background intensities. In this paper, we have proposed a novel approach of segmentation of the protein spots in the non separable wavelet domain. It utilizes the inter-scale relationship among enhanced wavelet coefficients, which can easily distinguish the different features of the image—the interior region of spots, the edges and the background. This technique is based on a single threshold and is independent of the gray value of the image. It copes with the inhomogeneities in the 2DGE images up to a great extent, which is helpful for finding the protein spots accurately. The artifacts are further removed using a non-threshold based method comprising a weighted Gaussian energy distribution model. Experimental results show that our method outperforms the available commercial software and previously reported works.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The 2DGE [1] is a powerful and most widely used technique in proteomics. It is used to separate out different proteins from human cells or plant tissues for their identification. In this technique, the proteins are separated in two dimensions—in the first dimension they are separated according to their isoelectric point and in the second dimension, they are separated according to their molecular weight. An important task is then to correctly analyze and interpret the image of the resulting gel. Due to nonlinearities involved in the 2DGE process, many streaks and multiple overlapping spots appear in the gel image. A gel image contains a few hundreds to few thousands of spots of varying size and intensities in an inhomogeneous background. The presence of low intensity spots, spots in exposed background and saturated spots makes the task more difficult [1–3].Several methods for analysis of 2DGE image [4–19] have been referred to in the literature. Three main important components of 2DGE image analysis are identified as: image segmentation, image registration and quantification. These components form two popular pipelines of 2DGE image analysis. One pipeline is composed of image segmentation followed by image registration. Another pipeline is image registration followed by image segmentation. For both pipelines, quantification is at the last stage after segmentation and registration. All three components have an important place in the image analysis pipeline. In this paper, we concentrate on the image segmentation part, which is the most challenging task in processing of 2DGE images.There are several segmentation approaches [4–11] to extract the protein spots from an inhomogeneous background. One of the simplest approaches is described by Cutler et al. [4] where the spot regions are formed by collecting the pixels based on their intensity value alone. It does not incorporate the spatial correlation information and therefore, fails to distinguish between the spot and the noise. The approach described by Liu et al. [5] utilizes relative pixel intensity of a spot to the background to cope with noise. The method presented by Savelonas et al. [6] utilizes adaptive histogram equalization for contrast enhancement of the gel image and applies the active contour method for segmentation. This method produces the accurate boundaries of the spots, although it still faces difficulties in segmenting the overlapped spots and faint spots. The watershed method [7] is a good method for 2D gel image segmentation, which divides the images into homogenous regions. The disadvantage of the watershed method is over-segmentation, which needs to be solved using different approaches. Kim et al. [8] combined the watershed method with stepwise thresholding to get the accurate segmentation of spots. The method still fails to segment the faint spots. The faint spots usually have lower intensity than several artifacts and many artifacts in the image have a larger size than the smallest spot. Therefore, the methods depending upon the regional intensity extreme and gray level thresholds such as the morphological method [9] either produce many artifacts or miss several faint spots. The watershed based approach described by Dos Anjos et al. [10] provides more plausible segmentation of the spots. The method is able to segment overlapping spots and produces a small number of artifacts. During our experiments, we have found that this method is less affected with the noise in comparison with other methods. Another advantage of this method is relatively easy tuning of its parameters.Recently, Nhek et al. [11] proposed a new pipeline which emphasizes pixel level statistical data analysis before image segmentation. The result of pixel level data analysis is utilized in the segmentation process, which seems to make it more robust against noise and inhomogeneities. The idea is new and needs further exploration. The different preprocessing methods are applied on the gel images to improve the results [8], although they affect the result significantly [12]. The contrast enhancement techniques and the background elimination techniques [13–15] are used as a preprocessing step, but such techniques do not take care of the spot morphology and thus, they may cause several faint spots to be left undetected. The parametric modeling of the spots has been explored [16–19] for the further refinement of the results. Since one gel image may contain hundreds to thousands of spots, the parametric modeling increases the time complexity of the segmentation method and also fails to represent all spots in the gel image.Many researchers are dependent on the commercial software packages such as Melanie 7 (Geneva Bioinformatics/GE Healthcare) [20] and Delta2D (Decodon) [21] for the gel image analysis. The output of these software packages is very much dependent upon the selection of the thresholds. Researchers first try to find out a good set of thresholds for individual gel images. Then they invest many hours to modify the results by manually editing, so that false spots can be eliminated and undetected true spots can be added. This is a very laborious, time-consuming and error-prone process.The wavelet transform [22] is a good tool for study of non-stationary signals [23]. The 2DGE image is a typical example of a non-stationary signal. Some researchers have applied the wavelet transform on the gel images for de-noising and have reported good results [13,24,25]. While 2D separable wavelets [22] can capture the singularities in three directions only (vertical, horizontal and diagonal), a non-separable wavelet [26–28] can provide more directional information. The quincunx wavelet [26] is the simplest non-separable decomposition. We have reported our initial studies on the 2DGE images using the Quincunx transform [29,30]. In our first work [29], 2DGE images are successfully de-noised in the Quincunx domain, while in subsequent work [30], spots and streaks are distinguished by characterizing their texture in the combined domain of the watershed transform and the Quincunx transform. In this work [30], the watershed transform is applied on the low resolution image and the overall result is marginally affected by it. This paper extends our work by providing a more robust and sophisticated solution for the segmentation of the 2DGE images.In this paper, we propose a novel approach of segmentation of 2DGE images in the non-separable wavelet domain. The discrimination power (DP) of each de-noised wavelet coefficient is quantitatively measured at each scale for better detection of the faint spots. The proposed inter-scale relationship among the DPs provides sufficient information to characterize and to segment the image into its distinct components: region of the spots, background and edges. The probability measure that describes the extent to which a wavelet coefficient belongs to the spot surface is calculated based upon the derived interscale relationship. A single threshold on the probability map is sufficient to extract the regions of the real spots. An energy distribution model has been used to remove the edges associated with artifacts without using any threshold. The oversaturated spots are difficult to analyze using the above method. Therefore, a separate algorithm is presented to detect all the oversaturated spots in the gray value image. Finally, the experimental results are presented to prove that our method outperforms the commercial software and available techniques.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
