@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A matched dual-tree wavelet denoising for tri-axial swallowing vibrations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The dual-tree wavelet decomposition is more time-invariant for swallowing vibrations.The dual-tree wavelet decomposition removes more noise from swallowing vibrations.A wavelet matched to swallowing vibrations improves both attributes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cervical auscultation,Wavelet denoising,Swallowing vibrations,Matched wavelets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Swallowing disorders affect thousands of patients every year. Currently utilized techniques to screen for this condition are questionably reliable and are often deployed in non-standard manners, so efforts have been put forth to generate an instrumental alternative based on cervical auscultation. These physiological signals with low signal-to-noise ratios are traditionally denoised by well-known wavelets in a discrete, single tree wavelet decomposition. We attempt to improve this widely accepted method by designing a matched wavelet for cervical auscultation signals to provide better denoising capabilities and by implementing a dual-tree complex wavelet transform to maintain time invariant properties of this filtering. We found that our matched wavelet did offer better denoising capabilities for cervical auscultation signals compared to several popular wavelets and that the dual tree complex wavelet transform did offer better time invariance when compared to the single tree structure. We conclude that this new method of denoising cervical auscultation signals could benefit applications that can spare the required computation time and complexity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dysphagia is a term that can be used to describe a number of swallowing disorders and impairments [1]. Though other techniques exist, the most widely utilized method of diagnosing swallowing disorders is the videofluoroscopic swallow study (VFSS) [1,2]. For this test, a patient is asked to swallow various foods and liquids that contain a radiopaque contrast agent while observed by a trained examiner who analyzes the kinematic X-ray data for biomechanical errors and subsequent misdirection of swallowed material [3,4]. This test is accepted as the standard diagnostic method, but it has a number of downsides. It is reliant on using a small amount of ionizing radiation, requires that the patient be able to actively participate during the exam, and assumes that the patient can travel to the examination site which could be in the same building as the patient's institutional residence or elsewhere. All of these conditions serve as potential obstacles to getting proper treatment to patients in a timely manner, thereby exposing them to prolonged risk if dysphagia is present [4–11].To provide a more accessible method of assessment, research has been put into developing a swallowing screening technique that has both high sensitivity and specificity and can be given at a patient's bedside. Cervical auscultation, which records the sounds and vibrations made by a patient's swallow with various transducers, has been proposed as one such method [12]. Performing such an exam manually, such as with a stethoscope, has demonstrated poor accuracy and reproducibility [13–15]. However, digital transducers can not only detect signals that cannot be detected through manual analysis [12], but they also allow for mathematically processing the resulting data. Research has demonstrated that processing cervical auscultation data in this manner can improve its quality and that these signals can provide valuable information about the swallowing process, thereby increasing the accuracy of this experimental assessment method [12].Swallowing vibrations are signals produced by numerous, temporally overlapping physiological events that co-occur with other non-swallowing physiological events. As a result, they tend to have relatively low signal to noise ratios. Past studies have often implemented wavelet denoising techniques in order to remove much of this unwanted data [12]. However, the standard, single tree wavelet transform is time varying. Each level of the decomposition involves down sampling the input by a factor of two and causes aliasing of the signal [16]. This means that the wavelet decomposition for one swallow may be different than that corresponding to an identical swallow that was recorded only a fraction of a second later. Though the decomposition and reconstruction filters are normally balanced so as to correct for this aliasing, denoising the signal by thresholding coefficients upsets this balance and can cause reconstruction errors. Such a situation must be accounted for, as it is impossible to precisely control the arrival time of swallowing vibration signals in a real-world situation. As a result, the single tree wavelet transform could be less effective at denoising than what may be expected while also potentially introducing new sources of errors. The dual-tree complex wavelet transform seeks to eliminate these issues caused by aliasing. In the simplest terms, it decomposes the signal with two parallel trees to create an analytical representation of the input [17]. This effectively doubles the amount of data available for analysis and allows for down sampling without aliasing [17]. This turns the wavelet decomposition into a time invariant process that maintains perfect reconstruction properties regardless of how the decomposed signal of interest is thresholded or otherwise modified [17]. While there are other methods of achieving a time-invariant denoising process, such as removing the downsampling stages entirely, the dual-tree method has a much lower computational load and does not necessarily require significant modification of the single-tree filters. Regardless, the dual-tree transform has not been previously tested with cervical auscultation data.Wavelet denoising operates by decomposing a given signal into multiple frequency bands, eliminating any coefficients that are less than a given threshold, and then reconstructing the signal based on the remaining components [16]. The signal of interest is assumed to have a spectrum that is concentrated among a few frequencies and will produce a small number of large-amplitude components through decomposition [16]. Noise, such as Gaussian white noise, is evenly spread across all frequency bands and will produce small-amplitude components at every frequency level. The effectiveness of the thresholding step depends on the difference in amplitude between the signal components and the noise components. If the wavelet used to decompose the signal is not similar to the signal of interest, its energy will be spread across a greater number of coefficients and levels when decomposed. On the other hand, a wavelet that is well matched to the signal of interest will concentrate the signal's energy into a smaller number of coefficients, thereby maximizing the difference between the signal and noise coefficients and the effectiveness of thresholding. If a wavelet is specifically designed to have characteristics that are similar to swallowing vibrations but are dis-similar to possible noise sources, it will be easier to separate the signal components from the noise with a single threshold. As a result, it should allow for superior denoising of swallowing vibration signals when compared to more popular, generalized wavelets. Previous research into cervical auscultation signals has only utilized general wavelet families, with no attempts to optimized the wavelet shape for the given signal [12].This manuscript investigates two key issues. First, we explore the dual-tree complex wavelet transform and determine if this technique is useful in the context of cervical auscultation signal analysis. We suspect that the increased time-invariance of this technique will offer better denoising properties than the often used single tree decomposition. Second, this manuscript attempts to create a wavelet specifically designed to denoise cervical auscultation signals. It is assumed that using a wavelet more closely matched to the signal of interest will allow for a greater concentration of energy in fewer wavelet levels and therefore a more effective denoising process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
