@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy system with tabu search learning for classification of motor imagery data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Combine wavelet transform and Wilcoxon statistics for EEG signal feature extraction.Introduce fuzzy standard additive model with tabu search learning for classification.Proposed tabu-FSAM method considerably dominates competitive classifiers.Tabu-FSAM outperforms the best performance reported in the BCI competition II.Proposed method can be implemented into a real-time EEG signal analysis system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wavelet transform,Wilcoxon test,EEG signal classification,Motor imagery data,BCI competition II,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces an approach to classify EEG signals using wavelet transform and a fuzzy standard additive model (FSAM) with tabu search learning mechanism. Wavelet coefficients are ranked based on statistics of the Wilcoxon test. The most informative coefficients are assembled to form a feature set that serves as inputs to the tabu-FSAM. Two benchmark datasets, named Ia and Ib, downloaded from the brain-computer interface (BCI) competition II are employed for the experiments. Classification performance is evaluated using accuracy, mutual information, Gini coefficient and F-measure. Widely-used classifiers, including feedforward neural network, support vector machine, k-nearest neighbours, ensemble learning Adaboost and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system, are also implemented for comparisons. The proposed tabu-FSAM method considerably dominates the competitive classifiers, and outperforms the best performance on the Ia and Ib datasets reported in the BCI competition II.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
BCIs are tools which use brain activity in humans or animals to activate external devices without participation of peripheral nerves and muscles. They are designed to enable a direct connection between brain and external devices. BCIs can be applied to different fields and particularly useful in the treatment of neuromuscular disorders of paralysed patients because of their ability to bypass the motor system using only brain activity (see Fig. 1). BCI allows those who are in severe movement disorders to have an alternative method for communication and control.EEG represents the bioelectrical potentials generated by the cerebral cortex nerve cells of the brain. Interpretation of the EEG signals to understand the characteristic parameters of brain electrical activity is a fundamental problem of a BCI. Building a usable and reliable BCI therefore requires an accurate and effective classification of multichannel EEG signals.There have been various techniques introduced for EEG signal classification in the literature from low-cost methods such as LDA [1–4], logistic regression [5–7], k-nearest neighbour [8–10], to computationally expensive techniques such as support vector machine [11–14], artificial neural networks [15–17], and Adaboost ensemble learning [1,18]. These methods however have a common drawback in handling the nonlinear, noisy, embedded outlier nature of EEG signal data. Consequently, fuzzy logic (FL), which has been well-known as a powerful tool for uncertainty modelling, is promoted for modelling and classifying EEG signals.Güler & Übeyli [19] designed five adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) classifiers to classify five classes of EEG signals based on the inputs derived by wavelet transform (WT). The ANFIS was constructed using backpropagation gradient descent method combined with the least squares method.An approach using ANFIS for the detection of epileptic seizure in EEG based on a set of statistical features extracted from discrete WT sub-bands is also introduced in [20]. The author showed that ANFIS has increased the credibility of the classification output through uncertainty modelling and thus it has a potential in epileptic seizure detection.Herman et al. [21,22] investigated type-2 FL systems for EEG signal classification based on features extracted by the power spectral density estimation with a sliding window strategy. Type-2 FL has demonstrated greater uncertainty handling capability and flexibility than type-1 FL and thus provided a promising potential in accounting for non-stationary long-term variability in neurophysiological data.Xu et al. [23] proposed the use of fuzzy SVM (FSVM) for classifying EEG-based left and right motor imagery with wavelet features obtained in two sub-bands beta and mu rhythms. The FSVM classifier has been shown as an effective and promising method for identifying different metal tasks from EEG signals.Recently, Yang et al. [24] in another approach utilized ANFIS classifier to distinguish electrical status epilepticus during sleep (ESES) and normal EEG signals. Permutation entropy and sample entropy of the EEG signals serve as inputs to the ANFIS models. The research highlighted ANFIS as a potential tool to classify the background EEG from ESES patients and normal control subjects.EEG signal classification in general requires a crucial investigation for a feature extraction. Autoregressive (AR) models, Fourier transform (FT), time-frequency analysis, common spatial pattern (CSP) and wavelet transform (WT) are broadly used in extracting prominent discriminant features [25]. AR, FT and conventional time-frequency methods commonly assume that EEG signal is stationary. However, this assumption is often violated in practice. Additionally, the performance of CSP method depends greatly on the frequency bands of input signals [26]. Therefore for non-stationary transient signals like EEG, WT is recommended rather than AR, FT and CSP. WT provides combined information in time-frequency domain that can enhance the performance of EEG classification [27].This paper proposes a method using WT and Wilcoxon test for EEG feature extraction. As conventional methods such as maximum variance (MV) and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test [28] has a shortcoming, the use of the Wilcoxon statistics for selecting wavelet has a potential to improve the EEG signal classification performance.The arguments of the paper are organized as follows. The next section presents fuzzy standard additive model with tabu search learning (tabu-FSAM) as a classifier. Section 3 is devoted for the main methodology that includes a feature extraction by wavelet transform with the Wilcoxon test. Experimental results are reported in Section 4, followed by concluding remarks in Section 5.The FSAM system F: Rn→Rpstores m if-then rules and can uniformly approximate continuous and bounded measurable functions in a compact domain [29,30]. Based on this approximation theorem, any choice of if-part fuzzy sets Aj⊂Rncan be employed. It also allows any choice of the then-part fuzzy sets Bj⊂Rpas the system utilizes only the centroid cjand volume Vjof Bjto calculate the output F(x) from the vector input x∈Rn.(1)Fx=Centroid∑j=1mwjajxBj=∑j=1mwjajxVjcj∑j=1mwjajxVj=∑j=1mpjxcjThe fuzzy system covers the graph of function f with m fuzzy rule patches of the form Aj×Bj⊂Rn×Rpor of the word form “If X=Ajthen X=Bj”. If-part set Aj⊂Rnhas joint set function aj: Rn→[0,1] that factors:ajx=aj1x1…ajnxn. Then-part fuzzy set Bj⊂Rphas membership function bj: Rp→[0,1] and volume (or area) Vjand centroid cj. The convex weights:(2)pjx=wjajxVj∑k=1mwjakxVkinduce the FSAM output F(x) as a convex sum of then-part set centroids.Fig. 2illustrates the parallel structure of FSAM and its state-space graph cover, which leads to an exponential rule explosion. A fuzzy system requires on the order of kn+p–1 rules to approximate a function f: Rn→Rpin a compact domain.Learning is a vital process of FSAM to construct a knowledge base that is a structure of if-then fuzzy rules. The FSAM learning process conventionally includes two basic steps: unsupervised learning for constructing if-then fuzzy rules and supervised learning for tuning rule parameters [32,33]. We propose the use of a meta-heuristic learning process, i.e. tabu search, to find the optimal if-then fuzzy rule structure for classification. Details of the learning process are presented in the following subsection.Tabu search is a meta-heuristic algorithm that was introduced by Glover [34]. It has emerged as a competent technique for solving difficult optimization problems. A main feature of tabu search is the employment of special strategies to exploit adaptive memory. Memory-based strategies allow tabu search to penetrate complexities that often confound other solving approaches. They also enable the implementation of searching procedures that are capable of exploring the solution space economically and effectively [35,36]. The following presents the tabu search pseudo code used in our methodology.Tabu search pseudo code:Similar to ordinary local or neighbourhood search, tabu search begins from an initial point (solution) and proceeds iteratively from one solution to another until a pre-set termination criterion is met. The basic principle is to avoid entrainment in cycles by restricting moves that take to previously visited points in the solution space.We apply tabu search to optimize the rule structure of FSAM system. Fuzzy rules are coded by binary digits where 1 means the rule is selected and 0 represents the case of omitting the rule. This application of tabu search becomes solving a problem where solution is a binary vector. The optimization problem is carried out with the objective that minimizes the error between the FSAM estimated outputs and real values.The proposed methodology for EEG signal classification is exhibited in Fig. 3. Fuzzy systems in general or FSAM in particular often encounters a huge challenge in computation if there are many inputs. High-dimensional data would decline the performance of FSAM. Therefore, a dimension reduction or feature extraction tool can be implemented before FSAM is executed. This is particularly important as the EEG data are often assembled in noisy and high-dimensional nature.The raw EEG signal data are divided into different channels before processing. For each channel, the WT is performed separately to extract the information contained in the signals. The wavelet coefficients are then ranked based on the Wilcoxon test statistic to select the most discriminative coefficients of each channel. In the next step, these selected coefficients are combined to produce a feature set that serves as inputs to the tabu-FSAM classifier. The following presents in detail WT and the employment of the Wilcoxon test for wavelet coefficient selection.WT represents a signal in a time-frequency fashion [37]. WT eliminates the requirement of signal stationarity that often applies to conventional methods. Once the wavelets (the mother wavelet) φ(x) is fixed, translations and dilations of the mother wavelet can be formedφx−ba,a,b∈R+×R. It is convenient to take special values for a and b as a=2−jand b=2−jk where j and k are integers. One of the simplest wavelets is the Haar wavelet, which has been found effective in various applications such as pattern recognition and image processing. Haar functions can uniformly approximate any continuous function. Dilations and translations of the function φ, which isφjkx=const⋅φ2jx−k, describe an orthogonal basis in the space of all square integrable functions, which is denoted as L2(R). Therefore any element in L2(R) may be characterized as a linear combination of these basis functions. The scaling function in Haar wavelet is simply unity on the interval [0,1] asϕx=1(0≤x<1).WT has been successfully applied to a number of problems including those of biomedical data analysis, e.g. see [38–41].We employ the four-level decomposition using Haar wavelets for feature extraction applied to processing neural signal data. Haar wavelets are chosen due to their compact support and orthogonality, which allows the discriminative features of data samples to be expressed with a few wavelet coefficients. The level four is applied as it has demonstrated the efficiency in processing neural signal presented in Quiroga et al. [28].Once the transformation is completed, a procedure to select coefficients that best separate the different classes is performed. A conventional approach to this procedure is the maximum variance (MV) criterion. MV selects coefficients (features) that have greatest variance. Quiroga et al. [28] argued that coefficients with the largest variance do not necessarily show the best discrimination among classes. Accordingly, selected coefficients should have the largest deviation from normality for the best discrimination. For this end, Quiroga et al. [28] suggested using the Lilliefors modification of a Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test for normality [42]. The test compares the cumulative distribution function of the data F(x) with that of a Gaussian distribution G(x) given a data set x. Deviation from normality is measured bymaxFx−Gx.Nevertheless, the KS test follows an unsupervised strategy that does not emphasize the difference or the discrimination of the classes. It is important to note that even in a single class, features may still present a large deviation from normality. If this context occurs, the KS test may nominate these features although they do not refer to the difference among the classes. Thus, the information used by KS test may not be appropriate to guarantee good discrimination properties of a feature passing the test. We introduce a method using the Wilcoxon test to select elite wavelet coefficients for classification. Unlike the MV or KS test, the Wilcoxon method provides information about the equality of population locations of the classes. It involves a supervised approach that takes into account class labels to separate features of different classes. The following subsection scrutinizes backgrounds of the Wilcoxon method.Wilcoxon rank sum test is equivalent to the Mann–Whitney U-test, which is a nonparametric test for equality of population locations (medians). The null hypothesis is that two populations enclose identical distribution functions whereas the alternative hypothesis refers to the case two distributions differ regarding the medians. The normality assumption regarding the differences between the two samples is not required. That is why this test is used instead of the two sample t-test in many applications when the normality assumption is concerned.The main steps of the Wilcoxon rank sum test [43,44] are summarized below. An illustrative example of the test can be referred to [43].(1)Assemble all observations of the two populations and rank them in the ascending order.The Wilcoxon statistic is calculated by the sum of all the ranks associated with the observations from the smaller group.The hypothesis decision is made based on the p-value, which is found from the Wilcoxon rank sum distribution table.In the application of the Wilcoxon test for wavelet coefficient selection, the absolute values of the standardized Wilcoxon statistics are employed to rank coefficients. Note that the Haar wavelets are orthogonal. This ensures that the higher ranking coefficients are more prominent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper introduces a method for EEG data classification using tabu-FSAM. The noisy, nonlinear and outlier-embedded nature of EEG signals is modelled proficiently by FSAM whose if-then fuzzy rule structure is optimized by the tabu search algorithm. The paper also presents an approach to supervised EEG signal feature extraction based on WT decomposition and the Wilcoxon statistics. Well-known methods such as MV and KS tests for selecting discriminative wavelet coefficients are used to examine features in an unsupervised approach without reference to the class labels. This does not guarantee the separability of the feature set. The proposed method in this study suggests using the Wilcoxon test, which performs in a supervised strategy. The Wilcoxon test separates data samples according to the class labels and select features by evaluating the population locations of the classes.Experimental results on two benchmark datasets downloaded from the BCI competition II exhibit the superiority of the Wilcoxon feature selection against the KS test approach. The tabu-FSAM designed for classification also shows great performance dominance to other comparable classifiers, including FFNN, SVM, kNN, Adaboost and ANFIS. More noticeably, the tabu-FSAM in combination with wavelets outperforms the two winning methods of the BCI competition II in both benchmark Ia and Ib datasets by 1.50% and 2.88% respectively. With regard to processing time expenses, tabu-FSAM classifier offers a computationally inexpensive approach, which requires few milliseconds to classify a single trial. High accuracy and low computational cost demonstrate the double-win efficiency of the proposed approach.As feature extraction plays an essential role in determining the classification performance, future research would investigate alternative feature extraction methods. Wavelet packet transform (WPT) is an example where it offers a richer range of possibilities for signal analysis than WT. WPT allows wavelet detail components to be decomposed to obtain its own approximation and detail components. The higher frequency components, which may store important information of the signal, therefore can be examined in the WPT. BCI behaviours may involve multiple actions that cause the classification task to be more complicated. As the present study focuses on the capability of tabu-FSAM for a binary classification, designing fuzzy systems for multi-class problems would be worth a further exploration.