@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling respiratory impedance in patients with kyphoscoliosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Applies specific signal processing techniques to impedance data from KS patients (not done before).Evaluates the nonlinear contributions in the impedance in KS patients (not done before).Delivers an index to quantify these nonlinear effects in KS patients (not done before).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Respiratory system,Recurrent anatomy,Frequency response,Ladder network,Impedance,kyphoscoliosis,Detection lines,(Non)linear analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When a nonlinear biological system is under analysis, one may employ linear and nonlinear tools. Linear tools such as fractional order lumped impedance models have not been previously employed to characterize difference between healthy volunteers and patients diagnosed with kyphoscoliosis (KS). Nonlinear tools such as detection lines from nonlinear contributions in frequency domain have also not been employed previously on KS patient data. KS is an irreversible restrictive disease, of genetic origin, which manifests by deformation of the spine and thorax. The forced oscillation technique (FOT) is a non-invasive, simple lung function test suitable for this class of patients with breathing difficulties, since it does not require any special maneuvre. In this work we show that the FOT method combined with both linear and nonlinear tools reveals important information which may be used as complementary to the standardized lung function tests (i.e. spirometry).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When extracting information from complex nonlinear biological systems, it is important to decide whether a linear or a nonlinear analysis is envisaged. The respiratory system is a complex nonlinear system, which changes properties with disease, i.e. the nonlinear behaviour may become more pronounced. A combination of both linear and nonlinear tools may be beneficial for the extraction of most information. In this work, we employ linear impedance extraction and detection of nonlinear distortions in the impedance data from patients diagnosed with kyphoscoliosis. Additionally, we employ a parametric model of fractional order which is directly linked to mechanical properties in the lungs, to identify quantitative differences between healthy volunteers and KS patients.Biological systems modelled by fractional order impedance models have received significant interest in the research community [35,7,6,22]. Initial characterizations of the lung's mechanical properties have been reported in several invasive animal studies, showing the necessity of a fractional order (FO) integral [9,10]. Recent studies led to the conclusion that a FO model outperforms most of the integer-order models for characterizing the frequency-dependence in human respiratory input impedance [11]. The major advantage of the FO models over the integer order counterpart is not only their low number of parameters, but also their intrinsic capability to characterize the viscoelastic properties and the recurrent structures of biologic materials [1,15,16,33,4].Fractional order models have been employed previously in both healthy subjects group [14] and various pathologies, such as asthma [18], Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) [17]. The respiratory impedance poses several resonant frequencies [21] and the validity of one fractional order model is restricted to the frequency range where its parameters have been identified [27]. As soon as the frequency range, in which the lung function is evaluated, changes, important variations in the frequency-dependence of the respiratory impedance may occur and the structure of the model must be revisited.Hitherto, to our knowledge, there is a lack of information on KS patients from the linear and nonlinear tools employed in this work. As such, the restrictive properties arise not from a lung parenchyma itself, but from the sub-optimal shape and anatomy of the thorax. The forced oscillation technique is a non-invasive, simple lung function test suitable for this class of patients with breathing difficulties, since it does not require any special maneuvre. In this work we show that the forced oscillation technique (FOT) combined with both linear and nonlinear tools revels important information which may be used as complementary to the standardized (spirometry) lung function tests. The only work which uses FOT in KS patients is that of Van Noord et al. [34]. There, the authors showed the ability of FOT to distinguish between various forms of restrictive and obstructive patterns.The work presented in this paper aims to provide the reader with a proof of concept on the added value of using FOT as a complementary lung function test to the standardized spirometry test. The added value is shown by means of linear non-parametric identification of the respiratory impedance, further parameterization with a FO model. The FOT data is also processed for the detection of nonlinear contributions from the lungs in the measured air-pressure.The paper is organized as follows: the methods, patients and measurement protocol are described in the next section. Third section presents the results and a fourth section discusses these results. A conclusion section summarizes the main ideas of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper applied, for the first time in literature, the fractional order impedance modelling to respiratory impedance data in patients diagnosed with kyphoscoliosis. A novel concept, that of detecting and evaluating nonlinear contributions originating from the lung parenchyma and lung structure, has also been applied to this group of patients. The results indicate that the methods have great potential to offer complementary information to the clinical practice, next to standardized lung function tests such as spirometry.