@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Increased quality of vision by innovative intraocular lens and human eye modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compare wave optical simulations of multifocal intraocular lenses in different eye models.Prototypes of bifocal and trifocal intraocular lenses were manufactured and characterized.Field tracing will become an important tool for future intraocular lens development.Vision quality depends on the eye model applied for intraocular lens design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intraocular lens,Vision quality,Human eye model,Multifocal,Field tracing,Optical simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The accommodative ability of the natural eye lens is lost when it is replaced by an artificial intraocular lens in cataract surgery. While monofocal intraocular lenses are usually intended for distance vision, multifocal lenses allow for good vision at various distances, thus enabling the patient to live without glasses. In this work, several innovative multifocal intraocular lens design concepts are analyzed in terms of vision quality. Results from simulations of these lenses in different human eye models are compared to results from in-vitro measurements. We further demonstrate how the choice of the eye model impacts intraocular lens design and we show how biometric parameters that are usually not considered in intraocular lens power calculation may influence vision quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When the crystalline lens of the human eye becomes opaque, currently the only treatment is cataract surgery involving extraction of the natural lens fibers and implantation of an intraocular lens (IOL) usually made of acrylic, silicone or poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). Cataract surgery is well-established and is generally considered effective and safe in restoring good vision. However, the majority of implanted IOLs are monofocal allowing only far vision. Thus, most cataract patients require glasses for vision in near and intermediate distances. Nowadays many patients undergo surgery long before serious vision impairment occurs, leading to an increasing demand for independence from glasses. For this reason, multifocal IOLs have been developed which provide good vision at various distances, comparable to the accommodative ability of the natural lens. Multifocal IOLs simultaneously form two or more images on the patient's retina. One of the images has, for example, objects in far distance in focus while intermediate and near objects are out of focus. Another image has near objects in focus while objects in other distances are out of focus. Although the patient's brain adapts to picking the in-focus image, the intensity of this image is reduced compared to a monofocal IOL and, further, out-of-focus portions of other images are superimposed on the focused image. Thus, usually losses in contrast sensitivity for far vision occur in exchange for improved near vision. Most multifocal IOL designs put more light into the far focus than in the near and intermediate foci [1]. This accounts for the fact that far vision light intensity cannot be easily controlled, while it is often possible to increase near vision light intensity by using additional light sources. Several multifocal IOL design concepts have been proposed, which are mainly distinguished into refractive and diffractive concepts [2]. Refractive multifocal IOLs consist of at least two surface regions with different optical powers, which can be arranged for example concentrically, in radial sections (sectors), or even in hexagonally shaped regions. Pupil dependency is one of the major disadvantages of concentrically designed refractive multifocal IOLs. Refractive concepts are characterized by the fact that diffractive effects are negligible because of the small wavelength of light compared to the surface structures of the IOL. In diffractive multifocal IOLs the diffractive effects are produced by small and closely spaced grooves cut into the IOL surface. These grooves induce phase shifts and create thereby an infinite number of foci, although the main intensity lies within the first two or three orders of diffraction. By adjusting the spacing and the shape of the grooves, the optical properties of the IOL, e.g. the intensity distribution between far, intermediate and near focus, can be altered. In diffractive IOLs the drawbacks of refractive IOL designs, i.e. pupil dependency and uncontrolled phase shifts that appear due to the necessary transition regions between zones of different refraction, are avoided. This also leads to better separation of the light intensity into distinct peaks with increased optical image quality. One disadvantage of diffractive multifocal IOLs is the intensity loss due to light deflected into higher orders of diffraction. First-generation multifocal IOLs showed in many cases glare and night-vision problems [3]. These phenomena are alleviated in new multifocal IOLs, e.g. in diffractive concepts by reducing the groove height toward the periphery of the lens (apodization). Further, this new generation of multifocal IOLs decreases the number of patients who require spectacles after IOL surgery. New multifocal IOLs often make use of hybrid diffractive/refractive designs [1]. For the optical design of new IOLs it is essential to have accurate eye models representing the anatomic and optical behavior of the human eye. These models are used to predict and/or optimize various parameters that are linked to quality of vision, e.g. the modulation transfer function (MTF) and the residual spherical aberration (SA) [4,5]. Furthermore, eye models are used for prediction of the required dioptric power of an IOL in cataract surgery, which is of high importance, as a wrongly chosen dioptric power outpaces every other known aberration in loss of visual acuity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
