@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Distance and mutual information methods for EMG feature and channel subset selection for classification of hand movements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two methods for selection of best features and channels.Selected features vary with the method.Performance was better than stat-of-art TD features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Myoelectric control,Pattern recognition,Features selection,Mahalanobis distance,Mutual information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Different approaches have been proposed to select features and channels for pattern recognition classification of myoelectric upper-limb prostheses. The goal of this work is to use deterministic methods to select the feature-channels pairs that best classify the hand postures at different limb positions. Two selection methods were tried. One is a distance-based feature selection (DFSS) that determines a separability index using the Mahalanobis distance between classes. The second method is a correlation-based feature selection (CFSS) that measures the amount of mutual information between features and classes. To evaluate the performance of these selection methods, EMG data from 10 able-bodied subjects were acquired when performing 5 hand postures at 9 different arm positions and 10 time-domain and frequency-domain features were extracted. Classification accuracy using both methods was always higher than including all the features and channels and showed slight improvement over classification using the state-of-art TD features when evaluated against limb variation. The CFSS method always used less feature-channel pairs compared to the DFSS method. Using both methods, selection of channels placed on the posterior side of the forearm was significantly higher than anterior side. Such methods could be used as fast screening filters to select features and channels that best classify different hand postures at different arm positions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The search for physiologically appropriate, yet robust and reliable strategies for controlling motorized upper limb prostheses has been and is still today one of the main challenges in the field of rehabilitation engineering. Pattern recognition (PR) algorithms applied on the surface electromyogram (EMG) of the residual muscles have been investigated for predicting the individual's intent and controlling myoelectric prostheses since the late 1960s [1]. This technique is based on the premise that humans can voluntarily activate repeatable and distinct EMG signal patterns for different motor tasks and that these patterns can be recognized by appropriate algorithm and used to send appropriate commands to the prosthesis.PR algorithms have demonstrated remarkable performance within ideal laboratory conditions [2–4]. However, their clinical viability is still unclear due to several factors that curtail their online performance in real-world scenarios. In particular, PR cannot adapt with the changes of EMG signals with time, like sweat, electrode displacement, contact impedance and fatigue [4] or with the changes of the physical setup like the variation of the limb position, the effects of weight and inertia [5–10]. The only example of clinically available PR myoelectric controller is represented by CoApt [11]. CoApt is a PR socket system and software program that serves the transhumeral and transradial amputation levels. The system consists of multiple sensors that are placed throughout a prosthetic socket. These sensors measure the strength and pattern of the muscle contractions when the user attempts the movements of the phantom arm. The patterns are stored in the PR system. The prosthesis is programed through a series of movements when the user first puts the socket on and can be reprogramed when the user feels like control is waning. To date CoApt assessed in a limited number of clinical cases in the US only.In a conventional PR system a set of features describing the signal is extracted from each of an array of EMG channels, using time windows and is used to train and test a machine learning algorithm, associated with the relative motion class [12–14]. Better classification results and lower computational costs are achieved by reducing the size of the processed features, i.e., the dimensionality of the problem.There is a general agreement that different machine learning algorithms like Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Multi-Layer Perception (MLP), perform similarly in terms of classification accuracy [15–18], however it is still an open question whether there are optimal or suboptimal features or feature sets, that decode the neural ensemble. Since Hudgins and colleagues proposed what became a widely used set of features, in 1993 [3], several new time-domain and frequency-domain features have been proposed (such as auto-regression coefficients, EMG histogram, Wilson Amplitude, Cepstrum coefficients, Wavelet decomposition coefficients, etc.). The performance of these features and of combination of features extracted from all the channels was assessed and compared [19–25] but very little work was done for searching the best features contained in each channel.To our knowledge Khushaba and colleagues [26] and Oskoei et al. [27], were the only who investigated the importance of selecting individual features from different channels. They defined this search as combined feature/channel subset selection (FSS). In both studies evolutionary computational techniques were used as search strategies (particle swarm optimization by Khushaba et al.; multi-objective genetic algorithm by Oskoei et al.,) and classification rate and/or separability indexes as the objective functions. The selected subsets of features resulted in higher classification accuracies compared to the original sets of features, without the need of preliminary user specific adjustments. In other words FSS was proven as a significant aid to pattern recognition systems. For best channel selection, both works fixed the features subset first- i.e., the selection of best features and channels were not done simultaneously. Recently, Liu et al. have proposed two similar methods for feature and channel selection (using minimum Redundancy Maximum Relevance and the Markov random field). However, the work neither compared the features selected in best subset using the two methods nor the importance of electrode locations to improve the classification accuracy [28].Based on these premises and on the promise hold, in this work we investigated whether FSS could represent a possible solution to address the so called position effect. The latter is the known degradation of the pattern recognition classification accuracy when the system is trained in one arm position and tested in another position. This degradation particularly affects intrinsic hand movements when the EMGs are collected from the residual forearm. The position effect, together with the above mentioned drawbacks severely curtail the clinical viability of physiologically appropriate pattern recognition systems (which use the muscles that would normally contribute to the function to be restored by the prosthesis) for multi-digit transradial prostheses commercially available. In this study we proposed two FSS deterministic methods, as opposed to evolutionary algorithms used in previous studies [26,27]. In particular we used a correlation-based method (CFSS) and a distance-based method (DFSS).In the CFSS method, the selection of feature/channel (hereafter F/C) is based on the amount of mutual information they represent about the motion classes. This method was used in different fields including computer networking and gene expression studies [29–31]; recently we have proposed it for classification of EMG patterns during hand movements, due to its effective selection performance and computational efficiency, especially with large number of F/Cs [32,33]. In the DFSS method the quality of a F/C is characterized based on its ability to discriminate samples of one motion class from samples of other motion classes using some measures of inter-class distance. Different measures have been used to quantify the inter-class distance such as the Fisher ratio [34,35], the Mahalanobis distance [36] and Bhattacharyya distance [37]. In this work we further explored the work by Bunderson and Kuiken [38] by using the Mahalanobis distance.The goal of this work was to compare the classification performance, the importance of features and electrode locations of the CFSS and the DFSS methods in selecting the optimum set of features and channels to classify different hand postures at different arm positions. We enrolled 10 able-bodied subjects and we recorded EMG signals from their forearms during the execution of five hand grips/postures in nine arm positions for a total of 225 repetitions. Offline, we computed 10 state of art features including time-domain features, the Wavelet Transform, and the Sample entropy. The method evaluates theF/Cs at different arm positions and selects those which are most robust against position variation which was not addressed in the previous works. Our results indeed show that FSS could be used for improving the performance of PR. Such proposed fast deterministic methods can be implemented as a subject-based approach for preselection of features and electrode placement to optimize the control myoelectric prostheses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
