@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Induced activity in EEG in response to auditory stimulation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Brain's induced response was measured in response to auditory tones and words.Power and coherence analyses were used for this purpose.Power analyses detected induced activity in response to words.Coherence analyses showed significant induced activity in response to both stimuli.The results may be of interest in studies involving hearing impaired patients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Induced response,Evoked response,EEG,Pairwise coherence,Auditory stimuli,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The response of the brain to a sensory stimulus may present itself in the electroencephalogram (EEG) as evoked and/or induced activity. While the evoked response is given by peaks and troughs in the signal, time-locked and phase-locked to the stimuli, the induced response is time- but not phase-locked, and can be considered as an increase or a decrease in the power of EEG in a specific frequency band at a specific time range with regard to the stimulus onset. The induced response does not have the same phase following successive stimuli. It is believed that cognition and perception of a stimulus present themselves primarily as the induced response in the EEG. In this paper, the induced response of the brain to auditory speech stimuli is investigated and different approaches to detect induced activity are compared. It is shown that there is an increase in theta and delta power in response to words compared to the baseline, starting around 500ms after their onset. During this time, there is also an increase in pairwise coherence between the posterior electrodes. In response to tone bursts, a change in pairwise coherence was observed in the beta band starting around 200ms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time such responses have been described using simple protocols without complex stimulus manipulations being involved. Responses in the EEG to speech rather than the more conventional tone-bursts or clicks suggests that it may be feasible to use the EEG as an objective means to demonstrate brain activation to salient real world stimuli. This would be of particular benefit in investigating access to speech in patients who are unable or unwilling to reliably respond to conventional subjective experimental protocols, such as infants.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The evoked response is phase-locked to a stimulus such that peaks and troughs occur at fixed times (latencies) following the stimuli. Coherent (ensemble) averaging can be used to enhance these responses and suppress the usually overwhelming background EEG activity which hides the response in the raw signals [1]. On the other hand, induced responses are defined as time-locked but not phase-locked brain responses to the presented stimuli. Thus, at a specific time following a stimulus, there may be an increase or decrease in the power of the signal. This increase or decrease in amplitude does not consistently involve the same phase angle in all stimulus presentations and that is why it may be cancelled out using time domain ensemble averaging. The induced response is best investigated in the frequency domain using time-frequency analysis of the signal [1].An evoked response is believed to be the result of coherent firing of neurons in response to the stimulus, whereas an induced response is thought to be related to higher order processes of the brain which are not directly related to the stimulus but are caused indirectly by nonlinear interactions of neurons following the stimulus [1]. The induced response can be linked to cognitive functions of the brain such as perception, attention, and learning [2–4] which can be considered to be higher-order processes. Different frequency bands can be affected, depending on the task being performed. The gamma band, for example, has been associated with recalling information in learning tasks [2] and was also observed in response to auditory mismatch negativity stimuli [3] while participants counted the deviant tones. Alpha band power has been found to increase in response to flicker stimuli [4] and beta power has been related to visual attention [5].The auditory induced response of the brain has been studied with specific stimulus types such as perturbed and unperturbed sequences of pure tones [6–9], repeated identical words [10], targeted words in specifically designed sentences [11], and repeating modified and unmodified sentences (changing the pitch of the last word) [12,13]. For example, the gamma band is activated in response to pure-tones with temporal perturbations [6], it is also affected when subjects are presented with different types of keywords in sentences [11], and an increase in 40Hz power has been observed in response to standard but not deviant repeating words [10]. In all these studies, specific presentation protocols were used to generate an attention or cognitive related response and aim to test quite specific hearing tasks and are not usually easy to reproduce. Whether such sophistication is necessary to find induced responses, has remained an open question. To the best of our knowledge, none of these studies has ever targeted the brain's induced response to a group of words with little restriction on their frequency or lexical content, or to repeating tone bursts, as commonly used in evoking the Auditory Late Responses (ALR). Furthermore, there is no study that may be particularly relevant to assessing hearing-impaired patient's access to speech.The brain's response to repeating pure tones has attracted much attention in audiology and has been shown to be beneficial for objective estimation of the hearing threshold [14–16]. For the purpose of finding hearing threshold, the brain response is typically analysed in the time domain focusing on the evoked response [14] to different sound levels of pure tones. Considerable research effort has gone into improving the detection rate of this response [17] for different conditions, such as in children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder [18]. However, to the best of our knowledge, little research has focused on the presence of induced responses to pure tones [6–9] and none on induced responses to repeating pure tones without manipulating the presentation protocol. This may be due to the assumption that a simple tone burst stimulus may not provide any higher order perception cues that would lead to the induced response, or because it is presumed that habituation of the brain to a repetitive sound may cause existing induced responses to vanish rapidly in repetitive stimulus presentations. Because the tone is simple and commonly used in clinical recordings, it may produce some insight into perception abilities of the participant rather than their hearing ability only, which presents itself primarily as an evoked activity. A comparison of induced responses to tone-bursts and words may also provide additional insights into the specific effect of speech.As mentioned before, there are a limited number of studies on the brain's response to normal speech such as words and sentences [10–13,19–21]. In addition, not all of these studies target the induced response but rather focus on the evoked response to these stimuli. There are some studies on patients including cochlear implant and hearing aid users [22], children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder [18], patients who have had a stroke [23], and hidden hearing loss in people who have been subjected to loud noise for too long [24]. The latter group sometimes show normal hearing thresholds when listening to pure tones but still report hearing problems in response to more complicated sounds such as words in quiet or noisy environments, i.e. they can hear the word but they do not understand it. Thus, it is important to investigate if these groups of subjects follow the perception cues in a way similar to that of normal hearing healthy subjects. Testing if their induced activity to speech is the same as normal hearing people could be a starting point for the development of new diagnostic methods.Recent publications have utilised different methods to investigate the existence and the significance of the induced response in the brain in response to various types of passive or active tasks. For example, time-frequency analyses have been carried out using Fourier Transform [25] or Wavelet Transform [11,3], normalisations have been performed using the baseline power [26–28,3] or the power of the whole time window being investigated [6], and statistical methods such as non-parametric Wilcoxon test [29], Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) tests [30], and bootstrapping [31] have been used to test the significance of the observed response.Given that it is suggested in the literature that the induced response reflects higher-order processing of auditory stimuli [1–4], the present work aims to investigate these responses following a relatively simple reproducible protocol involving repeating pure tones and lists of unrelated but commonly used words. The current study also compares different induced response detection methods. In addition to more conventional power analyses, the paper also extends previous work by using coherence analysis for the detection of induced responses to tone and word stimuli and compares the sensitivity of the two approaches. The overarching aim of this work is to improve knowledge and understanding of electrophysiological responses to auditory stimuli as well as investigating different approaches of induced response detection to move closer to objective assessment of patients’ access to speech, with a view to improve fitting hearing aids or cochlear implants in subjects who are unable or unwilling to collaborate with subjective testing.In this section, the process of recording and preprocessing the EEG data, parameter estimation, and analyses procedures are explained. It should be noted that the electrode placement and data recording protocols of tone-burst and word stimuli are different. The two different protocols are identified by “Pure-Tones (PT)” and “Words (WS)” protocols throughout the paper.Both protocols had the University of Southampton ethics approval and all subjects in both protocols voluntarily consented to take part in the experiments. Their normal hearing and middle-ear health were confirmed by pure tone audiometry (≤20dB HL in all frequencies) and tympanometry, respectively, before the start of the experiment.PT protocol: Ten normal hearing subjects (5 males and 5 females) aged 18–30 years old (27.2±2.5 years) participated in this experiment. No other exclusion criteria were applied in selecting the participants.WS protocol: Fifteen right-handed normal hearing native English speakers (8 males and 7 females) aged 18–45 years (24.9±7.4 years) participated in this study. Subjects suffering from tinnitus, ear diseases, epilepsy, or any psychiatric condition and subjects taking any neuroactive drugs were not included in the study.PT protocol: Tone bursts (1kHz) of 70ms length with 10ms linear rise/fall times were presented monaurally (right ear) to normal hearing adults 160 times at 60dB nHL, with a 1.4s inter-stimulus interval. This presentation sequence was repeated three times for each subject in the same session. The stimulus was generated at 22,050Hz sampling frequency and was presented using an Eartone 3-A insert earphone (E.A.R. Tone, Indianapolis, USA).WS protocol: 100 words (average length 540±80ms) from the Arthur Boothroyd (AB) word lists [32] – recorded by the Institute of Hearing Research, UK Medical Research Council – were selected randomly and presented to the right ear every about 2s at 62dB SPL. The only controlled parameter in these words was that they were three-phoneme words in the shape of consonant-vowel-consonant such as “ship”, “bone”, “move”, and “fan” and they were phonemically balanced, i.e. the phonemic composition was equivalent to that of everyday speech. The words were recorded by a male native English speaker and digitised at 22,050Hz. The stimulus was presented through a Sennheiser HDA200 (Sennheiser Electronic Corporation, CT, USA) headphone using Presentation® software (Neuro Behavioural Systems, California, USA).PT protocol: The EEG was recorded using a 65-channel EEG cap (Easycap, Falk Minow Services, Germany) pre-fitted with Ag/AgCl electrodes with the 10–20 system set-up. Two of these electrodes were used as ground and nose-reference electrodes. A schematic of scalp electrode locations is presented in Fig. 1a. Three more recording channels were used to record eye-blinks, ECG, and the same sound stimulus as was presented to the ear. The latter was used subsequently to find the stimulus onset and cut the signal into corresponding epochs. EEG was recorded with a sampling rate of 1000Hz using the NeuroScan4.3 software and Synamps2 amplifier (Compumedics Neuroscan, Germany) and filtered in the [0.05 100]Hz band.WS protocol: The EEG was recorded using a 66-channel EEG cap pre-fitted with Ag/AgCl electrodes with an equidistant map. Electrodes 67 and 68 were placed under the eyes to monitor eye movements and eye blinks. A schematic of scalp electrode locations is presented in Fig. 1b. Two more electrodes were used as ground and nose-reference electrodes, respectively. As the sound was presented using Presentation® software, the stimulus trigger was sent automatically and saved on the recorded EEG file. EEG was recorded with a sampling rate of 1000Hz using the NeuroScan4.3 software and Synamps2 amplifier (Compumedics Neuroscan, Germany) and filtered in the [0.05 200]Hz band at the time of the recording.The continuous data were epoched at the onset of each stimulus for both PT and WS protocols. EEG in response to tone bursts was epoched, i.e. segmented, to [−0.5 1]s with respect to the stimulus onset and in response to words this window was [−1 2]s. The time course before the onset of the stimulus was considered as the baseline condition. Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was applied to each epoched dataset and components representing stereotypical artefacts such as ECG and eye-blink were detected visually using the time-domain representation and topographical maps of components, and then were removed [33]. After reconstructing the data from the remaining components, epochs with amplitude values outside the ±100μV range in any channel were removed from further analyses. The data were again visually inspected and additional epochs with non-stereotypical artefacts (caused for example by muscle or head movements) were removed from the data. After this step, two subjects from each protocol were omitted from further computations as the number of their remaining epochs was too small compared to the remainder of the datasets, i.e. less than about 70% of their epochs were left. Note that in some of these procedures, functions from the EEGLAB toolbox [34] were employed.To obtain the power changes after the stimulus onset in the recorded EEG, for each protocol and each subject, the 256-point short time Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) of each epoch was performed over the whole epoch in 256ms windows (multiplied by a Hamming window) with a 245ms overlap. The 256ms window is centred around each time point. With a 1000-Hz sampling frequency and 256-point DFT the frequency resolution was 3.9Hz. To obtain the spectrogram of the evoked response for each dataset, the procedure of [35] was followed. Firstly, the complex DFT values of all epochs were averaged at each time-frequency point, and then the power of this averaged complex value was computed at each point to produce the Evoked Power (EP). To compute the power values of the induced response for each dataset, the power of the complex DFT value in each epoch was computed at each time-frequency point, and then the power was averaged over all epochs at each point, denominated as Total Power (TP). TP is a linear combination of the evoked and the induced power [35]. The Induced Power (IP) was obtained from IP=TP−EP at each time-frequency point.It is worth noting that we could have removed the evoked activity by subtracting the ensemble average in the time domain from each epoch. However, the adopted approach facilitates visualising the spectrogram of the evoked response and comparing it to that of the induced response. Given that the shape of evoked responses to tone bursts are documented in previous work [14–16], visualising its spectrogram can act as a quality check for methods used. Also, in the WS protocol, it was not clear from previous work if there was an induced response present, or in which frequency band the signal had to be filtered to observe an evoked response. The evoked power spectrogram helps to assess these issues.In order to compare the time-varying changes in different frequency bands, that show large changes over time and frequency, normalisation was required. Thus, at each frequency, the evoked and induced power values over time were divided by the average power over the whole epoch at that frequency. This type of normalisation brings all frequency bands into a similar range and enhances the visibility of peaks [6]. It is worth mentioning that normalisation to the baseline power was also tested with simulated data but it was observed to introduce a bias in power values after the onset and increase the false positive rate of significance tests that compared the power values after the onset with those of the baseline. One possible reason for this problem might have been the shape of the power distribution which was not normal but skewed towards zero which, in normalisation, shifted the values of power after the onset to slightly higher values compared to the baseline values. After normalisation, in the PT protocol, the spectra of the three repeated recordings (see Section 2.2) were averaged before further analyses to reduce random variations in the recordings.Normalised power was averaged over groups of electrodes marked in Fig. 1 and then, in order to reduce the number of multiple statistical tests, it was averaged within specific time-frequency windows in the spectrogram of the evoked or the induced response. These windows were selected as shown in Fig. 2. For different types of stimuli, different time widths were selected which is why time units are missing from this figure. According to the average evoked and induced responses observed for each specific stimulus, 100/200ms and 200/500ms windows were selected for evoked and induced powers for PT/WS protocols, respectively. Note that the windows do not overlap and that the onset is always the starting point of the first window after the onset and the ending point of the window before the onset. Obviously, the number of windows over time was different depending on the selected time width and the length of the epoch in each stimulus type, however, the frequency bands were kept constant.It has been shown that the evoked response to a rhythmic stimulation is easier to detect with coherence analyses (coherence with the stimulus) rather than power analyses [36,37]. This is tested in the current paper for induced activity and in response to both pure tones and word stimuli. Magnitude Squared Coherence (MSC) between two discrete signals x(k) and y(k) is a measure of linear interdependence between two signals and can be calculated from Eq. (1)[36]:(1)|γˆxy|2(f)=|∑i=1MXi*(f)Yi(f)|2∑i=1M|Xi(f)|2·∑i=1M|Yi(f)|2.where Xi(f) and Yi(f) are, respectively, the DFT of two different EEG channel segments (see Fig. 2 and the next paragraph) xiand yiwhere i is the index of an epoch, * denotes the complex conjugate, indicates the estimate, and M is the number of windows the signal has been divided into, which in the case of this study is the same as the number of epochs. The numerator of this fraction computes the cross-spectrum of the two signals and the denominator shows the auto-spectrum of each signal. So, for each segment of the data, the coherence is calculated separately.To calculate the coherence, the epoched data were first downsampled to 250Hz to reduce the computation time. Before downsampling, a 5th-order Butterworth anti-alias filter with a cut-off frequency of 100Hz was applied in the forward and reverse direction (to give zero phase). After downsampling, the ensemble average (evoked response) of EEG in each electrode was subtracted from each epoch (in the time domain) in that electrode so that we were only left with the induced response. Second, the values in each epoch were divided by the standard deviation of that epoch so that all epochs contributed to the coherence equally and to avoid the possibility of one segment with perhaps exceptionally large amplitudes dominating the estimates. Then, depending on the protocol, epochs were segmented into non-overlapping 200/500ms (for PT/WS protocol) windows using a rectangular window starting 200/500ms before the stimulus onset (as shown in Fig. 2). The two lengths were selected this way so that the results were comparable to those of the induced activity obtained from power analyses.The pairwise coherence was estimated in each time segment for all channel pairs after calculating the DFT of each segment. The number of points in the DFT was the same as the length of each segment, a frequency resolution of 2 or 5Hz was thus achieved for words and tones, respectively. The coherence was then averaged in the frequency bands shown in Fig. 2 for each channel pair; note that 0Hz was excluded from averaging in the [0 8]Hz band as coherence at 0Hz is not meaningful. Tests of significance of any change over time in these values will be described in Section 2.8. In the PT protocol, the values of coherence were averaged over the three recordings for each subject.To test the significance of power changes after the stimulus onset and thus infer the existence of the evoked or induced activity in the data, Friedman's tests were employed. For this purpose, the average spectrograms over groups of electrodes marked in Fig. 1b were calculated and the power was again averaged in each time-frequency window (as shown in Fig. 2) of the evoked or the induced spectrogram. Friedman's tests were then applied to groups of powers over time (e.g. for tone burst the five groups were [−200 0]ms, [0 200]ms, [200 400]ms, [400 600]ms, and [600 800]ms) in each frequency band. Friedman's test was thus applied five times, once for each frequency band. The number of observations in each group was the same as the number of subjects for that stimulus type. With post-hoc (Tukey's test) analysis, the groups that had powers significantly lower/higher than the baseline power were identified to have significant event-related decrease/increase in the power. Test significance was set at the 5% level.Significant coherence changes from the baseline to different segments of data after the stimulus onset would show the existence of event-related activity in those windows after the onset. As the evoked activity had been removed from the data, if a significant change was observed in any segment after the onset, it can be related to the induced activity. Since neighbouring electrodes in EEG data showed high coherence values (close to one, mainly due to the electrical conduction effects rather than neuronal activity) even without stimulus-related activity in the data, we focused on the change in the coherence over time rather than the actual coherence values between two electrodes.As for power analyses (see Section 2.7), Friedman's tests with 5% significance level were applied to coherence values of each channel pair and each frequency band separately. If a significant change over time was detected in a frequency band, post-hoc (Tukey's test) analyses were applied to find the time windows that had significantly different coherence values compared to the baseline. The post-hoc analysis was used to identify the patterns in connectivity. The significance level here was used primarily as a relative measure of significance, given that with multiple dependent tests, overall significance could not easily be determined. In order to reduce the number of potentially spurious connections identified, a 1% significance level was used at this stage. The significance value of 0.01 was chosen as a compromise: too high a value would give many false positives and confusing results, too low a value would show few connections and thus not be helpful in generating hypotheses about connectivity. Future work with more data will be required to test a smaller number of more targeted hypotheses, guided by this exploratory study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
