@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improved C-arm cardiac cone beam CT based on alternate reconstruction and segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new angiogram background suppression method based on 3D vessel segmentation is proposed in the context of sparsity regularized iterative reconstruction of coronary artery.A strategy of alternate reconstruction and segmentation is proposed to segment reconstructed vascular tree during iterative reconstruction.Several experiments are performed to quantitatively evaluate the proposed method and experimental results show that it can effectively improve the reconstruction quality of coronary artery.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
C-arm cardiac CBCT,ECG-gated reconstruction,Background suppression,Regularized iterative reconstruction,Top-hat,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sparsity regularized iterative reconstruction is an important and promising method for ECG-gated tomographic reconstruction of coronary artery during intervention treatment of cardiovascular diseases. As the reconstruction suffers from the problems of background overlay and data truncation, the background of angiogram should be well suppressed to obtain high reconstruction quality. Considering the deficiency of the commonly applied background suppression methods, this work proposes a strategy of alternate reconstruction and segmentation. During reconstruction, while the image intensity is iteratively updated, a contour is also evolved to segment the reconstructed vascular tree based on level set segmentation method. When the structure of the vascular tree is completely detected, the segmented vascular tree is re-projected to generate projection mask which is used to further reduce the projection background. Several experiments were performed to quantitatively evaluate the proposed method and the method is also compared with a state-of-the-art method. Experimental results show that the proposed strategy could effectively improve the reconstruction quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) gravely jeopardizes the health of human. C-arm based percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is a common procedure for the diagnosis and treatment of CVD. Though still considered as the standard imaging modality for PCI, 2D angiography has many limitations due to the projection characteristic [1]. Therefore, 3D coronary visualization has received a lot of attentions because it can provide intuitive 3D vascular morphology that has great clinical value [2,3]. However, due to the complex motion of the vessels, accurate 3D reconstruction of coronary vessels still remains a challenge [4,5].ECG-gated reconstruction of coronary artery is an important method for 3D coronary visualization. A sequence of projections (angiograms) are acquired while the C-arm rotates around the patient along a circular short-scan trajectory (typically 180–220°) and are sorted into different cardiac phases according to the simultaneously recorded ECG signal. At optimally selected cardiac phase with least vessel motion, only projections near the target phase are used for reconstruction. According to the typical protocol of modern C-arms, only 5–10 projections are available if nearest-neighbor gating is used to minimize the motion artifacts [6]. Such a small number of projections lead to severe angular under-sampling which renders the standard reconstruction methods, such as FDK [7] and SART [8], unable to generate satisfactory images. To address this problem, new imaging protocol involving multi-sweeping or/and long acquisition time has been proposed to acquire more projections for each phase [4,9]. But further investigation and improvement are needed before these protocols become available for clinical using. Motion estimation and compensation is another way to improve the reconstruction quality. In this method, the motion of coronary artery is firstly estimated by means of some kinds of registration [10] and then compensated in the reconstruction process using motion-compensated methods [11,12]. However, most of these methods require a gated reconstruction of 3D image [10,13] or 3D vessel centerlines [14] which are used as the reference for registration. The quality of the gated reconstruction has great impact on the accuracy of the estimated motion.Prior knowledge regularized iterative reconstruction is another promising method for accurate 3D reconstruction of coronary artery. The reconstruction process is embedded in the solving of an optimization problem which is formulated by combining the data fidelity item and prior knowledge of the image. Many kinds of prior knowledge have been used for the problem of coronary reconstruction, including the sparsity regularization [6,15], piecewise constant/smoothness [16,17], prior image constraint [4], the joint spatial–temporal constraint [18], etc. Among these methods, sparsity regularized methods have shown promising results and been investigated in clinical context [1].Due to the problem of background overlay and data truncation, the quality of sparsity regularized methods greatly depends on the good suppression of the angiogram background. Morphological top-hat filter is widely applied because it is simple and can be performed automatically [6,19,20]. However, because of the complexity of image context, the size of structure elements are commonly chosen to be substantially larger than the expected vessel size to avoid damaging the 2D vascular tree, especially the overlapped region of vessel branches. Therefore, top-hat based methods can only alleviate the problem to a certain extent and the reconstruction quality is degraded by the residual background. Other methods have been proposed to totally remove the angiogram background based on the segmentation of vascular trees in 2D angiograms before reconstruction [14,21]. Due to the complex background and diverse appearance of the vessels, automatic segmentation of 2D vascular tree is very difficult and manual assistance is commonly needed, which is not desired for the clinical operation of PCI.In this work, we propose a strategy of alternate reconstruction and segmentation to address the problem of residual background in the context of sparsity regularized iterative reconstruction [6]. The sparsity regularized reconstruction method is first described in Section 2. Then the proposed strategy is discussed in detail in Section 3. In Section 4, the performance of the proposed method is quantitatively evaluated. Discussion and conclusion are presented in Section 5.In iterative reconstruction methods, the image reconstruction is commonly formulated as the problem of solving a linear system of equations Ax=b, where x∈RNis the image that needs to be reconstructed and b∈RMis the measured projection image stored in vector. The system matrix A∈RM×Nmodels the cone beam imaging process of the projections. For ECG gated reconstruction of coronary vessels, the number of projections can be used is limited, typically 5–10 projections if the nearest-neighbor gating is used [6]. So the equation number M is much less than the number of unknowns. The linear system is very underdetermined and has infinite number of possible solutions. Appropriate constraints need to be imposed to obtain the solution with the best morphology of coronary arteries.Considering the image of coronary artery, the vessels are much brighter than surrounding tissues due to the existence of contrast agent and only occupy a small fraction of entire image. Therefore the image can be thought of being sparse if the background is well suppressed. Here an image is called to be sparse if the number of nonzero voxels is very small compared to the total number of voxels. Based on this prior knowledge, Meihua [15] proposed an iterative reconstruction method based on L1 regularization:(1)arg minx∈Rnx1s.t.x≥0,Ax=bwhere ||x||1 is the L1 norm of the image defined as the sum of absolute value of all image voxels. By perturbing the linear program to a quadratic program, the solution of the problem Eq. (1) was found by solving its dual problem using a row-action type iterative algorithm. Afterwards, Hansis [6] applied this method to ECG-gated reconstruction of coronary artery and also proposed several variations with parallel updates of the image. High-quality 3D image of coronary artery were obtained and the clinical usefulness of the method had also been investigated [1]. Here we focus on one of the variations, the simultaneous thresholded ART (START), as it has a better performance than other variations [6]. The following is the main update formula of START:(2)χjk+1=χjk+α∑imaij((bi−∑l=1nailH(χlk)χlk)/(max(Cmin,∑l=1nailH(χlk))))∑i=1maijwhere χ is the auxiliary variable really updated and the reconstructed image x is obtained by setting the negative elements of χ to zero; aijis the element of the system matrix A; Cmin is a user predefined variable to avoid numeric instability of dividing small real number; H(·) is the Heaviside function:(H(x))i=0xi<01xi≥0Compared with conventional un-regularized reconstruction methods, better result has been acquired by START method. However, due to the aforementioned issue of angiogram background, the performance of START is degraded by the residual background. Therefore, it is desired to develop better automatic background suppression method to improve reconstruction quality.During START iterations, as shown in Fig. 1, the structure of the vascular tree is gradually built up. Afterwards, the intensity consistency and the morphological detail of the vessel are further improved but more background artifacts are also reconstructed because of the residue angiogram background. Based on this observation, we propose a strategy of alternate reconstruction and segmentation to improve reconstruction quality. The basic idea is to track the formation of the vascular tree using active contour method and use the segmented 3D vessels for further background suppression. Through analysis of the volume change of the segmented vascular tree, we detect the iteration step at which the main structure of vascular tree have been reconstructed and perform the background suppression. Then, the reconstruction is continued using the refined angiograms. Finally, better reconstruction quality could be obtained.Compared with the segmentation of 2D vascular trees before reconstruction [14,21], segmentation of 3D vascular tree is much easier as the image background is simpler than that of 2D angiogram. Furthermore, the connectedness of the vascular tree can be also used to refine the segmentation. For example, false-positive connected components with small volume can be easily recognized and removed. Active contour methods have been widely used for 3D vessel segmentation and show promising results [22]. In this work, the evolution of the vascular contour is embedded in the reconstruction iterations. Because of the incremental formation of the vascular tree, previous segmentation provides a good initialization and only a few contour evolution iterations are required to recover the vessel increment at each step. Therefore, high efficiency and robustness can be expected for this alternate reconstruction and segmentation strategy.According to previous discussions, the following algorithm (Fig. 2) is proposed for improving the coronary reconstruction based on alternate segmentation and reconstruction. The method is denoted as STARTAS in this paper, standing for START with alternate segmentation. Next, each step of the method will be discussed according to the operation sequence.At step 1, the angiograms are processed by top-hat filter before reconstruction just as START [1,6]. Then, the reconstruction image is updated according to Eq. (2) using the top-hat filtered projections b at step 2.At step 3, we segment the reconstructed vascular tree by evolving the vessel contour Φ base on the region-based active contour method [23,24]. The contour is evolved to minimize the following functional(3)E(Φ)=λ1∫(I−uobj)2H(Φ)dΩ+λ2∫(I−ubkg)2(1−H(Φ))dΩ+α∫H(Φ)dΩ+β∫|∇H(Φ)|dΩwhere Φ is the implicit level set function in which the vessel contour is embedded. Φ(x)>0 and Φ(x)<0 represent the region inside and outside the vessel contour respectively, and Φ(x)=0 the vessel contour itself. H(Φ) is the Heaviside function of Φ. ubkgand uobjcomputed as(4)ubkg=∫ΩI(Ω)(1−H(Ω))dΩ∫Ω(1−H(Ω))dΩ;uobj=∫ΩI(Ω)H(Ω)dΩ∫ΩH(Ω)dΩare the mean intensity inside and outside the segmented contour at each iteration. In Eq. (3), the first two terms are the sum of squared intensity difference between image intensity at each position and the mean intensity inside and outside the contour. They act as the global binary fitting energy to separate an image into two regions of constant image intensities, the vessel and the background in this case. λ1 and λ2 are the weights of the global binary fitting energy for vessel and background respectively. Commonly, the same weight is used for these two energies. The third and fourth terms are regulations to constrain the volume and the area of the closed contour respectively, where the area regularization can also be represented as ∫δ(Φ)|∇Φ|dΩ using the Dirac function δ(Φ) defined as the derivative of the Heaviside function H(Φ). α and β are the weights for the volume and area constraints respectively. According to the theory of calculus of variation, the minimizer of the functional E(Φ) should satisfy the following Euler–Lagrange equation:LE(Φ)=δ(Φ)λ1(I−uobj)2−λ2(I−ubkg)2+α−βdiv∇Φ|∇Φ|=0wherediv(∇Φ/|∇Φ|)represent the curvature of level surface at every point, and the minimizer can be computed using the following gradient descend iteration:(5)Φk+1=−∇tLE(Φk)=∇t|∇Φk|λ2(I−ubkg)2−λ1(I−uobj)2−α+βdiv∇Φk|∇Φk|where ∇t is the time step for each iteration and set to 1 in this work, and δ(Φk) is replaced with |∇Φk| by scaling [24]. At each iteration, ubkgand uobjare computed according to Eq. (4) using current level set functional Φk.The vessel contour Φ is iteratively updated according to Eq. (5) until the currently reconstructed vascular tree is fully recovered. The convergence is testified by measuring the volume relative increase (VRI) of the segmented vasculature tree at step 4. VRI is defined asVRI(v1,v2)=v1−v2v2×100%where v1 and v2 are the vessel volume at current and previous iteration, and the volume is computed by counting the number of non-zero voxels. We stop the contour evolution when VRI is smaller than a predefined threshold VRIt1. Besides, as the vascular tree will be updated in the next reconstruction iteration and the contour evolution can be continued using current segmentation as initialization, there is no need to spend too much time on contour evolution in one segmentation iteration. Therefore, though the contour evolution can converge according to the convergence property of region-based active contour method [23,24], a limit is also imposed on the maximum iteration number to stop the contour evolution in some extreme cases and is set to 10 in this work.At step 5, we check the completeness of the vascular tree after post-processing the segmentation to decide whether or not to perform background reduction. First, the binary segmentation is filtered by 3D morphological dilation to connect the possible gaps of the vascular tree, using spherical structure element with a radius of 2 voxels. Next the segmentation is further improved by removing the isolated connected components with small volume (volume<Vt), where Vtis determined by calculating the Otsu threshold of the volumes of all connected components. Then the completeness of the vascular tree is testified using the same VRI metric discussed above. We assumed that the main structure of vascular tree has been completely built if the VRI between the post-processed segmentations of previous and current reconstruction iterations is smaller than the predefined threshold VRIt2. One thing needs to be noted is that the binary segmentation of vascular tree used at steps 4 and 5 is obtained by thresholding the level set function (Φ≥0). The post-processing only affects the binary segmentation. Throughout the whole reconstruction process, the level set function Φ is only updated according to the gradient descent flow Eq. (5).If the reconstructed vascular tree is detected to be complete, the residual background of the angiograms is further suppressed at step 7. The segmented vessels are re-projected to generate projection mask at each projection angle. A pixel is set to 1 if the path connecting the pixel and X-ray source passes through the segmented vascular tree. Otherwise, the pixel is set 0. Then, the angiograms are modified by setting the value of pixels outside the mask to zero. The modified projections are used in the following reconstruction iterations (step 8). When generating projection masks, the dilated segmentation is used to ensure that the whole vessel structure is retained for reconstruction. Though the residual background adjacent to vessel cannot be removed in this way, the reconstruction quality can still be greatly improved, as shown in the experiments.At steps 6 and 9, the stop condition of the whole reconstruction process is checked. The reconstruction could be stopped when the image update between two iterations ||xk+1−xk|| is sufficiently small or a certain number of iterations are reached. If the reconstructed vascular tree does not become complete before the stop condition is met, the whole algorithm will also be stopped without background suppression. In this case, the reconstruction result of our method would be the same as that of START.In this section, the performance of the STARTAS is evaluated using the 4D XCAT [25] phantom. This phantom contains anatomy information derived from real CT/MRI datasets, which allows the simulation of realistic datasets for cardiac C-arm CT [26]. Projections are simulated using cone-beam imaging geometry with source to detector distance (SDD) of 150cm and source to axis distance (SAD) of 50cm. The projection has a dimension of 512×512 pixels with an isotropic resolution of 0.5mm/pixel. Poisson noise is also added to the projection to simulate X-ray quantum noise and the incident photon number is set to 1e5 [27]. The reconstruction volume has a dimension of 256×256×220 voxels with isotropic resolution of 0.5mm/voxel. Fig. 3(a) shows the 3D phantom with enhanced coronary arteries, where the attenuation coefficient of vessels is set to 0.05mm3/gm. Fig. 3 (b) shows the surface model of coronary vessels and extracted centerlines which will be used to evaluate reconstruction quality.The quality of the reconstruction was quantitatively evaluated using the maximum mean overlap (MMO) [26] and relative radius error (RRE) [6,20] metrics. MMO was recommended by Rohkohl [26] to evaluate the overal morphological accuracy of reconstructed vascularture and was defined as the maximum mean overlap between binary ground truth and all possible threshold segmentation of the reconstructed image. RRE dedicates to the accuracy of vessel radius which is of great clinical values in PCI. At predetermined centerline points pi(as shown in Fig. 2(b)), the profiles of attenuation coefficient were extracted along 16 equally spaced directions perpendicular to the local vessel direction. For each profile, we calculated the distance ri,kat which the attenuation coefficient dropped to half the value of the centerline point. The mean value of 16 distances was determined as the radius at centerline point pi. Then, the RRE is calculated as:RRE=1Np∑i=1Np|ritrue−rirecon|ritruewhere Np=400 is the number of centerline points;ritrueandrireconare the radius calculated from the ground truth and the reconstructed image respectively.The method was implemented in MATLAB and run on a personal laptop with Intel i5-3210 CPU. And an accurate but compute-extensive forward/backward projection algorithm based on separable footprint convolution was used [28].Several parameters are involved in the proposed method. At first, the shape and size of the structuring element are two important factors affecting the background reduction effect for top-hat filter. In this work, circle structuring element is used as it can better accommodate varying appearance of vessels than other shapes [29]. The radius of the structuring element is selected by comparing the reconstruction quality of START method using different radiuses, and is set to 15 pixels.The α and β in the level set method control the weight of volume and area constraints. As these two constraints have similar effects on segmentation, the volume constraint is commonly omitted. β takes the role of the scale parameter: using small β can catch objects of all scales, while large β to only segment large objects or objects forming by grouping [23]. In this work, we try to segment the whole vascular tree. If we omit the area and volume constraints, we are able to segment objects of all scales and thus avoid the possibility of missing any parts of the vascular tree because of the area or volume constraints. As a side effect, more irrelevant artifacts of small size will also be falsely segmented. But most of these false segmentation can be removed by the post-processing procedure performed before background suppression. Therefore, it is appropriate to omit the area and volume constraints by setting α and β to zero. As we try to reconstruct vessel attenuation coefficient, the intensity of the image is very small, with the maximum being 0.05. Large λ1 and λ2 are needed to efficiently segment the vessels. Through experiments, we found it works well to set both λ1 and λ2 to 1e4.As the vascular tree is gradually built up during reconstruction, only a few iterations of contour evolution suffice to recover the vessel increment at each reconstruction step (steps 3 and 4 in Fig. 2). By looking into the reconstruction process, we found that the volume relative increase could reach ∼2% in the first three iterations in most cases. Therefore, in this work, we set the threshold for step 4 as VRIt1=2%. Fig. 4shows the plotting of VRI which is checked to verify the convergence of the segmentation at step 5 when reconstructing from different numbers of projections. Similar trends of change are observed in all cases and VRI is small than 3% (the black dash line in Fig. 4) after convergence. Therefore, VRIt2 is set to 3% in this work.The parameters associated with START are selected according to [6] and the same parameters are used in STARTAS. The whole reconstruction process is stopped when the total number of reconstruction iterations (the sum of the number of iterations before and after background suppression) reaches 20.Fig. 5shows the data fidelity error ||Axk−b||2 and L0 norm of the reconstructed image at each iteration when reconstructing from 5 projections. L0 norm is defined as the number of non-zero voxels and is the real metric for measuring the image sparsity. But it is usually replaced by the sparsity-inducing L1 norm in the optimization methods as it is very difficult to be optimized. The segmentation of the vascular tree converges at the 11th iteration when the background suppression is performed. Due to the suppression of angiogram background, the data fidelity error drops immediately. However, the L0 norm begins to decrease later, at the 13th iteration, because it still needs a few more iterations to compensate the already-reconstructed 3D background artifacts. On the contrary, the L0 norm continues to increase with START because of the increasing 3D background artifacts. The background artifacts not only hinder visual inspection but also degrade the accuracy of vessel size.Fig. 6(b–d) shows one of the original projections, the same projection after top-hat filtering and further background suppression. For reference, the ideal vessel projection without background (not available in clinical practice) is also shown in Fig. 6(a). As shown in Fig. 6(d), the proposed method can remove most of the irrelevant background while retain the whole structure of the vascular tree. But, it should be noted that our method cannot avoid the damages to vessel morphology caused by the top-hat filter (indicated by the red arrow in Fig. 6(c) and (d)) and the backgrounds adjacent to vessel remain due to the dilation of segmented vascular tree. Even so, the reconstruction quality can be greatly improved. Fig. 7shows the volume rendering of the reconstructed image using the two methods. Compared with the result of START (Fig. 7(a)), the result of STARTAS contains much fewer background artifacts and the accuracy of vessel size is also improved as shown in the following.Fig. 8shows the MMO and RRE for reconstructed images of START and STARTAS using five to ten projections. Generally, better image could be acquired when reconstructing using more projections. But the reconstruction quality also depends on the selection of projection angles [15], which accounts for the fluctuation of the two metrics. In this work, the projections are evenly spaced within a 0–220°C-arm rotation and the projection angles are selected according to the following strategy:angi=orbit_start+i×220Np,i=0,1,…,Np−1where angiis the projection angle in degree; Npis the number of projections used for reconstruction; orbit_start is the angle of the first projection. For the test shown in Fig. 8, the orbit_start is fixed to 0°. Compare with START, the proposed method consistently performs better, with larger MMO value and smaller RRE value. Among all these experiments, the average number of iterations for active contour evolution inside each reconstruction iteration is 2.5. And the background suppression is performed at around the 10th iteration. As projection angles have effect on reconstruction quality, we also compared the two methods under different selections of projection angles. Fig. 9shows the MMO and RRE when the orbit_start is set to 0–20° every 5° using seven projections. We can see that our method also consistently performs better than START. Due to the random characteristic of noise added to the projections, the reconstruction results vary a little even using the same number of projections with the same gantry angles.During background suppression, the information outside the projection mask is erased and it is possible that some parts of the vascular tree are missed due to the errors of the suppression. To investigate this, we check the completeness of the vascular tree by computing the following measure at each projection angle:C=Area(BPtrue∩BPmask)Area(BPtrue)where BPmaskis the projection mask generated at step 7 and BPtrueis the binary projection of the ground truth image generated in the same way as projection mask; Area() measures the number of pixels with value of 1. If C is smaller than one, it means some parts of the vascular tree are outside the projection mask and will be missed during background suppression. We checked the completeness in all the experiments we have performed and found C to be equal to 1 in all cases, which indicates that no information is lost due to background suppression.Another experiment has been performed to investigate the performance of STARTAS with the existence of vessel stenosis. The phantom is modified to contain five stenotic areas of different length and degree (as indicated by the red arrow in Fig. 10(a)) and reconstructed from five projections using the START and STARTAS methods. To evaluate the reconstruction results, we compare not only the RRE and MMO for the whole vascular tree but also the RRE for each stenotic area, and the results are shown in Table 1. Fig. 10(b) and (c) are the volume rendering of the reconstructed result of START and STARTAS respectively. From the results, we can see that our method could successfully reconstruct the vascular tree and obtain higher accuracy not only for the whole vascular tree but also at the stenotic areas.Table 2shows the reconstructing time using five to ten projections for two methods. Due to the extra segmentation process, the proposed method consumes more time than START, with a time increase of about 1min. This should be acceptable in view of the quality improvement.As an extension of START, the proposed method introduce additional parameters. While some of these parameters can be determined according to some general rules, the parameters VRIt1/VRIt2 and λ1/λ2 are chosen based on experiments in this work. In the following, we will analyze the performance of the method when using different settings of these parameters.VRIt1 is used to check the convergence of the active contour evolution at step 4 of the algorithm. According to the convergence property of region-based level set segmentation method, the active contour evolution could always converge as long as enough iterations are performed [23]. As a result, VRI at step 4 should converge to zero. As the vascular tree will be updated in the next reconstruction iteration and the contour evolution can be continued using current segmentation as initialization, we choose to stop the active contour evolution early by using a relative large VRIt1. VRIt2 is used to check the completeness of the segmented vascular tree at step 5. According to the convergence property of START method and region-based level set segmentation method, segmented vascular tree could always become complete and stable as long as enough iterations have been performed. And this means VRI at step 5 should also converge to zero. As we will perform morphological dilation to the segmented vascular tree before background suppression, we do not need to segment the vascular tree very accurately but segment the main structure of the vascular tree.In this study, we choose VRIt1 and VRIt2 to 2% and 3% respectively through investigating the converge property of the proposed method. But our method is not very sensitive to these two parameters. Fig. 11compares the reconstruction results for three cases: START, STARTAS #1 and STARTAS #2 when reconstructing from five to ten projections. For STARTAS #1, VRIt1 and VRIt2 are set to 2% and 3%. For STARTAS #2, VRIt1 and VRIt2 are set to 1% and 1%. Other parameters are set according to Section 4.2. The results of STARTAS #1 and STARTAS #2 are comparable and better than that of START. A general setting of those parameters (VRIt1=1%, VRIt2=1%) could be used for all reconstruction cases.The parameters λ1 and λ2 are chosen according to the attenuation coefficient of the contrast enhanced coronary vessels (Vatte). To analyze the sensitivity of the proposed method to these two parameters, we have compared the MMO and RRE metrics for the reconstructed images from five to ten projections using different settings of λ1 and λ2: STARTAS #1 (λ1=λ2=5e3), STARTAS #2 (λ1=λ2=1e4) and STARTAS #3 (λ1=λ2=2e4). Other parameters are set according to Section 4.2 except that both VRIt1 and VRIt2 are set to 1% in these experiments. The results are shown in Fig. 12. The results of different cases of STARTAS are similar when reconstructing using relatively more projections but vary a little when reconstructing using fewer projections. But STARTAS generally performs better than START. When performing C-arm based cardiac CBCT, the attenuation coefficient of coronary vessel may vary a little for different cases according to the concentration of injected contrast agent but should be very close. Therefore, improved reconstruction results could be obtained by the proposed method using a general setting (λ1=λ2=1e4).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
