@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Objective model assessment for short-term anxiety recognition from blood volume pulse signal

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a short-term anxiety recognition system in healthy people.We used only one bio-sensor “Blood volume pulse signal”.Data was obtained through an emotion stimuli based on virtual reality exposure.We recognize two anxiety levels with 97% and three anxiety levels with 96%.Model's objective assessment was done by features dynamics in anxiety situations.We validate a model of three levels anxiety operable in clinical studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anxiety recognition,Blood volume pulse signal,Exposure to virtual reality (EVR),Features selection,Support vector machines (SVM),Objective assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human emotional recognition using physiological signals is relatively recent. The interest to this field has been motivated by the robustness of physiological traits to avoid the artifacts created by human social masking. In this paper our attention is focus on two aims: the development of an anxiety recognition system using only one physiological signal “Blood volume pulse, BVP” and the creation of a reliable anxiety model using objective assessment. This assessment is done by using dynamics of selected features. The anxiety elicitation is based on exposure to virtual reality (EVR). The results of these investigations show that this assessment technique is effective for the construction of a reliable database and hence improves the recognition system rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The handicap caused by social anxiety for many people in the world has drawn attention of scientists leading to the development of efficient strategies for reducing and/or treating it. Efficiency of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in virtuo for treating this disease has been proved by several studies. Several anxiogenic scenes were developed according to different scenarios (performance scenario, scenario of privacy, scenario statement and observation scenario) [1–3]. Those scenes were used to make a comparative study with cognitive behavioral therapy in vivo, thus proving the reliability of CBT in virtuo. In these studies, the anxiety measure is done by using subjective methods such as self-assessment and different questionnaires (Liebowitz questionnaire, ATPSQ: Attitude towards Public Speaking Questionnaire and SUDS: Subjective units of discomfort) [2,4–6].Controlling these therapies in a progressive manner using automatic anxiety recognition has many advantages. It helps in preserving the privacy and safety of the patient, assessing the progress of therapy through the means used in measures and allowing the therapist to be more attentive to patient behavior. Different anxiety levels can be resulting in several varieties of physiological reactions. An important aspect of this procedure is the selection of the effective and comfortable physiological signal for recognition system. It is essential to obtain a reliable database representing specific emotional states, to acquire a database in which the influence of emotional status is faithfully reflected, a set of protocols for emotional induction using exposition to virtual reality (EVR) was developed [7–9].Finding a reliable indicator in order to ensure that the subject is in a particular emotional state is a tough task. In addition, all methods of emotional recognition compare a set of characteristics after measurements with a predefined template which is assumed universally [10]. The creation of these models is based on generated characteristics labeled by an artificial stimuli, self-assessment and questionnaires. Our challenge is to check the emotional state of the users using objective method. For that purpose, we investigate a novel method for database assessment using dynamics of relevant features to differentiate each affective state.This paper shows the development of a short-term anxiety recognition system based only on blood volume pulse signal (BVP) using a reliable model. The advantage of this work is the use of only one sensor which contributes in reducing the time required for signal monitoring and minimizing gene users. The emotion stimulus is based on exposure to anxiogenic virtual environment. Our most challenge in performing this system is the assessment of the anxiety model created using objective method.In the following sections, first we present, some previous works achieved on emotion recognition using physiological signals. Second, some information on the selected physiological signal is provided and different features which contributes in recognizing the emotional state are revealed. Third, the elaborated protocol and procedure are described in Section 4. Fourth, we present the different stages to implement the system: BVP acquisition, features selection, classification and the objective database assessment. Finally, the limitations and applications of the proposed approach are discussed in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
