@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spectral turbulence measuring as feature extraction method from EEG on affective computing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Spectral turbulence (ST) measure is computed from EEG single-trial signals.SVM-RFE is performed to select the most relevant EEG channels on emotion detection.Left temporal scalp region gives the best results for classifying affective valence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Affective computing,EEG classification,Emotion,Spectral turbulence,SVM-RFE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In biomedical and psychological applications dealing with EEG, a suitable selection of the most relevant electrodes is useful for lightening the data acquisition and facilitating the signal processing. Therefore, an efficient method for extracting and selecting features from EEG channels is desirable. Classification methods are more and more applied for obtaining important conclusions from diverse psychological processes, and specifically for emotional processing. In this work, an original and straightforward method, inspired by the spectral turbulence (ST) measure from electrocardiogram and the support vector machine-recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE) algorithm, is proposed for classifying EEG signals. The goal of this study is to introduce the ST concept in applications of artificial intelligence related to cognitive processes and to determine the best EEG channels for distinguishing between two different experimental conditions. By means of this method, the left temporal region of the brain has revealed to be greatly involved in the affective valence processing elicited by visual stimuli.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In order to classify properly EEG signals corresponding to different experimental conditions, it is necessary to extract efficient features that are able to describe the signals unequivocally. As it is well known, event-related potentials (ERPs) have been widely studied to define diverse psychological processes, and specifically for studying the emotional processing. In addition, some works suggest that ERP components are induced by a phase resetting [1], which makes specially relevant the analysis of the spectral dynamics of the EEG signals.In this work, a new feature based on the spectral turbulence (ST) parameter used in electrocardiogram analysis [2], never used for classification purposes on EEG signals neither inter-subject nor intra-subject approaches, is proposed for distinguishing the affective valence elicited by an image (negative vs positive valence). ST provides a measure from the time-frequency map by comparing neighboring spectral estimates, which has been specifically used as a marker of determined cardiac disorders. From a signal, ST could be considered like an index of the stability of its spectral content over time. In [2] ST is analyzed and computed over averaged electrocardiogram (ECG) signals for predicting patients with inducible sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. Following the same line, Malik et al. [3] analyzed ST, also over ECG signals, in survivors of acute myocardial infarction. More recently, Barbosa et al. [4] employed ST analysis as a predictor of recurrence of idiopathic atrial fibrillation. Nevertheless, few examples of ST applied on EEG signals can be found in the literature, as far as the authors are aware. For instance, in [5] it is proposed to compute ST in order to determine the evolution of the cognitive impairment in the Alzheimer disease, but using magnetoencephalography (MEG). Thus, ST analysis is a wide field to explore in EEG.The concrete approach described in this work consists of a valence recognition system using visual stimuli (images), which is an essential component in some brain computer interface (BCI) applications [6] and emotion-based systems [7]. According to the dimensional model of emotions, the brain activity elicited by a stimulus is modulated by two attributes of it: arousal and affective valence. The arousal indicates the alertness level (defined in a continuum from relax to excitement) which is produced by the stimuli. On the other hand, the affective valence refers to the pleasure (or displeasure) elicited by the stimuli. A large number of research works have focused on studying the underlying neurophysiology and the behavioral correlates linked to each dimension and have suggested EEG as a valuable source of emotional information [8–10].Generally, the automatic classification tasks of EEG signals aiming at identifying the sign of the affective valence, using a reasonable small number of features, are difficult and yield moderated results in terms of accuracy (hardly exceeds 70% on average) [11]. However, the obtained accuracy values depend on diverse factors: number of emotional categories, presentation and type of the stimuli, number of available trials, etc. Different methods for feature extraction from EEG signals have been used, e.g. the computation of amplitude peaks and latencies from the ERP in time domain [12], inter-hemisphere asymmetry [13] or wavelet filtering [14] and event-related desynchronization/synchronization (ERD/ERS) [15] in spectral domain, among others. In this work, the ST is computed, allowing to reduce greatly the number of initial features and to tackle directly the EEG single-trial signals.The goal of this paper is to introduce and check the usefulness of ST measure as suitable feature for classifying emotional states. Moreover, it is desirable to select the most relevant electrode positions for optimizing the signal acquisition and avoiding too large sets of features. For this purpose, a wrapper method, known as support vector machine-recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE) based on a SVM classifier [16], is implemented to optimize accuracy and computation resources.The method used for extracting features from the EEG signals is based on the first part of the ST computation reported by Kelen [2] and consists of computing the Pearson's correlation coefficient (ρ) between adjacent columns of the spectrogram (time×frequency) from EEG epochs. Note that lower ρ values imply higher spectral variations.The columns of the spectrogram are computed taking consecutive 100ms long time-intervals from the stimulus onset (image presentation=0ms) with an overlap of 50% and computing the fast Fourier transform (FFT) (FFT were computed by means of Goertzel algorithm) on these intervals. Experimentally (see Section 3.1), the most discriminant time intervals for determining the affective valence are the time intervals just after 250ms from the onset of the stimulus. Therefore, the extracted features (ST values) used as input for the classifier are taken from 300ms post stimulus (i.e. from the correlation between the time interval which begins at 250ms and the next overlapped interval), when the P3 component in time domain simultaneously occurs and the first perceptive processing of the stimulus has been concluded [8]. Thus, 9 ST values are extracted from each spectrogram, since the final time intervals are taking from 250ms to 800ms (100ms long, 50ms overlap, as it is explained before, i.e. ten time intervals), belonging to the 9 possible comparisons between adjacent intervals.The frequencies considered range was from 8Hz to 30Hz (alpha and beta bands) using a step of 1Hz (23 frequency samples per column).Support vector machines (SVMs) separate a given set of binary labeled training data with a hyperplane that is maximally distant from the two classes, known as the maximal margin hyper-plane [17,18]. The objective is to build a functionf:ℝM⟶{±1}using training data, that is, M-dimensional patterns xiand class labels yi, so that f will correctly classify new examples (x, y). Linear discriminant functions define such decision hyper-surfaces or hyperplane in a multidimensional feature space, that is:(1)g(x)=wTx+w0=0,where w is known as the weight vector andw0as the threshold. The weight vector w is orthogonal to the decision hyperplane. The optimization task consists of finding the unknown parameterswm,m=1,…,Mandw0, which separate the two classes optimally [19]. For the Linear SVM, the vector w can be explicitly computed and this constitutes an advantage as it decreases the complexity during the test phase. Given a new element x, the predicted label is then:g(x)=wTx+w0⇒g(x)>0x∈ω1⇔label≡1g(x)<0x∈ω2⇔label≡−1The vectorw=∑iNsyiλixiis a weighted sum of the support vectors which are the Nselements of training set chosen during the training phase inside the margin. And 0<λi<C are the corresponding Lagrangian parameters which are also optimized during training. The value of C needs to be assigned to run the training optimization algorithm. It is a parameter that indirectly controls the width of the margin of the classifier. However, during the optimization process, C represents the weight of the penalty term of the optimization function that is related with the misclassification error in the training set. Therefore, the optimization determines the trade-off between the width of the margin and the number of accepted misclassifications. There is no optimal procedure to assign this parameter, so the required parameter was kept by default as C=1. Finally, the value of the thresholdw0is estimated by solving the equations related to the hyperplanes that define the margin.Guyon et al. [16] suggested the SVM-RFE as a feature selection method, which eliminates recursively the features corresponding to the lowest value|wi|, since the elements in the vector w close to zero have minor influence to g(x) and consequently they hardly contribute to the decision. Thus, a linear kernel is used. The algorithm uses all the features the first time and rejects consecutively the feature considered less relevant by ordering the absolute values of the entries of w. The process is repeated as long as the classifier performance (using linear SVM), which is evaluated using leave-one-out (LOO) strategy, improves. This algorithm has been successfully used in other neuroscientist applications [20,21].In order to design the LOO strategy, two options exist. One alternative consists of ignoring completely a feature vector in the classification system design and finally to use this vector only like a test vector. However, the test vector could be taken into account in the training when the most relevant features are determined by SVM-RFE. In other words, as a second option, the test vector participates in building the model of the feature elimination stage. Anyway, in both cases, the test vector is come out from the SVM classifier design. In the former method, the test vector does not participate in the selection of the features, but in the latter the test vector takes part in the SVM-RFE. In this work, the second method (test in training) will be only applied on the inter-subject classification in order to check the influence of the LOO strategy in the SVM-RFE.For inter-subject classification tasks, feature vectors x are made up by computing the ST from averaged EEG signals (ERPs) belonging to each condition (30–36 trials), that is, for each subject, two 9-dimensional feature vectors are extracted, one per condition (positive and negative valence). In intra-subject classification tasks, ST values are computed from the single-trials and one classification task is carried out for each subject and for each channel.All the numerical routines, needed for the implementation of the method explained above, were implemented using software MATLAB. In particular, tools from BioInformatics toolbox were required. In order to complete the conclusions with some statistical contrasts, paired t-tests were performed using STATISTICA software.A total of 26 female volunteers participated in the study. EEG activity was recorded from 21 Ag/AgCl electrodes (EEG channels), positioned on an electrode cap from EasyCap according to the 10/20 system (Fp1, Fpz, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, T7, C3, Cz, C4, T8, P7, P3, Pz, P4, T8, O1, Oz, O2), internally referenced to an electrode on the tip of the nose, and 2 electrooculograms (vertical and horizontal) were sampled at 1kHz and stored. The impedances of all electrodes were kept below 5kΩ. The signals were preprocessed (artifact rejected based on amplitude values, eye-movement correction based on [22] and segmented) using the SCAN 4.3 software (Compumedics Neuroscan, Germany).The EEG was recorded while the volunteers were visualizing pictures selected from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS), which is widely used in psychological experiments. It is composed of pictures classified in terms of arousal and affective valence. Twenty four high-arousal (score s>6) images, 12 of them corresponding to positive valence (7.29±0.65) and 12 to negative valence (1.47±0.24) were selected. Each image was presented on the center of the screen three times in a pseudo-random order and each trial lasted 3500ms: during the first 750ms, a fixation cross was presented, then one of the images was shown during 500ms, and finally a black screen followed for a period of 2250ms. The single-trial signal length was 950ms, including 150ms previous to the stimulus onset.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Spectral turbulence (ST) measure is presented as a good alternative in feature extraction and data input reduction for classifying EEG signals and selecting the most suitable EEG channels for discriminating among psychological processes, specifically affective valence detection. SVM-RFE algorithm for feature selection applied on a SVM-based classifier is implemented, increasing up to 13.25% the accuracy rates. The most relevant EEG sensor found is T7, which measures the electrical activity from the left temporal lobe, and reaches up to 80.77% in inter-subject classification using ERPs. Results derived from inter-subject are more reliable than those from intra-subject classification, due to the individual differences. In future works, it can be recommendable to compute ST from EEG signals for determining psychological disorders and BCI applications.