@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discrimination of different myocardial infarction stages using wide band electrocardiogram

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The work studies the feature extraction from wide band electrocardiogram (ECG) signals for classifying myocardial infarction (MI) stages.The data for the analysis was taken from Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt diagnostic ECG database.Multivariable autoregressive modeling technique was employed, and its coefficients were used as features.The orthogonal ECG signals and standard ECG signals with different frequency ranges were generated for the analysis.MI classification accuracy can be improved by introducing higher frequency components.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Myocardial infarction,Wide band electrocardiogram,Feature extraction,Discrimination,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most of usual electrocardiogram (ECG) signals normally keep the signal energy in the 0.05–100Hz band, but higher frequencies containing valuable diagnostic information are also present in wide band (WB) ECG signals. Existing studies on computer-assisted myocardial infarction (MI) diagnosis are mostly based on the usual ECG signals, and the valuable diagnostic information has not been used sufficiently yet. Multivariable autoregressive coefficients were extracted from WB orthogonal ECG (OECG) signals for the classification purpose in this research. The data for the analysis were taken from Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt diagnostic ECG database including health control, MI in early stage and MI in acute stage. In order to further investigate the performance of WB ECG signals, standard ECG signals with a wide frequency band were utilized for the feature extraction and classification as the same way. The experimental results showed that the MI classification accuracy could be improved by introducing WB ECG signals and the features extracted from WB OECG signals with a frequency of 0–250Hz would be the best efficient representation for discriminating different MI stages. The classifiable and efficient features can be extracted from WB OECG signals for the classification of MI stages with a high accuracy.OECG signal with a bandwidth of 0–100HzOECG signal with a bandwidth of 0–250HzOECG signal with a bandwidth of 0–500HzMAR model coefficients estimated from the OECG signalMAR model coefficients estimated from the SECG signalFMAR coefficients estimated from 100Hz_OECGFMAR coefficients estimated from 250Hz_OECGFMAR coefficients estimated from 500Hz_OECGSECG signal with a bandwidth of 0–100HzSECG signal with a bandwidth of 0–250HzSECG signal with a bandwidth of 0–500HzSMAR coefficients estimated from 100Hz_SECGSMAR coefficients estimated from 250Hz_SECGSMAR coefficients estimated from 500Hz_SECG

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
From the view of pathology, the evolution processes of myocardial infarction (MI) can be orderly separated into the stages: From health control (HC) to MI in early stage (MIES, within several minutes or hours) to MI in acute stage (MIAS) ect. If patients can obtain the thrombolytic therapy during MIES, the heart tissue that is closer to death can be saved and continue to survive, otherwise the irreversible heart tissue damage will occur and even lead to inevitable sudden death in later stages. The various MI stages are directly related to the size of the damaged myocardium on which the outcome of early prognosis depends. Thus, it is essential and significant to identify different MI stages for patient's urgent treatment and management [1,2].The electrocardiogram (ECG) signal analysis is an effective non-invasive clinical diagnostic method. According to the medical definition, the typical symptoms of MI in clinic can be described as: In early stage of MI, T wave and ST segment start to elevate, abnormal Q wave does not appear yet, while R wave is still preserved. In acute stage of MI, R wave disappears, abnormal Q wave is easy to be discerned, a flatted or negative T waves can be observed [3]. On the other hand, we should notice that these abnormal changes appeared in ECG are low-level signals during the evolution processes. Actually, less than half of patients with MIES have clear diagnostic changes of ECG on their first trace. Automatic detection and classification of the abnormalities in ECG will be of great help in medical examinations or monitoring of critical ill patients. In existing studies on abnormal changes of MI ECG, MIES and MIAS were grouped together, and rare attention has been paid to the detection of MIES [4,5,6,7,8]. Thus, the reliable computer assisted automatic MI recognition remains a study for a cardiovascular diagnostic system.Most of usual ECG signals are derived from the frequencies limited to 0.05–100Hz, but higher frequencies (HF) are also present in the ECG signals. Wide band (WB) ECG usually refers to the ECGs with an extended bandwidth of up to 1000Hz. In current study, the ECG signals with a frequency bandwidth above 100Hz are also called as WB ECG. It was reported that root mean square (RMS) computed from the HF components of the QRS complex is more sensitive in the detecting acute coronary artery occlusion than conventional ST elevation diagnostic criterial [9]. Another significant reported example for the use of HF ECG is the reduced amplitude zone (RAZ) defined by Abbound et al. [10], it reported that RAZ could be detected earlier than either QRS complex or ST interval significant changes. Lots of existing studies on MI detection and classification are based on the usual ECG signals [1,4,11]. More and more attentions have been paid to diagnose cardiac diseases including MI and late potentials of myocardial depolarization using HF ECGs nowadays [2,5,10,12].There are two typical ECG lead systems, namely, 12-standard lead system and 3-orthogonal Frank lead system, and the sampled ECG signals are called as orthogonal ECG (OECG) and standard ECG (SECG) respectively. From the view of electrophysiology, Frank OECG can better reflect the anatomic changes [3]. In addition, the number of leads for Frank lead system is less than for standard lead system. Lower dimensional feature vectors might be extracted easily from OECG compared to SECG. Both 12-lead SECG and 3-lead OECG are equally applicable for automated computer analysis and diagnosis [12]. A lot of quantitative OECG descriptors have been studied and provided different accuracy indices, but we should note that clear OECG criteria for assessment of myocardial condition have not been defined yet [2].This is part of our previously related works that were aimed at building a high accurate classification system of different MI stages. The purpose of the work described in this paper is to investigate to what extent WB ECG signals would help in the classification of different MI stages and explore the practicality of using multivariable autoregressive (MAR) model to extract the classifiable features from WB OECG signals.The remained of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the methods including ECG data processing, MAR modeling, feature extraction and classification. Section 3 presents the experimental results. Section 4 discusses the results and finally Section 5 concludes the study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, MAR modeling technique was performed on ECG signals with different frequency ranges to investigate to what extent WB ECG signals would help in the classification of different MI stages including HC, MIES and MIAS. The fitter MAR model order is 4 for modeling ECG signals with a sampling rate of 200Hz and with a sampling rate of 500Hz, and it is 6 for modeling ECG signals with a sampling rate of 1000Hz. The best efficient representation of ECG signals is the MAR coefficients extracted from WB OECG signals of which the bandwidth is 0–250Hz. Compared to MAR coefficients extracted from SECG signals, MAR coefficients extracted from OECG signals can classify better if the dimension of the feature vectors or the frequency range of the modeled ECG is the same between them. Even if more KL coefficients (140 in current study) computed from MAR coefficients extracted from SECG signals are introduced, the classification accuracy is still not better than that of MAR coefficients extracted from OECG signals.In conclusion, WB ECG would provide more information enhancing the diagnostic value of the ECG signals. MAR coefficients extracted from OECG signals with a frequency of 0–250Hz is the best efficient representation. The OECG signals can classify better than SECG signals. It is practical to extract classifiable features from WB OECG signals to obtain a high classification accuracy for various MI stages based on MAR modeling.