@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiband vocal dysperiodicities analysis using empirical mode decomposition in the log-spectral domain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
EMD algorithm is used to decompose the log-magnitude spectrum of the speech signal.EMD-based HNR is applied for disordered voices analysis.Multiband analysis is proposed to predict scores of the perceived hoarseness.Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vocal dysperiodicities,Empirical mode decomposition,Multiband analysis,Disordered voices,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, empirical mode decomposition (EMD) is proposed as an alternative to decompose the log magnitude spectrum of the speech signal into its harmonic, envelope and noise components. The acoustic measure named harmonic-to-noise ratio (HNR) is used to summarize the degree of disturbance in the speech signal and consequently to evaluate the overall quality of the disordered voices produced by dysphonic speakers.Most approaches for HNR estimation have in common to involve the isolation of individual speech cycles or pseudo-harmonics/rhamonics in speech spectrum/cepstrum; however, this isolation cannot be carried out reliably in speech produced by severely hoarse speakers and may result in inaccurate HNR estimation. The EMD-based approach used in this study incorporates an appropriate procedure that estimates automatically the thresholds used by the clustering algorithm without knowledge of the fundamental frequency. The frequency range of the harmonic and noise components is divided into ten equally spaced intervals and the harmonic-to-noise ratios (HNRs) within each interval are used as independent variables to summarize the amount of perceived hoarseness.The proposed method is evaluated on a corpus comprising 251 normophonic and dysphonic speakers. Multiple correlation analysis carried out on HNRs from the different frequency bands shows that multi-band analysis based on empirical mode decomposition results in statistically significantly higher correlation of predicted scores with scores of perceived hoarseness over full-band analysis.Principal component analysis is carried out on the HNR measures obtained in the ten frequency bands. More than 97% of the total variance is explained by the first two principal components, PC1 and PC2. Experimental results show that the first principal component is interpretable in terms of the degree of the severity of hoarseness whereas the second principal component indicates whether the voice is high-pitched or low-pitched. It is shown that the first two principal components result in a high predictability of hoarseness scores.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Voice disorders are common consequences of disease or malfunction of the larynx. Clinical evaluation of voice disorders is routinely based on listener perception of speech according to some protocol of rating scales (e.g. GRBAS scales). For example, clinicians rate the degree of perceived overall abnormality, called grade, to monitor the voice of patients. A major drawback of perceptual ratings is intra- and inter-judge variability [1,2]. Experiments have shown that to obtain reproducible evaluations, listeners must have substantial experience in voice quality rating.In contrast to subjective measures, objective measures for voice analysis are obtained from the speech signal [3]. Such measures are of great importance for clinical evaluation of voice disorders because they are noninvasive and enable clinicians to monitor the progress of patients and document quantitatively the perceived degree of hoarseness. Despite the number of acoustic measures that have been proposed in the literature to characterize the voice of dysphonic speakers, finding reliable and accurate descriptors of voice function and voice quality is still an issue.One of the manifestations of voice disorders is the lack of periodicity in voiced speech produced by dysphonic speakers. These dysperiodicities may be caused by additive noise owing to turbulence and modulation noise owing to external perturbations of the glottal excitation signal as well as intrinsically irregular dynamics of the vocal folds [4,5]. As a consequence, the energy of the harmonic structure of the spectrum is decreased in favor of that of the nonharmonic structure. Several acoustic measures used to assess vocal fold function reflect the deviation of the speech waveform from the perfect periodicity. For instance, jitter and shimmer are frequently used to measure perturbations produced by the variations in the fundamental period and amplitude, respectively. The acoustic measures named signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [6,7] and harmonic-to-noise ratio (HNR) [8] summarize the amount of dysperiodicities in the acoustic signal. The estimation of these acoustic measures can be performed either in the time domain or in the frequency domain [9,10]. Most approaches for HNR estimation have in common to involve the isolation of individual speech cycles or pseudo-harmonics/rhamonics in speech spectrum/cepstrum; however, this isolation cannot be carried out reliably in speech produced by severely hoarse speakers and may result in inaccurate HNR estimation.Most techniques for estimating vocal dysperiodicities have been applied to steady fragments extracted from sustained vowels. The widespread use of sustained vowels is due to the technical feasibility of the analysis rather than clinical relevance. Most clinicians consider that connected speech is more informative than sustained sounds for many reasons. Recent approaches for vocal dysperiodicities estimation have focused on continuous speech [11].Performance analysis of the different acoustic measures in terms of their ability to predict the overall quality of voice has received a considerable attention in the literature. To compare the performances of the different acoustic measures in terms of their ability in predicting perceptual assessment, correlation analysis of subjective and objective measures is carried out. As the voice quality assessment is a multidimensional task in the sense that listeners use several subjective components to make judgment, multivariate approaches which combine several acoustic measures to predict the overall quality of voice have been used as an alternative to univariate approaches based on a single acoustic measure [12,13]. In [14], the performance of multi-band segmental signal-to-dysperiodicity ratio has been investigated in terms of the correlation with scores of perceived hoarseness on a corpus comprising a total of 22 normophonic and dysphonic subjects. More recently, the performance of the method has been evaluated on much larger corpora (a total of over 900 speakers sustaining sounds and producing connected speech). It has been concluded that multi-band segmental signal-to-dysperiodicity ratio correlates more strongly with the perceptual assessment of the degree of hoarseness than the full-band analysis [15].In [16], we proposed the empirical mode decomposition (EMD) algorithm [17] as an alternative to decompose the log of the spectrum magnitude of the speech signal into its harmonic, envelope and noise components. The acoustic measure named harmonic-to-noise ratio (HNR) has been used to summarize the degree of disturbance in the speech signal and consequently to evaluate the overall quality of the disordered voices produced by dysphonic speakers. The performance of acoustic analysis of voice by means of spectral acoustic measures obtained via empirical mode decomposition (EMD) of the log of the magnitude spectrum of the speech signal has been investigated in [18], and compared with cepstral-based acoustic measures on corpora of synthetic and natural vowels. Experimental results have shown that the EMD-based approach results in a high correlation between HNR estimates and average perceived grade scores. In the method proposed in [16,18], the thresholds involved in the algorithm for intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) clustering have been fixed empirically. These thresholds depend on the fundamental frequency f0, so that, the method requires the estimation of the average fundamental frequency for each stimulus.In the present study, the performance of multi-band vocal dysperiodicities analysis based on the empirical mode decomposition in terms of correlation of HNR estimates with the perceived degree of hoarseness is investigated. The empirical mode decomposition is applied to the log of the magnitude spectrum of the speech signal to decompose it into its harmonic, envelope and noise components and multi-band analysis is carried out on the HNR. The proposed EMD-based approach for disordered voices assessment incorporates an appropriate procedure that estimates automatically the thresholds used by the EMD algorithm without knowledge of the fundamental frequency.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
