@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gender differences in the myoelectric activity of lower limb muscles in young healthy subjects during walking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rectus and biceps femoris sEMG activity shows no gender differences during walking.Gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior and vastus show gender-dependent sEMG activity.Differences are found in frequency of occurrence rather than in activation pattern.Females reveal a propensity for a more complex recruitment of GL, TA and VL.Suitability of developing sEMG databases separated for males and females is suggested.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surface EMG,Statistical gait analysis,Gender,Ankle motion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present study was designed to achieve a comprehensive analysis of gender-related differences in the myoelectric activity of lower limb muscles during normal walking at self-selected speed and cadence, in terms of muscle activation patterns and occurrence frequencies. To this aim, statistical gait analysis (SGA) of surface EMG signal from tibialis anterior (TA), gastrocnemius lateralis (GL), rectus femoris (RF), biceps femoris (BF) and vastus lateralis (VL) was performed in 11 female (F-group) and 11 male (M-group) age-matched healthy young adults. SGA is a recent methodology performing a statistical characterization of gait, by averaging spatio-temporal and sEMG-based parameters over numerous strides. Findings showed that males and females walk at the same comfortable speed, despite the significantly lower height and higher cadence detected in females. No significant differences in muscle onset/offset were detected between groups. The analysis of occurrence frequencies of muscle activity showed no significant differences in BF and RF, between groups. Conversely, in F-group, compared with M-group, GL, TA and VL showed a significantly higher occurrence frequency in the modalities with a high number of activations, and a significantly lower occurrence frequency in the modalities with a low number of activations. These findings indicate a propensity of females for a more complex recruitment of TA, GL and VL during walking, compared to males. The observed differences recommend the suitability of developing electromyographic databases, separated for males and females.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Gender-specific morphology of pelvis and thigh are widely known [22,26]. These structural differences led to wonder if gender could be also a factor influencing movement patterns during walking. Temporal gait-parameter differences were broadly reported: compared with males, females walk with higher cadence and slightly shorter stride length, although when normalized for height, differences in stride length seem to be not statistically significant [32,35]. Gender-related differences were identified also in movement patterns during walking. An increased sagittal-plane hip flexion and a decreased knee flexion were reported in females in preparation for weight bearing, together with changes in knee-flexion moment and power absorption during pre-swing [23]. An analysis of various walking conditions showed that excursions in frontal and transverse planes were greater at hip and knee for females compared to males [22]. Clear gender differences were also observed in hip kinematics across a variety of walking speeds and surface inclinations, indicating that females displayed greater peak hip internal rotation and adduction, for all walking conditions [10]. Recently, increased hip adduction and knee abduction were observed during the downward and upward phases of the gait task in females, compared with males [31].Given the identified gender-related differences in joint kinematics, it is likely that gender differences in underlying muscle activities are also present. However, only few studies reported suitable results on the effect of gender on walking, provided by analyzing the electromyographic signals recorded from the lower limb muscles [9–11]. In particular, analyzing the surface electromyographic (sEMG) signal from biceps femoris, rectus femoris, gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior, Chiu and Wang [9] reported that females produce significantly higher muscle activity only in tibialis anterior during walking and Chung and Wang [11] added that the EMG response in tibialis anterior increases with increasing walking speed. Thus, the study of tibialis anterior, together with its antagonist muscle for ankle plantar/dorsiflexion, the gastrocnemius, appears to be relevant for analyzing possible gender-related EMG differences, during walking. However, many of the reported kinematics/kinetics differences between males and females during walking [10,22,23,31] concern the role of proximal leg joints. Moreover, different studies [5,27] documented a higher risk of anterior cruciate ligament injury in females, compared to male, suggesting a different workload of muscles crossing knee. So, it can be argued that also proximal muscles may provide significant insights concerning the gender-related differences in muscle activity.Moreover, it was observed that advancing age modifies the timing of onset/offset activation of lower limb muscles and the duration of the activity of agonist and antagonist muscles [21,38]. This suggests the suitability of developing electromyographic databases, separated for young and old subjects.The purpose of this study was to perform in healthy young subjects a comprehensive analysis of the gender-related differences in the myoelectric activity of lower limb muscles during walking at self-selected speed and cadence, in terms of activation patterns of each muscle and of its occurrence frequency. The goal of this study was pursued by performing the technique of statistical gait analysis (SGA) [3] of sEMG signal acquired from tibialis anterior (TA), gastrocnemius lateralis (GL), rectus femoris (RF), biceps femoris (BF) and vastus lateralis (VL). SGA is a recently developed methodology, which performs a statistical characterization of gait by averaging spatial–temporal and sEMG-based parameters over numerous strides (hundreds), during the same walking trial. Since this method depends on the accuracy of the process used to detect muscles onset/offset, this study is based on the availability of robust techniques for the detection of muscle activation intervals [7,37], and specific tools for SGA.Twenty-two young healthy Caucasian volunteers were recruited. Subjects were divided into two groups: 11 females (F-group) and 11 males (M-group). Mean age, height, weight and body mass index (BMI) are given in Table 1. Exclusion criteria included history of neurological pathology, orthopedic surgery, acute/chronic knee pain or pathology, flat feet and BMI ≥25, or abnormal gait. Participants signed informed consent.Signals were acquired (sampling rate: 2kHz; resolution: 12 bit) and processed by the multichannel recording system Step32, DemItalia, Italy. Each subject was instrumented with foot-switches, knee electrogoniometers and sEMG probes on both lower limbs. Three foot-switches (size:11mm×11mm×0.5mm; activation force:3N) were attached beneath the heel, the first and the fifth metatarsal heads of each foot. An electro-goniometer (accuracy:0.5°) was attached to the lateral side of each lower limb for measuring knee joint angles in sagittal plane.sEMG signals were detected with single differential probes with fixed geometry constituted by Ag/Ag-Cl disks (manufacturer: DemItalia, size:7mm×27mm×19mm; electrode diameter:4mm; interelectrode distance:8mm, gain:1000, high-pass filter:10Hz, input impedance >1.5GΩ, CMRR>126dB, input referred noise≤1μVrms), and with variable geometry constituted by Ag/Ag-Cl disks (manufacturer: DemItalia, minimum interelectrode distance:12mm, gain:1000, high-pass filter:10Hz, input impedance >1.5GΩ, CMRR>126dB, input referred noise≤200nVrms). sEMG signals were further amplified and low-pass filtered (450Hz) by the recording system. An overall gain, ranging from 1000 to 50,000, could be chosen to suit the need of the specific muscle observed.Before positioning the probes, the skin was shaved, cleaned with abrasive paste and then wet with a soaked cloth. To assure proper electrode–skin contact, electrodes were dressed with highly conductive gel. Probes with fixed geometry were applied over GL, TA and BF and probes with variable geometry were applied over RF and VL, following the SENIAM recommendations for electrode location and orientation over muscle with respect to tendons, motor point and fiber direction [20]. Subjects were asked to walk barefoot over the floor for 5min at natural speed and cadence, following the path schematized in Fig. 1[13]. The possibility of cross-talk was checked for by visual inspection of raw data. Cross-talk was suspected when two muscles in the same limb section showed simultaneous activity with similar amplitude modulation. In particular, cross-talk of VL on RF activity was suspected during loading response, as reported in [13]. Moreover, since sEMG activity from peroneus longus was not acquired, a possibility has been considered, that crosstalk between TA and peroneus longus may affect the analysis, as indicated by Campanini et al. [8]. Thus, as suggested [8], the test was repeated with slightly different electrode locations on TA.Footswitch signals were debounced, converted to four levels, heel contact (H), flat foot contact (F), push off (P), swing (S), and processed to segment and classify the different gait cycles [1].Electro-goniometric signals were low-pass filtered (FIR filter, 100 taps, cut-off frequency 15Hz). Knee angles in sagittal plane along with sequences and durations of gait phases derived by the basographic signal, were used by a multivariate statistical filter, to detect and discard outlier cycles like those relative to deceleration, reversing, and acceleration. The multivariate statistical filter tests knee angles and gait phase durations from every stride of subject's walking, comparing them with the mean value computed on each single subject. When knee angles and/or gait phases in the single stride are significantly different (Hotelling t-test, α=0.05) from mean value, corresponding stride was discarded [1,3].sEMG signals were high-pass filtered (FIR filter, 100 taps, cut-off frequency of 20Hz) which basically removes movement artifacts, and processed by a double-threshold statistical detector that allows a user-independent assessment of muscle activation intervals. The statistical detector includes also a preliminary data processing: whitening filter and identification of an auxiliary time series, as reported in [7]. This technique [7] consists in selecting a first threshold ζ and observing m successive samples: if at least r0 (second threshold) out of successive m samples are above the first threshold ζ, the presence of the signal is acknowledged. Values of the three parameters ζ, r0, and m are selected to jointly minimize the value of false-alarm probability and maximize probability of detection for each specific signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The setting of the first threshold, ζ, is based on the assessment of the background noise level, as a necessary input parameter. Furthermore, the double-threshold detector requires to estimate the SNR in order to fine tune r0. Background noise level and SNR, necessary to run double-threshold algorithm, are estimated for each signal by Step32 system, using the statistical approach proposed by Agostini and Knaflitz [2]. Eventually, m=30ms is considered a suitable value for the study of muscle activation in gait analysis [7].Statistical gait analysis (SGA) is a recently developed methodology [3], which performs a statistical characterization of gait by averaging spatial–temporal and sEMG-based parameters over numerous (hundreds) strides, during the same walking. SGA relies on the fact that the number of muscle activations is cycle dependent, so that averaging should be performed only over onset/offset instants of cycles including the same number of activations, i.e. belonging to the same activation modality. Activation modality is defined as the number of times a muscle activates during a single gait cycle, GC; n-activation modality consists of n activation intervals for the considered muscle, during a single GC. Mean activation intervals normalized with respect to GC, for each activation modality are achieved, according to the following steps. First, muscle activation intervals relative to each GC are identified, computing muscle onset/offset instants in temporal space [7], as previously described. Then, muscle activations are grouped according to their modality. Eventually, the onset/offset time instants of each activation modality are averaged over the population subjects. Averaged onset/offset percentage time instants are normalized with respect to GC to provide mean activation intervals in percentage of GC. SGA was performed by Step32 system.Data are reported as mean±standard deviation (SD). Shapiro–Wilk test was used to evaluate the hypothesis that each data vector had a normal distribution. Comparisons between two populations (females vs. males) were performed with two-tailed, non-paired Student's t-test between normally distributed samples and with Wilcoxon rank sum test between not normally distributed samples. ANOVA test (normally distributed samples) and Kruskal–Wallis test (not normally distributed samples) followed by multiple comparison test, were used to establish the most recurrent activation modality/ies, within each gender group. Statistical significance was set at 5%.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
