@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of the robustness of spectral indices during ventricular fibrillation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the robustness of spectral indices describing fibrillation organization.The dominant frequency is a robust spectral index.Indices depending on the spectral envelope of cardiac signals are non-robust.The spatial resolution of lead systems can distort the spectral envelope.Non-robust indices provide inconsistent measures of fibrillation organization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spectral analysis,Dominant frequency,Cardiac organization,Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator,Intracardiac electrogram,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The spatiotemporal characteristics of cardiac fibrillation are often investigated by using indices extracted from the spectrum of cardiac signals. However different signal acquisition systems may produce signals of different spectra and affect the estimation of some spectral indices. In this study, we investigate the robustness of four spectral indices previously proposed for describing fibrillation, namely the dominant frequency (DF), the peak frequency (PF), the median frequency (MF) and the organization index (OI). The effects of different lead configurations on the values of the spectral indices are statistically quantified and further analyzed in a database consisting of unipolar and bipolar intracardiac electrograms (EGM), recorded by implantable cardioverter-defibrillators during ventricular fibrillation. Our analysis shows that the lead configuration significantly affects the PF, the MF and the OI, whereas the DF remains unaffected. We further explore the nature of cardiac spectrum and show that unipolar EGM concentrate power at lower frequencies than bipolar EGM. We conclude that indices that depend on the envelope of the spectrum of cardiac signals are in general sensitive to the lead configuration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) has been traditionally described as a highly irregular and disorganized cardiac rhythm [1]. This description is motivated by the observation of VF in the electrocardiogram (ECG), in which VF lacks any discernible pattern and is characterized by irregular deflections whose frequency, amplitude and shape are continually changing. However, some studies based on spectral analysis of cardiac signals have suggested otherwise, that fibrillation is not completely chaotic and could possess a high degree of spatiotemporal organization. Early applications of spectral analysis revealed that ECG spectrum during VF has a distinct dominant frequency (DF) between 3 and 7Hz [2], and that median frequency (MF) reflects the evolution of an episode of VF [3]. More recently, two methods based on spectral analysis have been developed for quantifying cardiac spatiotemporal organization during fibrillation. In the first method an organization index (OI) extracted from the spectrum of intracardiac electrograms (EGM) has been used to quantify atrial fibrillation (AF) organization [4]. The second method consists of computing the DF in either optical or electrical recordings to estimate the local activation rate of cardiac tissue during fibrillation. The analysis of DF maps has revealed regional differences in the atria during AF [5–7] and in the ventricles during VF [8,9], which have been interpreted as a manifestation of cardiac spatiotemporal organization. In other practical applications, spectral analysis has been used to detect ventricular tachyarrhythmias [10–13], to predict the success of the defibrillation shock [2,14–16], to characterize VF in implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) EGM [17–20] and to identify artifact events in ICD EGM [21].The widespread use of spectral indices for describing fibrillation has motivated to further investigate their nature and their relationship to cardiac spatiotemporal characteristics. On the one hand, from a signal processing perspective it has been shown that EGM complexity and fractionation can hinder the estimation of the local activation rate during DF analysis [22]. Also, the DF and a spectral index used for quantifying EGM regularity have been analyzed in [23]. On the other hand, from a signal measurement perspective there exists the possibility that lead configuration may have an effect on the estimation of some spectral indices. For instance, it has been previously shown that during spatially correlated rhythms there exists an inverse relationship between the spatial resolution of the lead system and the spectrum bandwidth [24]. Hence, signals recorded during the same cardiac episode by different lead configurations could have non-identical spectra, possibly resulting in non-robust estimations of some spectral indices.The aim of this paper is to investigate experimentally the robustness of a family of spectral indices previously proposed for describing cardiac fibrillation. We use retrospectively a database of intracardiac EGM recorded by ICD during VF. The ICD is the primary treatment for patients at high risk of undergoing sudden cardiac death due to tachyarrhythmias and it can provide with intracardiac EGM recorded by a diversity of lead configurations during VF. In this study we use EGM recorded by ICD to analyze the effects of the lead system on the values of the spectral indices under investigation. Statistical methods allow us to quantify the robustness of each spectral index, and the effects of the lead configuration on the spectrum of cardiac signals are further analyzed.Most current ICD monitor heart rhythm by analyzing intracardiac EGM sensed by transvenous leads, which consist of a set electrodes some of which are inserted into the heart chambers [25]. The basic set of electrodes in transvenous lead systems includes the following (Fig. 1): the tip, placed near the apex of the right ventricle; the ring, located in the proximity of the tip electrode; the distal coil, located close to the tip electrode; the proximal coil, placed in the superior cava vein; and the active can, which constitutes the casing of the ICD and is usually implanted in a left subpectoral position. The combination of two or more electrodes defines the following lead configurations:–Unipolar configurations, consisting of a distal electrode (such as the tip or the distal coil) and the active can, which is connected to the proximal coil.True bipolar configurations, consisting of the tip and the ring electrodes.Integrated bipolar configurations, consisting of the tip and the distal coil electrodes.The signal provided by the sensing leads pass subsequently through anti-aliasing filters, low-noise preamplifiers and finally it is converted to digital form by an A/D converter [26]. Additionally, since bipolar EGM are used for arrhythmia detection, EGM signals can be further processed by band-pass filtering, which attenuates the noise generated by physiological and environmental sources.The ICD constitutes a suitable experimental framework to study the robustness of spectral indices during fibrillation. Firstly, ICD technology is widely used as the only effective therapy against VF. Therefore, ICD can provide with cardiac signals recorded in humans during VF episodes of varied etiology and termination. And secondly, ICD can provide with intracardiac EGM recorded simultaneously by unipolar and bipolar lead configurations during the same episode of VF. Hence, the effects of lead configuration on the estimation of spectral indices can be statistically quantified.In this study we analyzed retrospectively a database of EGM signals collected from 342 patients from Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca (Murcia, Spain) and Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón (Madrid, Spain), of which 215 were implanted Boston Scientific devices (belonging to the Contak Renewal® and Ventak Mini® families) and 127 were implanted Medtronic devices (belonging to the GEM® family).A total of 1079 spontaneous episodes of VF were identified in the database. Each VF episode was recorded by unipolar leads, bipolar leads, or both. EGM signals were classified into four disjoint EGM groups based on the lead configuration (unipolar or bipolar) and the device manufacturer (Boston Scientific or Medtronic). Unipolar and bipolar EGM were labeled for Boston Scientific devices as UBand BB, respectively, and for Medtronic devices they were labeled as UMand BM, respectively. Bipolar BBleads were integrated, while BMleads were true bipolar. Additionally, it was noted that EGM from Boston Scientific devices were sampled at 200Hz, while EGM from Medtronic devices were sampled at 128Hz.The episodes that were included in this study were chosen based on two criteria. Firstly, in order to prevent selection bias, only one episode from each patient was selected. And secondly, in order to minimize the variability in the statistical analysis, only episodes that were recorded simultaneously by unipolar and bipolar configurations were considered. A total of 71 devices out of the 215 Boston Scientific ICD and 78 devices out of the 127 Medtronic ICD were found to record unipolar and bipolar EGM simultaneously. As a result 149 episodes of VF were included in the analysis (71 episodes from Boston Scientific devices and 78 episodes from Medtronic devices).This section describes the family of spectral indices that were analyzed, namely the DF, the peak frequency (PF), the MF and the OI. These spectral indices have been previously proposed for describing fibrillation and they are based on the assumption that fibrillation is a quasi-periodic process. In quasi-periodic signals, power distributes over a series of equidistant narrow frequency bands, i.e. harmonic frequencies (HF). This feature is illustrated for VF signals in Fig. 2(b). The separation between consecutive HF is known as the fundamental frequency (FF) and it coincides with both the first HF and with the inverse of the mean fundamental period. Additionally, each HF has in general different amplitude, which defines a characteristic spectrum envelope.In order to extract the DF and the OI, an auxiliary signal was obtained from each EGM by implementing a widely used non-linear method previously proposed in [27]. This method was originally proposed for analyzing the spatial organization of AF and in the present study we adapted it for processing the VF EGM signals optimally. The resulting method consisted of the following stages. Firstly, each EGM was filtered using a 30–50Hz band-pass, second-order Butterworth filter. Secondly, filtered EGM were rectified. Finally, the rectified signal was filtered using a 15Hz low-pass Butterworth filter. In order to illustrate this method, an EGM signal and its processed counterpart (pEGM) are shown both in time and frequency in Fig. 2. A more detailed description of this non-linear method and its effects on the spectrum of EGM signals can be found in [23].Based on the spectrum of an original EGM and the spectrum of its processed counterpart pEGM, the following family of spectral indices during VF was defined:–Dominant frequency, the DF is commonly defined as the frequency where the maximum of the spectrum of pEGM occurs [5–9], and it usually coincides with the first HF, i.e. the FF, of the original EGM.Peak frequency, the PF is the frequency at which the maximum of the spectrum of the original EGM occurs [15,16]. Because of the quasi-periodic spectral structure of VF, the PF usually coincides with the FF or a higher HF of the original EGM.Median frequency, the MF is defined as the gravity center of the spectrum of the original EGM [3].Organization index, the OI is defined on the spectrum of the pEGM as the ratio of the power concentrated at the first four HF in 1Hz windows, to the total signal power contained from 2.5Hz up to, but not including, the fifth HF [4].This family of spectral indices constitutes a summarized description of the spectral features of EGM during VF, such as periodicity (DF), envelope (PF, MF) and quasi-periodicity (OI). They are illustrated in Fig. 3in the spectra of two unipolar and two bipolar EGM recorded during VF by an ICD. It is worth noting that the term dominant frequency has also been used in the literature to denote the PF. As stated before, in this study the DF has been defined as the frequency where the maximum of the spectrum of pEGM occurs. This decision is motivated by the fact that this is the most common definition of DF in the literature.Following previous studies in which the spectrum of VF signal was analyzed [8,14,28], spectra were estimated in EGM windows of 3s of duration. In our study, clinical experts determined the beginning of the analysis window based on the EGM morphology. During the onset of VF, EGM morphology degrades after a few clearly recognizable QRS complexes. Based on this, the beginning of the analysis window was set after the initial sequence of recognizable QRS complexes. Also, it was made sure that the end of the analysis window never exceeded the time instant that the defibrillation shock was delivered. Once the analysis windows was extracted, MATLAB software (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA) was used for signal processing and power spectra were calculated based on Welch's periodogram and Fast Fourier Transform techniques.Two pairs of hypothesis tests were formulated to investigate the robustness of each spectral index (DF, PF, MF, OI). Based on them, we assessed whether spectral indices are affected by different lead configurations from the same manufacturer, and/or by equivalent lead configurations from different manufacturers.Each EGM from every EGM group (UB, BB, UM, BM) provided with a sample of the DF, the PF, the MF and the OI. We used the resulting collection of samples to assess statistically the robustness of each spectral index. Before hypothesis testing, we eliminated data outliers by using two statistical techniques. Firstly, we plotted the histograms of the samples of every spectral index collected from each of the four EGM groups. Secondly, Bland–Altman plots [29] for matched samples, i.e. samples that were obtained from simultaneously recorded unipolar and bipolar EGM, were generated for studying trends in the data. Samples that visually lied outside the overall pattern of their histograms or deviated from the overall trend in Bland–Altman plots were excluded from the analysis. After this stage, the number of episodes that were included in the study was reduced from 149 to a total of 122, of which 61 episodes were from Boston Scientific devices and other 61 episodes were from Medtronic devices.Once the outliers were eliminated, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to check for normality. Data are presented as mean±standard error. The following statistical tests were defined for every spectral index:–Test 1: comparison between spectral indices obtained from unipolar and bipolar EGM in Boston Scientific devices.Test 2: comparison between spectral indices obtained from unipolar and bipolar EGM in Medtronic devices.Test 3: comparison between spectral indices obtained from unipolar EGM of different device manufacturers.Test 4: comparison between spectral indices obtained from bipolar EGM of different device manufacturers.The statistical tests were performed using the Student's t-test. Two-sided p values were calculated, and values p<0.05 were considered significant. It is important to note that BBcorresponded to an integrated bipolar configuration, and BMto a true bipolar configuration. Therefore, any statistical difference between spectral indices from both groups could also be due to differences in the type of bipolar lead.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The effects of different acquisition systems on the spectrum of fibrillation were investigated in this study. We hypothesized that lead configuration may affect significantly the estimation of spectral indices previously proposed to describe fibrillation. In order to test this hypothesis, the discrepancies between the values of a family of spectral indices obtained from unipolar and bipolar EGM from two ICD manufacturers were statistically analyzed. This family of spectral indices included the DF, the PF, the MF and the OI, all of which have been previously proposed in the literature to study the spatiotemporal organization of fibrillation. Based on the results of our statistical analysis we can conclude that (1) the DF is robust against changes in lead configuration; (2) the PF, the MF and the OI are affected by lead configuration; (3) spectral indices obtained from unipolar configurations are robust regardless the device manufacturer, and (4) the DF coincides with the PF for unipolar EGM.The structure of the spectrum of cardiac signals during fibrillation can help to explain the results of our study. The spectrum of cardiac signals during fibrillation has a harmonic structure, i.e. it consists of a series of equidistant HF of different amplitudes defining a characteristic envelope. Lead configuration can alter the spectral envelope of cardiac signals during fibrillation while preserving the harmonic separation, i.e. the FF, which in our database always coincided with the DF. As a consequence, the DF is a robust spectral index while the rest of the spectral indices, which depend on the spectral envelope, are not.We always observed that bipolar EGM concentrate power at higher frequencies than unipolar EGM (see panels (b, d, f and h) in Fig. 3). In order to test this qualitative visual observation, we obtained the concentration of power in the first three HF of the spectrum of every EGM, and then we estimated their mean value and standard error for each EGM group (UB, BB, UM, BM). These values, which are shown in Table 5, constitute a summarized description of the average spectral envelope in every EGM group. In general, unipolar UBand UMEGM concentrate most of the power at the first three HF. The greatest concentration occurs at the FF, and then decreases rapidly for higher HF. Bipolar BBand BMEGM on the other hand, have different spectra. In the case of BBEGM, power concentrates at higher HF, which explains why the PF and the MF is higher in this EGM group than in the other groups. On the contrary, BMEGM show a monotonic, decreasing spectral envelope that manifests in a decrease in the power for higher HF. Still, there is a higher concentration of power at low frequencies in unipolar EGM than in BMEGM. These observations agree with previous reports in which the spectra of unipolar and bipolar intracardiac EGM were compared [28,30].The level of significance associated to each spectral index in the statistical tests could be interpreted as a measure of invariance under changes in the lead configuration. VF spectral invariance has two possible interpretations. One interpretation is that the values of variant indices are distorted in different ways depending on the configuration of the lead system. In other words, a variant index contains information about VF characteristics, which is clinically relevant, and information about the lead system, which is clinically irrelevant. Another interpretation is that each lead configuration describes diverse aspects of VF and variant spectral indices mirror such diversity. For example, if the spatial resolution of ICD leads is taken into account [31], it could then be stated that the spectrum of bipolar EGM describes local characteristics of VF, while the spectrum of unipolar EGM describes global characteristics of VF.There exist two main mechanisms that can explain how signal acquisition affects spectral envelope. The first one is filtering. When quasi-periodic signals are high-pass filtered, the power concentration at lower HF is suppressed, while higher HF are enhanced. In ICD, since bipolar EGM are used for arrhythmia detection low frequencies are usually filtered out during signal acquisition. Thus, filtering could explain the shape of the spectral envelope that we observed in both BBand BMEGM.The second mechanism that could affect spectral envelope is sensing itself. The following simple example could illustrate this physical phenomenon. Let us suppose that a bipolar lead, modeled by two close point electrodes E1 and E2, records a signal b(t) induced by a cardiac, plane excitation wave. In this scenario, the unipolar signal recorded by electrode E2, u2(t), will be a delayed version of the signal recorded by electrode E1, u2(t)=u1(t−t0) and therefore, the bipolar signal will be b(t)=u1(t)−u2(t)=u1(t)−u1(t−t0). In words, a bipolar signal can be formulated in the time domain as the difference of a unipolar signal and a delayed version of the unipolar signal itself. Consequently, in the frequency domain the spectrum of bipolar signals can be expressed as a high-pass filtered version of the spectrum of unipolar signals. Therefore, we would expect bipolar signals to concentrate more power at higher frequencies than unipolar signals.When investigating more realistic lead designs, a more general approach is needed to describe the effects of sensing on cardiac spectrum. In [24] it was shown that the bandwidth of the spectrum of cardiac signals is related to the lead spatial resolution in such a way that global leads concentrate power at low frequencies, while local leads concentrate power at high frequencies. These observations could explain some of the spectral differences between EGM recorded by unipolar and bipolar ICD leads. In a previous study the spatial resolution of unipolar and bipolar ICD leads was quantified and it was found that bipolar leads are more local than unipolar leads [31]. Based on this estimation of the spatial resolution of ICD leads, we would thus expect that bipolar leads concentrate power at higher frequencies than unipolar leads. Therefore, part of the discrepancies of the spectra of unipolar and bipolar ICD leads observed in the present investigation could be also ascribed to differences in the spatial resolution, although the relative importance of this mechanism compared to signal filtering could not be quantified.In addition to signal acquisition, signal processing itself could affect the estimation of spectral indices. For example, the first stage of the method that is used to extract the DF consists of a 30–50Hz band-pass filter. If the original EGM has little spectral content in this frequency band, this method would provide with an estimation of the DF that does not correspond to the DF of the original EGM. Also, the OI as defined in [4] is not estimated from the ICD EGM but from its processed counterpart pEGM and therefore, its meaning in terms of the characteristics of the underlying episode of fibrillation should be carefully extracted, since it is obtained from a signal that has been digitally post-processed and hence, its information content has been modified.The results of our study can give insight into the nature of the spectrum of EGM signals recorded by ICD. Spectral analysis has been previously applied to ICD signals to detect ventricular tachyarrhythmias [10–13]. However, differentiating life threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias from physiologic high rhythms based on the spectrum of ICD signals alone remains a challenging task [11]. Our study indicates that differences in the spectrum of cardiac signals can be due to both differences in the heart rhythm and differences in the lead configuration. Therefore, when devising new spectral approaches for detecting ventricular tachyarrhythmias in ICD, the possible distorting effects produced by the lead system should be taken into consideration. One limitation of the present study is that due to its proprietary nature, a detailed description of the transfer function of the ICD internal circuitry was not available and hence, filtering distorting effects could not be further analyzed. Despite this limitation, the take-home message of this study remains that caution should be used when interpreting cardiac spectrum in terms of cardiac spatiotemporal organization, especially in those studies in which non-robust spectral indices are used to describe the spatiotemporal characteristics of fibrillation.