@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reduction of stimulation coherent artifacts in electrically evoked auditory brainstem responses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
61-channel auditory brainstem responses from bilateral cochlear implant subjects.A customized EEG cap is presented with holes at the cochlear implant coil locations.Facial nerve stimulation artifacts contaminate the wave eV in some CI subjects.Principle component analysis was applied to remove the facial nerve artifacts.Electric pulse artifact reduction strategies applied with bilateral stimulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electrically evoked auditory brainstem response,Cochlear implant,Artifacts,Facial nerve stimulation,Principle component analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The electrically evoked auditory brainstem response (eABR) is one of the clinically employed objective evaluation tools for cochlear implant (CI) subjects. It is commonly obtained by averaging responses, but because of the electric CI stimulation, some artifacts are phase locked to the stimulus and do not average out by increasing repetitions. A series of artifact reduction methods, such as general post-processing procedures for all subjects and individual post-processing procedures for some subjects, were developed in this study, aiming at reducing CI stimulation coherent artifacts. Seven bilateral CI subjects were recruited, and both monaural and binaural multi-channel eABRs were recorded in this study. The results show that the CI stimulation pulse artifacts can be efficiently removed by the general post-processing procedure, using alternating polarity stimuli combined with linear interpolation. Recordings obtained with non-alternating polarity show a strong exponential decay. Exponential fitting and subtraction worked reasonably well in this case. For eABR recordings contaminated with facial nerve stimulation (FNS) artifacts, principle component analysis was introduced to minimize the FNS artifacts for potential clinic application in the future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A cochlear implant (CI) is an electrical device that helps to restore hearing to the profoundly deaf. The main principle of CI is to directly stimulate the auditory nerve via electrodes surgically inserted into the inner ear. With the development of new speech processors and algorithms, CI users benefit more and more from CIs [1]. However, average perception performance of CI users is still far below that of normal hearing (NH) listeners, especially in the presence of background noise. Bilateral cochlear implants (BiCIs) have provided some success in improving spatial hearing abilities to bilateral CI users, but with large variability in performance. One reason for the variability is that there may be a mismatch in the place-of-stimulation arising from electrode arrays being inserted at different depths in each cochlea. One promising objective way to optimize the interaural electrode pairing (IEP) is using the binaural interaction component (BIC) by recording the monaural and binaural electrically evoked auditory brainstem responses (eABRs) [2,3].EABR is an objective measurement similar to acoustically evoked brainstem response (ABR). It is generated by delivering electrical pulses via an intra-cochlear electrode array of the cochlear implant and stimulating subsequent physiological structures. The morphology of an eABR is similar to a traditional ABR, but there are differences as well [4–6]: latencies for eABR are shorter than traditional ABR because the electrical stimulus directly activating the neural pathway, therefore avoiding the effects of the time delay associated with the acoustic travel time from the earphone to the neural pathway of the inner ear. The wave eV latency is approximately 1.5–2ms shorter for eABR at high stimulus level. Wave eI and often, wave eII, will not be observed due to the stimulation pulse artifact from the implant. Amplitudes are larger than traditional ABR amplitudes. The morphology and the electrical artifacts of eABR depend on several factors such as stimulation mode, stimulus polarity, phase duration, stimulus rate, stimulus level, and stimulating electrode. The larger the pulse energy, the larger is the electrical artifact. EABR as well as ABR are commonly obtained by averaging responses to increase signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), but because of the electric CI stimulation, some artifacts are synchronous with stimulation and cannot be removed by ensemble averaging. These phase locked stimulus artifacts are the important sources of distortion in eABR recordings [7–12], they overlap with the evoked response in both the time and frequency domains, such that conventional time windowing and frequency filtering are incapable of removing stimulus artifacts without distorting the evoked response. There are several studies on how to remove some of the CI related artifacts, such as the strong artifact during the pulse and the exponentially decaying post pulse artifact [7–11]. This paper therefore focuses on another special CI related electrical artifact observed in some CI subjects’ eABR data caused by the facial nerve stimulation (FNS). Unintended facial nerve stimulation is one of the most frequent complications in CI surgery and postsurgical fitting. There are several possible reasons accounting for the FNS following CI, such as the close proximity of the facial nerve to the lateral wall of the cochlea [13,14], a low impedance pathway, high stimulation levels [15]. Various methods have been proposed to eliminate FNS, such as changing the programming strategy and/or stimulation mode, turning off some electrodes, reducing the comfort levels under FNS thresholds and a re-implantation with a new device [16].In some eABR recordings of CI participants, it was found that the CI electrodes stimulated not only the auditory nerve, but also some unexpected nerves, such as the facial nerve [16–18]. Thus, these nerves also elicited an EEG response. In cases of muscle-stimulating nerves, the evoked potential is expected to be much stronger than the eABR signal itself. The facial nerve response in eABR is triggered by the stimulus and does not average out with more repetitions. Its latency sometimes is also temporally overlapping with the wave eV latency regime. To our knowledge, no method has been described in the literature to suppress such artifacts in CI eABRs. Independent component analysis (ICA) [19] has been widely used in EEG signal processing in various applications, such as in attenuating the eye movement or eye blink [20–24]. It can be used to some extent to separate the EEG signals into statistically maximally independent components [25,26]. However the manual selection of CI artifact components requires expert-choices and is time consuming. Considering that our long-term goal is clinical usage, a computationally efficient principle component analysis (PCA) [27] based FNS artifact reduction method is proposed in this study.The paper is organized in the following way: Section 2 describes the eABR recording setup. Section 3 introduces the typical features of the recorded eABRs and the general offline post-processing procedures to remove the common CI stimulation artifacts and to enhance the SNRs of eABRs in all CI subjects. Section 4 introduces the post-processing procedures for those data sets contaminated with either the exponential decay and/or FNS artifacts. In addition to the existing eABR artifact reduction methods, a new method based on PCA is proposed to remove the FNS artifact co-existing in multi-channel eABRs. Finally the discussions and the conclusions are presented in Section 5.Seven BiCIs users took part in a parallel IEP study [2] and four BiCIs’ (S1, S5, S6, and S7) data were presented as examples in this paper, because they show a FNS artifact in their eABR. Table 1shows some information of these four participants.All participants were severe-to-profound postlingually deaf and were using bilateral MED-EL CIs. The subjects ranged in age from 27 to 78 years. All subjects had a minimum of 9 months bilateral hearing experience with their CIs before joining in this study. All of them used both CIs daily. All subjects except S1 have no residual hearing. The compliance limit of the implants was checked before the experiment. Subjects were evaluated with an interview and questionnaires before the experiment. All participants gave informed consent after a full explanation of the experimental protocol. The voluntary informed written consent was obtained with the approval of the Ethics Committee of Oldenburg University.The stimulation and EEG setup is schematized in Fig. 1(a), which is part of our self-developed IEP research platform [2,28].Stimuli were generated with the research interface box (RIB II, manufactured at University of Innsbruck, Austria) under the control of an on-line stimulation computer with a National Instruments (NI) I/O card. The monaural or bilaterally synchronized electrical pulses were applied to an external induction coil coupled to the MED-EL cochlear implants (without external processor). Prior to the experiment, the stimuli were verified using two detector boxes (the MED-EL CI simulators) and an oscilloscope. A graphical user interface (GUI) was used to input subject's information (e.g. implant type and implant ID) and experiment parameters (e.g. test electrode, pulse parameters), to execute the basic hearing tests (e.g., loudness estimation and loudness balancing), and to control the electrical stimulation via the stimulation computer. The participants’ responses during the psychophysical testing were obtained using a touch screen monitor connected to the stimulation computer (For more details please refer to [2]).A self-developed EEG cap for CI subjects (manufactured by Easycap, Herrsching, Germany) was used. Fig. 1(b) shows the scalp channel locations and labels of the EEG cap. Fig. 1(c) is a photo of the cap and the stimulation coil. Two electrodes (22 and 26) that were classically located at one of the CI coil positions were left unconnected (marked in red in Fig. 1(b)). The participant can switch between the CI telemetry coils and his or her standard coils during the preparation or pause, which is most convenient for communication and comfortable. Moreover, a dislocation of the coils when putting on the cap can be avoided. The position on the central anterior–posterior line is equivalent to 10%-electrode system (e.g. 31=Fpz, Ref=Cz, 49=lz, etc.). Channel 49, 56, 57, 59, 61, and 62 were the selected channels of primary interest, as these are the channels which pick up most of the brainstem potentials and are most typically used ABR recording sites.All stimuli were constant amplitude pulse trains presented at a rate of 19.9 pulses per second (pps) to a single electrode. The rate of pulsatile stimulation was lower than typical stimulation rates used in clinical CI processors but optimal for the assessment of eABR [3]. The stimulus was a train of charge-balanced biphasic pulses, with 50 or 60μs phase duration, and 2.1μs interphase gap presented repeatedly via monopolar stimulation mode. A phase duration of 60μs was used only when the subject could not reach the MCL with 50μs. The trigger had a 5ms duration and was sent 25ms before the CI stimulation pulse (−25ms) to the EEG recording computer as is shown in Fig. 2.Alternating polarity stimulation was introduced in previous publications [7–11] for electric artifact suppression, especially for the rejection of post pulse artifact. However, alternating polarity is not an option for some investigations, for instance, at the most peripheral stages the response is polarity dependent [10]. If the desired eABR investigation requires a specific polarity, other means of artifact reduction are required. In subject S5, we therefore tested a biphasic pulse including a non-alternating stimulation: a positive (anodic) first phase followed by a negative (catholic) second phase. For the parallel IEP study, the reference electrode was the 4th electrode of the left implant (L4), and the probe electrodes were the 12 electrodes of the right implant. The EEG stimulation of each run consisted of 25 CI electrode conditions (1 (left reference electrode only) +12 (right electrode only)+12 (pairs electrodes on both side)). Each condition had 300 biphasic pulses, which started with monaural stimuli presented on reference electrode (L4), respectively. Between them were the right only (Rx) monaural stimuli each followed by the corresponding binaural stimuli (L4Rx) conditions, where the 12 probe electrodes were randomized.The presentation level of each electrode was obtained via the IEP GUI system [2] as follows: first, loudness estimation procedure was used to test the hearing threshold level (HL) and the maximum comfortable level (MCL) of L4; second, a loudness balancing procedure between the reference electrode L4 and the 12 probe electrodes was executed, where electrode L4 was always presented at 60% of the dynamic range (DR) obtained in the former step and the presentation order of probe electrodes was randomized. Finally, each probe electrode was presented at the loudness balanced level obtained in the second step in the eABR recording session.EABRs were differentially recorded from Ag/AgCl electrodes of an equidistant 63-channel braincap (Easycap, Fig. 1(b)) with an electrode at FPz serving as the ground, and the midline cephalic location (Cz) as the physical reference. The electrodes above the CI coil, typically these were 22 and 26, were left unconnected. Electrode impedances were kept below 10kΩ. The 63 scalp electrodes were connected to the 63 monopolar input connectors of a 70-channel SynAmps RT amplifier system (Neuroscan). The voltage resolution was approximately 29.8nV/LSB. The sweeps were filtered by an analog antialiasing-lowpass with a corner frequency of 8kHz, digitized with 20kHz sampling rate via a 24 bit A/D convertor, and stored to hard disk. The recording software was CURRY 7 (Neuroscan).During the experiment, the participants were seated in a recliner and watched silent subtitled movies within an electrically shielded sound-attenuating booth. The eABRs were recorded at the 60% of the subject's individual DR obtained by hearing threshold and maximum comfort estimation on the left and subsequent loudness balancing at 60% DR for all right ear electrodes. All 26 electrode combination conditions were recorded in each run on a sweep-by-sweep basis. The impedances were checked after each run and adjusted if necessary. In total, 7–10 runs (2100–3000 single pulses in each condition) were carried out for each subject depending on the appointment. The duration of the recording session was about 1.5h without preparation and pauses. During the recording any artifact rejection was turned off, since filtering, artifact analysis, and averaging was done offline.One outstanding feature of the eABR recordings of responses to electrical stimulation is its inherent contamination with artifacts from the stimulation itself. They vary between subjects and depend on several factors, such as the position and impedance of the recording electrodes. The CI stimulation artifacts could cause the erroneous detection of neural responses and could distort response properties. In this section, we will describe some typical eABR features and our general post-processing procedures to reduce artifacts and to improve the eABR SNR.Fig. 3shows the morphology of two subjects’ eABRs recorded from channel 56 (right mastoid). The top panel and the bottom panel are recordings from subject S5 (non-alternating) and S6 (alternating polarity) respectively. The stimulation electrode was R4. The right panel in each row is the zoomed in version of the corresponding left panel. Some CI related features are indicated with arrows and texts in Fig. 3, such as CI trigger on and trigger off artifacts, CI pulse artifact (the huge artifacts during and post the pulse [7–11]), FNS artifact and the wave eV of the eABR. The waves eIII–eV of eABR are one of our main focuses, which are characterized by the latencies and the amplitudes of the peaks. The amplitude was defined as the difference between the positive peak and the former trough amplitude. In contrast to acoustic ABR, wave eV occurs already approximately 3.6ms after pulse [3]. Fig. 3 shows that: (1) the different amplitude scales in the left panels imply that the CI stimulation pulse artifact can be dramatically reduced by applying alternating polarity although not totally be removed. (2) The exponential decay is eliminated by using alternating polarity. (3) Subject S6 shows a FNS artifact in the 3–8ms interval, which can contain the wave eV to some extent.The general eABR post-processing procedure mainly aimed at removing the trigger on/off artifact and CI pulse artifact shown in Fig. 3, and at improving the eABR SNR. A 2-stage signal processing procedure was applied to the recordings to obtain clearer eABRs. The first step consisted of canceling the electrical artifact that contaminated the response, the trigger on/off artifact, and the CI pulse artifact. (1) The trigger was sent 25ms before the CI stimulation pulse (−25ms). The trigger on and off artifacts were removed by limiting the epochs to the time range between −10 and 25ms in the offline data analysis, where 0 means the start time of sending CI stimulation, −10ms means 15ms after trigger onset or 10ms before sending the CI stimulation. It should be noted that the trigger artifact can also be highly reduced by shielding the RIB II but for the purpose of eABR measurements it is the safest and most straight forward solution to include a time lag between trigger and CI pulse. (2) Note that the key point of this research is to obtain an accurate wave eIII–eV, since the CI pulse artifact caused by the stimulus pulses are synchronous to the expected response and mainly happen in the range from CI pulse to the range of wave eI to wave eII, a simple linear interpolation was adopted to line out the huge electrical pulse artifact during its short duration. This method cannot completely cancel out the artifact during the pulse, but it is acceptable for our purpose. This is in line with monaural CI EEG after averaging over polarity [29].The second step was to obtain an offline average: the processed single epochs were first baseline corrected relative to the 5ms pre-stimulus recordings; then they were filtered by a sixth-order Butterworth digital bandpass filter, with cutoff frequencies set to 100 and 3000Hz; finally, an iterated weighted average of the filtered sweeps was computed for all stimulus conditions [30]. Fig. 4(a) and (b) shows the results of the left and right mastoid channels (ch56 and ch62), after the first two stage post-processing for subject S7. R1-R12 and L4R1-L4R12 are the post-processed recordings corresponding to one right electrode (Rx) stimulated monaurally and one pair of binaural electrodes (L4Rx) stimulated simultaneously, respectively. Although all the electrodes were presented at their loudness balanced levels, 60% of DR of the reference electrode L4, Fig. 4(a) and (b) shows that the eABR amplitudes are various across stimulating electrodes and across recording surface channels. For most conditions, S7 shows a clear wave eV in most of the conditions after the 2-stage post-processing procedures. At first glance the response morphology looks very much like a typical (uncontaminated) eABR especially in the binaural cases. However, some eABRs recorded on channel 56 show much larger amplitudes at the typical wave eV latency (around 4ms) when the ipsilateral electrodes, such as R5 and R6, were stimulated. Since these amplitudes are outside the range of any reasonable eABR amplitude and they occur only when the ipsilateral side is stimulated, these recordings are most likely contaminated by an FNS artifact.The above two steps are our basic processing for all the recorded eABRs. Since there are big variations between individual recordings, this section aims at suppressing these individual artifacts, namely the exponential decay and the FNS artifact.As is shown in Fig. 3 (the top right panel), some recordings are corrupted by an exponential decay, which will have a negative effect on the eABR, especially on the amplitude estimation. An exponential fitting and subtraction method was applied to these data [31]. This may be necessary when alternating polarity cannot totally remove the exponential decay or mono-polarity has to be used as in [10].The exponential decay reduction consisted of fitting an exponential function and a subsequent subtraction. The estimation was firstly constructed by fitting the following function (1) to the average eABR data obtained by the above 2-stage procedures:(1)f(t)=a1+a2×exp(−a3×t)where a1, a2 and a3 are the parameters of the exponential function. Here, nonlinear least squares regression was used to fit these parameters. Then the resulting fitted curve was subtracted from the data.Fig. 5shows one example of exponential fitting for S5, who showed a very large exponential decay in some channels, such as channels 49 and 59. The bottom and top panels of Fig. 5 are the results of these two channels with and without exponential decay suppression, respectively. In our data, exponential fitting showed quite good performance to remove this type of artifact, the amplitude of the wave eV was easier to identify after the exponential decay reduction in comparison to the original one.The other artifact is caused by facial nerve stimulation from some CI subjects, which is triggered by the CI stimulus and does not average out with more repetitions. There are some evaluations of the electric facial nerve signal via electroneuronography (ENoG) to tests the facial nerve function [18,32] and some CI stimulation methods to eliminate FNS, such as changing the programming strategy and/or stimulation mode, turning off some electrodes, reducing the comfort levels under FNS thresholds, and also a re-implantation with a new device. However, FNS potentials were detected in some subjects’ eABRs even when the presentation level was below their FNS perception threshold, such as for S6 and S7 in this study.As an example, Fig. 6shows some eABRs recorded from 6 different recording channels of subject S1. The blue, red and green curves are the monaural and binaural eABRs of L4, R4, and L4R4 stimulation conditions respectively. The morphology of these eABRs has distinguished differences from a classical eABR: (1) there is no positive wave eV peak around 4ms for most of the binaural eABRs, except channel 62; (2) the amplitude of the wave eV at latency around 4ms is far larger than a classic eABR (∼2μV), except the eABRs from channel 61 and 62 of the right stimulation electrode R4; (3) there are large positive peaks at latency of about 6ms, which is not an eABR latency but it is overlapped with parts of eABR. This artifact corresponds to the facial nerve stimulation muscle response according to the literature [7–11] and some subjects’ reports in the parallel IEP study.Up-to-date no method has been described to suppress such artifacts in eABRs. Sometimes, recording monaural eABR from contralateral side of stimulation (contralateral mastoid) can be one alternative to reduce the FNS artifact. But for subjects with a strong FNS, such as S1 in Fig. 6, there is a non-negligible FNS artifact even in the contralateral recordings. Especially when binaural eABRs are recorded as in our study, the eABRs recorded from both sides are contaminated by the FNS artifact and there is no a-priory knowledge about which side is more contaminated. Thus we need find another way to extract eABRs from FNS artifact contaminated signals. Considering that both FNS response and eABRs are CI stimulation triggered the above mentioned methods cannot be applied and a PCA based FNS artifact reduction is introduced as follows.Principle components analysis (PCA), also known as Karhunen–Loeve Transform (KLT) [33], can be used for data compression to reduce the number of dimensions without much loss of information [34]. It is one of the algorithms that have been proposed in the literature for extracting the signals from a contaminated multi-channel EEG recording [27]. In this paper, computationally efficient singular value decomposition (SVD) based PCA is applied to enhance the FNS artifact contaminated EEG data.Suppose A is an M (time points)×N (observations) (N<M) rectangular matrix containing N observed signals which are linear combinations of N source signals corrupted by noise signals. A generalization of the eigenvalue-eigenvector representation of a square matrix is SVD [35]. In this part, PCA was used to reduce the FNS artifacts, and SVD was used to derive the principal components (PCs) of the EEG signals.The first step in the formulation of the facial nerve artifact minimization problem is to obtain a suitable model for the measured EEG signals. The measured signal is considered as the sum of the pure EEG and a linear combination of artifacts [36]. Assume the number of the source is the same as the number of recording channels, our multiple-channel EEG recordings can be expressed by an M (time points in samples)×N (channels) matrix A (N<M) that was decomposed as a product of three matrixes, A=UΛVT, where U is a column-orthonormal M×N matrix which contains its N normalized principal component waveforms that are decorrelated linearly and can be remixed to reconstruct the original EEG. Λ is an M×N diagonal matrix where the elements are sorted in descending order, which contains the N amplitudes of the N principal component waveforms. We can define the “non-normalized” principal component waveforms as the columns of P=UΛ. V is a column-orthonormal N×N matrix such that VTV=VVT=I, which is essentially a set of topographic scalp maps. Once the estimates of the source signals are found as Ps=UsΛs, one can construct a matrixAˆthat contains only the wanted signal asAˆ=UsΛsVswhere Usis an M×R matrix and contains the R columns of U associated with the signal part. Λsis a R×R diagonal matrix, and Vsis a R×N matrix.For example, for the above S1 dataset, M is 800 (epoch length in samples), N is 61 (channels), Usis the matrix by removing the first principle component which is assumed to mainly consist of the FNS artifact component. Fig. 7(a) shows the first six principle components of S1's eABRs after CI stimulation pulse artifact reduction, the general 2-stage offline post-processing procedure. Since the FNS artifact typically has much larger amplitude than the eABR, we assume the first PC is dominated by the FNS artifact and can be removed from the reconstruction. Fig. 7(b) shows the reconstruction results of some channels by removing the first principle component. The solid line is the eABRs after the general post-processing procedure. The dash-dotted line is the result after further PCA processing, where the first PC was removed. Fig. 8gives another example of the PCA application in reducing FNS artifact in subject S6. The y-axis was set to ±4.5μV in each subplot in order to capture realistic eABR amplitudes (The amplitude of the wave eV of classic eABR is around 2μV, here, with a 60% DR stimulation, 1–2μV amplitudes are expected) [6–11]. The green dashed lines in Fig. 8 shows the PCA reconstruction results when only the eABR data collected from the 17 yellow scalp channels (marked in Fig. 1) were selected for PCA analysis. It shows that this method works well even with 17 channels. In one case (ch57) it even outperforms the 61-channel PCA may due to the exclusion of some noisy recording channels. It is assumed that the number of channels can be even less than 17, as long as some of them recorded reasonable eABR data, which will be further investigated in the future. The results of both Figs. 7 and 8 show that PCA can remove most of the FNS in some but not in all recording channels in these two subjects. However, for most purposes it is sufficient that at least one of these six critical channels contains a clear eABRs after PCA post-processing. In some cases of the 61-channel PCA, an improved eABR morphology is observed but the wave eV amplitudes are still larger than expected, indicating some residual artifact.Monitoring and reduction of the electrically stimulated artifacts in eABRs is of critical importance. Plenty of algorithms have been proposed in the literature for extracting the actual EEG signals from contaminated EEG signals. However, none of them have been used in the analysis of multi-channel eABRs according to the authors’ knowledge. In this study, a series of offline post-processing methods were further developed to remove the CI related artifacts and to enhance the wave eII–eV of the multi-channel eABR data from MED-EL BiCIs. The post-processing includes a 2-stage general post-processing and an individual post-processing. The general post-processing procedure aimed at reducing common CI stimulation artifacts for all eABR recordings. Additional individual post-processing procedures were applied to some recordings that were contaminated with exponential decay and/or FNS artifacts. In this paper, a SVD-based PCA was proposed to suppress FNS artifacts considering the clinical application in the future. The post-processing procedures were tested with 61 channel real eABR data, which were collected from seven MED-EL BiCIs participants. The stimulation protocol, the EEG cap, and the post processing techniques were all self-developed. The results showed that the multichannel eABR post-processing procedures are very effective in minimizing the CI related artifacts and thus in enhancing the eABR signals. In particular, the SVD-based PCA can extract the eABR signals from the FNS artifact contaminated EEG signals in the investigated CI subjects, and can be adapted to future clinical applications with less scalp electrodes. Future studies elaborate on more advanced signal processing methods, such as ICA with automatic or semi-automatic identification of artifact components or pattern recognition algorithms to further explore the advantage of multi-channel eABR technology by mining into the redundant information hidden in the multi-channel eABR recordings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
