@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Methodological issues in the spectral analysis of the heart rate variability: Application in patients with epilepsy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Heart rate variability (HRV) is a useful measure of autonomic function.Frequency domain analysis of HRV in 68patients with epilepsy was performed.Two-parametric and two non-parametric spectral methods were employed.Epilepsy-related abnormalities of HRV were not consistent in all four methods.Parametric methods seemed to be more appropriate for this type of analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heart rate variability,Autonomic dysfunction,Epilepsy,Frequency domain analysis,Time domain analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeSpectral analysis of heart rate variability (HRV) constitutes a useful tool for the evaluation of autonomic function. However, it is difficult to compare the published data because different mathematical approaches for the calculation of the frequency bands are applied. Our aim was to compare the HRV frequency domain parameters obtained by application of 2 parametric and 2 non-parametric spectral methods in a group of patients with chronic epilepsy.MethodsSixty-eight patients and 69 healthy controls underwent a 5-min recording of RR signal, which was analyzed off-line in time and in frequency domains.ResultsThe time domain parameters – variation RR ratio, standard deviation of normal-to-normal RR and coefficient of variation – were significantly lower in patients than in controls. In spectral analysis of the patient group deviation toward opposite directions of Low Frequency band (p=0.034) and Total Power (p=0.013) measures was detected depending on the method used. The results of Burg's and Yule-Walker's parametric methods fitted best to those of time domain estimates for both control and patient groups.ConclusionsEpilepsy-related abnormalities of HRV were disclosed by time as well as by frequency domain analysis. In the present setting, the parametric methods proved to be superior to the non-parametric ones in matching time domain parameters of patients and healthy subjects and at the same time in detecting abnormalities of the frequency domain measures of patients with epilepsy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Autonomic nervous system (ANS) plays a vital role in cardiovascular system regulation. Impaired autonomic control upon heart rhythm has been disclosed by means of physiological or pharmacological approaches in various systematic, cardiac, neural and psychiatric diseases [1–4]. The growing interest in the evaluation of ANS function is largely due to the implication of autonomic dysregulation in the pathophysiology of sudden unexpected death of patients suffering from epilepsy or heart arrhythmias [5]. The study of heart rate variability (HRV) in short or long term RR signal recordings, at rest or under stress conditions and the measurements of time domain variables constitutes the every-day routine method to examine the autoregulatory effect on the cardiac rhythm. This analysis is also being incorporated in several electromyographic apparatus software programs. In our previous study [6], the RR interval variability at rest in a group of 71 patients with chronic epilepsy did not prove to be a sensitive index of ANS dysfunction because it was abnormal in only 7% of those patients. The application of dynamic tests, such as Valsalva maneuver and tilt ratio, increased the percentage of abnormality to 42.2% of the patients as compared to the matched control group of healthy individuals.The supplementation of HRV time domain measurements by frequency domain analysis appeals to clinicians due to its simplicity of recording and its efficacy in evaluating the cardiovascular tone. The sympathetic and parasympathetic (vagus nerve) are the two distinct and opposite influences on heart rate modulation. By decomposing the frequency spectrum into four frequency bands it separates the sole contribution of the vagus nerve from that of the joint sympathovagal input to cardiac rhythm [7]. In recent literature an increasing number of articles have presented the results of power spectral analysis in patients with heart failure, myocardial infarction, epilepsy and Parkinson's disease as compared to healthy controls [4,8,9]. According to recent reviews, some of the markers of parasympathetic tone or balance between sympathetic and parasympathetic inputs might differ between patients with epilepsy and control groups but the findings of different studies were mixed or even contradictive [10,11]. A possible reason for these discrepancies could be the different mathematical approaches employed for the calculation of the Power Spectral Densities. Unlike time domain, the analysis of frequency domain variables requires sophisticated mathematical analyses, performed off-line, often via a custom-built PC program. Thus, methodological dissimilarities among studies pose obstacles to the direct comparison of published data. Moreover, there has been no attempt to compare the results of different mathematical models in order to identify the most suitable model that best serves the purposes of clinical studies.We, therefore, undertook this study to measure the values of the frequency domain parameters obtained by the application of four different spectral methods to the same RR recordings. Secondary objectives were: (i) to detect possible changes of HRV power spectral measures in patients with epilepsies in comparison to a matched group of healthy individuals, (ii) to explore the possible correlation of the frequency domain to the time domain variables, as well as to clinical epileptic parameters, such as duration of epilepsy, seizure type and mono- or multiple-therapy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
