@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The anterior contralateral response improves performance in a single trial auditory oddball BMI

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We improved the accuracy of single-trial three-stimuli auditory BMIs.We compare features from standard EEG and N200-anterior-contralateral signals.The addition of N2ac features significantly improves classification accuracy.Target stimuli with larger pitch range facilitate focusing on the desired answer.The results are among the best reported to date for single-trial auditory BCIs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain machine interface,Oddball auditory paradigm,N200-anterior-contralateral,Empirical Mode Decomposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Auditory Brain Machine Interfaces were designed for patients with severe neurofunctional disabilities, such as those suffering with late-stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), who have impaired eye movements or are unable to maintain gaze preventing them from using visual strategies for communication. This study explores the three-stimulus auditory oddball paradigm with binary choices (yes/no) associated with Empirical Mode Decomposition to extract features used to train and test a Support Vector Machine classifier. Data from standard EEG channels and from the N200-anterior-contralateral (N2ac) response signal were tested. Ten healthy male subjects, age 20 to 27 years, participated in the experiment. The best performance (average classification accuracy of 87.41% and information transfer ratio of 6.48bit/min) was achieved when features extracted from the N2ac response were added to features extracted from the EEG channels. Also, the results showed that by using target stimuli with larger frequency separation helps the subjects focus better on the desired answer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain machine interfaces (BMI) have been shown to provide severely disabled patients with late-stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) a method of non-muscular augmentative communication and control [1,2]. Such interfaces are generally based on features extracted from electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings such as the visual P300 event related potential (ERP) [3], slow cortical potentials (SCPs) [4] and sensorimotor rhythms (SMR) recorded over the sensorimotor cortex [5,6]. Most of these neural features are exhibited and modulated during exogenous visual stimulation paradigms such as the P300 matrix speller paradigm and the steady-state evoked potential paradigm (SSVEP) [7]. Many potential BMI users however, such as patients with late-stage ALS, suffer from visual impairments and may be unable to maintain gaze fixation when performing visual BMI paradigms. These patients may benefit from modified paradigms that use an alternative sensory modality such as auditory perception [8–12]. An early attempt to explore the feasibility of auditory BMIs was performed by Nijboer et al., who modified the traditional SMR BMI paradigm by administering multi-modality (auditory/visual) stimuli, showing that, given sufficient training time, an auditory BMI can be as effective as a visual BMI [13].Currently, auditory BMI using EEG is usually performed as a modified P300 oddball paradigm; that is, visual stimuli are replaced by audio stimuli such as bells, buzzing, tones and spoken words or numbers. Sellers et al. achieved average accuracies of 65% using an auditory P300 paradigm in which subjects were asked to pay attention to a target “attended” word in a stream of unattended word stimuli [14]. Hill et al. achieved 63–97% accuracy in a streaming auditory P300-inspired task in which subjects were asked to pay attention to one of two binaurally delivered stimuli streams [15]. Klobassa et al. modified the traditional P300 matrix speller paradigm to include six environmental sounds associated with the 6×6 visual stimulus grid, but found equivalent online and offline accuracy, compared to the original paradigm without the added auditory stimuli [16]. In all cases, the amount of attention that must be spent to maintain high BMI performance can quickly become exhausting, especially for late stage ALS patients who suffer a marked decrease in their attention span in addition to their motor deficiencies [17,18]. In an attempt to minimize mental effort, Halder et al. proposed a simple auditory three-stimulus oddball paradigm in which the subjects were presented with two targets and a series of frequent standard tones randomized in sequences of up to seven stimuli. Targets differed in loudness, pitch or location and selections were made by focusing on either one of the two targets [9]. The results showed that the best performance (average accuracy of 78.5%) was achieved with targets differing in pitch. However, even in the best-case scenario, the information transfer rate (ITR) was very low for practical applications (1.3 to 1.7bit/min).Overall, practical BMIs for the severely disabled must provide a system that requires minimal effort to operate but offers high accuracy at high speeds of communication—ITRs of 1 or 2bit per minute, most probably, would not fulfill such requirements. Since ITR depends on the accuracy of the system, on the number of different targets to choose from and on the time needed for selection, higher ITR can be achieved by: (a) reducing the number of choices: e.g. one could look for strategies to minimize the number of selections with the help of the BMI; (b) reducing the time to make a selection: either by searching for different paradigms or looking for better algorithms to detect user's intentions and; (c) increase the accuracy of target selection: again this could imply the use of a new paradigm, new processing techniques or new features that facilitate communication between the user and the BMI.Recently, Gamble and Luck reported a negativity around the N2 latency at anterior contralateral EEG sites that occurred when subjects were instructed to attend to one of two auditory stimuli presented simultaneously from different spatial locations [19]. The authors named this negativity “N200-anterior-contralateral” (N2ac) component of auditory ERP. Later, Gamble and Woldorff [20] studied the sequence of neural processes evoked during auditory target search and concluded that the lateralized N2ac ERP response reflects a general electrophysiological marker of the lateralized focusing of auditory attention towards a detected target sound in an auditory scene.In this study, we evaluate the influence of the N2ac ERP response in the performance of an auditory BMI based on a three-stimulus oddball paradigm with binary choices (yes/no). In this paradigm, two target stimuli are presented monaurally and a standard white-noise stimulus is presented binaurally. The subjects were required to attend to one of two target stimuli presented. EEG feature extraction was optimized by means of Empirical Mode Decomposition and the main Intrinsic Mode Functions were used as input to a Support Vector Machine classifier. Since the N2ac response is strongly correlated to lateralized focusing of auditory attention, we hypothesize that its inclusion as an added feature to the classifier would improve classification accuracy and boost the ITR of the BMI. We also designed two tasks in which the target stimuli are played at different “pitch distances”, to explore if the distance between the frequencies of the target stimuli contributes to better discrimination and accuracy. Finally, we test the performance of the model for single-trials on healthy volunteers in an attempt to show its viability and eventual applicability as an online tool for the severely disabled.Ten healthy male subjects, age 20 to 27 years, participated in the experiment. The experimental procedure was explained in detail to each subject, who also signed an informed consent form (Ethics Committee Protocol CEP/UFU/314/11). None of the participants had a history of hearing loss and were all able to clearly hear and identify the different frequencies used in the experiment.A standard clinical 32-electrode (Ag/AgCl) cap (Compumedics Neuroscan, USA) was used for recording EEG signals. The SynAmps2 amplifier and data acquisition system (Compumedics Neuroscan, USA) was used for signal conditioning and data acquisition (bandwidth 0.05–250Hz, 60Hz notch filter, 24bit AD). EEG data were collected from F3, Fz, F4, C3, Cz, C4, FC3, FCz, FC4 (referenced to M1 and M2 and grounded at AFz) and sampled at 1000Hz.The subjects comfortably sat in a reclining chair. They donned the EEG cap and gel was injected in the selected electrodes. Electrode impedance was kept below 5kΩ during the experiments. Additionally, the subjects were told to keep their eyes closed and avoid eye movements during testing and recording. Conventional headphones were used to play the auditory stimuli. All experiments were performed in a quiet room in order to reduce the interference of environmental noise.The subjects were verbally asked a simple yes-no question (‘Is the soccer ball round?’, ‘Is the sky green?’, etc.) prior to EEG recording. Their answer to the question dictated the target they were supposed to pay attention to (if ‘yes’, attend to target A, if ‘no’, attend to target B). Four different auditory stimuli were selected for tasks in the experiments: three pure tones at 100Hz, 1000Hz, 4000Hz and white noise.Two tasks were designed around the hypothesis that the tone frequencies have an important effect on the discrimination results. In each task three types of stimuli were presented: two pure tones with different frequencies (target A and target B) and a white noise stimulus. As described earlier, before each task, the volunteers were asked a randomly selected “yes/no” question. If the subject intended to reply ‘yes’, they were supposed to attend to target A, and if the intention was to answer ‘no’, to instead attend to target B. In all cases, subjects were instructed not to verbalize their answer, but to instead answer by directing their attention to the proper stimulus. Subjects were, however, instructed to answer the question correctly. The subjects performed each task twice, answering one question each time with the two questions requiring different responses. A task consisted of 20 trials and for each trial seven stimuli were played: target A played mono at the left ear, target B played mono at the right ear, and five pulses of white noise played in stereo (Fig. 1). Each stimulus lasted 100ms with intensity set to 75dB (sound pressure level) and the inter stimuli intervals (ISI) were randomized between 400ms and 800ms. Overall, the main difference between the two tasks was the tones chosen for target A, as follows:•Task 1:∘Target A: 1000Hz tone, played once at the left audio channel,Target B: 4000Hz tone, played once at the right audio channel,White noise played five times binaural.Task 2:∘Target A: 100Hz tone, played once at the left audio channel,Target B: 4000Hz tone, played once at the right audio channel,White noise played five times binaural.Prior to the experiment, the subjects were presented the four auditory stimuli individually to make sure that they could differentiate them. A test sequence was also conducted to verify that the subjects could distinguish the two target stimuli and understood the task.To reduce power line interference, a hardware bandpass filter with cutoff frequencies at 0.05Hz to 50Hz was enabled on the EEG amplifier, in addition to a 60Hz notch filter for each channel. Also, prior to any processing, the raw EEG data were once again filtered using a 0.5–25Hz digital band-pass filter.In order to avoid ocular artifacts in the data set, both vertical and horizontal electrooculographic (EOG) signals were recorded simultaneously with the EEG data. All epochs were first visually inspected before processing and those with excessive artifact were removed from the data set. Finally, a ±50μV threshold was used to validate the epochs [21]. Any trials with voltage fluctuations exceeding that threshold were also excluded.As described by Gamble and Luke, the N2ac is a component of auditory ERPs characterized by a negativity around the N2 latency (200ms) range at anterior contralateral electrodes [19]. The N2ac response is calculated as shown in Eqs. (1) and (2). By subtracting the anterior ipsilateral response from the anterior contralateral response, a negative peak (the N2ac response) would appear overlapping the N2 peak.•For target A (left audio channel)(1)N2acA=F4+FC4+C4−F3+FC3+C3For target B (right audio channel)(2)N2acB=F3+FC3+C3−F4+FC4+C4The epochs were extracted from all channels from 200ms before the stimulus-onset to 800ms after the stimulus-onset. After extraction, all epochs were referred to the mean amplitude of the pre-stimulus baseline. Since there were twenty trials per task, with seven stimuli in each trial, 140 epochs were extracted from each channel per task and used to train and test the classifier.In order to investigate if the anterior contralateral response would improve classification accuracy, the classifiers were also tested using epochs extracted from the N2acA or N2acB signals (depending on the stimulus) in addition to the epochs extracted from the original EEG channels.Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) is a nonlinear and adaptive technique that decomposes any times-series into a set of functions called Intrinsic Mode Functions (IMF) [22–24]. These IMFs represent natural oscillatory modes embedded in the signal, which are derived from the signal itself, rather than from a pre-determined kernel, such as the mother wavelet required for Wavelet transforms or sine and cosine waves required for Fourier analyses. An IMF represents a generally simple oscillatory mode as a counterpart to the simple harmonic function. By definition, an IMF is any function with the same number of extrema and zero crossings, with its envelopes being symmetric with respect to zero. ERPs cannot be easily detected or visualized in single trials since the EEG reflects a multitude of ongoing processes in the brain—and that is the reason why they are usually represented as the result of grand averages of epochs from multiple trials. However, ERPs do happen in every trial and, therefore, can be thought as natural oscillations that appear in the EEG signal after a suitable stimulus is presented [25,35]. The authors want to test the hypothesis that the EMD is sensitive enough to represent those oscillations in single trials and improve classification accuracy.EMD was applied to all 140 epochs of every signal (EEG channels and N2acA/B signals), resulting in a set of IMFs per epoch. In order to select the best IMF of each epoch (the one that better captures the overall response for the specific stimulus), we compute the correlation coefficient between each IMF and a template signal related to the same type of stimulus that generated the epoch. Three different templates were obtained for each channel and for each subject by averaging the individual responses for target A, target B or white noise of the training trials in the task. The IMF with the highest correlation coefficient of the epoch was chosen as the best component (main IMF). In so doing, we were left with 140 IMFs per signal, each one representing a different epoch.Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are a set of supervised learning methods derived from statistical learning theory that attempts to maximize the margin between two hyper-planes that linearly separate the data into its respective classes [26]. SVMs are capable of delivering high and reproducible classification performance as well as robustness with a low number of training samples [27,28]. In this study, an SVM using a radial basis function kernel (RBF) was used to identify the attended target stimulus. The regularization constant (C) and the kernel hyper parameter (γ) for the classifier were selected using the grid search method [29]. As described earlier, the data recorded from each subject consisted of 80 trials (2 tasks×2 repetitions×20 trials). Since each trial consisted of 7 epochs (1 target stimulus, 1 non-target stimulus and 5 non-target-white-noise stimuli) represented by their main IMFs, the complete dataset for each subject consisted of 560 main IMFs (80 targets and 480 non-targets). The dataset used to train and test the classifiers (one for each volunteer) consisted of features (main IMFs) from the 80 target trials and 80 non-targets randomly selected from the original 480 non-targets. A “shuffle/split” cross-validation technique was used to evaluate the performance of the SVM classifier in single trials. For each cross-validation, 3/4 of the dataset was randomly selected for training and the remaining 1/4 was used for testing. The measured performance is the average of the values computed across the four folds. This is a common approach used in the literature and according to Hastie et al. and Jian et al., it mitigates the risk of overfitting/overtraining and can be used to test the performance of classifiers such as SVMs [30,31].In order to assess the effectiveness of the N2ac component, offline classification was tested using different time segments/periods of the main IMFs (down-sampled to 20Hz). Although previous studies reported that the N200 component shows a negative deflection peaking at about 200ms after presentation of stimulus and P300 peaks around 300ms after the stimulus, there is no unified range for these ERPs [32]. In this study, after preliminary investigation, we chose the following periods: (a) 100–300ms—the N200 window; (b) 300–600ms—the P300 window; and (c) 100–600ms—the N200 plus P300 window. Furthermore, for each period, we tested the classifier using: (i) only IMFs related to the EEG channels, (ii) only IMFs related to the N2acA/B signals; and (iii) using the IMFs from both the EEG channels and from the N2acA/B signals.The predicted performance of a BMI using the strategies proposed in this paper can be assessed by the information transfer rate. This value can be derived from the number of bits transmitted per trial, as introduced in [9,33]:(3)BR=log2N+Plog2P+1−Plog21−PN−1where BR is the bitrate (bits per trial), P is the classification accuracy (probability of correct classification) and N is the number of targets (2).The information transfer rate can be calculated by dividing BR by the time (T, in seconds) needed for a selection with the given number of trials. Since ITR is usually described in terms of bit/min, we can write it as shown in the following equation:(4)ITR=BR×60TA paired t-test was used for evaluating the statistical significance of differences between the average of contralateral and ipsilateral waveforms at the anterior electrodes when subjects pay attention to chosen target stimuli. The test was applied to determine the selectivity or preferential side of the N200 and P300 ERPs related to chosen target stimuli. A t-test was also used to compare the classification accuracy of the SVM classifiers for the different periods of data and different tasks (different target tones).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
