@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using Blind Source Separation on accelerometry data to analyze and distinguish the toe walking gait from normal gait in ITW children

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper discusses a lab based automated classification method using Blind Source Separation (BSS) technique.We identify toe walking gait from normal gait in Idiopathic Toe Walkers (ITW) children.We use BSS methods separate simultaneous movements of the foot in the horizontal and vertical planes.BSS technique and K-means method classify various gait patterns in normal and ITW children with 98% accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Idiopathic Toe Walkers (ITW),Blind Source Separation (BSS),Gait analysis,Independent component analysis (ICA),Independent Components (ICs),K-Means clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gait analysis is an important aspect of Biomedical Engineering. In the recent past, researchers have applied several signal processing methods for the analysis of gait activities. Sensors such as accelerometers, gyroscopes and pressure sensors are more commonly used to identify gait activities remotely. Most of the applications have multiple sensors placed on a single board which is used for gait assessment. However, the problem with multiple sensors is the cross talk introduced by one sensor due to another sensor. Some of the applications use a single sensor such as accelerometer with dual axis measuring the gait activity in horizontal and vertical planes. Depending on the orientation of the accelerometer, the two axial outputs could have overlapping spectra which is very difficult to observe. Spectral and temporal filtering is not suitable for this because of overlapping spectra due to simultaneous movements of the foot in the horizontal and vertical planes. To reliably identify the gait activities, there is a need to decompose and separate the two vertical and horizontal acceleration signals. The earlier research has described a novel method which can be used remotely to identify the gait in ITW children. This paper discusses a lab based automated classification method using Blind Source Separation (BSS) technique to identify toe walking gait from normal gait in Idiopathic Toe Walkers (ITW) children. The outcome of the research study reveals that the BSS techniques in association with K-means classifier can suitably distinguish toe-walking gait from normal gait in ITW children with 97.9±0.2% accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Idiopathic Toe Walkers (ITW) are children who normally tend to walk on their toes with the ankle plantar flexed. These children are called idiopathic because they are considered to walk on their toes for no apparent reason [1]. The severity of toe walking varies as some children walk on the tip of the toes while some have their heels just off the ground [2]. Consequences of toe walking often lead to an abnormal gait associated with back pain or a bouncy gait if they are not treated and monitored. The treatment options for these children vary as per the severity of toe walking. However, even after the treatment there is a tendency for these children to revert back to toe walking due to habit. Hence monitoring their gait after treatment is very important.Currently, the ITW children are assessed by measuring the ankle flexibility at the clinics. Parental feedback is another form of gait assessment method in ITW children. However, both these methods are subjective and confined to a gait laboratory and clinics [1,2]. There are other methods for monitoring the gait using the wireless sensor technology [2]. Sensors such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, pressure sensors are very commonly used for gait analysis. However each of these sensors has certain limitations in terms of measurements. Gyroscopes can be used for gait analysis but are preferred for applications with angle or tilt measurement and hence useful to determine the angle of the foot with respect to ground [3–5]. Pressure sensors are also used for gait analysis in clinical settings [6–9]. The drawback of using the pressure sensors is that we need multiple pressure sensors on the foot (one on heel, one on balls of the foot, etc.) as they provide output (pressure in analog value) only when that part of the foot is in contact with the ground [8,9]. An accelerometer provides output acceleration (analog or digital) of the foot even when the foot is not in contact with the ground. Therefore it is possible to determine the acceleration of the foot during the full gait cycle and also determine the different phases (stance & swing) in the gait cycle using accelerometers [10–14]. Hence, for this study we have chosen a dual axis accelerometer.The new activity monitoring devices uses wireless technology integrated with multiple sensors such as accelerometers, gyroscopes and pressure sensors in order to determine the gait activity [10–14]. However, these sensors are highly sensitive to vibrations or movement. Even a very small change in one sensor can affect the other sensors. Hence, the signal associated with one sensor could record signals originating from adjacent sensors and lead to cross-talk (noise). This cross talk could lead to an overlapping spectrum of signals. The cross talk or the noise often goes unobserved by the researcher or the clinician as the level (amplitude) of the cross talk can vary depending on the gait activity. If the cross talk is substantial, it can also lead to improper assessment while monitoring the gait activity in subjects.To reliably identify the gait activities from multiple sensor data or multiple axes from a single sensor, there is a need to decompose and separate each sensor's signals accurately. Spectral and temporal filtering is not suitable for this because of overlapping signals from the multiple sensors used due to simultaneous movements of the foot in the horizontal and vertical planes. BSS techniques provide a solution for such a situation. Independent component analysis (ICA) is a widely used BSS technique that is suitable for estimating Independent Components (ICs) from a mixture. It has been used very successfully for audio and bio-signal applications [15–17]. BSS is also widely used in source separation and identification of other biomedical signals such as Electroencephalography (EEG), Electrocardiography (ECG) and Electromyography (EMG), which are weak and overlapping.In this research, we propose an automated classification of heel accelerometer data (ITW and normal gait) using ICA and KNN classifiers. Initially, the ICA algorithm is used to extract features; a feature vector by a coefficient matrix is formed. The feature vectors are then classified by a K-means clustering algorithm. The rest of the paper is organized as follows; the basic principle of heel accelerometer data and ICA are described in Section 2. In Section 3, experimental sensor setup and sensor calibration is introduced. Section 4 explains the data analysis and the classification results of normal and toe walking gait. Section 5 discusses the outcome of the proposed research technique. Finally, in Section 6, the proposed method is summarized and suggestions for future work are mentioned.The following section explains the concept of heel accelerometer data used to assess the gait and ICA in brief.In normal walking, when a body moves forward, one foot is in swing phase and moves forward and the other foot is in stance phase and is stationary on the ground. In a normal gait cycle, stance phase contributes to 60% and swing phase contributes 40% of the gait cycle [18,19]. Stance phase can further be divided into early (immediately following heel strike), mid (flat foot or when the foot is on the ground) and late (toes down or plantar flexed foot) stance. However, in a toe walking gait cycle, the foot is always at an angle to the ground i.e. plantarflexed, even during the stance phase. Hence the accelerometer signals in a toe walking gait during stance are observed to be significantly different than the normal stance.Fig. 1shows the boots with the position of the accelerometer in the heel used for the experiments at the clinic. Based on the earlier research [14], it is proved that in the group of children with a normal gait during mid stance, as the foot is stationary, the angle of inclination of the heel with respect to ground is zero. Hence, the dual axis accelerometer, embedded in the heel of the boot represents a near constant value of (−g) in the vertical acceleration signal (ay). The horizontal acceleration axrepresents zero acceleration during mid stance. In severe ITW children (who walk on the tip of the toes) during mid stance, the acceleration ay, due to the foot being angled down, is not equal to −g as shown in Fig. 2a and b respectively. Also, Eqs. (1) and (2) represents the horizontal acceleration and the vertical acceleration in relation to the gravity (g) and the angle made by the foot w.r.t the ground (θ) [18,19].(1)ax≈∼−gsinθ(2)ay≈∼−gcosθICA is a method originally proposed to solve the BSS problem, which aims to separate the mixed accelerometer signals into a set of underlying independent sources given very little or no prior information. ICA assumes that original sources are linear, statistically independent and have non-Gaussian distribution. We denote the n source signals by s(t)=s1(t), s2(t), …, sn(t) and the m observed recordings by x(t)=x1(t), x2(t), …, xm(t), then the most common linear ICA model (noise free) can be expressed as(3)x(t)=As(t)where, A is referred to as m×n mixing matrix. For normal ICA it is assumed that N=M (number of sources equal to number of recordings). Each observation is modeled as a linear combination of original sources. The goal of ICA is to find the inverse of A, the unmixing matrix W (W=A−1), and obtain the ICs simply by(4)u(t)=Ws(t)=WAs(t)The underlying ICs are estimated through maximizing some parameters by computing the statistical independence [15,16]. The ICA source separation process is shown in Fig. 3.The ICA algorithm can be derived based on different theories and techniques. Infomax ICA and FastICA are two of the more popular referenced ICA techniques in the literature, more information about these algorithms can be found in [16] and [17]. FastICA uses simple estimates of Negentropy based on the maximum entropy principle [16,17], which requires the use of appropriate nonlinearities for the learning rule of the neural network. To estimate source uithe vector w (a row of unmixing matrix W) is selected such that Negentropy of WTX is maximized. The W that creates the least Gaussian distribution must produce estimation to Negentropy based on the maximum entropy principle. The approximate Negentropy is given by(5)JG(W,X)=[E{G(WTX)}−E{G(V)}]2where G(•) are some nonnegative quadratic functions, E is mathematical expectation and V is a Gaussian variable of zero mean and unit variance. The success of FastICA algorithm depends on the proper selection of G(•) value. The basic form of FastICA algorithm is described below:1.Choose an initial vectorW+=E{XG′(WTX)}−E{XG′′(WTX)}WLetW=W+/W+If not converged, go back to step 2.Prior to the above process, it is required to pre-process the data, which include zero-mean and whitening process [20]. As explained above, the algorithm has estimated only one independent (deflation approach) vector (u). In order to estimate additional sources, techniques based on the orthogonal of weight vectors w of W are essential (symmetric approach) [21].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
