@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Extracting optimal tempo-spatial features using local discriminant bases and common spatial patterns for brain computer interfacing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modified local discriminant bases to extract information from motor imagery data.We use common spatial patterns as transform function instead of orthogonal methods.Our method obtains better classification performance than classical approaches.We obtain useful insights on discriminative spatio-temporal information.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain computer interface,Motor imagery,Local discriminant bases,Common spatial patterns,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Brain computer interfaces (BCI) provide a new approach to human computer communication, where the control is realised via performing mental tasks such as motor imagery (MI). In this study, we investigate a novel method to automatically segment electroencephalographic (EEG) data within a trial and extract features accordingly in order to improve the performance of MI data classification techniques. A new local discriminant bases (LDB) algorithm using common spatial patterns (CSP) projection as transform function is proposed for automatic trial segmentation. CSP is also used for feature extraction following trial segmentation. This new technique also allows to obtain a more accurate picture of the most relevant temporal–spatial points in the EEG during the MI. The results are compared with other standard temporal segmentation techniques such as sliding window and LDB based on the local cosine transform (LCT).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain computer interfaces (BCI) are communication systems that use human thoughts as control signals to operate machines [1]. These systems are particularly valuable for paralysed users who may not be able to interact with computers in any other manner. From the non-disabled user's point of view, BCIs can enrich human computer interaction where the subject's mental states, such as emotions and error related activity, can be taken into account. Regular users suffering from an induced disability (situations where the user's concentration or attention may be compromised, such as surgeons or pilots) may also benefit from this kind of human computer interaction [2].BCIs are classified into several paradigms depending on which mental state or signal type is analysed [3]. Whenever a limb movement is performed, several areas on the brain cortex are activated due to firing signals from different neuronal populations. Some of these populations show activity even if no real movement is performed at all; just imagining limb movement is sufficient to produce changes of state in the motor cortex [4]. The BCI studied in this paper is based on motor imagery (MI), using EEG as a method for signal acquisition.Limb movement imagery is characterised by short lasting power amplifications /attenuations along the μ band in EEG, which are known as event related desynchronisation (ERD) and event related synchronisation (ERS) [5,6]. Many BCI designs rely on ERD/ERS to discriminate MI movements (such as hands, feet, fingers, tongue, etc.) [7,8]. ERD/ERS components can be found in temporal, spatial, and spectral domains. Different researchers use different techniques to find the most discriminant features in each domain. For example, many studies focus on spatial components such as common spatial patterns (CSP) [9]. Some researchers try to extract relevant information from the ERD/ERS time course using techniques like local discriminant bases (LDB) [10]. Other studies combine elements from two or three different domains, such as PARAFAC based methods [11,12], common sparse spectral spatial pattern (CSSSP) [13], filter bank common spatial pattern (FBCSP) [14], and wavelet common spatial pattern (WCSP) [15].The time span given to the subject for imagining limb movement is denominated a trial, within which the ERD/ERS occurs. Depending on the experiment protocol the trial duration may vary from 4 to 8s. The classification of the data obtained from the feature extraction can be performed sample by sample, giving a classification result for every sample in the input data, or trial by trial, where only a single prediction is given for the whole trial. CSP has been popularly used in the literature for feature extraction due to its ability in locating the active sources while maximising the variance among two or more classes. Usually CSP is applied for trial by trial classification sub-dividing the trial in different frequency bands.In this paper, we aim to study the benefits of using CSP in different temporal stages of the trial development instead of focusing on different frequency bands. Our motivation is originated from two different grounds. Firstly, we hope to decrease the computational effort derived from the feature extraction when an unseen trial is to be processed. Secondly, unifying the spatial analysis provided by CSP with a temporal study, we will be able to construct a temporal–spatial profile that may be useful for further studies.In contrast to exhaustive methods such as using sliding windows, LDB finds a subset of signal segments in the temporal domain to build a discriminant base. Traditional approaches [16] use the local cosine transform (LCT) as transform function, which has certain major disadvantages. Firstly, each channel is transformed independently losing the spatial context during the transform. Secondly, the resulting coefficients from a discrete cosine transform need an extra step for feature selection prior to the classification phase.In this study, we propose a new LDB approach, where, instead of LCT, CSP is used as transform function. This allows us to build up a coherent spatio-temporal analysis tool, which can simultaneously identify the significant temporal segments and spatial locations on the scalp to improve the EEG classification. The covariance decomposition performed by CSP adds insights from the spatial relationships into the LDB algorithm, whilst the features extracted from the transform are directly used for the pattern construction.This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 explains the methodology: data acquisition (Section 2.1), time segmentation strategies (Section 2.2.1), feature extraction methods in spatial (Section 2.2.2) and temporal domains (Section 2.2.3), classification techniques (Section 2.3), and the experiment set up (Section 2.4). Section 3 describes and discusses the obtained results. Conclusions are drawn in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In terms of classification accuracy measured by the Kappa value, LDB+CSP performs significantly better than sliding window with CSP for feature extraction, and has an additional advantage of consuming less computational resources. However, its classification accuracy depends on the segmentation length. The proposed method achieved better classification performance than the BCI competition winner as well. However, due to the lack of information provided by the BCI competition winner, it is difficult to compare to the results obtained in the competition with a statistical significance test.The combination of CSP and LDB gives detailed information on which instants and channels contain the most significant information for EEG classification during the trial development. We believe that this is an interesting contribution to LDB as the temporal–spatial decomposition can be exploited in order to improve existing methods or develop new ones.When it comes to the use of LCT and CSP as transform function, the results indicate that CSP performs significantly better than LCT. This is likely due to the fact that during the discovery of the best basis, CSP already takes into account which parts of the signal will contribute better to the classification output.When comparing automatic and manual partition techniques, LDB+CSP reduces computational resource consumption while obtaining classification performance comparable to the sliding window approach. The number of CSP projections (temporal segments) and LDA classifications involved is reduced by about a half during the evaluation stage, with comparable classification performance.