@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An empirical study on optic disc segmentation using an active contour model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Active contour models (ACMs) detecting optic disc (OD) boundaries are investigated.Images are subject to adaptive histogram equalization and morphological operations.Various ACMs are initialized with contours estimated by circular Hough transform.Gradient-vector-flow-based ACM outclasses the rest with a statistical significance.Segmented ODs are accurate, and the approach incurs less computational burden.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Active contour models,Circular Hough transform,Glaucoma,Optic disc segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The accurate segmentation of the optic disc (OD) offers an important cue to extract other retinal features in an automated diagnostic system, which in turn will assist ophthalmologists to track many retinopathy conditions such as glaucoma. Research contributions regarding the OD segmentation is on the rise, since the design of a robust automated system would help prevent blindness, for instance, by diagnosing glaucoma at an early stage and a condition known as ocular hypertension. Among the evaluated OD segmentation schemes, the active contour models (ACMs) have often been preferred by researchers, because ACMs are endowed with several attractive properties. To this end, we designed an OD segmentation scheme to infer how the performance of the well-known gradient vector flow (GVF) model compares with nine popular/recent ACM algorithms by supplying them with the initial OD contour derived from the circular Hough transform. The findings would hopefully equip a diagnostic system designer with an empirical support to ratify the choice of a specific model as we are bereft of such a comparative study. A dataset comprising 169 diverse retinal images was tested, and the segmentation results were assessed by a gold standard derived from the annotations of five domain experts. The segmented ODs from the GVF-based ACM coincide to a greater degree with those of the experts in 94% of the cases as predicted by the least overall Hausdorff distance value (33.49±18.21). Additionally, the decrease in the segmentation error due to the suggested ACM has been confirmed to be statistically significant in view of the p values (≤1.49e−09) from the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The mean computational time taken by the investigated approaches has also been reported.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Detection of retinal anatomical features is crucial to clinically assess the health of the retina. To facilitate this task, automated diagnostic systems critically rely on an accurate optic disc (OD) detection procedure, in the sense that other anatomical features such as retinal blood vessels, macula, optic cup, and lesions can in turn be detected with reference to the OD location [1]. In particular, the OD detection is extremely useful in diagnosing a retinopathy condition called glaucoma, which is the leading cause of blindness next to cataract[2]. According to Nayak et al. [3], glaucoma affects one in two hundred individuals around the age of 50, and one in ten above 80 years. Moreover, the detrimental effects of glaucoma surface only at a later stage, and hence it is commonly known as the “sneak thief of sight”. Interestingly though, the detection of this disease at an early stage will help to retard its progression thanks to medical advancements [4]. In other words, the structural change in the OD provides vital clues concerning the prognosis of glaucoma. Fueled by the diagnostic and prognostic significance, automatic OD detection schemes have been attempted by many and their design still remains as a vibrant research area [5].An accurate OD segmentation with computer-aided techniques faces several challenges due to factors that are common to other medical images, for instance, boundary insufficiencies—missing edges and/or inadequate texture contrast between regions of interest (ROIs) and the background. On the other hand, manually segmenting the OD is not deemed admissible, since it is subject to impediments such as limited perception of the human eye, fatigue, and the availability of voluminous fundus image data. Therefore, developing algorithms that can reliably detect accurate OD boundaries with less computational overheads is an imperative research goal.To provide an overview of the research efforts along this direction, a brief survey on the state-of-the-art OD segmentation schemes is in order. Lalonde et al. [6] reported a technique for the OD localization in color fundus images by combining a Hausdorff-distance-based template matching on edge maps and a pyramidal decomposition. Li and Chutatape [7] applied the principal component analysis on a color retinal photography to locate the OD and an active shape model to segment the same. Foracchia et al. [8] described the common directional pattern of retinal vessels with a geometrical parametric model, and identified the coordinates of the OD center with a simulated annealing technique. Niemeijer et al. [9] formulated the OD detection task as an optimization problem that fits a single point distribution model to a color fundus photograph. Youssif et al. [10] adopted a filter to match the expected directional pattern of retinal blood vessels in the vicinity of the OD, and segmented the vessels with a 2-D Gaussian matched filter to estimate the OD center. Lu and Lim [11] designed a line operator, which evaluates the intensity variation along multiple line segments with specific orientations and traversing through retinal image pixels. Lu [12] employed a circular transformation, wherein every retinal image pixel corresponding to the maximum image variation along multiple evenly-oriented radial line segments of fixed length constitutes the OD boundary.In view of the inherent advantages of active contour models (ACMs), there is an emerging trend to make use of ACMs in OD segmentation tasks. In general, ACMs have been proven successful in image segmentation applications [13,14]. They are based on profound mathematical properties and efficient level-set-based numerical schemes. It is possible to achieve a sub-pixel accuracy of object boundaries with the ACMs [15]. They lend themselves to incorporate a prior knowledge, e.g., shape and intensity distribution [16]. Furthermore, they can be implemented to exploit several properties, e.g., edges, statistics, and texture, which are normally considered by other segmentation procedures. Besides producing quite regular contours, the segmented regions possess continuous boundaries. In addition, the level set theory offers a lot of flexibility in their implementation.In that vein, a few interesting contributions involving an ACM to segment the OD are listed below. Lowell et al. [17] presented an algorithm, which localizes the OD using a specialized template matching, and then segments it with a deformable contour model. Unlike other edge detection methods, this model reliably segmented the ODs from images of diseased retinae including strong distractors. Chrástek et al. [18] presented an automated algorithm for the OD segmentation in scanning-laser-tomography images. This method is based on morphological operations, the Hough transform, and an anchored ACM derived from the works of Cohen and Cohen [19] and Kucera [20]. Xu et al. tackled the problem of vessel occlusion that interferes with the OD segmentation in [21] by incorporating a knowledge-based clustering of contour points and a smoothing update into the original snake by Kass et al. [22]. Joshi et al. [24] enhanced the robustness of the ACM by Chan and Vese [23] against variations in the vicinity of the OD region by integrating the local image information around each point of interest in a multidimensional feature space; the segmentation results were shown to be consistent with respect to geometric and photometric variations in retinal images. Yu et al. developed a fast and fully automatic OD segmentation algorithm in [25], which applies an initial OD contour identified with the template matching to a hybrid level set model proposed by Zhang et al. [26]. The robustness and accuracy of segmented OD boundaries are attributed to the fact that the model in [25] combines the region and local gradient information in the retinal images.Notwithstanding a dedicated research effort in the design of ACM-based image segmentation tools, as far as we know, a rigorous comparison of a wide range of ACM techniques has not yet been reported in the context of the OD segmentation. In fact, empirical results from an exhaustive study involving popular ACM methods on a large collection of retinal images would be suggestive of the kind of ACM scheme to be advocated in the design of a fully automated OD segmentation system for clinical screening purposes. Within this framework, we methodically compared the OD segmentation results from ten theoretically well-established ACM techniques supplied with 169 diverse retinal fundus images annotated by domain experts. To be fair in our comparison, the ACM algorithms were initialized with a contour obtained by a morphological process and the circular Hough transform (CHT). Unless the resultant contour warrants further tuning, the default parameters were kept unaltered for the ACM models.The open retinal image database for optic nerve evaluation (RIM-ONE) is an online dataset of 169 retinal fundus images annotated by five experts in ophthalmology [27]. The retinal photograph is captured (with non-mydriatic fundus camera) while the pupil is not dilated with flash intensities that avoid saturation. The images are stored in the red-green-blue (RGB) color bitmap (i.e., BMP) format with intensities ranging from 0 to 255 in each channel. The domain experts have classified the images in the dataset into the following categories: 118 normal eye (non-glaucomatous), 12 early glaucoma, 14 moderate glaucoma, 14 deep glaucoma, and 11 ocular hypertension (OHT). A gold standard has been provided for each image from the contours demarcated by five experts.A schematic diagram of the proposed methodology to enhance the segmentation accuracy of the OD is presented in Fig. 1. The retinal images under investigation are preprocessed using the adaptive histogram equalization in the red channel, which facilitates an accurate OD identification due to the image contrast improvement. Subsequently, the morphological processing is performed using a line operator to remove any blood vessel present in the image. Following the preprocessing, the CHT is applied to estimate the contour that roughly encloses the circular-shaped OD. Based on the empirical study involving ten well-known ACM algorithms, which is deferred to Section 6, the gradient vector flow (GVF) model is recommended in our work. Note that the GVF model is acclaimed to be a fast and hybrid level set method, which fine-tunes the contour initialized with the CHT until it accurately fits the boundary of the OD.Retinal images usually contain noise due to interference of various phenomena. Nonuniform illumination is one such problem because of the complexity of the image acquisition system. The noise and artifacts thus introduced complicate the retinal image analysis. For instance, they may cause only minor differences between normal and abnormal tissues. Precisely, noise affects the process of measuring parameters in retinal images. Hence preprocessing is an essential step in order to remove noise and artifacts present in these images. The adaptive histogram equalization is applied to compensate for the illumination artifacts [10]. As the name implies, the adaptive technique generates several histograms, each one corresponding to an image neighborhood for computing a transformation function, to modify the brightness levels of pixels belonging to that neighborhood. As a consequence, the contrast of an image is locally improved and the details are enhanced.Blood vessels originate from the OD, and appear as deep red or orange red filaments of progressively diminishing width. As they interfere with the detection of the OD, blood vessels are to be removed beforehand. A common practice is to carry out a morphological preprocessing prior to locating the OD, since this step filters out the blood vessels and exudates present in the retinal image [28]. In principle, the opening operation tends to smooth an image contour, whereas the closing is meant to fuse narrow breaks and to generate vessel masks. While the opening suppresses bright details, closing annihilates dark ones, provided the details remain smaller than the structuring element. A rotating structuring element, which is 1° to 6° apart and having enough length to traverse vessels and erase them, is employed in our application. Fig. 2depicts preprocessing of the red and green channels from the RGB fundus image. Since the blood vessels are more prominent in the green channel, the red one is used for further processing.In retinal image analysis, accurately locating the OD in the presence of exudates is crucial due to the following reason. The exudates as well as the OD appear as clusters of high intensity pixels, which would pose challenges to an intensity-based OD segmentation scheme. We rely on the CHT to distinguish between the exudates and OD, since the CHT is well-suited for localizing the circular- or elliptic-shaped OD region [29]. The CHT is applied on the binary image resulting from the morphological processing. The preprocessed gray-scale images are converted to binary images (see Fig. 2(e) and (i)) with the help of gray-scale thresholds, which are selected in an unsupervised manner as described in [30]. This threshold selection scheme utilizes only the zeroth- and the first-order cumulative moments of the gray-scale histogram, and thus remains simple. The black pixels of the binary image constitute the approximate boundary of the OD, whereas the white ones represent the background. The transform maps a point (x, y) corresponding to a black pixel in the binary image to a truncated conical surface whose upper and lower radii (rmax and rmin, respectively) are determined by the a-priori knowledge of the OD radius’ range (refer to Fig. 3(a)). In other words, a point in the image space is mapped to a truncated conical surface in the parameter space. Fig. 3(a) illustrates the generation of three truncated cones corresponding to three points on the perimeter of the binary image. As the CHT traverses through all the black pixels in the binary image, a three dimensional accumulation matrix will store the number of intersections of the truncated conical surfaces. The position of a cell in the accumulation matrix denotes a “potential” center and the radius of the OD, and the value stored in the cell implies how probable it is to be the “true” center and radius. Evidently, the triplet(aˆ,bˆ,rˆ)associated with the accumulation cell that stores the largest value returns the actual center(aˆ,bˆ)and the radiusrˆof the OD region. For instance, the application of CHT on the preprocessed binary image from the red channel in Fig. 2(e) gives rise to the Hough circle as displayed in Fig. 3(b). Subsequently, the ACM method is initialized with a contour derived from the Hough circle.In our experiments, an estimate of the OD radius rguess is considered to be either 150 or 260 pixel units depending on whether the retinal image resolution is less or more than 512×512. The rmin and rmax values are selected as 80% and 120% of rguess, respectively. Thus a reliable and accurate boundary of the OD is delineated with the Hough circle as demonstrated in Fig. 4(a), since the OD is the only large circular object inside the ROI. Nonetheless, the presence of peripapillary atrophy (PPA) at the OD boundary may interfere with the OD detection process, leading to its inaccurate localization as depicted in Fig. 4(b).Following the localization of the OD region, the segmentation scheme should accurately demarcate the boundary of the OD to help track the progression of eye diseases. Naive segmentation algorithms that do not take the edge smoothness and continuity properties into account may fall short of accurately detecting the OD boundary. On the contrary, an ACM otherwise known as the snake is a promising alternative, as it relies on the gradient as well as the spatial distribution at a specific point to verify the presence of an edge. Aside from this merit, as explained in what follows, the snake can be adapted to capture even concavities on the OD boundary. A comprehensive list of advantages in resorting to ACMs has already been included in Section 1.The snake in general is an energy minimizing deformable spline that satisfies the Euler equation. In the sequel, the Euler equation can be viewed as a force balance equation,Fint+Fext(p)=0, where the internal force Fint discourages the snake to stretch and bend, while the external potential forceFext(p)pulls the snake toward an image edge. However, the traditional snake inherently suffers from the failure to progress into (image) boundary concavities, and possesses only a limited capture range. To overcome these drawbacks, Xu and Prince replacedFext(p)in the force balance equation with a static external force field v(x, y), namely, GVF field, on the premise of the Helmholtz theorem[14]. An attractive consequence is that while v minimizes an energy functional,11E=∫∫μ(ux2+uy2+vx2+vy2)+|∇f|2|v−∇f|2dxdy, where ux, uy,vx, andvyare the partial derivatives of the vector fieldv(x,y)=[u(x,y),v(x,y)]according to [14].the snake is endowed with a large capture range and the ability to move into boundary concavities. In the energy functional, if the gradient of an edge map22The edge map is a function f(x, y) derived from an image I(x, y) such that it has larger values near a desired image feature.|∇f| is small, the smoothing term corresponding to the sum of the squares of the partial derivatives of v is predominant. As a result, the energy minimization yields a slowly varying field in homogeneous image regions. By contrast, for a large |∇f|, the energy is minimized by bringing v almost close to |∇f|, which is a desired effect. Furthermore, a regularization term μ in the energy functional maintains a good balance between both scenarios, and its choice remains directly proportional to the amount of noise.In the present setting, the snake is initialized with the approximate OD boundary generated by the CHT. Subsequently, the minimization of the GVF-based energy functional forces the snake to undergo dynamic adaptation to the edges of the OD. The deformation of the snake iteratively proceeds until the energy functional reaches its minimum as illustrated in Fig. 5(a)–(d). Note that we have empirically selected the value of μ to be 0.2, and observed an impressive segmentation accuracy with a faster rate of convergence.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
