@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A combination of singular value decomposition and multivariate feature selection method for diagnosis of schizophrenia using fMRI

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed a three-phase dimensionality reduction for CAD of schizophrenia using fMRI.Used spatial clustering on each 3-D spatial map created using GLM/ICA.Obtained discriminative features using SVD and a novel multivariate feature selection.Better performance than the existing methods is demonstrated on two datasets.Identified discriminative brain regions are consistent for both the datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Schizophrenia,Computer-aided diagnosis,Functional magnetic resonance imaging,Singular value decomposition,Multivariate forward feature selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder which lacks any established diagnostic test and is currently diagnosed on the basis of externally observed behavioral symptoms. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is helpful in capturing abnormalities in brain activation patterns of schizophrenia patients in comparison to healthy subjects. Since the dimension of fMRI data is huge, while the number of samples is limited, dimensionality reduction is essential. Thus, this research work aims to utilize pattern recognition techniques to reduce the dimension of fMRI data for developing an effective computer-aided diagnosis method for schizophrenia. A three-phase method is proposed which involves spatial clustering of whole-brain voxels of individual 3-D spatial maps (β-maps or independent component score-maps), representation of each cluster using singular value decomposition followed by a novel hybrid multivariate forward feature selection method to obtain an optimal subset of relevant and non-redundant features for classification. A decision model is built using support vector machine classifier with leave-one-out cross-validation scheme. The measures, namely, sensitivity, specificity and classification accuracy are utilized to evaluate the performance of the decision model. The efficacy of the proposed method is evaluated on two distinct balanced datasets D1 and D2 (captured from 1.5T and 3T MRI scanners, respectively). D1 and D2 comprise of auditory oddball task fMRI data of schizophrenia patients and well age-matched healthy subjects, derived from publicly available FBIRN multisite dataset. Best classification accuracy of 92.6% and 94% are achieved for D1 and D2, respectively with the proposed method. The proposed method exhibits superior performance over the existing methods. In addition, discriminative brain regions, corresponding to the optimal subset of features, are identified and are in accordance with the literature. The proposed method is able to effectively classify schizophrenia patients and healthy subjects and thus, may be utilized as a diagnostic tool.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a non-invasive neuroimaging technique based on Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) effect [1]. Recently, fMRI is being widely used for understanding the functionality of the brain. While acquiring fMRI, subjects are supposed to perform some predesigned task. The fMRI experiments are designed to capture the brain activity related to a particular functional task and are helpful in identifying variations in activation patterns between patients and healthy subjects. This makes fMRI a suitable neuroimaging technique for studies involving differentiation of healthy subjects from patients suffering from certain disorders that are difficult to diagnose manually e.g. schizophrenia.Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder that has ill-effects on many cognitive functions such as emotion, executive function, perception, attention and memory. It can be characterized by hallucinations, delusions, disorganization of speech and cognitive impairment [2]. It leads to impairment of personal relationships, impersistence at work and poor self-care [3]. Early and accurate diagnosis is essential to provide timely and appropriate treatment to the patients for better recovery. However, due to lack of established clinical tests, currently the diagnosis of schizophrenia purely relies on assessment of externally observed behavioral symptoms by experts. However, these assessments are subjective and are unable to reveal internal changes occurring in the brain. fMRI is shown to be helpful in capturing these internal changes in terms of differences in functional brain activity between patients and healthy subjects [4–7]. However, manual (or visual) interpretation of the brain activity patterns from 4-D fMRI data, i.e. time series of 3-D MRI volumes, is difficult. This has drawn the attention of pattern recognition and image processing research communities toward the need for developing efficient computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) methods for classification of patients and healthy subjects using fMRI. Further, if CAD method is able to identify discriminative brain regions, it would be beneficial in providing insights for better diagnostic and treatment purposes.In literature, general linear model (GLM) [8], independent component analysis (ICA) [9], and dictionary learning approaches [10] have been suggested for analysis of fMRI data. The dictionary learning approaches build dictionaries of atoms or subspaces that provide efficient representations of classes of signals. Sparse representation is used to express a given signal as a linear combination of a small number of signals taken from a “resource” database, which is called the dictionary [11]. GLM is a statistical method, which involves finding out correlation of time series of each voxel with the experimental task. ICA is a data-driven method, which detects various independent components (ICs) of voxels having coherent neural activity during the experimental task. GLM and ICA are the most commonly utilized approaches for analysis of 4-D fMRI data. Both these approaches give rise to 3-D spatial maps which can be used for further analysis.One of the main difficulties of using pattern recognition in fMRI is that each brain MRI volume consists of hundreds of thousands of voxels. Even after utilizing GLM (or ICA), the dimensionality of each 3-D spatial map is high (∼103) in comparison to the number of subjects (∼10 to 100) under study. This leads to the well-known curse-of-dimensionality problem [12] and degrades the generalization performance of a decision model. Further, not all the voxels are useful for classification. Therefore, dimensionality reduction is necessary and essential before classification in any CAD method using fMRI. Feature extraction and feature selection are two categories of dimensionality reduction methods suggested in the literature [13].Feature extraction utilizes a suitable transformation to represent original high dimensional data in a lower dimensional space. On the other hand, feature selection determines a subset of discriminative features that improves the classification performance. Feature selection can be further classified into three categories: filter, wrapper and embedded methods [14]. Filter methods utilize statistical properties of data to select a subset of discriminative features without involving any classifier. On the other hand, wrapper methods and embedded methods involve a classifier. Wrapper methods make use of a classifier to determine the relevant feature set that gives better prediction accuracy while in embedded methods the learning algorithm takes advantage of its own feature selection criterion. However, filter methods are computationally faster than wrapper and embedded methods.Several pattern recognition techniques have been applied on fMRI data to develop CAD methods for schizophrenia detection [15–19]. Ford et al. [15] used spatial maps obtained using GLM. These maps were projected to lower dimensional space using principal component analysis (PCA). In the reduced space, Fisher's linear discriminant (FLD) was used to differentiate between healthy subjects and patients. However, their method is not helpful in identification of biomarkers since the whole 3-D spatial map is transformed to another space using PCA. Demirci et al. [16] used ICA to obtain IC spatial maps. On each IC spatial map, they applied PCA with projection pursuit algorithm to reduce the dimensionality of the feature vector. Due to transformation of whole 3-D spatial map to another space, this method is also unable to identify biomarkers or discriminative brain regions. Castro et al. [17] utilized both GLM and ICA to obtain spatial maps. They combined composite kernel support vector machine (SVM) and recursive feature elimination (RFE) to obtain a reduced set of discriminative brain regions. Their method is able to identify the discriminative brain regions along with classification of subjects. However, RFE is a computationally expensive wrapper method and its combination with composite kernels makes it even more computationally expensive. Yoon et al. [18] employed functional region(s)-of-interest (ROIs) based approach on β-maps obtained by GLM. Average beta values, from each brain region containing statistically significant voxels, were used to construct features. Their method is able to identify fewer discriminative regions to handle the curse-of-dimensionality. However, the features so constructed, in terms of average beta values of each region, may not be able to effectively characterize the region and hence may not be helpful in classification. Du et al. [19] proposed a three-phase feature selection and extraction method. For each IC spatial map shortlisted based on visual inspection, a two-level feature identification scheme was employed to select a set of discriminative voxels. Next, kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) [20] was employed to represent the data with fewer features. Further, FLD was applied to extract a discriminative feature. Since the whole of each 3-D spatial map was transformed to another space, the biomarkers could not be identified. In addition, initial selection of ICs, based on visual inspection, may be subjective.The limitations of the existing methods and the lack of any established diagnostic tests for schizophrenia, till date, motivate the present research work toward: (i) developing a novel method for effective CAD of schizophrenia and (ii) identification of biomarkers or discriminative brain regions. In this work, we propose an effective three-phase dimensionality reduction method to obtain a reduced set of discriminative features for classification. The proposed method is applied individually on each 3-D spatial map obtained by GLM and ICA. In the first phase, to take into account both structural and spatial information of voxels, each 3-D spatial map is segmented to identify clusters of spatially contiguous voxels. In the second phase, from each of these clusters, informative features are extracted using singular value decomposition (SVD) [21], a well-known mathematical transform. SVD has been successfully applied in a wide variety of computer vision applications such as image compression and reconstruction [22], image restoration [23] and image hiding [24]. It has also been utilized for dimensionality reduction in hyperspectral image data [25] and earthquake prediction [26]. However, its applicability to fMRI data, as a feature extraction method for CAD, has not been explored yet. This motivates the current research work, to employ SVD as a feature extraction technique to extract informative features from clusters of voxels in 3-D spatial maps of fMRI data. SVD transforms each cluster into a feature that carries the maximum information on the basis of variance while retaining the cluster identity. However, the feature vector so obtained may contain correlated/redundant features, which may degrade the performance of a decision model [27]. Therefore, in the third phase we propose a novel hybrid multivariate forward feature selection method, a filter method, which combines the advantages of Fisher's discriminant ratio (FDR) and Pearson's correlation, to select an optimal set of relevant and non-redundant features. Thereafter, SVM [28], a well-known and widely utilized machine learning algorithm in neuroimaging [29], is utilized to learn a decision model. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated using leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) scheme in terms of sensitivity, specificity and classification accuracy. The efficacy of the proposed method is evaluated on two distinct balanced datasets, derived from publicly available Function Biomedical Informatics Research Network (FBIRN) multisite dataset11http://fbirnbdr.birncommunity.org:8080/BDR/., of auditory oddball fMRI of schizophrenia patients and well age-matched healthy subjects. Further, the performance of the proposed method is compared with the existing methods [15–19].The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives brief description of materials and methods which includes details of the datasets, preprocessing and the proposed three-phase dimensionality reduction method. Section 3 contains the results and discussion. Finally, the research work is concluded in Section 4.The data used in this study were acquired through and provided by the Biomedical Informatics Research Network (BIRN) under the following support: U24-RR021992, Function BIRN (FBIRN) and U24 GM104203, Bio-Informatics Research Network Coordinating Center (BIRN-CC). The FBIRN multisite dataset includes fMRI of schizophrenia and healthy subjects from around the US. These data were downloaded from the FBIRN Data Repository, Project Accession Number 2007-BDR-6UHZ1 and are publicly available at (http://fbirnbdr.birncommunity.org:8080/BDR/). The data were acquired on 1.5T and 3T scanners with all other imaging parameters matched as closely as possible across all the participating sites. In this research work, BOLD fMRI data of auditory oddball (AO) task is utilized. AO task is the most commonly used task for studying the alterations in brain activation patterns associated with schizophrenia [7]. To avoid any variation in data due to difference in magnetic strength of the imaging scanners, in this research work, two types of datasets are derived from the available FBIRN data in the following way:(1)Dataset D1: fMRI data of 34 schizophrenia patients and 34 well-age matched healthy subjects acquired through 1.5T scanners available at site 0009 and site 0010 of FBIRN data.Dataset D2: fMRI data of 25 schizophrenia patients and 25 well-age matched healthy subjects acquired through 3T scanners available at site 0005, site 0006 and site 0018 of FBIRN multisite data.The details of participants included in datasets D1 and D2 are mentioned in Table 1.Auditory oddball (AO) task is the most popular fMRI paradigm which captures the deficits in brain activation patterns of schizophrenia patients in comparison to healthy subjects. In a standard AO task, the subject is presented with a continuous sequence of discrete stimuli comprising standard tones and deviant/oddball tones. Standard tones (1000Hz) appear on 95% of trials. Deviant tones (1200Hz) are distinct from standard tones, occur infrequently (5% of trials), and require a differential response. This task is used to investigate auditory “automatic” involuntary sensory processing regions. The AO task conducted by FBIRN consists of 4 experimental runs, each having duration of 280s (4.67min). For the duration of each run, subjects were made to view gray screen with a black fixation cross in the middle. They were instructed to focus on the cross while listening to the tones and to press button ‘1’ each time they heard a deviant tone. The task began with a fixation block of silence (15s). This was followed by the presentation of a series of standard tones (duration=100ms). The deviant tone (duration=100ms) was presented every 6–15s. A period of silence (duration=15s) ended each task run. In each experimental run, 140 brain scans were acquired with repetition time (TR) of 2s.The imaging parameters in the FBIRN multisite data are as follows. The functional scans were T2*-weighted gradient EPI (echo planar imaging) sequences. Pulse sequence parameters for all the sites were as closely matched as possible based on pilot studies carried out by the FBIRN group and are as follows. Orientation: anterior commissure-posterior commissure line; number of slices: 27; slice thickness: 4mm; TR: 2s; time to echo: 30ms for 3T scanners and 40ms for 1.5T scanners; field of view: 22cm; matrix: 64×64 and flip angle: 90°.Datasets are preprocessed using statistical parametric mapping toolbox version 8 (SPM8) [30] similar to the existing fMRI studies [6,7,31]. Scans originally collected at 3.4×3.4×4mm3 are realigned with the first scan as reference. Then slice timing correction is performed to account for possible errors associated with temporal variations in the acquisition of fMRI datasets. Thereafter, the scans are spatially normalized [32] into standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using an EPI template available in SPM8 and subsampled to 3×3×3mm3 resulting in volumes of 53×63×46 voxels. Lastly, scans are spatially smoothed with a 9×9×9mm3 full width at half maximum Gaussian kernel.In this research work, the two most commonly used approaches for analysis of 4-D fMRI data i.e. general linear model (GLM) and independent component analysis (ICA) are utilized separately. Both GLM and ICA can be utilized to obtain 3-D spatial maps (three spatial dimensions) from original 4-D fMRI data (three spatial dimensions and one time dimension).GLM approach performs a univariate multiple regression of experimental design matrix with time course of each voxel. The experimental design matrix is generated by convolving pulse train functions (onset times of the fMRI task) with the hemodynamic response function [33] thereby reducing the time dimension to a single beta value. Thus, a set of 3-D spatial β-maps corresponding to each parametric regressor are obtained for each experimental run for each subject. In this research work, the β-maps corresponding to the deviant versus standard tone contrast are utilized. For every subject, β-maps are averaged over the four experimental runs to reduce noise thereby forming one averaged 3-D β-map per subject.Group spatial ICA [34] is used to determine independent components (ICs) with the help of the GIFT toolbox22http://icatb.sourceforge.net/.as follows. Modified minimum description length (MDL) criterion, which takes spatial correlation into account [35], is used to estimate the number of ICs. Group spatial ICA is performed in two stages i.e. individual stage and group stage. At individual stage, the temporal dimension of each subject is reduced using principal component analysis (PCA). In group stage, the reduced data of individual subjects are concatenated and the dimension of this aggregate data is reduced to the desired number of components (obtained using MDL) using group PCA. Thereafter, group ICA is performed on this reduced group data using Infomax algorithm [36]. It generates independent components (ICs) which are represented in terms of 3-D ICA spatial maps and corresponding ICA timecourses, for each experimental run corresponding to each subject. The 3-D ICA spatial map and the corresponding ICA timecourse are then calibrated using z-scores. A high z-score value within the 3-D spatial map represents stronger representation of the corresponding ICA timecourse. In this research work, the 3-D ICA spatial scores (z-score) i.e. IC score-maps, are utilized as 3-D spatial maps to represent individual ICs.In this work, group ICA is performed on different training sets in each LOOCV iteration and corresponding spatial components of each test subject are obtained using Back-reconstruction. However, group ICA introduces a permutation ambiguity. Therefore, to maintain consistency in ordering of the components, the components obtained in first LOOCV iteration are used to create mask and components in the following LOOCV iterations are matched to these masks using spatial sorting by the help of GIFT toolbox. For example, the ith component obtained in 1st LOOCV iteration is taken as ith mask. Within each LOOCV iteration, all the components obtained are spatially sorted with respect to the ith mask. This is done by calculating correlations between each spatial component and the mask. The component providing the largest correlation value is marked as ith component of that LOOCV iteration. Thereafter, ICs, corresponding to four experimental runs of a subject, are averaged to reduce noise thereby forming averaged 3-D ICs per subject.The proposed work utilizes MDL criterion modified to account for spatial correlation [35] to estimate the number of independent components. In their research work Li et al. [35] have shown that MDL criterion achieves better results for fMRI data in comparison to Akaike's information criterion (AIC) and Kullback–Leibler information criterion (KIC). Further, in most of the literature on ICA on fMRI data [5,6,17,31], the modified MDL criterion [35] has been utilized to estimate the number of independent components, which motivated the present research work to utilize the same in the proposed model.Further, in the same work, Li et al. [35] have also studied the impact of the number of components selected on the results and have reported that for an estimated number of independent components, the components are mostly compact and well separated. As the number of components increases, most components become less compact and some of the components run into each other.In this research work, the number of components estimated using MDL is 9 for dataset D1 and 18 for dataset D2. In group spatial ICA, at individual level, data of each subject is reduced from 140 temporal dimensions to 14 for D1 and 27 temporal dimensions for D2. At group stage, the aggregate data is reduced to 9 components for D1 and 18 components for D2. The 3-D spatial maps (β-map and IC score-maps) obtained by GLM and ICA are utilized independently to extract a minimal set of relevant and non-redundant features. ith IC score-map corresponds to the 3-D ICA spatial score-map with respect to ith component.Each 3-D spatial map consists of thousands of voxels i.e. dimension is high in comparison to the number of subjects available. Some of these voxels may be irrelevant for classification purpose. In addition, correlation/redundancy may exist among these voxels. This may increase the time and space complexity thereby degrading the performance of the classifier. Therefore, dimensionality reduction is essential. However, dimensionality reduction in terms of individual voxels may not be effective since the brain activity is characterized by a group/cluster of voxels within local brain regions and not by individual voxels. Therefore, the structural and spatial information of voxels is an important factor to be taken into account while selecting features. Thus, in this research work spatial clustering is carried out to obtain clusters of spatially contiguous voxels.Before spatial clustering, for each 3-D spatial map (β-map obtained from GLM and IC score-maps obtained from group ICA), a two-tailed two-sample t-test is applied voxel-wise between voxel values of schizophrenia patients and healthy subjects to identify the voxels which significantly different between the two classes of subjects. The threshold value of t-test is considered to be α=0.05.Thereafter, spatial clustering is performed on the same set of significantly different (active) voxels identified as above. Since the clustering method employed is based on position of voxels and not on their values, it yields identical clusters (same number of clusters and voxels within each cluster) across all the subjects. Therefore, input data for feature extraction (Xc) from cth cluster, has a dimension of number of subjects×number of voxels in cth cluster for all c=1,2,3,…,L where L is the total number of clusters obtained. In this research work, the input data (Xc) for feature extraction from cth cluster (c=1,2,3,…,L) comprises of β values obtained from β-map in case of GLM while in case of ICA, it comprises of spatial component scores (z-score) obtained from group ICA.Thus, each 3-D spatial map is segmented into spatial clusters in order to retain local spatial contiguity i.e. the active voxels are clustered in such a way that all the spatial contiguous voxels belong to a cluster. Thus, each cth cluster Ccis represented as:(1)Cc=vc1,vc2,vc3,…,vcnc∀c=1,2,3,…,Lwherevc1,vc2,vc3,…,vcncare spatially contiguous voxels belonging to cth cluster Cc, the number of voxels belonging to cth cluster is denoted by nc. To discard the small-size clusters, the clusters containing lesser than five voxels are discarded. Feature extraction, as explained below, is performed on each of the remaining clusters.Feature extraction involves transformation of original high dimensional data to more meaningful representation of data in a lower dimensional space. Singular value decomposition (SVD) [21] is one of the powerful and well-known mathematical transforms that allows representation of data into a lower dimension. SVD allows approximate representation of a data matrix X in terms of only first k (k≤r, where r is rank33The rank of a matrix is the largest number of rows (or columns) we can choose for which no nonzero linear combination of the rows is the all-zero vector (we say a set of such rows or columns is linearly independent).of X) largest uncorrelated linear components of X while retaining the major associational structure of X. It helps in discarding noise and less informative components of the data.In general, SVD can be defined as follows. Let X denote a n×m data matrix of real-valued data where n denotes the number of subjects, m denotes the number of features and rankr=minm,n. SVD of X involves estimation of U, S and V such that:(2)X=USVTwhere U is a n×m matrix, represented in terms of eigenvectors ue, e=1, 2, 3, …, m, of XXT. It is an orthonormal matrix i.e. ui·uj=δijwhere δij=1 for i=j, and δij=0 otherwise. S is a m×m diagonal matrix whose entries are the eigenvalues corresponding to XXT, also called the singular values. The diagonal elements of S are non-negative, and can be ordered such that: s11≥s22≥⋯≥smm. The square of each singular value represents the variance of the data along a given eigenvector. V is a m×m orthonormal matrix represented in terms of eigenvectors veof XTX.The ith column of X i.e. xican be expressed as a linear combination of the m basis vectors in U (u1, u2, …, um), m singular values in S (s11, s22, …, smm) and the ith columnviTin VT.Since rank of X is r, only first r entries of the diagonal of S are non-zero, i.e.(3)skk≥0for1≤k≤rskk=0forr+1≤k≤mTherefore, without loss of information, the number of columns in U, the number of rows and columns of S and the number of rows in VT can be reduced to r thereby removing noise present in the data. In order to further reduce the dimension of data, the singular vectors corresponding to the top k (<r) singular values can be used to project the m-dimensional data X onto k-dimensional space (k<r≤m) to retain most relevant information of the data.In this research work, SVD is applied on each data matrix Xc, c=1, 2, 3, …, L, containing values of voxels belonging to the cth spatial cluster, and k=1 is utilized to extract a 1-D representation of Xc. Thus, a feature is extracted from each cluster by projecting Xconto the topmost eigenvector v1 corresponding to the highest singular value s11. Thereafter, the new data matrixXˆ. is constructed by concatenating the features extracted from all the clusters and can be denoted as:(4)Xˆ=xˆ11xˆ12⋯xˆ1L⋮⋮⋱⋮xˆn1xˆn2⋯xˆnLwhere n is the number of subjects, L is the number of clusters andxˆijis the value of jth feature (feature from jth cluster) for ith subject. These cluster level features may further contain some correlated/redundant features. Therefore, feature selection is performed in the next step to obtain a reduced set of relevant and non-redundant features.To select a reduced set of relevant and non-redundant features, a novel and computationally less intensive hybrid filter featurselection method is proposed. The method employs a selection criterion which maximizes the discriminative power of the candidate feature and simultaneously minimizes its overall correlation with the selected features.At any iteration, assumeXˆSelto be the set of already selected features andXˆRemto be the set of remaining features. In the proposed feature selection method, a featurexˆabelonging toXˆRemis selected for inclusion inXˆSelif it maximizes the selection criterion function J. This can be denoted as:(5)XˆSel=XˆSel∪xˆa;XˆRem=XˆRem−xˆawhere(6)xˆa=maxxˆfJxˆf∀xˆf∈XˆRemThe selection criterion functionJxˆffor a candidate featurexˆf∈XˆRemis defined as:(7)Jxˆf=FDR_Scorexˆf−α×Correlation_Scorexˆf,XˆSelIn Eq. (7), ‘FDR_Score’ quantifies the strength of a candidate featurexˆfto discriminate between healthy subjects and schizophrenia patients, while ‘Correlation_Score’ computes the mean correlation/redundancy of thexˆffeature withXˆSeland α is a weight or penalty factor. ‘FDR_Score’ is defined as:(8)FDR_Scorexˆf=μxˆfh−μxˆfs2σxˆfh2+σxˆfs2whereμxˆfh(orμxˆfs) andσxˆfh2(orσxˆfs2) are mean and variance ofxˆffeature corresponding to healthy subjects (or schizophrenia patients), respectively. ‘Correlation_Score’ is defined as:(9)Correlation_Scorexˆf,XˆSel=1XˆSel∑g=1XˆSelExˆf−μxˆfXˆgSel−μXˆgSel/σxˆfσXˆgSelwhereμxˆfandσxˆfdenote the mean and standard deviation ofxˆf, respectively andμXˆgSelandσXˆgSeldenote the mean and standard deviation of gth selected featureXˆgSel, respectively.Apart from maximization of the discriminative power and simultaneous minimization of overall correlation with the selected features, a feature selection method should also ensure that the number of features selected should be as minimal as possible. However, it may not be sensible to manually estimate the number of features to be selected. For this purpose, in this research work, weight α is incorporated in the criterion functionJxˆfto dynamically control/limit the number of features selected. Initially, α=1. With each iteration, the value of α is incremented by 0.05. Thus, at each subsequent iteration, the weight α of the ‘Correlation_Score’ (which is to be minimized) increases, thereby penalizing the criterion function for further addition of features. The feature selection process is terminated whenJxˆf≤0.The proposed feature selection method is summarized below:(1)Initialize α=1;XˆSel=xˆ1;XˆRem=Xˆ−xˆ1wherexˆ1is the feature with maximum ‘FDR_Score’.Find featurexˆasuch thatxˆa=maxxˆf∈XˆRemJxˆf.Ifxˆa>0, Then updateXˆSel=XˆSel∪xˆa;XˆRem=XˆRem−xˆa; α=α+0.05.Else: terminate feature selection method and returnXˆSel.Repeat Steps 2–3 till termination condition is reached.Support vector machine (SVM) is a popular and widely used supervised classification method [28]. It is based on the principle of structural risk minimization and is briefly explained below:For a given set of training dataset of n samplesxˆi,yi∈ℜL×−1,+1where i=1, 2,…, n;xˆiis ith training sample and yiis the corresponding class label. SVM algorithm learns a hyperplane (decision boundary) that maximizes the margin between two classes of data. The basic linear SVM determines a separating hyperplane given by:(10)WTXˆ+w0=0where W∈ℜLis weight vector andw0∈ℜis bias. The primal binary optimization problem is formulated as:(11)minW,w0,ξ12W2+C∑i=1nξiSubject toyiWTxˆi+w0≥1−ξiwith ξi≥0, i=1,2,…,n.where ξiis slack variables required to tolerate misclassification, and C>0 is a tuning parameter, that governs the tradeoff between minimization of rate of misclassification of training dataset and maximization of the margin width.It may be noted that minimizing the regularization term1/2W2is equivalent to maximizing the margin between two parallel supporting hyperplanesWTXˆ+w0=+1andWTXˆ+w0=−1. After obtaining the optimal solution of Eq. (11), a test sample x is classified as +1 (schizophrenia patient) or −1 (healthy subject) depending upon the decision functionWTx+w0>0or<0, respectively.A flowchart of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 1.Three measures namely sensitivity, specificity and accuracy are utilized to compute performance of the learning model, these are defined as:(12)Sensitivity=TPTP+FN(13)Specificity=TNTN+FP(14)Specificity=TNTN+FPwhere TP, FP, TN and FN denote the number true positive, false positive, true negative and false negative cases, respectively. Sensitivity measures how well a method correctly identifies positive cases (schizophrenia patients) out of total positive cases. Specificity measures the correctly classified negative cases (healthy subjects) out of total negative cases. Accuracy measures the overall performance and is defined as a measure of the total correctly identified cases out of all the subjects. In case of a balanced dataset, accuracy is not biased toward sensitivity or specificity and is calculated as arithmetic mean of sensitivity and specificity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
