@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SEMG-based prediction of masticatory kinematics in rhythmic clenching movements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
EMG signals of two masseter and temporalis muscles are used to predict clenching movements.GA is employed to find optimal number of neurons in the hidden layer and total duration of delays.Validity of the proposed models is experimentally demonstrated.The performance of AR-TDANN is better than that of TDANN.The TDANN would be sufficiently efficient for controlling masticatory robots.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mastication,Surface electromyography (SEMG),Kinematic parameters,Genetic algorithm (GA),Time-delayed artificial neural network (TDANN),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigated the ability of a hybrid time-delayed artificial neural network (TDANN)/autoregressive TDANN (AR-TDANN) to predict clenching movements during mastication from surface electromyography (SEMG) signals. Actual jaw motions and SEMG signals from the masticatory muscles were recorded and used as output and input, respectively. Three separate TDANNs/AR-TDANNs were used to predict displacement (in terms of position/orientation), velocity, and acceleration. The optimal number of neurons in the hidden layer and total duration of delays were obtained for each TDANN/AR-TDANN and each subject through a genetic algorithm (GA). The kinematic modeling of a human-like masticatory robot, based on a 6-universal-prismatic-spherical parallel robot, is described. The structure and motion variables of the robot were determined. The closed-form solution of the inverse kinematic problem (IKP) of the robot was found by vector analysis. Thereafter, the framework for an EMG-based human mastication robot interface is explained. Predictions by AR-TDANN were superior to those by TDANN. SEMG signals from mastication muscles contained important information about the mandibular kinematic parameters. This information can be employed to develop control systems for rehabilitation robots. Thus, by predicting the subject's movement and solving the IKP, we provide applicable tools for EMG-based masticatory robot control.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The significance of the chewing process on digestion and health necessitates studies of the mastication system. Mastication in humans consists of two basic movements, clenching and grinding. For clenching, the mandible moves in the sagittal plane; for grinding, it traces a circular path in the frontal plane. More than 20 muscles are involved in the process of human mastication, with six of them playing the major role in mandible control during coordinated masticatory movements [40,45]. These muscles are the temporalis muscles, attached from the side of the skull to the top of the mandible; the masseter muscles, attached between the cheek and the lower rear section of the mandible; the medial pterygoid muscles, attached to the inside of the skull and the mandible; the lateral pterygoid muscles, horizontally attached between the skull and the mandible; and the digastric muscle, attached between the skull and the chin. The masseter and temporalis muscles are primarily employed during clenching, whereas the pterygoid muscles have their main role during grinding. During jaw closing, the mandible is elevated by the temporalis and masseter muscles, while it is protruded by the masseter muscles. Pterygoid muscles protrude the mandible, produce its side-to-side movements, and generate the grinding motion.Researchers have utilized various methods to study the chewing process, including gnathosonics for measuring the sounds of mastication, ultra-high-speed cinematography for measuring mandibular movement and velocity, and laryngophone for monitoring swallowing [15]. Small markers or magnets have been used to record the chewing trajectory [43,17]. Electromyography (EMG) has been employed to study changes in the electrical activity of the muscles during mastication [15,36,26,20]. Changes in EMG parameters are better able to assess the sensory characteristics than mechanical measurements [15]. Experimentally obtained signals, together with the physiological cross-sectional area of the muscles, have been employed to estimate instantaneous muscle forces [4,31] or to differentiate food-texture characteristics [15]. Additionally, EMG has been used to identify differences in chewing patterns between individuals and to classify individuals into groups according to their chewing efficiency [21,5–7].Recently, EMG signals recorded from the muscles have been applied to control and classify the motion of prosthetic limbs [14], wheelchairs, and teleoperated robots [8,30,16,46,13,38,19]. Indeed, there have been various attempts to classify different movements for the purpose of controlling prostheses. Methods that have been applied to classify motions and categorize the mastication process include autoregressive (AR) models [16], Bayesian classifiers [22], artificial neural networks [25,18,41,42], fuzzy neural networks [3], dynamic recurrent neural networks [10], probabilistic neural networks [13,9], and Bayesian networks [8]. For instance, Graupe et al. [16] used an AR model to extract features from EMG signals and determine motions [47]. Au et al. [2] found that a time-delayed artificial neural network (TDANN) was capable of predicting shoulder and elbow motions from only EMG signals.EMG signals are nonstationary. The feature patterns vary significantly depending on the tasks and conditions of the users. In addition, EMG signals are very likely to be affected by artifacts and noise. In practical applications, it is difficult to achieve sufficient accuracy and stable performance of motion classification when using only EMG signals. This achievement requires the careful operation of a prosthetic device or human-assisting manipulator. However, predicting the trajectory can be very helpful for guiding prosthetic devices in space. Toward this endeavor, a dentist-guided masticatory robot was recently developed for training patients with jaw disorders [39].This study aimed to predict the kinematic parameters of motion during jaw opening and closing using surface EMG (SEMG) signals. Because surface electrodes are only able to record the electrical activities of the bilateral masseter and temporalis muscles, this paper focused on clenching movement. For motion prediction, a hybrid TDANN/auto-regressive TDANN (AR-TDANN) was developed from the experimental results. Predicted trajectory parameters were applied in a case study, to solve the inverse kinematic problem (IKP) and to estimate variations in the actuators (muscles) during jaw opening/closing. These findings will provide tools to control masticatory robots using SEMG signals.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The experimental setup, protocol, and hybrid algorithm are explained in Section 2. Kinematics of the masticatory robot and the hybrid motion framework for the SEMG-based human mastication robot interface are discussed in Section 2.4. The performance of the TDAAN/AR-TDANN in predicting the kinematic parameters of motion is presented in Section 3. This section also provides the results from solving the IKP problem, based on the predicted time-varying moments for one subject. A discussion and some remarks on future works are presented in Sections 4 and 5.An 8-channel EMG system, with a sampling rate of 1kHz, was used for recording the electrical activity of muscles (SEMG). For each subject, SEMG signals were recorded from four muscles: namely, the bilateral masseter and temporalis muscles (Fig. 1a). Surface electrodes were placed ∼2cm apart, oriented parallel to the muscle fibers, between the belly of each muscle and its end. Recorded raw SEMG signals were passed through a bandpass (15–400Hz) 3rd order Butterworth filter [12]. A notch filter (50Hz) was used to eliminate power line noise. The resulting signals were rectified and smoothed by a moving average window of size 200. The sampling rate of the preprocessed SEMG signals was reduced to 250Hz, to match the sampling rate of the motion data. The z-scores of the processed signals were computed and used for further processing.To trace the chewing trajectory, the Simi Reality Motion System (GmbH, Germany) was employed. Recorded data were preprocessed before modeling, using the Simi Motion software (Website: www.simi.com). The camera output was digitized to 250 frames per second (fps). Frequencies above 7Hz were removed. To track the jaw motion, six small reflective markers, ∼10mm in diameter, were placed at specific facial locations (Fig. 1). Forehead markers were used as reference points.We recruited seven volunteers (four males, age: 23±2 years) for this study. All subjects were well-informed about the procedure and provided written consent to the experimental protocol. Subjects were seated in a comfortable chair and instructed to sit still during recording sessions. They were unable to view the computer screen. Each experiment consisted of six repeated trials. In each trial, subjects were asked to perform a symmetrical maximum voluntary mandible opening and closing in the sagittal plane (Fig. 2) within an interval of 5s without the chin deviated toward the right or left side.A schematic of the TDANN used in this study is shown in Fig. 3. Nodes of the first hidden layer had log-sigmoidal transfer functions, and nodes of the output layer had purely linear transfer functions. Different delays of SEMG signals from the temporalis and masseter muscles were used as inputs. Kinematic variables (i.e., position, linear velocity, and acceleration of the chin point (CP) along the x- and z-axes, and the angle, angular velocity, and acceleration about y-axis) were set as outputs. Velocity and acceleration variables were determined by calculating the first and second derivatives of the trajectory related curves. Three TDANNs were trained for predicting the position/orientation (χCP, ZCp, β), velocity(χ˙CP,Z˙Cp,β˙),and acceleration(χ¨CP,Z¨Cp,β¨)kinematic parameters, respectively.Additionally, we proposed an AR-TDANN for better prediction of the kinematic variables. In this scenario, different delays of output variables were fed back to the system (Fig. 3) and used for predicting the current output values. Weights and biases of the network were initialized with random values. Batch training was used, in which the weights between the neurons were updated only after all of the training samples were exposed to the network. The Levenberg–Marquardt method [44], which gave the best possible results, was used for training.The optimal number of neurons in the hidden layer and total duration of delays used for SEMG inputs were determined by a GA. The role of the GA was to find the best reference input and number of neurons for the prediction process. The TDANN (AR-TDANN) searched for the best nonlinear mapping function to predict the targets (kinematics variables), based on the schematic provided by the GA. The number of neurons in the hidden layer and the total delay were restricted to 10–60 and 0–1000ms (with 200-ms intervals), respectively.To obtain the best possible results, a fitness function was defined from the prediction error of the neural network, as follows:(1)F=α||y−yˆ||+max(y−yˆ)+βstd(y−yˆ)where y andyˆrepresent the measured and estimated output vectors, respectively. α and β were chosen empirically and added to balance the variation range of different terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (1). Three GA operators (selection, crossover, and mutation) led to a near-optimal solution through iterative computation. The crossover fraction was set to 0.8. Fig. 4illustrates the proposed training algorithm.Optimal parameters of TDANN/AR-TDANN were separately computed for each subject. After the optimal networks were found, three evaluation criteria were used to validate the trained networks: namely, the relative mean square error (RMSE), cross-correlation (CC), and average absolute error (AAE). The equations for these parameters are given below [33].(2)RMSE=100*∑i(yi−yˆi)2∑i(yi)2(3)CC=100*∑i(yi*yˆi)∑i(yi)2∑i(yˆi)2(4)AAE=∑i|yi−yˆi|nwhere n is the number of samples. CC is a measure of similarity between y andyˆ,regardless of scaling. The proposed system was trained with 50% of the recorded data, while validation was performed with 50% of the data.The primary motivation of this section is to determine whether sufficient information could be extracted from the SEMG signals of mastication muscles to control a masticatory robot. For this purpose, we solved the IKP, using the predicted kinematic parameters of motion from the SEMG signals. To represent the geometry of human mastication, we used a general 6-universal-prismatic-spherical (UPS) Stewart-Gough platform. The mobile and stationary platforms represent the human mandible and skull, respectively, and the actuators represent the jaw muscles (schematic in Fig. 5). Dimensions were chosen according to the available literature [45]. Actuators S1 to S6 in Fig. 5(a) represent the lateral pterygoid, temporalis, and masseter muscles, respectively. Giand Mi(i=1,2…6) represent the connecting locations of these muscles to the skull and mandible. Two coordinate systems, {S} and {M}, are attached to the skull and mandible.We used vector algebra to obtain the closed-form equations for the kinematics of the human-like masticatory robot. The configuration of the masticatory robot is specified by the position and orientation of the system {M} with respect to {S} (Fig. 6). For each leg, a vector loop equation can be written as,(5)aiS+siS=PS+RMSbiM(i=1,2,…,6)whereSP andaiSare the position vectors of the CP and mandible joint with respect to the skull coordinate system, respectively, andbiMrepresents the position vector of the skull joint with respect to the mandible coordinate system. The magnitude of sirepresents the actuated muscle length. The orientation of the mandible system {M} with respect to the skull coordinates {S}, referred to as the mandible's rotation matrixRMS,is defined using roll, pitch, and yaw angles γ, β, and α, respectively, as shown in Eq. (6).(6)RMS=cγcβcγsβsα−sγcαcγsβcα+sγsαsγcβsγsβsα+cγcαsγsβcα−cγsα−sβcβsαcβcαwhere cβ=cos(β), s(β)=sin(β), and so on. According to Eq. (5), we have(7)SxSySz=PxPyPz+RMSbxbybz−axayazTherefore, the lengths of the actuators can be obtained as follows:(8)Si=||si||=six2+siy2+siz2=siTSSiS(i=1,2,…,6)Eq. (8) provides the solution to the IKP. Position vectorsaiSandbiMare fixed and known in the IKP. Therefore, by specifying the trajectory of the mandible, and knowingSP andRMS,Eq. (8) provides the required lengths of the six muscles.The proposed mastication human robot is shown in Fig. 7. This system comprises two major parts: (1) SEMG-based kinematic pattern detection (EKP), and (2) motion decision (MD). In EKP, three TDANNs predict the corresponding position/orientation, velocity, and acceleration of subject's mandible, from the sampled preprocessed data SEMGd(t), where d=1,2,…,n. In MD, the required lengths and orientations of the six muscles are determined by using the EKP block estimate and the IKP solution (Eq. (5)). By predicting the subject's movement and solving the IKP, we provide applicable tools for controlling an SEMG-based masticatory robot.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
