@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
2D ECG differences in frontal vs preferential planes inpatients referred for percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared cardiac vectors of ischemic and healthy patients in two different planes.Planes under study: the Einthoven's plane (FP) and a PCA-transformed plane (PP).We compared the ability to discriminate ischemia from health of both representations.The FP enabled the discrimination of ischemic patients while the PP did not.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Frontal plane,PCA-transformed ECG,Electrical cardiac axis,Cardiac vectors,Ventricular gradient,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work proposes a comparative study of a pair of electrocardiographic 2D representations: the frontal plane (FP) and a preferential plane (PP) obtained from ECG data. During depolarization and repolarization, main electrical vectors were analyzed and compared between healthy subjects and patients referred for percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA). Recordings were obtained at rest. Many patients from the latter group presented normal ECGs, thus, the hypothesis to prove was that electrical axis in any of the studied planes would effectively discriminate silent ischemia records from healthy ones. The FP was constructed with I and aVF leads, while the PP used the two first eigenvectors of the spatial correlation matrix of the ECG. Although the depolarization and repolarization vectors from both groups resulted normal, those from the silent ischemia group appeared strongly biased to the left, closer to the limit of the normality range. This slight change originated a significant separation between health and disease in the FP. Here, most of the parameters resulted highly informative, even those related to the depolarization phase. The cardiac vector, integrating both depolarization and repolarization information, presented the highest performance (AUC=0.89). Parameters in the PP, however, did not produce an acceptable discrimination, except for the amplitude of the T-wave (AUC=0.79). Additionally, the repolarization orientation in the FP was the only marker that simultaneously discriminated three different groups of patients according to their occlusion sites (p<0.0001). In conclusion: the FP offered a 2D representation general enough to enable the separation of silent ischemia versus health populations while the PP did not, due mainly to its individually optimized nature, failing to provide a unique referencial frame for all the subjects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Myocardial ischemia occurs due to an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand. This phenomenon is frequently associated with coronary atherosclerosis, which hinders the normal coronary artery blood flow. An insufficient myocardial cell irrigation is accompanied by a succession of electrophysiological modifications that affect cardiac ventricular repolarization [1,2]. These repolarization changes are reflected in the electrocardiogram (ECG) as ST-segment [3] and T-wave morphology modifications [4]. Others reported depolarization changes accompanying ischemia as well. Particular examples are: decrease of upward and downward slopes of the QRS-complex during coronary artery occlusion [5], changes in QRS amplitudes [6,7], changes in QRS-complexes duration [8], angular modifications [9] and even changes in vectocardiographic QRS-loop parameters [10].In general, the duration and morphology changes of the depolarization or the repolarization phenomenon during an ischemic episode are analyzed individually [11,12]. In addition to the individual analysis, we also looked for depolarization and repolarization phases relationships using certain concepts of ventricular gradient with the aim to improve ischemic diagnosis.The idea of the ventricular gradient, calculated as the difference in the global orientation and extent of the QRS-complex and of the T-wave, was proposed by Wilson et al. as early as the 1930s [13]. The most important use of it is to identify primary and secondary T-wave abnormalities in the ECG [14]. A secondary T-wave puts into evidence ventricular conduction abnormalities. A primary T-wave calls attention to several possible disorders such as tachycardia or bradycardia, hypokalemia or hyperkalemia local ischemia and even necrosis [15].Expanding the old ventricular gradient concept, the angle of the 3D between QRS-complex and T-wave loops in the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) space was proposed [16]. This 3D descriptor, so-called Total Cosine R-to-T (Tcrt), proved to be a good cardiac risk predictor in different groups of patients, including survivors of acute myocardial infarction and patients with known ischemic heart diseases [17], as well as in the general population [18,19].Myocardial ischemia is usually diagnosed by means of a stress test. In asymptomatic patients, which is the case for silent ischemia, the decision to perform a stress test is based upon estimation of the absolute risk of any cardiac event during the following 10 years, together with the familiar history of coronary heart disease risk [20]. A stress test is a rather complex test, requiring many resources and time from the healthcare system. The modalities used to document any abnormal stress response include the electrocardiogram, echocardiography, radionuclide imaging with either single photon emission computed tomography or positron emission tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging.Another spatiotemporal technique called cardiogoniometry (CGM) has been proposed for myocardial ischemia detection, as an alternative to ECG analysis [21]. CGM is an orthogonal representation of the cardiac activity onto two orthogonal planes: the frontal plane and the oblique sagittal plane. The improvement introduced with respect to vectorcardiography is that planes are oriented in rough approximation to the anatomy of the heart, rather than the body. Recently, Huebner and collaborators have classified ischemic patients and healthy subjects using cardiogoniometric parameters [22].In order to find a fast and inexpensive first diagnosis of myocardial ischemia that allows to reduce the amount of stress tests indications, we focused on the analysis of cardiac vectors in two bidimensional representations derived from the ECG, such as the frontal plane (FP), defined by the Einthoven's triangle, and a preferential plane (PP), obtained from applying PCA methods to the ECG data. The hypothesis behind this study relies on the fact that the FP is an individual-independent frame. That is, orientation of the main vectors are independent on individuals, while the PCA transformed space can be seen as a frontal plane undergoing an individual-dependent rotation which captures most of the ECG energy for each subject. According to this, the PP would act as an individually optimized frontal plane.The principal objective of the study aimed at comparing the ability of these two representations of the ECG (the frontal plane and the preferential plane) to separate ischemic patients from healthy subjects. To accomplish the objective, we studied two parameters, angle and modulus of the depolarization and repolarization dominant vectors in the above mentioned planes.The study population was composed of two groups, one consisting of ECG records from 52 healthy subjects obtained from the Physikalish Technisque Bundesanstalt (PTB) database (39 men, age 42±14 yrs, and 13 women, age 48±19 yrs), provided by the National Institute of Metrology of Germany, conceived with educational, algorithm benchmarking and research purposes [23,24]. ECG records were obtained with a non-commercial device consisting of 16 input channels (15 for ECG: I, II, III, aVR, aVL, aVF, V1–V6, Vx, Vy, Vz and 1 for respiration), each of them acquired at 1000Hz. Even though the PTB database also contained pathologic ECG records, we limited its usage to control subjects. The second group consisted of resting ECG records from 83 patients (52 men, age 62±14, 31 females, age 65±11) at the Charleston Area Medical Center in West Virginia before undergoing elective prolonged balloon occlusion during percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), in one of the major coronary arteries (STAFF-III study). This study was approved by the Investigational Review Board. Informed consent was obtained from each subject [3,25]. Eight leads (V1–V6, I, II) were recorded using equipment by Siemens-Elena AB (Solna, Sweden) and digitized at sampling rate of 1000Hz and amplitude resolution of 0.6μV. Leads III, aVR, aVL and aVF were derived from leads I and II. Two control recordings were acquired continuously for five minutes in supine position prior to the PTCA procedure in clinical stable conditions, within a time interval of a maximum of 1 hour. The electrodes were maintained on the patients between both recordings, or changed and their positions marked, to enable accurate comparisons of the ECG variables.Signal preprocessing was applied on the 12 standard or 8 linearly independent leads of the ECG data (PTB and STAFF-III databases respectively). QRS detection and selection of normal beats were implemented according to the method in [26], cubic spline interpolation was used for baseline wander attenuation. Rejection of noisy beats was implemented when differences in mean isoelectric level with respect to adjacent beats were larger than 300μV. The QRS-complexes and T-waves were located and delineated using the wavelet transform method, as in [27].The FP was defined by the standard and augmented limb leads (I, II, III, aVR, aVL and aVF). More specifically, the frontal representation consisted of constructing the QRS and T-wave loops defined by lead I (LI) and lead aVF (LaVF). First, segmentation of the QRS-complex and T-wave was accomplished for each ith beat using a single lead criteria where the onset of the QRS-complex and the T-wave were the earliest reliable QRS-complex and T-wave onset at LI or LaVF and the offsets, the latest reliable QRS-complex and T-wave offset in the same leads. On these segmented waves, the QRS-loop and the T-loop for each ith beat were constructed and both cardiac vectors computed at the loop samplesn∈WiQRSandn∈WiT, representing the QRS-complex and T-wave windows respectively. The samplenmaxQRS(i)andnmaxT(i)at which the respective QRS and T cardiac vectors resulted maximum were computed. Then, the modulus and angle of the QRS-complex main cardiac vector for the ith beat,Rfα(i)andRfm(i)respectively, were defined as:(1)Rfα(i)=atanLaVF(nmaxQRS(i))LI(nmaxQRS(i))(2)Rfm(i)=LI(nmaxQRS(i))2+LaVF(nmaxQRS(i))2where(3)nmaxQRS(i)=argmaxnLI(n)2+LaVF(n)2where n∈WiQRSAnalogously, the modulus and angle of the T-wave maximum cardiac vector for the ith beat,Tfα(i)andTfm(i)respectively, were defined as:(4)Tfα(i)=atanLaVF(nmaxT(i))LI(nmaxT(i))(5)Tfm(i)=LI(nmaxT(i))2+LaVF(nmaxT(i))2where(6)nmaxT(i)=argmaxnLI(n)2+LaVF(n)2wheren∈WiTThe depolarization and repolarization equivalent vector components for the ith beatRTFα(i)andRTFm(i)were computed as the following vectorial sum:(7)RTFα(i)=atanRy(i)+Ty(i)Rx(i)+Tx(i)(8)RTFm(i)=(Rx(i)+Tx(i))2+(Ry(i)+Ty(i))2where Rx(i) and Ry(i) are the cartesian components of [Rfα(i),Rfm(i)] and Tx(i) and Ty(i) are the cartesian components of [Tfα(i),Tfm(i)]. We will refer to this vector as the cardiac vector.In [16] there is a detailed explanation about the ECG decomposition onto the PCA space. Briefly, the NtimesM ECG matrix X undergoes the singular value decomposition (SVD). Here, N is conformed by the 8 independent ECG leads (I, II, V1–V6) and M accounts for the samples of the recordings. Thus, the ECG data can be expressed as X=U ΣVT, where U is an 8×8 matrix whose columns are the left singular vectors, V is an M×M matrix whose columns are the right singular vectors and Σ is an 8×M non-negative diagonal matrix containing the singular values σ1, …, σN. This decomposition rotates the ECG matrix X in an 8-dimensional space represented by 8 singular values contained in the Σ matrix and 8 singular vectors contained in the columns of U.After PCA, the windowsWiRandWiTcorresponding to the QRS-complex and T-wave at each beat were defined by delineating a norm signal defined asE2D(n)=s12(n)+s22(n), where s1(n) and s2(n) are the projections of the ECG data matrix X, onto the two first eigenvectors u1 and u2 associated to the SVD in the equation S=UTX. Delineation was modified from [16] for the two-dimensional case.QRS- and T-loops were constructed for each ith beat. A cardiac vector was computed at the loop samples n∈WiRand n∈WiT, selecting the samplenmR(i)andnmT(i)at which the depolarization and repolarization cardiac vector was maximum. The modulus and angle of the main depolarization vector for the ith beat,Rpα(i)andRpm(i)respectively, as well as the modulus and angle of the T-wave maximum cardiac vector for the ith beat,Tpα(i)andTpm(i)and the depolarization and repolarization equivalent vector components for the ith beatRTPα(i)andRTPm(i)were defined as in (1)-(8).In order to compensate for changes induced by respiratory movements, an alignment of all QRS-loops and T-loops was carried out [28]. To do this, rotation (Ral) and translation (Tal) matrices were calculated to align beat-to-beat loops against a template loop. The latter was computed by averaging the temporally aligned QRS-complex or T-wave in the respective leads (Lead I and Lead aVF for the FP or s1(n) and s2(n) for the PP) at the first minute of each record using the standard methodology [29]. Such Raland Talmatrices were computed from an adapted version of the algorithm [30], as follows:1.Coordinates LI(i) and LaVF(i) (or s1(i) and s2(i)) of the pattern loop and the individual loops were grouped into piand qisets respectively, with i=1, …, N, N standing for the total number of samples of the segmented signal to align.Both sets piand qiwere arranged in two 3×N matrices, designed as P and Q, respectively. Then, the covariance matrix H was defined as QPT.The matrices U, Σ and V were obtained by applying SVD to the H matrix: H = UΣVT. Therefore, Ral= VUT.The translation matrix was calculated as the difference between the coordinates of the QRS-loop centroid (pc) and the centroid of the individual QRS-loop (qc), that is Tal=pc−Ral×qc.All data were expressed as mean±SD. The D’Agostino–Pearson normality test was applied to quantify the discrepancy between the distribution of the indexes and an ideal Gaussian distribution. In order to determine the statistical power of each marker to discriminate health from ischemia, a non-parametric two-tailed Mann–Whitney test was applied between healthy and ischemic patients. When p-value was <0.05, differences were considered statistically significant.We calculated the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for every parameter and plotted the sensitivity against the 1-specificity values for the different possible cut-off points. Thereafter, the optimal cut-off point in the ROC curve was computed as the point nearest the top left-hand corner. This selection maximizes the sensitivity and specificity sum, when it is assumed that the ‘cost’ of a false negative result is the same as that of a false positive result [31].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
