@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal sigmoid nonlinear stochastic control of HIV-1 infection based on bacteria foraging optimization method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed new nonlinear stochastic control of HIV infection.The proposed method is based on new nonlinear convex function as controller that their parameter tunes by genetic algorithm.In evaluating long periods, the total amount of drugs increases slightly, but rebound risks for viral load are minimized.The result of our paper is drudge dosage management method for control of HIV.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nonlinear stochastic control,HIV-1 infection,Bacterial foraging optimization (BFO) method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Using nonlinear stochastic state-space model of HIV-1 infection, having as state variables the concentration of healthy and infected cells and the concentration of virions (free virus particles), utilized for design a control method. In this paper, a new optimal nonlinear stochastic controller is presented based on a bacterial foraging optimization (BFO) method to decrease the number of infected cells in presence of stochastic parameters of HIV dynamic. Bacterial foraging optimization sigmoid nonlinear control (BFO-SNC) is a novel nonlinear robust optimal method that can control the biological characteristics of nonlinear stochastic HIV dynamic by drug dosage management. The BFOA should optimize this kind of controller included three parameters. The proposed control method searches the best controller parameters domain subject to minimize a stochastic expected value of cost function. Simulation results show that the proposed BFO-SNC scheme does improve the treatment performance in compare to other control methods. For comparison with BFO-SNC method, a modified PID controller is chosen as controller structure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Therapy of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has remained a great challenge. About thirty-half years ago, HIV began to occurrence around the world at a threatening rate. The problems of HIV/AIDS are very important in present world. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a kind of disease that can be treated by using expedient drugs. AIDS occurs when infection with the HIV destroys the body's natural protection from illness. The immune system weakens to the point where opportunistic infections and certain cancers can attack us [1]. These infections would not cause problems for healthy people, but for people with AIDS, they may cause serious or even life-threatening problems.Blood is a significant part of the body's immune system. White bloods cells help to protect people from disease. Important parts of white bloods cells called T-cells perform a critical role. Some of the special T-cells are called “helper” cells that the HIV viruses attack and destroy them. When enough cells are destroyed, the immune system no longer works and the patient has AIDS. The good news is that HIV and its complications often can be treated. The proper treatment can lead HIV carrier patients to relatively normal lives for many years. Treatment options include antiviral therapy known as antiretroviral drugs:1.Treatments for infectionsTreatments for cancersTreatments for symptoms antiretroviral drugs slow the progress of HIV because fewer HIV cells have formed [1].Mathematical modeling has developed a substantial impact on clinical result consideration of HIV-1 infection. A massive amount of deterministic models has been developed to describe the immune system and its interaction with HIV-1 as well as the results of drug therapy [2]. Detailed studies that combine modeling analysis with clinical results show that the initial infection phase may be represented using simple nonlinear state models [3]. This fact has illustrated the generation of an increasing number of papers where therapy strategies derived from control principles. In most proposed methods, their mathematical model has based in relatively complex systems of nonlinear dynamic equations.The majority of existing studies consider the HIV dynamics as a system with two independent control inputs; each input is related to one of the two drug types, i.e. RTIs and PIs. Many researchers have shown the dynamic HIV/AIDS studies [4]. Several of the papers illustrated analytical base of therapeutic aspects, such as switching protocols drugs on or off during the period of infection. Systems and control strategies have been applied to the specification of therapeutic methods in [4,5,3,6], using of open-loop optimization or stabilization based on close-loop control. All of these methods and design studies are according to ordinary differential equations.The problem of designing a heavy-duty control that provides global stability for an uncertain nonlinear system has been the subject of considerable research over the last decade. Classical methods of control design assume full knowledge of the system arrangement and its constant parameters. If this condition is not fulfilled, heavy-duty control is recommendable for design with uncertain parameters varying in the given interval [11]. For nonlinear systems with unknown static nonlinearities satisfying known functional bounds, the current literature focuses on deterministic worst-case robust analysis and synthesis. For parametric uncertainty, guaranteed stability-bound estimates frequently are unduly conservative, and the resulting controller usually needs very high control attempt. The convex programming problems arise often in mathematics, engineering and finance problems. Many publications deal with this problem by numerical algorithms. Since the computing time greatly depends on the dimension and the structure of the problems, numerical algorithm is usually less effective in large-scale or real-time optimization problems. The bacteria foraging algorithm (BFA), on the other hand, have massively paralleled distributed computation and fast convergence. It can be considered as an efficient method to solve large-scale or real-time optimization problems.The essence of bacteria foraging optimization is to establish an energy function (nonnegative). The dynamic system is normally in the form of first order ordinary differential equations. It is expected that for an initial point, the dynamic system will approach its static state (or equilibrium point) which corresponds the solution of the underlying optimization problem. An important requirement is that the energy function decreases monotonically as the dynamic system approaches an equilibrium point.Motivated by the above discussions, this paper proposes a strategy that combines sigmoid function as convex controller and BFOA in existence of stochastic uncertain parameters that convince best drug dosage management. Due to the wide variability of the dynamics associated to different patients, the capacity of a controller to stabilize models that are different from the nominal one is quite important.The BFOA proposed by Passino, is a family of nature-inspired optimization algorithms. For over the last five decades, optimization algorithms like genetic algorithms (GAs), Evolutionary Programming (EP) and Evolutionary Strategies (ES) have been developed by researchers. Recently natural swarm inspired algorithms like Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) have found their way into this domain and proved their effectiveness. Following the same study of swarm-based algorithms, Passino proposed the BFOA in application of group foraging strategy of a swarm of E. coli bacteria in multi-optimal function optimization that is the key idea of the new algorithm. Bacteria look for nutrients in a manner to maximize energy obtained per unit time. Sending signals, Specific bacterium also communicates with others. A bacterium takes foraging decisions after considering two previous factors. The process, where a bacterium moves by taking small steps while searching for nutrients, is called chemo taxis; and the key idea of BFOA is based on chemo tactic that movement of virtual bacteria in the problem searches space [15].This paper presents BFO-sigmoid nonlinear control systems (BFO-SNC) and introduces some basic properties like controllability, stability and optimality for this class of systems. The previous studies developed several approaches in the control of the HIV infection [3,6–8]. Entrance the control strategies in biological system control generated the production of an increasing number of papers where therapy strategies are developed from control theory. Examples include nonlinear control based on Lyapunov methods; state drive using bang–bang control [6], adaptive control [7], optimal control, predictive control and model based feedback [8]. Various methods based on time-delay feedback control are shown in [9]. HIV-1 infection control strategy is developed based on nonlinear geometric control (feedback linearization) [10].The influence of this paper illustrated in two parts. First, a theoretical setting is introduced for stochastic nonlinear HIV-1 infection dynamic modeling where it has applied virus concentration as a stochastic variable with Gaussian distribution. Second, BFO-sigmoid controller is designed as an automatic drug dosage management method and applied to HIV dynamics in a more biological feasible approach.The nonlinear state space model for illustrating the HIV-1 biological behaviors has based on the following three state variables:X1Number of healthy cells.X2Number of infected cells.X3Number of virions (free virus particles).In most cases, HIV virus affects the level of CD4+ T cells, these cells are important in helping a body against to infection. Free virus means the HIV virus is found in blood plasma. The healthy CD4+ T cells are produced from a source, such as the thymus that is represented by constant rate S and died at rate d. The coefficient β is the infection rate. The infected cells result from the infection of healthy CD4+ T cells and die at a rate μ. A free-virus particle is known as virions, so called viral load, and clear at a rate C (death rate of virus). The variable K is a rate of free virus particles product per infection CD4+ T cell. The nonlinear dynamic model to describe HIV with treatment is as follows [13]:(1)X˙1=s−dX1(t)−(1−U1(t))βX1(t)X3(t)X˙2=(1−U1(t))βX1(t)X3(t)−μX2(t)X˙3=(1−U2(t))KX2(t)−CX3(t)where the controller input U1(t) and U2(t) are numbers of expedient drugs. U1=0 corresponds to the absence of drug and U1=1 to a drug efficiency in preventing infection of 100%. Actually, with the available drugs, the efficiency is below 100%, and U1 is constrained to the interval [0, UMax] with UMax<1.Fig. 1shows the transient time reply to an HIV-1 infection. The parameters used [12] are the ones of Table 1. The initial conditions correspond to a healthy person infected with a virus concentration of one copy per mm3.By looking at the third state dynamic in X3, it is seen the defines a stable linear system with input X2 and the system can reduce in model. The reduced model of HIV-1 is as follows:(2)X˙1=s−dX1−(1−u)βKCX1X2X˙2=(1−u)βKCX1X2−μX2Since the equation for X3 is stable and unites fast to the equilibrium, the controller does not need to control this state explicitly and the model may be reduced to second order. The time evolution of relation X2/X3 is shown in Fig. 2. After a transient lasting about 2 or 3 days, the proportion of these variables is close to 0.024 with an initial small deviation.In this section, the parametric probabilistic approach is used for HIV modeling the uncertainties in the nonlinear computational model and the dynamic.(3)X˙1=s−dX1−(1−u)β0(1±Δ)KCX1X2X˙2=(1−u)β0(1±Δ)KCX1X2−μX2where all parameters have defined as Eq. (3) and ||Δ||<1 is zero mean stochastic flexible with Gaussian distribution and β=β0(1+Δ) illustrated infection rate as uncertain variable.The analysis of equilibrium points and corresponding stability properties of the full model (1) has been performed in [12]. In the absence of therapy, u=0 the compact model has the explanations of the algebraic equations as equilibrium points:(4)s−dX1−(1−u)βKCX1X2=0(1−u)βKCX1X2−μX2=0By using model parameters of Table 1, the results of Table 2are obtained.Stability analysis of these equilibrium points is made by computing the eigenvalues of the Jacobin matrix M, given by:(5)M=−d−βKCX2−βKCX2βKCX2−βKCX1−μApplication to the single input HIV model for the controlled stochastic model (2):(6)x˙=f(x,Δ)+g(x,Δ)uWith the vector stochastic functions f and g is defined as:(7)f=s−dX1−β0(1±Δ)KCX1X2β0(1±Δ)KCX1X2−μX2g=β0(1±Δ)KCX1X21−1where (Δ) is stochastic uncertaintyIn addition, the corresponding controllability matrix is given by:(8)C=BABA2B…An−1B=β0KCX1X21−d−β0KC(X2−X1)−1β0KC(X2−X1)+μMoreover, it is seen that:(9)rank(C)=2ifd≠μ;X1,X2≠01ifd=μ;X1,X2≠00ifX1,X2=0The aim of the control input u(t) is to ensure the successful therapy conditions and to upsurge the healthy CD4+ T cells count that is to keep the system around the equilibrium point. When the linearized system is not controllable, it may still be possible to control the nonlinear system. The controllability examination of a nonlinear system is much more complex than in the linear case, and the controllability in the nonlinear case can only be studied locally since there are no global results. Computing the Lie algebra in all the points of the state space with X2≠0; it is observed that the accessibility rank condition is two, so this region is locally reachable.The BFOA has been widely accepted as a global optimization algorithm of current interest for distributed optimization and control. The social foraging behavior of Escherichia coli inspires BFOA. It has already drawn the attention of researchers because of its efficiency in solving real-world optimization problems arising in several application domains. The underlying biology behind the foraging strategy of E. coli emulates in an extraordinary manner and is used as a simple optimization algorithm. Considering the fact that several deterministic worst-case robust analysis and synthesis are unduly conservative, while the resulting controllers usually need a high control effort, several authors have studied the probabilistic robustness method in combination with a BFOA. The purpose of their design was to find the optimal parameters that minimized the stochastic cost function, and was formalized by combining the probabilities of different design requirements with certain trade-offs [14].The Monte Carlo evaluation was a practical and flexible approach to the problem estimated the probabilities. The discrepancy between the results of the Monte Carlo evaluation and the true values resulted in apparent ‘noise’ in the evaluation of the cost function and the fact that the cost function was not convex. To alleviate these problems, a BFO was used to search for optimal design parameters. Their results showed excellent stability and performance robustness. As a result, a BFOA-based search method is proposed here to find the optimal values of the u(t) {dosage of therapy} [15].(10)u=0ifE[e(k)]<emin]ω211+exp(−γ(e−(emin+emax)/2)),ifemin<E[e(k)]<emax1ifE[e(k)]>emaxwhere E[.] denotes stochastic expected value,0<γ<2,ω∈Rparameters tuning with BFO algorithm and after iteration this parameter generate, the sigmoid probability curve is illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4, the iteration of γ, ω, η has been shown in [16]. In another iteration, ((emin+emax)/2)=η∈R and γ, ω, η iterations of three parameters are supposed, as shown in Fig. 4.As seen in Fig. 4, BFO algorithm tests a value less cost and considers the error caused by coefficient of the sigmoid nonlinear controller, trying to optimize the controller responses to it claims to have witnessed the convergence of the three parameters γ, ω, η.The optimal control [17] problem is proposed as the maximization of the following functions:(11)J(ω(k),γ(k))=E∑k=0pλ1e(k)−λ2(u12(k)+u22(k))u1 represents Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors – RTI that reduces the virus performance. u2 represents the action of drugs (Protease Inhibitors – PI) that avoids infected cells to produce free virus particles. Just one drug was used and reduced equation, so Eq. (11) was changed to (12).(12)J(ω(k),γ(k))=E∑k=0pλ1e(k)−λ2(u2(k))The functional searches to boost the immune response of the body by maximizing the accumulated T-cells count during the treatment and minimizing the systemic cost to the body that count on the accumulated efficacies of drugs [18]. Quadratic terms are justified, since drugs could be poisonous to human body when they are dosed in high amounts. Constants λ1 and λ2 are used to fix the relative importance between boosting the immune response and minimizing the systemic cost to the body. γ, ω, η are the BFO-sigmoid parameters illustrated in (9). Using the BFOA, the best values of BFO-sigmoid parameters are found for reducing the cost function presented in (12) and these optimal values γ, ω, η applied to the closed-loop system depicted in Fig. 5. The optimization process dose is observed between each sampling time.For solving the above optimization problem, the procedure of the standard BFO method can be described as follows.The BFOA is based on four principal mechanisms observed in a real bacterial system: chemo taxis, swarming, reproduction and elimination-dispersal to solve this non-gradient optimization problem. Let us define a chemo-tactic step to be a tumble followed by a tumble or a tumble followed by a run. Let j be the index for the chemotactic step. Let k be the index for the reproduction step. Let l be the index of the elimination dispersal event. Also, let:P: Dimension of the search space,S: Total number of bacteria in the population,NC: The number of chemotactic steps,NS: The swimming length,Nre: The number of reproduction steps,Ned: The number of elimination-dispersal events,Ped: Elimination-dispersal probability,C(i): The size of the step taken in the random direction specified by the tumble.Step1: Initialize parameters P, S, NC, NS, Nre, Ned, Ped, C(i) (i=1, 2, …, S), θialgorithm:Step2: Elimination-dispersal loop: l=l+1Step3: Reproduction loop: k=k+1Step4: Chemo taxis loop: j=j+1For i=1, 2, …, S take a chemo-tactic step for bacterium i as follows. Compute fitness function J(i, j, k, l). Let J(i, j, k, l)=J(i, j, k, l)+JCC(θi(j, k, l), P(j, k, l)) (i.e. add on the cell-to-cell attractant-repellant profile to simulate the swarming behavior) where, JCCis defined in (13). Let JLast=J(i, j, k, l) to save this value, since a better cost may be found via a run.(Tumble: Generate a random vector Δ(i)∈Rpwith each element Δm(i), m=1, 2, …, p is a random number on [−1, 1].)Move, Let:θi(j+1,k,l)=θi(j,k,l)+C(i)Δ(i)ΔT(i)Δ(i)This result in a step of size C(i) in the direction of the tumble for bacterium i.Compute J(i, j+1, k, l) and let:J(i,j+1,k,l)=J(i,j,k,l)+JCC(θi(j+1,k,l),P(j+1,k,l))Swim:•Let m=0 (counter for swim length).While m<NS(if have not climbed down too long).Let m=m+1.If J(i, j+1, k, l)<JLast(if doing better), let JLast=J(i, j+1, k, l) and letθi(j+1,k,l)=θi(j,k,l)+C(i)Δ(i)ΔT(i)Δ(i)In addition, use this θi(j+1, k, l) to compute the new J(i, j+1, k, l) as in else was done, let m=NS, this is the end of the while statement. Go to next bacterium (i+1) if i≠S.Step5: If j<NC, go to step four. In this case, continue chemo taxis since the life of the bacteria is not over.Step6: Reproduction.For the given k and l for each i=1, 2, …, S, letJhealthi=∑j=1NC+1J(i,j,k,l).Be the health of the bacterium i (a measure of how many nutrients it got over its lifetime and how successful it was at avoiding noxious substances). Kind of bacteria and chemo-tactic parameters C(i) in order of ascending cost of J health (higher cost means lower health). The Srbacteria with the highest J health values dies and the remaining with the best values splits (this process is performed by the copies that are made and placed at the same location as their parent).Step7: If k<Nre, go to step three. In this case, we have not reached the number of specified reproduction steps, so we start the next generation of the chemo-tactic loop.Step8: Elimination-dispersal, for i=1, 2, …, S with probability Pedeliminate and disperse each bacterium (this keeps the number of bacteria in the population constant). To do this, if a bacterium is disregarded; it simply disperses another one to a random location on the optimization domain. If l<Ned, then go to step 2, otherwise end.The position of ith bacteria at the jth chemo-tactic step, kth reproduction step, and lth elimination-dispersal respectively represented as p(j, k, l)={θi(j, k, l)|i=1, 2, …, S}, J(i, j, k, l) denotes the cost at the location of the ith bacterium θi(j, k, l)∈Rp.(13)J(i,j,k,l)=J(i,j,k,l)+JCC(θi(j,k,l),P(j,k,l))JCC(θ,P(j,k,l))=∑i=1SJCC(θ+θi(j,k,l))=∑i=1S−dattractantexp−Wattractant∑m=1P(θm−θmi)2+∑i=1Shrepellantexp−Wrepellant∑m=1P(θm−θmi)2where JCC(θ, P(j, k, l)) is the objective function value to be added to the actual objective function (to be minimized) to present a time varying objective function, S is the total number of bacteria, p is the number of variables to be optimized, which are present in each bacterium and θ=[θ1, θ2, …, θp]Tis a point in the p-dimensional search domain. dattractant, Wattractant, hrepellant, Wrepellantare different coefficients that should be chosen properly, JLast=J(i, j, k, l) saves this value since a better cost may be found via a run. After that calculate the(14)J(i,j+1,k,l)=J(i,j,k,l)+JCC(θi(j+1,k,l),P(j+1,k,l))Compare J(i, j, k, l) with J(i, j+1, k, l) and the best position that optimizes the cost function will be equal to JLast.The intended BFO-SNC algorithm exploitation BFO involves the following steps:Step 1: Initialize γ, ω, η and ascertain the fitness function.Step 2: Use BFO technique to search the optimal γ, ω, η, such that J(ω(k+1), γ(k+1)) J(ω(k), γ(k)) optimizes the fitness function.1.Initialize a population of bacteria with randomly chosen positions within the boundary limit, initialize the P, S, NC, NS, Nre, Ned, Ped, C(i) (i=1, 2, …, S), θi.For each bacteria, evaluate the corresponding fitness function values at each position.Compare the fitness cost function with their JLast. If current value is better than JLast, then set JLastvalue equal to the current value and the JLastlocation equal to the current location in d-dimensional space.Use (13) and (14) to update the positions of each bacteria, respectively.A simulation result is given to illustrate the advantage of BFOA-sigmoid nonlinear controller in compare to earlier control Algorithm. A sigmoid controller is designed using the nonlinear dynamics that regulate the system at the desired reference. Fig. 6shows actual variables (input u and states X1, X2) for model validation. Fig. 7shows the concentration of free virus. Its value decays fast, such as the one of infected cells, as shown in Fig. 6. It is mentioned that the results from the test BFO-SNC in compared with the results recorded in the literature and clinical outcomes in the past [13] that use to feedback linearization techniques and existence trouble in adjustment linear control for robust against uncertainty biological processes, had difficulties associated with the need for complex calculations and achieved to optimal treatment demands quickly. In addition with a view to drugs therapy u that is so important with a view to injection dosage in during process, also good results were achieved. Consider now the problem of control design by sigmoid in the presence of structured uncertainty in the model [19]. Assume that there is multiplicative uncertainty in parameter β, i.e. the actual system uses β0(1+Δ), with Δ unknown and stochastic with Gaussian distribution. The state equation describes the model:(15)x˙=f(x+Δ)+g(x+Δ)uBy applying standard root-locus methods, it is possible to compute analytically that the closed-loop remains stable for rates of Δ∈[−1 1.93]. This ensures the robustness of the controller design with respect to uncertainty on parameter β. For the sake of illustration, Figs. 8 and 9show simulations with E[Δ]=1 and E[Δ]=−0.5. These values for Δ have been selected in the average of positive and negative range that guarantee stability of closed loop system. When Δ change randomized and −0.5≤E[Δ]<1 control performance with uncertainty on the parameter β become robustness. As mentioned in HIV-1 model, infection rate coefficient β is equal to 2.4×10−5. In first level of testing uncertainty, value of E[Δ] in β0(1+Δ) got 1 and in another effort the value of E[Δ] in β(1+Δ) got 0.5; they were tested in simulator. The BFO-SNC could obtain good results in terms of both drug therapy u and errors, as shown in Figs. 8 and 9. In other hand, it should be noticed how two parameters X1 and X2 effect to treatment, in uncertainty situation these parameters going to desired points and controller could treat the disease.Fig. 10shows the randomized Δ. Fig. 8 shows the control performance with uncertainty on the parameters β(E[Δ]=1, β is twice the nominal value). As it shows, the additional term due to the uncertainty Δ does not transform the nonlinear characteristic system. Fig. 9, illustrates control performance with uncertainty on the parameters β(E[Δ]=−0.5, i.e., the true β is half of the nominal value); as you can see the output result system is untouched but it is robust yet. Δ is used as a stochastic variable that −0.5≤E[Δ]<1 and β=β0(1+Δ) checked; and it is seen that the output changed but BFO-SNC can be robust system. The result of Δ as a stochastic variable is shown in Fig. 10.The specification consists in reducing the number of virus to 50 copies per mm3 in a period of less than 50 days. Fig. 6 shows the concentration of healthy cell and it proves that the BFO-SNC could control nonlinear system correctly, the healthy cells start to increase after drug injection (as you can see in Fig. 6 the concentration of infected cell decreases). In Fig. 7, the illustrated free virus cells decrease after drug injection. Fig. 11has illustrated performance of proposed controller in compare to control approach that presented in Ref. [19]. This simulation demonstrations the system controlled based on PID has undershoot and overshoots and close loop system does not stable; but BFO-SNC can control system in the approved manner and the system is stable. Fig. 11, illustrated the block diagram of PID controller, the concentration of healthy cells X1, the concentration of infected cells X2 and the drug therapy u that controlled with PID controller.Responses and results of HIV-1 control that obtain with help of linearization technique with PID controller in compare of results of BFO-SNC, as shown in Figs. 6 and 11;clearly show the overshoot and speed of treat in X1 and X2 parameters that is not acceptable. More important drug therapy u, despite to follow optimum injection fluctuates sharply that it is so dangerous and causes the patient to be in shock.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
