@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Brain region ranking for 18FDG-PET computer-aided diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Region-based approach for brain PET images classification in Alzheimer disease.Computer-aided diagnosis in neurodegenerative diseases.Rank brain region of interest ability for classification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD),Feature selection (FS),Positron emission tomography (PET),Support vector machine (SVM),Receiver operating characteristic (ROC),Alzheimer's disease (AD),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a functional molecular imaging, which helps to diagnose neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), by evaluating cerebral metabolic rate of glucose after administration of (18)F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose ((18)FDG). A quantitative evaluation, using computer aided methods, is of importance to improve medical care. In this paper a novel ranking method of the effectiveness of brain region of interest to classify healthy and AD brain is developed. Brain images are first segmented into 116 regions according to an anatomical atlas. A spatial normalization and four gray level normalization methods are used for comparison. Each extracted region is then characterized by a feature set based on gray level histogram moments, as well as age and gender of a subject. Using a receiver operating characteristic curve for each region, it was possible to define a Separating Power Factor (SPF) to rank region's ability to separate healthy from AD brain images. Using a set of selected regions, according to their rank, and when inputting them to a support vector machine classifier, it was possible to show that classification results were similar or slightly better than those obtained when using the whole gray matter voxels of the brain or the 116 regions as input features to the classifier. Computational time was reduced compared to the other methods to which our approach was compared.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a functional imaging, which helps to diagnose neurodegenerative diseases. This biomedical imaging modality produces a three-dimensional image of molecular processes. The system detects, using a gamma sensor, pairs of rays emitted indirectly by a positron-emitting radionuclide (tracer), which is introduced into the body on a biologically active molecule. Images of tracer concentration within the body are then constructed by computer analysis. If the biologically active molecule chosen for PET is (18)F-fluorodeoxy-glucose ((18)FDG), an analogue of glucose, the concentrations of tracer imaged will indicate tissue metabolic activity by virtue of the regional glucose uptake. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia, with a worldwide prevalence of 35.6 million in 2010 [1], which is expected to rise above 100 million by 2050 [2]. Early detection and diagnosis of AD is of importance for developing new treatments. Visual evaluation of brain scan images remains qualitative and operator-dependent. Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD), based on medical imaging, may be a valuable tool for physicians, and could bring a quantitative evaluation to better detect and evaluate brain diseases such as AD.Image processing techniques have been applied successfully to PET and other functional images for CAD of AD [3–12]. One of the main approaches consist in studying the brain image as a set of raw voxels, compute some statistical parameters to rank the significance of their values, using Student's t-test [3,4,7] or Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon U-test [13,14], and input them to a classifier. The main disadvantage of these methods is the small sample size problem, where the features input to the classifier are higher than the samples used for the training process. The second approaches are Region Of Interest (ROI) based, where the brain is first segmented into region on which feature extraction and selection is applied, including Principal Component Analysis [15,16], Independent Component Analysis [17,18], Fisher Linear Discriminant [19] or Factor Analysis [4,20] are applied. More recent work has been reported on image processing applied to PET Images, including feature selection and extraction [21–23], segmentation: Gaussian Mixture Model [24], Fuzzy C-Means [25], and classification: K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN) [26], Neural Networks [21,27] and support vector machine (SVM) [26,28,29]. Last step is the posterior classification into different classes using some discriminative functions [30].A novel region-based approach is developed in this article to classify brain 18FDG-PET images. The motivation of this work is to identify the best regional features for AD patients and healthy controls for classification task. The clinical benefits of this approach are provide doctors with a new computer-aided diagnosis tool to help them for AD classification PET brain images. For this purpose a brain mapping given by an atlas [31] is used to segment PET images into regions and then characterize each region by a set of features computed on the moments of their gray-level histograms. The effectiveness of combined features for each region to classify brain images is studied using ROC curves. This feature subset selection approach allowed to set a ranking of the ability of each ROI to separate healthy from AD brain images and compared it with the set of regions obtained by Fischer Linear score [32]. Support vector machine classifier shows that inputting best ranked regions, on which are computed the first order moments, are able to classify PET brain images with higher accuracy than using the whole-regions. Classification results are comparable to those obtained using a voxel-based classification (VBC), where the whole brain image gray matter voxels are input to the classifier without any feature extraction. It has been shown that the proposed approach is less computational time consuming.The article is organized as follow. Section 2 gives a general description of the approach developed in this paper. Data acquisition and processing PET is provided in Section 3. Our main contribution for feature selection is explained in Section 4. Section 5 is dedicated to the presentation of obtained results, where a discussion is given in Section 6. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 7.The general scheme of the proposed method, shown in Fig. 1, focuses on PET images and uses a CAD supervised learning approach. It consists on several important stages:1.18FDG-PET data acquisition and preprocessing.Feature selection and region ranking.Classification.The different parts of the flowchart are detailed in the following sections.The database is built up of the imaging studies of subjects following the protocol of a hospital-based service. This study was conducted at the Timone University Hospital, in the Nuclear Medicine Department (Marseille, France).PET scans were performed using an integrated PET/CT camera (Discovery ST, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, USA), with 6.2mm axial resolution, allowing 47 contiguous transverse sections of the brain of 3.27mm thickness. 150MBq of 18FDG were injected intravenously in an awake and resting state, with eyes closed, in a quiet environment. Image acquisition started 30min after injection and ended 15min later. Images were reconstructed using ordered subsets expectation maximization algorithm, with 5 iterations and 32 subsets, and corrected for attenuation using CT transmission scan.To evaluate the performance of the proposed method we used a local database of PET brain images from 142 subjects (see Table 1). The data was subdivided into two different groups:-61 healthy controls (HC).81 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD).18FDG-PET scans were acquired according to a standardized protocol. The complexity of brain structures and the differences between brains of distinct subjects makes some difficulties to use the registered images for all type of calculations that directly compares them with each other. However, the proposed system will assume the following two conditions to be met:-the same location within different images corresponds to the same anatomical position;the same gray-level intensity corresponds to the same brain activity (within or among subjects).Images were spatially normalized because of brain volume variation, shape and position from one patient to another. Spatial normalization consisted in applying deformations on volumes so that the whole-brain statistical analysis was performed at voxel-level using SPM8 software [3] (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, University College, London, UK). The data were spatially normalized onto the Montreal Neurological Institute atlas (MNI). This method assumes an affine generic model with 12 parameters [33] and a cost function which presents an extreme value when the image and a template that represents our ‘brain space’ correspond to each other. The spatial normalization is achieved by optimizing the quadratic difference between the template and each image.After this spatial normalization, the dimensions of the resulting voxel were 2×2×2mm and the resulting images of size 79×95×68≈5×105 voxels in both datasets are filtered. These images were smoothed with a Gaussian filter (with different value of Full Width at Half Maximum “FWHM”) to blur individual variations in gyral anatomy and to increase the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR). Different FWHM 0, 4, and 8 values were tested to fix the best one.After spatial normalization, intensity normalization was required in order to perform direct images comparison between different subjects. Intensity normalization was necessary since global brain activity varies from one subject to another. Different normalization methods were tested to determine the most appropriate one. This consisted in dividing the intensity level of voxels by the intensity level mean of a region or a set of regions denoted reference, supposed to be preserved in patients. We used first as reference: (a) the gray-matter global brain ROI activity, and (b) the global cerebellar ROI activity. Finally we used the most active region found in patients in comparison to healthy subjects (i.e. the most preserved region in AD patients), determined by comparing regions of AAL atlas between AD patients and HC. For this last step, we precisely used (c) the individual most active anatomical region (the vermis) and (d) the most active cluster (addition of individual regions, in contact with one another) (selected regions of the cerebellum). These regions used as references are shown in Fig. 2.In this section, we present the main idea of both feature selection and region ranking. Brain images are segmented into Z Regions Of Interest (ROI) according to AAL of WFU-Pickatlas tool, version 2.4. [31]. Each region Rjis characterized by a set of features (p1, p2,,…, pN). The main question that we want to answer is: how to quantify regions’ ability to best distinguish between AD and HC? To answer this question we need first to select a subset of features that best characterizes regions and then rank regions, using the set of features selected in the previous step.Selecting and ranking ROIs which best separate AD and HC subjects is done according to a “separation power factor” (SPF), defined in the following, and consequently produce a hierarchy of the ability of ROI to separate between groups of subjects. Selected regions are then introduced into a classifier. The data tensor shown in Fig. 3is the one used to represent data for analysis and statistical tests.Our goal is to find a minimal number of features which allow the best separation between our classes (AD and HC). Thus, we have tested different feature combinations to perform this separation.In order to achieve this goal, our first approach consisted in testing all potential combinations. This approach has proved tedious considering the large number of possible feature combinations. In fact, considering N features, the number of total possible combinations induces∑k=0N−1NN−klook-up operations.On a second approach, we used a Forward Sequential Feature Selection [32]. It consists on an iterative process according to which we add one feature at each step to a parameter list, and examine the average of the separation power of all regions (Z regions) based on this combination. The one that provides the best average of the separation power is then added to the final feature combination. Our algorithm stops when the same or a lower power of separation is obtained. Then, we select the feature combination with the lowest number of elements.The separation power factor (SPF), denoted αj−iis calculated for a region Rj j∈{1,…, Z} depending on the contribution of the feature pi i∈{1,…, N}.The average of the separation power over the Z regions is denotedβi∑j=1Zαj−i/Zdepending on the contribution of features pi i∈{1,…, N}.This is depicted in Fig. 4. It illustrates the Forward Sequential Feature Selection algorithm using 5 features {p1, p2, p3, p4, p5} for Z regions. We noticed that when using 5 features, we couldn’t further improve the separation (β24,351≤β2435); in this case, we kept the four features {p2, p4, p3, p5}.In what follows, we discuss the specificities of the proposed method and validate it using our database (containing 142 HC and AD patient).After determining the optimal parameters in the context of feature selection, each region Rjis characterized by the p parameters chosen in the previous feature selection step. Our goal is to reduce the number of regions. The regions are classified according to their ability to separate the AD patients compared to the healthy subjects based on the ROC curve (SPF). The subsets of the top ranked regions are selected for use in experiments using SVM classifier.For a given region Rj, HC and AD subjects are plotted in a p dimensional feature space (p≤N). A p-D sphere is created over the group of healthy subjects (HC) (p=1 correspond to an interval, p=2 correspond to a disk). The p-D sphere's center is the center of mass of HC subjects. Let design by nb_AD and nb_HC the number of AD and HC subjects in the database, respectivelyAt various radii of the p-D sphere, we compute the following parameters:-nb_HC_in, number of HC subjects inside the p-D sphere.nb_AD_in, number of subjects with AD inside the p-D sphere.nb_HC_in/nb_HC, rate of HC subjects inside the p-D sphere.nb_AD_in/nb_AD, rate of AD subjects inside the p-D sphere.The rate of AD (nb_AD_in/nb_AD) subjects is considered as a metric for non-successful separation between the two types of subjects.The ROC curve is created by plotting the fraction of true positives out of the total actual positives (nb_HC_in/nb_HC=true positive rate: TPR) vs. the fraction of false positives out of the total actual negatives (nb_AD_in/nb_AD=false positive rate: FPR), at various radii of the p-D sphere settings. The true positives are the HC subjects well ranked and the false positives are the AD subjects misclassified. Fig. 5shows an example in a 3-D feature space with the corresponding sphere.Once these two rates (TPR and FPR) are computed for different radii, we represent them in the ROC curve. The Separation Power Factor (SPF) is defined as the area under ROC curve “AUC” and is within [0,1] range. Computing the SPF is used in both approaches, feature selection and region ranking.Each ROI Rjis characterized by the first four moments and the entropy of its gray level histogram (Eq. (1)).(1)h(x)=numberofpixelsinRjwithgraylevelxtotalnumberofpixelsintheregionx∈lmin,…,lmaxwhere x is a gray level value of a voxel belonging to region Rjand lmin et lmax are the minimum and the maximum gray level values in region Rj, respectively.(2)μ1=∑x=lminlmaxxh(x)(3)μ2=∑x=lminlmax(x−μ1)2h(x)(4)μi=∑x=lminlmaxx−μ1ih(x)μ2i/2i={3,4}(5)E=−∑x=lminlmaxh(x)log2h(x)Mean=μ1, Variance=μ2, Skewness=μ3, Kurtosis=μ4, Entropy: E.For the purposes of this analysis, each region was characterized by seven parameters: the first four moments of gray level histogram of voxels, histogram entropy, as well as gender and age of the subject. In this paper, different parameters are used as described in Section 4.1. For each region, the SPF is computed depending on the number of features characterizing it. Figs. 6 and 7show the results obtained on the “Cingulum_Post_Left” region based on the two parameters mean and standard deviation. SPF is computed on the ROC curve in Fig. 7. This study was applied to the 116 anatomical regions of AAL (Z=116), and the average SPF (βi) of all regions for different parameters are shown in Table 2.There is slightly no difference on the obtained results using the different intensity normalization methods. The global brain shows however a little improvement. According to this table, the different values of the FWHM did not improve the rate of separation between groups. 8mm was retained for this smoothing parameter. This value is justified by the fact that the smoothing must be near to that of the template used by SPM.Mean, standard-deviation and age, using the whole brain intensity normalization and an 8mm smoothing parameter FWHM appear to best characterize regions for class separation purposes. These parameters are chosen for region ranking and classification purposes in the following.Physicians were regularly invited to discuss selected regions for a given threshold of SPF values. After many experiments, the value of 0.7 was chosen as the reference threshold because it was more suitable to the clinical status according to their recommendations.With this threshold, 72 ROIs among 116 were selected. Computing the average of these 72 ROIs and selecting those that have an SPF upper this average, the number of regions was reduced to 29 ROIs. This method led to rank 29 cortical regions that provide good discrimination between AD and HC. Table 3shows the 29 best ranked ROI obtained by this method. According to physicians, these top ranked regions are in concordance with clinical aspects of Alzheimer disease, where the first affected regions are the temporal and the parietal ones [33]. Fig. 8shows the 29 ROI selected by SPF ranking in 3-D representation.As a general rule, a classifier takes a number of input variables qualifying the data under investigation and produces output indicating the classes to which the data belong. Support vector machines implement a very simple idea. They map pattern vectors to a high-dimensional feature space where a ‘best’ separating hyperplane (the maximal margin hyperplane) is constructed. SVMs try to maximize the separation margin by the distance between a hyperplane and the closest data samples. In the present work we used a classifier SVM with a linear kernel [32].The performance of our classification approach is tested in three steps: training, cross-validation and test.Cross validation is achieved by means of the leave-one-out method, a technique that iteratively holds out a subject for test, while training the classifier with the remaining subjects, so that each subject is left out once.The linear kernel is implemented with Python standard library. Note that the performance is evaluated in term of classification success rate. We evaluated also the score function on feature selection according to the k highest scores with the SelectKBest of SVM.The SelektKabest [34] works by selecting the best features based on univariate statistical tests. It can be seen as a preprocessing step to an estimator. It exposes feature selection routines as a standard technique for extracting the most significant features from a dataset, frequently used to reduce the raw data to a subset of features that contain the largest amount of variance. The number of the features used by SelektKbest is set by user. Hereafter, it is symbolized by k. It removes all but the k highest scoring features.Feature vectors input to the SVM classifier were obtained using the methods described below:-Voxel-based analysis: Voxel-based methods are massively univariate: each voxel is tested in isolation of the rest of the brain. We are concerned with metabolic activity in the gray matter rather than the entire brain: approximately 182,413 brain surface voxels are input to the classifier for each subject. Those intensity values for the HC and AD images will allow us to classify the images accurately. This method will be considered as a baseline classification approach for comparison purposes.Regions of interest (ROI) analysis: 116 anatomical brain ROIs, segmented by WFU-Pickatlas tool, are input to the classifier with different parameters (selected among the parameter vector associated to the region). The SelektKabest is used to boost their performance.Regions selection with ranking method: This method reduces the number of features from 116 ROI to q ROIs with q∈{1:116} refers to our approach ROC curve using the SPF.The results achieved using the proposed methods and the SelektKabest of SVM are depicted in Table 4. It illustrates classification success rate with the three classification approaches. The voxel based analysis reached 94.36% success classification rate. It lasted a day computation time to analyze the whole database.We note that by using the mean and the standard-deviation as parameters of the 116 ROIs into the SVM with SelektKabest we had the same success rate as the voxel-based analysis. Computation time was reduced to few minutes.Our ROC feature selection and region ranking study reduced the number of regions from 116 to the 29 as depicted in Table 4.The classification performance of our approach is tested by varying the feature vectors dimension. In fact, different experiments were performed by considering the means of the 29 regions, or both the means and the standard-deviation of these regions, or their first four moments and the entropy. The results achieved using 29 ROIs with these different parameters are summarized also in Table 4. We noticed that, characterizing ROIs by the whole moments and injecting them into the classifier did not improve more our classification whereas inputting the 29 ROI characterized by their means in the SVM with the SelektKabest (k=20), we obtained a classification success rate slightly higher or equal than that of 116 ROI or the voxel-based analysis. The number of features was reduced with a same classification rate success (94.36%) and the computation time was reduced to a few seconds.According to a recent review article [35], 21 regions involving the temporo-parietal cortex, including the precuneus and the adjacent posterior cingulate cortex are particularly important for positive diagnosis of AD. These regions are within the 29 detected by our approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
