@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An interval type-2 fuzzy approach for real-time EEG-based control of wrist and finger movement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Session-to-session EEG variation is addressed and tackled by the proposed method.Interval type-2 fuzzy classification approach adopted for the purpose.Studied on discrimination of wrist and fingers motor imagery EEG signals.Offline and online experiments establish the efficacy of the proposed method.Using Extreme Energy Ratio as features 86.45% and 78.44% accuracies are obtained.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electroencephalography,Interval type-2 fuzzy systems,Motor imagination,Extreme energy ratio,Wrist movement and grasping,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Feature extraction and automatic classification of mental states is an interesting and open area of research in the field of brain–computer interfacing (BCI). A well-trained classifier would allow the BCI system to control an external assistive device in real world problems. Sometimes, standard existing classifiers fail to generalize the components of a non-stationary signal, like Electroencephalography (EEG) which may pose one or more problems during real-time usage of the BCI system. In this paper, we aim to tackle this issue by designing an interval type-2 fuzzy classifier which deals with the uncertainties of the EEG signal over various sessions. Our designed classifier is used to decode various movements concerning the wrist (extension and flexion) and finger (opening and closing of a fist). For this purpose, we have employed extreme energy ratio (EER) to construct the feature vector. The average classification accuracy achieved during offline training and online testing over eight subjects are 86.45% and 78.44%, respectively. On comparison with other related works, it is shown that our designed IT2FS classifier presents a better performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain–computer interfacing (BCI) provides a non-muscular communication channel between the human brain and external world where the brain signals act as information carrier. It consists of steps involving brain signal acquisition, decoding and feature extraction from the acquired signal, classification of its modality, controlling of an external device using the same, and feedback of the operation performed to achieve the desired action [1–3]. The spectrum of BCI application includes robotics, military services, virtual gaming controls, mass communication, healthcare and navigation [4]. A profound application of BCI is aiding mobility-disabled people by establishing a communication channel between the brain and a prosthetic device [5]. Electroencephalography (EEG) is frequently used by researchers in BCI applications because of its high temporal resolution, non-invasive nature, easy availability and portability [6].Researchers working on EEG-based BCI have successfully discriminated among left-right motor imagery signals [7–9] using various standard classification techniques like Support Vector Machine (SVM) [10–13], Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) [10–12,14], Naïve Bayesian (NB) [10–12,15] and k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) classifiers [10–12,14]. However, EEG responses are non-stationary in nature which varies at each session of recording whereas standard classifiers often validates stationary feature distribution hypothesis, parametrically or non-parametrically [16]. Previous works have mitigated the effect of short-term non-stationarities by recalibrating the system [7,8] but these are unable to provide any long term solution. Although the EEG responses vary from session to session, yet there are no crisp boundaries that distinguish the responses of different sessions. Thus, a fuzzy model can provide a better insight to such scenarios. Considering each EEG response as a fuzzy set, it is difficult to determine its exact membership function. Hence, the focus is shifted to type-2 fuzzy systems which can tune the membership distributions for each fuzzy set more flexibly than type-1 fuzzy systems.The capability of fuzzy systems (both Type-1 and Type-2) to handle uncertainty has been explored in several classification problems [17–19]. As the two-dimensional membership function of Type-2 Fuzzy System (T2FS) [20] has an additional degree of freedom it can capture more information at the cost of increased computation. This cost can be reduced to some extent by using interval T2FS (IT2FS) where the secondary membership is uniform and constant. The common practice to build an IT2FS classifier is to randomly initialize a rule-base and arbitrarily form fuzzy sets in the universe of discourse [21]. Previous works on IT2FS in EEG-BCI applications necessitate the creation of an initial rule base either by supervised clustering [22] or by using T1FS [21]. Our simple yet novel approach neither resorts to a random initialization nor to the use of other methods like clustering and T1FS, rather the parameters of a distribution of a single session are completely statistical in nature which can be directly evaluated from the training data-set at hand.In this study, classification of motor imagery signals for wrist rotation (extension and flexion) and grasping activity (opening and closing of a fist) has been performed using IT2FS classifier. Wrist [23–26] and finger movements [24–26] classified from EEG can aid in extending the functionality of prosthetic devices assisting handicapped individuals and open a new area of motor task related BCI research. Our previous work [26] has shown the discriminative capability of Extreme Energy Ratio (EER) based feature in decoding wrist and finger movements from EEG signal. The performance of IT2FS classifier, trained on EER based features, over several days are compared with previous works of other researchers. This study also includes experiments which deals with the use of our designed classifier in online recognition problems.EEG signals are acquired using a 14-channel Emotiv Headset (Research edition SDK with inbuilt band pass filter of 0.2–45Hz and sampling rate of 128Hz). All the 14 electrodes of the headset viz. AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8 and AF4 are considered during the data acquisition whose placement is dictated by the standard 10/20 electrode placement system [27]. The electrodes placed over the central motor cortex are FC5 and FC6, which are responsible for the motor imagery signals [27]. The electrodes covering the remaining frontal lobe are AF3, F7, F3, F4, F8 and AF4 which are accountable for decision making on receiving the stimulus [27]. The experiments are performed using audio-visual stimulus and thus, the electrodes T7, T8, O1 and O2 are considered during the signal analysis. Finally, P7 and P8 are also considered as somato-sensation is involved in most of the motor activities [27].EEG data are collected from 8 subjects (4 male, 4 female) in the age group of 25±3 years over a period of 3 consecutive days as training data. The experiment requires the subject to imagine kinesthetic tasks based on a visual cue projected on a screen in a well-lit, empty, sound-proof, isolated room so that the EEG signals are free from any other unknown environmental stimulus (noise). The data collected from these experiments are used to train the classifier and the subjects simultaneously.For data acquisition, the subjects have been informed of the purpose of the experiment and the meaning of the stimulus. The data are acquired only after they have signed on a duly filled consent form. The experimental objective and procedure were informed in details to the institutional committee, which they had agreed upon. All the devices and experiments are non-invasive and all safety norms are followed to assure the protection of the subjects. Thus, the ethical issues have been considered relating to human subject experiments. Helsinki Declaration of 1975, revised in 2000 [28], is abided by for dealing with human subjects for experimental purpose.The visual stimulus consists of a sequence of instructions, all displayed for a fixed period of time. The sequence starts with a ‘blank’ screen at 0th second during which the subject relaxes and the baseline EEG is recorded from them for 10s. After the baseline recording, the subject undergoes a series of repetitive trials based on the visual instructions, which are as follows: First, a ‘+’ is displayed on-screen for 3s which informs the subject to get ready for the instructions. Next, the command task is displayed based on which the subject imagines the movement-based task for 3s. The commands for the tasks are: ‘extension of wrist’, ‘flexion of wrist’, ‘opening fingers to deform a fist’ or ‘closing fingers to form a fist’, which is shown in Fig. 1(a). Lastly, a ‘blank’ section of 2s is displayed which allows the subject to relax and it helps in obtaining non-overlapping responses from subsequent trials. The complete process is repeated 50 times over each motor imagery task in a random fashion for each session. Also, the EEG acquired during the ‘+’ phase is considered to be an EEG signal representing ‘no-movement’ in this study. Thus, there are a total of 400 observations at each session and each subject participates in three separate sessions at three different days. This is because each of the 50 observations for the four movements (viz. opening a fist, closing a fist, extension of wrist and flexion of wrist) is preceded by a ‘+’ phase where motor imagery signals for ‘no-movement’ EEG response has been acquired. Thus, there are 2 (movement or no-movement)×4 (four types of wrist and finger movements)×50 (trials of each type of movement)=400 observations in the dataset per session per subject.The classifiers trained in the offline mode with the EEG observation of three days are used in the online mode. For this purpose, data are acquired from the same eight subjects in the same manner and the testing is done for two more days. The visual cue for each trial is similar to that used during training except the addition of a feedback phase after the blank screen, which is shown in Fig. 1(b). Here, the incoming EEG is classified for each trial following the completion of the task and the result of the classifier is communicated to the subject via a microphone during the feedback phase. This feedback also changes the weights and biases of the biological neural network responsible for motor imagination and thus, optimizes the performance of the subject when he/she is stimulated by the next visual command. The cue of ‘ready’, ‘command’, ‘blank’ and ‘feedback’ instructions are repeated 10 times for each class where the four types of movement tasks and the no-movement instruction appear randomly in the ‘command’ phase. Thus, there are 50 EEG observations. The difference between offline and the online stimuli can be noted from the sequence of the stimuli shown in Fig. 1.Information about the mental states of the subject cannot be obtained directly from the EEG signals. The EEG needs to be processed and relevant features, defined by characteristic signatures for each mental state, must be extracted. This sub-section discusses on the approach employed in this study.Informative motor imagery signals are found to be prevalent in the μ (8–12Hz) and central β (16–24Hz) bands [21,22]. Based on this information, EEG signal of 8–25Hz bandwidth is filtered using an elliptical filter of order 12 having 1dB pass-band ripple and 50dB stop-band ripple. An elliptical filter is used as it has equi-ripple behavior in the pass-band and stop-band and has a steeper roll-off characteristic when compared to other standard filters [29]. Filtering also helps to remove other forms of environmental and cognitive noises from the signal.EEG signals acquired from each electrode are often affected by cross-talk from the regions covered by the other neighboring electrodes. To reduce such interference, we have used Common average referencing [27] where signal received by an electrode is scaled with respect to a reference obtained by averaging the signals received by all the electrodes. Finally, each of the EEG observation is normalized with respect to the maximum value within that period. Thus each observation is in the interval [0,1].In the present study, we have employed Extreme Energy Ratio to construct the feature vectors from the incoming EEG signals.Extreme Energy Ratio (EER) [26,30] is a criterion based on which spatial filters are designed and the signals filtered using them is said to have optimal discriminative capability. Thus, the energy of the filtered signals can be treated as features. The following steps yield the spatial filters based on EER [30]:(a)Each EEG observation X is rearranged to form an E×n matrix where E is the number of electrodes which is 14 for our work and n is the total number discrete time instants.Covariance C of an EEG sample X is obtained using (1) where (.)T denotes the transpose operation on a matrix. Dimension of C is E×E.Considering binary classification, the covariance of all the samples belonging to a particular class are averaged to produce Ci(for i=0 or 1).The maximum and minimum Eigen values for the matrix C1−1C0are calculated. The Eigen vectors corresponding to these maximum and minimum values generates ϕmaxand ϕminrespectively which are the two spatial filters indicating a single latent brain location or the information source generating the motor imagery signal. The signal energy associated with the signal filtered by ϕ is given by ϕTXXTϕ=ϕTCϕ. The ϕmaxand ϕminfilters represent maximization or minimization of the EER given by (2).One source of brain signal does not always suffice to describe the inherent brain activities. This calls for multiple sources to be identified. If m sources are recognized, we have 2m values for each EEG sample. For this a filter bank Φ=[ϕ1, ϕ2, …, ϕm] has to be evaluated and the EER criterion is updated to (3) where |·| denotes determinant of the matrix. In other words, for m sources, Φmax(or Φmin) is a set of filters corresponding to m generalized Eigen vectors of the matrix pair (C0, C1) corresponding to first (or last) m Eigen values when all the Eigen values are arranged in descending order.Here, we have considered m=7 for considering all the filters (Eigen vectors) and thus, from each EEG sample the feature vector is of dimension 1×14 which are the energies of the signal filtered by the 2m(=2×7=14) filters.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work aims at developing a strategy for controlling wrist and fingers to model the grasping and releasing action for helping mobility-disabled individuals using BCI methods. For achieving the purpose, EEG signals have been recorded from eight subjects over three days for training IT2FS classifiers using EER based features. The trained classifier has been evaluated in an online testing paradigm for two days. From the results, we note that EER based features provide good performance in short time in both online and offline perspective yielding an accuracy of 86.45% in offline mode and 78.44% in online mode. It is also shown in this paper that our proposed algorithm is superior to other standard algorithms. In future, we would like to implement the proposed method in controlling a robot arm as a BCI controlled prosthetic device in rehabilitation.