@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prognostic value of the total cosine R to T measured in high resolution body surface potential mapping during exercise test

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The aim was to assess the prognostic value of the total cosine R-to-T.The HRBSPM were recorded during exercise test in the group of 123 subjects.TCRT measured at peak exercise might be an effective predictor of arrhythmia.Analysis during exercise improves sensitivity compared to measurement at rest.TCRT parameter normalization to heart rate increases diagnostic value.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe total cosine R-to-T (TCRT) is a vectorcardiographic measure of differences in propagation of depolarization and repolarization in the heart. The high TCRT value reflects increased heterogeneity of repolarization process. The aim of study was to assess the prognostic value of the TCRT measured during exercise stress test.MethodsThe high-resolution body surface potential maps were recorded at rest and during exercise test in the group of 90 cardiac patients and 33 healthy volunteers. The TCRT was computed from averaged in time ECG signals. The prognostic value of TCRT parameter was determined based on the results of SPECT and echocardiography.ResultsTCRT was heart rate dependent and its magnitude decreased when measured at peak exercise in comparison to TCRT measured at rest. The significant differences in TCRT were obtained between patients with low (LVEF≤40%,) and high (LVEF>40%) left ventricular ejection fraction. These differences were greater if the TCRT was determined from a 67-lead ECG than computed from the standard ECG leads and were more pronounced for TCRT determined at peak exercise than at rest. The separation capacity was farther improved for TCRT normalized to mean heart rate. Simulation and experimental results showed that presence and localization of myocardial ischemia or post-infarction scar tissue have negligible impact on TCRT.ConclusionsWider R-to-T angle was associated with lower LVEF. The statistically significant differences of TCRT in patients with low LVEF and high LVEF may suggest high prognostic value of TCRT parameter in risk assessment of ventricular arrhythmia.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is the leading cause of death among people with cardiovascular diseases. One of the factors that increase the risk of SCD is development of ischemic heart disease (IHD) which might be noninvasive monitored with use of exercise electrocardiography. Moreover, exercise test can be also successful used for arrhythmia risk assessment such as T-wave alternans detection which is more pronounced at higher heart rates. During exercise, ECG signals are mainly examined for the presence of pathological changes in ST-T complexes omitting other reported [1,2] potentially valuable features like QRS and T loops orientation changes during exercise. Interest in using of vectorcardiography as a diagnostic procedure has increased in recent years. Usefulness of an analysis of relationship between electric axes of QRS and T complexes was first noticed by Wilson. The concept of QRS-T angle measurements was redefined by Acar et al. [3] who suggested analysis of ECG signals from virtual, orthogonal leads obtained by applying singular value decomposition to the recorded ECG signals. Proposed parameter was defined as integrated cosine between three-dimensional QRS and T loops and called total cosine R-to-T (TCRT). It is a measure of concordance between directions of depolarization and repolarization waves propagation in the heart.The clinical usefulness of TCRT was already shown in various studies. Zabel et al. [4] reported the advantage of TCRT as independent predictor of mortality in post-MI patients. It was noticed that wide R-to-T angles (negative TCRT values) are related with arrhythmic events [4–6] and also could be associated with thickening of the myocardium of the left ventricle [3,7]. Independent studies indicate TCRT as a strong predictor of mortality among patients with cardiovascular diseases [8,9], hemodialyzed patients [10], as well as mortality in general population [9,11,12]. In the most of studies TCRT parameter was computed from standard 12-lead ECG recordings performed at rest. The aim of this study was to check the performance of TCRT parameter measured during exercise test in arrhythmia risk assessment within patients with cardiovascular disease. In particular to check if analysis of ECG signal at submaximal effort allows for better selection of subjects vulnerable to cardiac arrhythmias compared to analysis of ECG signals measured at rest and to check whether TCRT computation from multi-lead ECG perform better than calculation of TCRT from standard 12-lead ECG. Karsikas et al. [1] noticed more negative trend of TCRT during exercise in patients with coronary artery disease compared to healthy subjects. Thus exercise-induced myocardial ischemia potentially may affect TCRT measurements, what was the subject of additional study carried out on simulated and measured ECG.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The total cosine R-to-T measured at peak exercise might be an effective marker of vulnerability to ventricular arrhythmia. The use of stress testing during examination improves efficiency in the detection of patients prone to future arrhythmic events. TCRT parameter correction by heart rate as well as the use of described in the paper non-standard ECG lead system increases its diagnostic value. The presence and localization of ischemic lesion in heart have negligible influence on TCRT.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.