@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Signal (Stream) synchronization with White noise sources, in biomedical applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Motivation: Synchronize biomedical signals from several acquisition systems is a difficult task.Methodology: Use of white noise and correlation methods to synchronize biomedical signals.Results: Synchronization with an error of 0.2ms in an experimental case.Conclusions: This is a reliable and flexible method for several biomedical acquisition systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Correlation,Instrument optimization,Synchronization,White noise,Biomedical signals,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When multiple acquisition systems are used to simultaneously acquire signals, synchronization issues may arise potentially causing errors in the determination of acquisition starting points and continuous clock offsets and shifts on each device. This paper introduces a processing method to efficiently synchronize these signals in the presence of white noise sources without the requirement of clock sharing or any other digital line exchange. The use of a signal source, such as white noise with a very wide frequency band, is of great interest for synchronization purposes, due to its aperiodic nature. This high bandwidth signal is simultaneously acquired by all the acquisition channels, on distinct systems, and, synchronized afterwards using cross-correlation methods. Two different correlation methods were tested; a global method, used when clock system frequencies are exactly known, and a local method, used when independent clocks evidence shifts over time that cumulatively account for long term acquisition errors in the synchronization process. In a computational simulation with known clock frequencies the results show a synchronization error of ≈1/10 of the time resolution, for both methods. For unknown clock frequencies, the global method achieved an error of 24/10 the time resolution, indicating a much poorer performance. In the experimental set-up, only the local method was tested. The best result shows a synchronization error of 4/10 of the time resolution. All the signal conditioning and acquisition parameters were chosen taking into account potential biomedical applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The human body is a highly complex system which is composed by many subsystems with specific functions. The assessment of human health condition is made by visual observation or biomedical signals acquisition. These signals can be composed by multiple variables (different physical quantities) which are measured at different body locations [1]. Some examples of biomedical signals are: body temperature; bio-electric potentials; arterial blood pressure (ABP); or respiratory rate [2].The assessment of multiple biomedical signals is a common medical situation that produces valuable information to improve clinical diagnosis. Usually, biomedical signals are acquired by different devices, each one with its own acquisition set-up. Different equipments have different sampling frequencies, resolutions, ranges, signal-to-noise-ratios (SNR) and temporal references [3].The absence of a common temporal reference between signals occurs when multiple signals are acquired from the same patient. This situation makes the combined analysis of these signals extremely difficult. A common situation in biomedical applications is the use of different acquisition modules, from different manufacturers, each one with a specific internal clock source. The inclusion of an external clock is often very difficult or impossible. Even if the clocks are equal, an offset in the starting points of the acquisitions appears.To overtake these issues, it is mandatory to have a time reference, of some sort, in order to guarantee the synchronization of independent data streams. This work proposes a scheme where an electronic circuitry (white noise generator) is used to automatically synchronize data signals acquired from different devices and setups.This technique is based on the acquisition of a random signal (white noise) by all the data acquisition systems (DAS) during their normal operation. The biomedical signal must be internally synchronized with the random signal by each device. Thereafter, these random signals are processed using cross-correlation methods to determine the delay between each physiological signal and to build a common temporal reference. Cross-correlation is a widely used method for delay determination in random shifted signals [4–6], including for biomedical purposes [7].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a synchronization method, based in cross-correlation, for biomedical signals which are acquired with different devices is proposed. This method exploits the random nature of white noise and its large frequency band. These features guarantee that it is unlikely to find the same segment of signal in a short time period making it a good candidate for time synchronization applications.A computation simulation was performed in absence of quantization noise and using an infinite frequency band white noise. In these perfect conditions, an error of 0.068ms (13% of the time resolution) was achieved. This error is less than the time resolution of the cross-correlation (0.5ms) which means that the correct sample is identified for the delay calculi.In the case of minimal variations in the sampling frequency (0.025%) the simple cross-correlation achieved a minimal error of 1.93ms (259% relative error). This result shows a poor performance in the identification of a delay between two biological signals. Moreover, the quality of the correlations decreases with the increase in the sampling rate difference. To overpass this problem a more complex approach was used.The local approach uses a short segment of the synchronization signal to perform the cross-correlation and identify, in the signal with a reliable sampling rate, the correspondent points. By selecting many segments it is possible to obtain a set of points on which a linear regression is performed. With this linear regression it is possible to create a new time vector for the data with unknown sampling rate. This method identifies the initial delay with an error of 0.068ms, in accordance with the previous result.Section 3 shows the results achieved with a real experimental set-up. A National Instruments™NI-DAQ and an Arduino™were used as the DAS. The first system uses a sampling frequency of 20kHz and the second one an undefined frequency of approximately 2kHz. Three different data sets were recorded and processed using the algorithm presented in Section 2.2.2. The best result was achieved with the DS3 with a acquisition starting point identification error of 0.2ms (40% relative error).Concluding, the presented methods are capable of synchronize acquired biomedical signals with different devices with an accuracy of a millisecond and, most significantly, under the signal time resolution. In the physiological processes, this scale is small enough to be considered a good result.