@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An optimized feature selection and classification method for using electroencephalographic coherence in brain–computer interfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
EEG coherence is used to blindly select sensors in a brain–computer interface.In addition to reveal connectivity, coherences are used to discriminate mental tasks.Our method selects optimal sensors without prior knowledge about the brain processes.The proposed method achieves good accuracy rates with a reduced number of sensors.In spite of previous reports, we show that EEG coherence is relevant for classifying mental tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain–computer interfaces,Electroencephalography,Coherence,Linear discriminant,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a method to use electroencephalographic (EEG) coherences as features in a brain–computer interface (BCI). The coherence provides a sense of the brain's connectivity, and it is relevant as different regions of the brain must communicate between each other for the integration of sensory information. In our case, the process of feature selection is optimized in the sense that only those statistically significant and potentially discriminative coherences at a specific frequency are used, which results in a feature vector of reduced-dimension. Next, those features are classified through an optimized linear discriminant, where the best discriminating hyperplanes are selected such that the area under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve is maximized. Overall, the proposed EEG coherence selection and classification method can provide efficiency rates similar to those obtained with other methods in BCI, but with the advantage of blindly selecting and optimal combination of features out of all the possible pairwise coherences. We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed method through numerical examples using real data from motor and cognitive tasks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A brain–computer interface (BCI) is a communication system that allows a subject to act on his/her environment solely by means of his/her thoughts, i.e. without using the brain's normal output pathways of muscles or peripheral nerves [1]. Non-invasive BCIs rely on electroencephalographic (EEG) measurements of the brain's activity to read out the intentions of the subject and translate them into commands for a computerized system.The translation from the brain activity to a command is usually achieved by means of a feature generator that extracts feature values from the EEG signals that correspond to the underlying neurological mechanism employed by the user for control. Next, a feature translator classifies the features into logical control signals, such as a two-state discrete output. Many methods have been proposed so far to carry out the extraction/classification processes in BCI, and a very comprehensive review about them can be found in [2]. In general, feature extraction methods are closely related to specific neuromechanisms, while feature classification algorithms are determined by the type of features that they discriminate.Here, we examine the use of the EEG coherence as feature in a BCI. The coherence provides a sense of the brain's connectivity, and it is relevant to measure it as different regions widely distributed over the brain must communicate between each other in order to provide the basis for integration of sensory information, as well as for many functions that are critical for learning, memory, information processing, perception, and behavior. Transient periods of synchronization of oscillating neural discharges have been proposed to act as an integrative mechanism that may bring a widely distributed set of neurons together into a coherent ensemble that underlies a cognitive act [3], and many studies have used the EEG coherence to quantify such synchronization process (see [4] and references therein). In [5], the patterns in the coherence were studied during sequential and simultaneous tasks, while in [6], signals corresponding to spontaneous EEG, imaginery movement, and movement execution were classified based on the coherence using hidden Markov models and a multilayer perceptron. Nevertheless, the only attempt known to us of using the coherence in the context of BCI can be found in [7]. There, the use of the coherence as a feature was assessed for the case of measuring the mean coupling between signals recorded from an electrode and its neighbors, and a few individual electrode pairs reflecting connectivity between fronto-centro-parietal and temporal lobes. Given the limited number of subjects tested and the coherences that were assessed, their results do not allow for a statistical conclusion regarding general performance of the proposed measures. Nevertheless, the results in [7] suggest that coherence-based features might not perform as well as other features, but still could be relevant for classifying mental tasks.Therefore, in this paper we propose an optimized method for feature selection and classification which is customized for the EEG coherence. The process of feature selection is optimized in the sense that only those statistically significant and potentially discriminative coherences at a specific frequency are used, which results in a feature vector of reduced-dimension. Next, those features are classified through an optimized linear discriminant, where the best discriminating hyperplanes are selected such that the area under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve is maximized. Based on these ideas, the paper is organized as follows: the coherence is briefly reviewed in Section 2, then the proposed coherence-based feature selection and classification process is introduced; in Section 3, we show the applicability of our method through a series of numerical examples using real EEG data; in Section 4, we discuss the results and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We presented a method based on EEG coherence to select an optimal feature vector with reduced-dimension for BCI applications. The selection was performed without prior knowledge about brain activity related to the tasks involved. However, by assessing the significance of the EEG coherence, we assure that the signals from selected channels indeed provide information related to the brain connectivity associated to the task. Our experiments with real EEG data show that the selected sensors are capable of discriminating different tasks (motor and cognitive) with good accuracy rates, while using a reduced number of sensors. Our results also show that, against previous belief, coherence-based features can provide a good performance, and it can be comparable to the one provided with other methods based on features with higher dimensionality.Our method is well suited for practical BCI applications where mobile EEG systems are used. In this type of systems, the number of sensors available might not be large, then it is important to find a subset of sensors that allows to reduce the computational load but, at the same time, optimizes the classification process by taking into account the connectivity information of the brain processes in a personalized manner. For the case when the search for an optimal feature is being performed in a highly dense EEG array (e.g., for the whole 118 sensors available in the data set in Section 3.1), our proposed method might seem exhaustive. However, for those cases we recommend an initial randomized search of possible combinations of L sensors in which candidates of the optimal solution are pre-selected, then those candidates can be used in a directed search through metaheuristic methods. In preliminary tests using this approach, we have been able to reach an optimal feature out of 10,000 random picks instead of exhaustively testing the whole1183=266,916combinations. This opens the possibility of exploring cases with L>3, as well as more dense measuring arrays, such as magnetoencephalographic (MEG) systems, for which coherence measures seem to reflect different aspects of neocortical dynamics [21].Our future work will extend our approach to network theory, in which L channels could be seen as forming a sensor network, and their pairwise coherences could serve as connectivity weights. Having that in mind, our work will include a more rigorous assessment of the connectivity through other metrics, such as the partial directed coherence [22], so we could propose different network topologies and not only fully-connected networks as in this work.