@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
EMD-based EEG signal enhancement for auditory evoked potential recovery under high stimulus-rate paradigm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We designed an EMD-based approach to EEG signal enhancement.We devised different thresholding and rejection algorithms for different IMF groups.We evaluated our method using real EEGs and synthetic data under two HSR conditions.Results from real and synthetic data demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Empirical mode decomposition,Threshold filtering,Auditory evoked potential,High stimulus-rate paradigm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Short inter-stimulus interval (ISI) is one inherent characteristic of the high stimulus-rate (HSR) paradigms for studying auditory evoked potentials (AEPs). At short ISIs, the AEPs to adjacent stimuli overlap. To resolve the AEP to a specific stimulus requires an inverse process of overlapping. Inverse filtering (also called as deconvolution) has been commonly employed to achieve this goal. However, the resulted signal may be severely distorted as inverse filtering can substantially amplify such undesired components as noises and artifacts in the raw EEG recordings. In practice, even if care be taken to obtain quality EEGs, noises and artifacts are unavoidable. It is thus critical to remove or at least supress these undesired components for studies using HSR paradigms. In this paper, we propose a systematic approach to EEG signal enhancement based on empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and threshold filtering/rejection. Using synthetic and real data, we test the effectiveness of our approach. Results for both types of data consistently demonstrate that our methods can significantly improve the quality of recovered AEPs, according to visual inspection and SNRs estimated using two metrics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) are microvolt level electrical signals time-locked to acoustic stimuli presented to the subject. Usually these tiny signals recorded on scalp are buried in various types of artifacts and random noises. The conventional approach to obtaining reliable AEPs is averaging typically hundreds of trials of electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings at low stimulus rate so that random noises and artifacts are reduced. Recently, high stimulus-rate (HSR) paradigms have been introduced to assess the auditory system adaptation or to explore the mechanisms of different AEP components [1–3]. HSR-AEPs also show promising applications in rating the depth and the effects of anesthesia [4,5] and the study of sleep states [6]. For HSR paradigm, the inter-stimulus intervals are shorter than the duration of AEPs to individual stimuli. Therefore, EEGs recorded with HSR paradigm consist of overlapped AEPs (see Fig. 1in Section 2.1). To obtain the transient AEP from such EEG recordings, an unwrapping process called deconvolution becomes mandatory. Since the deconvolution process is very sensitive to noises (for reasons detailed in Section 2.2), quality requirement of EEG for HSR-AEP study is much higher than that for conventional paradigm [7].The deconvolution algorithms require appropriate design of stimulus-sequences. Early proposed HSR paradigms use a pseudorandom sequence called maximum length sequence (m-sequence) associated with a method that is capable of retrieving the AEP with noise attenuation property [8,9]. Since the large jitter of inter-stimulus interval (ISI) with an m-sequence imposes an obstacle for practical applications, continuous loop averaging deconvolution (CLAD) paradigms have been developed by Delgado and Özdamar [10]. And Jewett et al. [7] also provided an approach to selecting the appropriate stimulus loop (named q-sequence) making the HSR paradigm more practical. However, the CLAD method, inverse filtering in essence, can amplify such irrelevant components as random noise and artifacts within specific frequency bins determined by the properties of the stimulus sequences in frequency domain [1,11,12], introducing a new issue of low AEP recording efficiency [13].It is well known that EEGs recorded from a scalp are highly contaminated by noises, physiological artifacts such as ocular and cardiac activities, and electromagnetic interference from power lines or devices on site. In general, these components exhibits properties of broadband, 1/f distribution, slow baseline-drifting and nonstationarity, which are caused by various factors such as recording systems, environmental interferences, movements of electrodes or muscles. Even infrequent artifacts can be dominant in some trials and bias the averaged evoked potentials. Conventional averaging has limited power in removing those noises/artifacts for the EEGs to be suitable for HSR paradigms. Manual screening sometimes is necessary to exclude EEG segments contaminated by large artifacts. However, it is a highly subjective and time consuming task. Furthermore, artifacts from muscle activities, eye movements, cardiac rhythms, respiration, and impedance change of electrodes and the like are usually non-stationary or exquisitely assorted, and therefore sometimes only identifiable by skilled experts.To achieve objectivity and automate the process, artifacts rejection based on a predefined threshold is widely adopted prior to the averaging; it will reject EEG sweeps if the maximal amplitude exceed the threshold. Artifacts rejection for HSR paradigm has two drawbacks. First, small- and moderate-size artifacts (e.g. sustained electromyogram or some rapid eye movements) that may be obvious in visual screening can be neglected. Second, the artifact rejection in HSR paradigms is even more uninviting in that the exclusion of whole sweep for the occurrence of transient artifacts can cause a big waste of data due to a relative large of sweep length that contains a number of stimuli.Other signal processing tools have also been designed to remove or suppress artifacts from brain signals of interest. Traditional signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) enhancement methods based on linear filtering are not so effective when the observed signals contain abrupt variations and impulses of short duration. Newly developed methods, such as independent component analysis (ICA) becomes very effective when artifacts are statistically independent [14]. However, ICA requires recordings from more than one channel, and does not apply when artifacts occur infrequently from various sources. Moreover, the assumptions that artifacts come from independent sources and mix linearly can be difficult to satisfy since artifacts of specific wave-profile behaviors may not be associated with a specific source. Wavelet transform is commonly employed for nonstationary signals. As a frequency filter-bank technology in essence with the advantage of providing results in analytic form, it has been criticized for being non-adaptive, since one will have to use them to analyze the whole dataset once the base wavelets are selected.Recently, a technique called empirical mode decomposition (EMD) has been proposed to represent the recorded signals with oscillatory functions. In brief, EMD decomposes a signal into a number of amplitude and frequency modulated zero-mean elements, termed as intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) in which useful information and artifacts or noises are reserved more or less separately. One significant advantage of this technique is that it can handle nonstationary signals and/or those generated by a nonlinear system in some automatic and fully data-driven way [15].A number of studies have been reported to take advantage of EMD techniques for signal enhancement. The basic idea of which is removing the undesired componentswhich are more prominent in the representative IMFs being selected using statistics or empirical criteria. Conventionally, a statistical test is performed to exclude IMFs that contain primarily noise from signal synthesis [9]. Some studies assume that IMFs of low frequency contain major structures of signals. A distortion measure is defined as well to assist the identification of the crucial IMF index [16]. An improved strategy, inspired by the wavelet-based denoising idea, was proposed to apply IMF-dependent thresholds for eliminating subthreshold components [17].Although it has been reported that EMD-based signal enhancement outperforms some classical methods [18,19], their applications for AEP studies using the HSR paradigm need to be further investigated. The AEPs are tiny signals usually at μV level buried in background electrophysiological activities and artifacts, which are usually tens or even hundreds times larger in amplitude. When EMD is applied directly, components of AEP are essentially unrecognizable in IMFs which are still dominated by stochastic artifacts. This study is thus aimed to develop a threshold-filtering and rejection method for IMFs, which are classified a priori based on empirical examination. We also evaluate the performance of this method using both HSR-AEP recordings from human subjects and synthesized data mixed with an known AEP and additive background EEG.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
