@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Review of medical image quality assessment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review the Image Quality Assessment (IQA) for medical images.Majority of IQA was done on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed Tomography (CT), and ultrasonic images.No reference - IQA (NR-IQA) is suitable in assessing real world medical images.Designing an ideal medical NR-IQA method is a challenging task.Medical image characteristics and content need to be considered in designing medical NR-IQA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image Quality Assessment (IQA),No reference-IQA (NR-IQA),Medical images,MRI,CT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) plays an important role in assessing any new hardware, software, image acquisition techniques, image reconstruction or post-processing algorithms, etc. In the past decade, there have been various IQA methods designed to evaluate natural images. Some were used for the medical images but the use was limited. This paper reviews the recent advancement on IQA for medical images, mainly for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed Tomography (CT), and ultrasonic imaging. Thus far, there is no gold standard of IQA for medical images due to various difficulties in designing a suitable IQA for medical images, and there are many different image characteristics and contents across various imaging modalities. No reference-IQA (NR-IQA) is recommended for assessing medical images because there is no perfect reference image in the real world medical imaging. We will discuss and comment on some useful and interesting IQA methods, and then suggest several important factors to be considered in designing a new IQA method for medical images. There is still great potential for research in this area.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical imaging is an important branch of medicine. It is especially useful in assisting diagnosis and treatment. Among the most common imaging modalities are Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed Tomography (CT), ultrasonic imaging, X-ray, nuclear magnetic imaging with Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) [1]. Each of them has its own specific features and each is chosen according to the requirement of image types, physical and/or physiological study, patient's condition and availability. There are a lot of researches conducted to improve the quality of the medical images, either during acquisition or post-processing. The majority of the researches and development in medical imaging aim to speed up the acquisition time and/or improve the image signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Therefore, there is a need for a good standard of Image Quality Assessment (IQA) to assess any newly developed hardware, software, higher field strength (in MRI) or radiation (in CT, X-ray or PET), image reconstruction techniques and image processing algorithm, etc. In the past few decades, there has been a huge advancement in the research and development of MRI compared to other imaging modalities. Naturally, the majority of the published IQA studies on medical images were performed on MRI. Therefore, we would also focus this review more on MRI.There are two paramount problems in the IQA of medical images: the measure of image quality is not a reliable measure of diagnostic accuracy and it does not indicate any abnormality in the scanned areas. Usually a specific imaging technique is used to acquire the signal or image of a single focal lesion, but it may not have the best image quality overall; Yet, it is still serving its purpose and is considered good enough for a specific diagnosis. In other words, IQA is not necessarily equal to diagnostic quality assessment [2]. Nevertheless, radiologists and medical consultants would prefer high quality images for accurate diagnosis. A high quality image will increase the confidence in diagnosing and subsequently lead to the right treatment.There are various image artifacts in medical images that are not seen in natural images. The artifacts can generally be categorized as hardware-related and human-related artifacts. The hardware-related artifacts are related to the technology of the imaging system. For example, in MRI, it could be due to Bo field inhomogeneity, RF noise or irregularities, chemical shift, ghosting, electromagnetic interference, etc [3]. The common artifacts in CT include beam hardening, scattering, pseudo enhancement, cone beam, helical, Zebra, ring, and metal artifacts [4]. In ultrasound, there are gray-scale and Doppler ultrasound artifacts [5]. Refer to Figs. 1–3for some examples of artifacts in MRI, CT and ultrasound respectively. There were many researches conducted to improve the imaging modality. Subsequently, there are various proposed quality assurance (QA) protocols and methodologies to test machine-related artifacts [6,7]. The main human-related artifact is motion of the scanned subjects, which leads to blurred images. The majority of the patients find it difficult to keep still during a long period of scanning. Hence, many researches were conducted to reduce the imaging time without compromising on image quality. There are other typical artifacts in a particular imaging modality. For example, in MRI, Gibbs ringing artifacts are seen if there is insufficient acquisition matrix, chemical shift artifacts due to the different Larmor frequency of fat and water, susceptibility artifacts due to the variations in the magnetic field strength at tissues with different magnetic susceptibilities; wrap-around artifacts, partial volume artifacts, zebra stripes, Radio Frequency (RF) flow, flowing spin artifacts, zipper artifacts, cross-excitation, shading artifacts, etc. [8] Patients with metallic orthopedic implant would also produce artifacts on the scanned images, in both MRI and CT [9]. However, ultrasound is not limited by the metallic artifacts [10]. The various types of artifacts in medical images could impinge on the effectiveness of the state-of-the-art NR-IQA designed for natural images. Therefore, modification of the natural image NR-IQA model is recommended for a more accurate IQA on medical images.IQA is divided into two categories: (i) subjective assessment, which is judged by human beings, and (ii) objective assessment, which is computed with mathematical algorithms [11]. The objective assessment can be further divided into three categories: (i) full reference (FR-IQA), where there is a perfect reference image for comparison with the test image; (ii) reduced reference (RR-IQA), which contains partial information of the reference image, and (iii) no reference (NR-IQA), where no information regarding the reference image is available for the assessment [1]. The majority of the early work on IQA were designed for natural images, starting with the FR-IQA. These have lately evolved into various NR-IQA methods because this is a more practical assessment in real world application. Nonetheless, NR-IQA is a challenging method because no pristine image is used to compare and evaluate the quality for a given image. In any real-time medical imaging, there is no pristine or perfect image as a reference for the image assessment. NR-IQA, therefore, is the most appropriate assessment method for medical images. There are not much published works on RR-IQA for medical images. Refer Table 1for the classification of medical IQA.There are several FR-IQA methods. The most common and widely used FR-IQA methods are Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), where the noise is represented by the Mean Squared Error (MSE), calculated by averaging the squared pixel intensity differences between the distorted and the reference image [12]. Although both MSE and PSNR can be calculated easily with little computational time, these are not sufficient to give a good measure between distorted and reference images in terms of the image features and characteristics. Yet, many researchers are still using PSNR for ease of computation or as a standard comparison metric with their newly introduced techniques.In MRI, there are several objective image quality metrics: Shannon's information content [13], SNR [14–16], PSNR [17], Contrast-to-Noise Ratio (CNR) [18], MSE [19], and Root-Mean-Squared Error (RMSE) [20]. Fuderer proposed an objective measure of MR image quality using Shannon's theoretical information content of the MR images [13]. His measure takes into account of the CNR, the scan resolution and the pixel size which are related to the Field Of View (FOV). Both SNR and CNR are pixel-based. SNR is defined as the maximum pixel or intensity value of the image divided by the standard deviation of the noise. CNR is defined as the ratio between the standard deviation of the pixel values in the Region of Interest (ROI) over the standard deviation of the noise [21].The International Telecommunication Union of the television industry, Rec. ITU-R BT.500-10 [22] proposed that Double-Stimulus Continuous-Quality Scale (DSCQS) is the most reliable and widely used method for subjective testing of MR images. It was used as an assessment tool for fast imaging, where MR images was partially reconstructed (instead of the usual full k-space reconstruction) in order to produce as many images as possible within the short scanning time. The subjects compare and rate a possibly degraded “fast MR” images with a full k-space reconstructed reference image [17,23]. This method has low sensitivity to contextual effects. One advantage, however, is that besides MR images, DSCQS was also used to evaluate ultrasound [24,25] and telemedicine images [26].Although subjective assessment of medical images is a conventional tool for evaluation, there are many weaknesses. It is time consuming, biased by the individual subject perception, prone to variation along a number of dimensions: the subject's alertness, the electronic viewing devices used, and the display environment, i.e. luminance, distance to the viewer, display size, etc. It is neither suitable across big geographical areas nor different nations because researches found that different nationalities have different preferences over colors [27]. For all these reasons, it is not ideal to use human perception as an effective medical image evaluation.Difference Mean Opinion Score (DMOS) is categorized as a subjective FR-IQA metric. It is calculated using the raw scores obtained from DSCQS. The raw scores are normalized to obtain the Mean Opinion Scores (MOS). Then, DMOS is measured as the perceived relative quality of the distorted images with respect to the reference image [28]. Several research groups used DMOS or MOS as a standard IQA model to assess several objective FR-IQA metrics on a database of natural images distorted with various distortion types and levels as indicated by the following: LIVE database by Sheikh et al. [29], TID2008 database by Ponomarenko et al. [30], and CSIQ database by Larson et al. [31]. Recently, Chow et al. also used DMOS to assess a database of MR images distorted using Rician noise, Gaussian white noise, Gaussian blur and DCT compression [32]. From all these studies, it was found that there is a high correlation between the subjective DMOS scores and the objective FR-IQA scores in both natural and medical images.The actual purpose of the above studies were to use DMOS to identify the best FR-IQA metric. However, it was also agreed by all of the above studies that subjective assessment with DMOS scores over hundreds of images was very time consuming and involved a lot of human subjects in order to get a fair evaluation. On the other hand, the same database of images can easily be evaluated by computer using the objective FR-IQA metrics. The mathematical algorithms are less prone to human factors or errors.Perceptual Difference Model (PDM) is a computerized human vision model that calculates the visual difference between a test image and a standard reference image [17,33]. PDM incorporate various components of the human visual system (HVS) and other properties like luminance, pixel size, nonlinear gray level perception and viewing condition. PDM aims to quantitatively produce a map of any visual differences between the test image and the reference image when viewed by human beings. Huo et al. used PDM to evaluate the images produced by different values of regularization parameters in parallel MR imaging [23]. Jiang et al. used three methods of IQA: human detection, Channelized Hotelling Observer (CHO) [35], and PDM to quantitatively evaluate the image quality of parallel reconstructions of MR images [35]. CHO models the human observer using spatial frequency selective filters and optimal linear statistics. PDM is a useful tool to assist in the design and optimization of the reconstruction methods in parallel MR imaging.Miao et al. used Case-PDM to quantitatively evaluate MR images [36] and showed that it is almost as good as Structural Similarity (SSIM) [37] and Sarnoff's IDM [38]. The Case-PDM is able to produce consistent prediction of detection thresholds for just perceptible differences across various images and processing types. It was validated favorably with the human subject evaluation using DSCQS experiments [19], Functional Measurement Theory (FMT) experiments, and 2-Alternative Forced Choice (AFC) experiments [39]. Although Miao et al. claim that Case-PDM is very useful in MR image evaluation, but it is only applicable to study of similar input images and similar processing. PDM is categorized as FR-IQA where a standard reference image is required for the evaluation. Therefore, it is not an ideal NR-IQA method for real-time medical imaging.SSIM is also a type of FR-IQA introduced by Wang et al. [37], where they measure similarities between a perfect reference image and a test image in three components: luminance, contrast and structure. These three components are independent from each other. Then, the three components were combined to calculate the overall similarity measure. Wang et al. applied the SSIM assessment on original natural images and their distorted images. The specific form of the SSIM index between two images x and y was given by [37]:(1)SSIMx,y=2μxμy+C12σxy+C2μx2+μy2+C1σx2+σy2+C2where μxand μyis the mean intensity for the image x and y respectively; σxand σyis the standard deviation for the image x and y respectively; and(2)σxy=1N−1∑i=1Nxi−μxyi−μy(3)C1=K1L2(4)C2=K2L2where K1=0.01, K2=0.03, however these values are arbitrary and insensitive to the calculation of the SSIM index; L is the dynamic range of the pixel values (i.e. L=255 for 8-bit gray scale images). Wang et al. claim that it is useful to apply the SSIM index (Eq. (1)) locally rather than globally across the whole image. Then, they calculate the mean SSIM (MSSIM) index for the whole image using the formula:(5)MSSIMx,y=1M∑j=1MSSIMxj,yjBoth Kumar et al. [40] and Kumar et al. [11] used PSNR and SSIM to evaluate the quality of compressed MR images, and both authors found that SSIM is a better measure with greater accuracy than PSNR, because SSIM measures the structural characteristics of the images. Kumar et al. also applied other quality metrics such as MSE, PSNR, Average Difference (AD), Maximum Difference (MD), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Normalized Cross-correlation (NK), Structural Content (SC), Image Fidelity (IF), Peak Mean Square Error (PMSE), and SSIM on noisy MR images, blurred X-ray images, contrast ultrasound images with various stretching limits. They concluded that SSIM gave a good approximation of quality measurement compared to the rest of the quality metrics in their study; but SSIM incurred a relatively larger computational time compared to that of other metrics [11]. Rangaraju et al. also applied SSIM and MSE to evaluate ultrasound images corrupted with known distortion, and showed that MSSIM scores are more reliable than MSE scores [41]. Kowalik-Urbaniak et al. also reported that SSIM showed a better performance than the MSE/PSNR measure on CT images with JPEG and JPEG2000 compression [42]. Moreover, they reported that Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) and Kolmogorov–Smirnov analysis shows that the compression ratios may not reflect the visual quality, but SSIM demonstrated the best performance as IQA.In fact, in all the above studies, SSIM was used to evaluate images where known distortion was added to the original image at various intensities. Hence, the results presented in reference [40,11,41,42] are a mere confirmation of the functionality of the SSIM algorithm on distorted images with known distorted intensity level. For example, if the original image was distorted with a higher noise level, the SSIM metric will produce a smaller value due to poorer image quality compared to its original image; and vice versa. SSIM is only applicable by comparing a test image with a ‘perfect’ original image. Therefore, SSIM is not appropriate for real-time medical images where there is no ‘perfect’ original image as a reference.There are a few NR-IQAs for medical images. NR-IQA is also known as blind assessment because no reference image is used in the assessment. It is a difficult and challenging task. However, since NR-IQA is an ideal method for future evaluation of medical images, we will summarize the works for the natural images using NR-IQA, which could be applicable for medical images provided that modification is performed according to the image characteristics of the medical images.Some earlier works on NR-IQA methods were designed based on a known distortion, e.g. noise, blur, compression, etc. [43–49]. Later, several general purpose NR-IQA methods were introduced: Codebook Blind Image Quality measure (CBIQ) [50], Learning based Blind Image Quality measure (LBIQ) [51], Distortion Identification-based Image Integrity and Verity Evaluation (DIIVINE) index [52], Blind Image Notator using Discrete cosine transform (DCT) Statistics (BLINDS-II) [53] The CBIQ approach is based on a visual codebook, which consists of Gabor-filter-based local features extracted from local image patches, which is then used to capture the complex statistics of a natural image [50]. Then, a differential mean opinion score (DMOS) is obtained for the entire image, which may not accurately represent different level of quality for each image patch. This approach is limited by its expensive computation. The LBIQ approach uses a regression algorithm to incorporate numerous image quality features, i.e. natural image statistics, distortion texture statistics and blur/noise statistics [51]. The DIIVINE index uses a summary from a Natural Scene Statistics (NSS) [54] wavelet coefficient model. It contains a 2-stage framework for quality assessment: distortion identification and distortion specific [52]. The BLINDS-II index uses the Bayesian inference model to predict image quality scores given certain extracted features, which are based on an NSS model of the image DCT coefficients. The calculated NSS features are fed to a regression function to predict the quality [53]. Although each of these techniques showed that they have outperformed the state of-the-art at their time of publication, each of these studies still has certain limitations, i.e. slow computational time due to large numbers of features or statistics. A more recent NR-IQA model called Blind/referenceless image spatial quality evaluator (BRISQUE) operates in the spatial domain [54]. The BRISQUE approach does not calculate the distortion-specific features, but it uses scene statistics of locally normalized luminance coefficients to quantify possible losses of “naturalness” in the image. It is statistically better than PSNR and SSIM [37], and it is highly competitive with and computationally more efficient than the above mentioned NR-IQA [54].Woodard et al. propose a NR-IQA measure for structural MRI using two types of analysis of variance [55]: the first one is based on NSS [56] and the second one was initially developed to measure the distortion caused by Joint Picture Experts Group (JPEG) compression [57]. They tested on MR images with human added distortion of either additive Gaussian noise or Intensity Nonuniformity (INU). They showed that both NSS-based and JPEG-based measures were effective. And, they claimed that the best quality measure was NSS-based by using the correlation of wavelet coefficients. Srivastava et al. also showed that NSS closely represents statistics empirically derived from undistorted images [58]. It is also suggested that NSS measurement could accurately model image blurring [59]. Although Woodard et al. have shown good results, their chosen NR-IQA methods were tested on known human added distortion, not on the real world MR images. Furthermore, they evaluated on two types of distortion only.Mortamet et al. exploited air background of magnitude images as a means to develop an IQA measure of 3D structural MRI [60]. Since the air background typically occupies 40% of the total image area in the structural brain images, it was used to detect any image degradation due to bulk motion, residual magnetization from incomplete spoiling, blurring, and ghosting. Most of these artifactural signal intensities propagate from the signal image into the background region, and subsequently corrupt the expected noise distribution. Mortamet et al. used two quality metrics: the first one calculates the proportion of artifactural voxels relative to the background size, which would reflect the presence of artifacts; the second one examines the noise intensity distribution by fitting it with Rayleigh distribution. They tested on 749 MRI head scan images and have shown good agreement with the reference standard quality ratings with high sensitivity and specificity (>85%). Although the proposed method is a good fully-automated NR-IQA measure for the structural brain MRI, it has neither been proven applicable to other anatomical images nor other imaging modalities. Nevertheless, it stands a great potential for other MRI anatomical images provided that the air background area is about 40% of the total image area.Nakhaie et al. presented a watermarking method using spread spectrum and discrete wavelet transform based on ROI processing as a new NR-IQA measure for medical images [61]. Then they evaluated the results with PSNR and MSE, which showed a good correlation with the distortion intensities. They added JPEG compression and Gaussian noises to 100 images without mentioning the imaging modality source. Again, this study was done on images with added noise, not the actual medical images.Kalayeh et al. proposed two new numerical observer models based on Bayesian learning regression: the Channelized Relevance Vector Machine (CRVM) and the Multi-Kernel Channelized Relevance Vector Machine (MKCRVM) [62]. Both models were used to mimic the human observer's performance in a cardiac perfusion defect detection task in SPECT. They have shown that MKCRVM has the best accuracy compared to CHO and Channelized Support Vector Machine (CSVM). MKCRVM also shows the advantage of low computational cost and design simplicity. However, their proposed method was only tested on phantom SPECT images simulated by the Mathematical Cardiac Torso (MCAT) [63], but not on any actual medical images. Nevertheless, their proposed technique may have potential for future medical IQA.Dutta et al. used a quantitative statistical method with closed-form analytical expressions to measure medical image quality [64]. Two key metrics: resolution and covariance were calculated as the image quality measure. They proposed two analysis techniques: fixed-point and iteration-based analysis. The fixed-point analysis computes the resolution and covariance at a fixed point; whereas the iteration-based analysis depends on various factors including objective function, iterative algorithm, initialization image for the iterative process, and iteration number when the algorithm is ended. Dutta et al. reviewed and proposed very detailed theoretical algorithms on the quantitative statistical measurement of the medical images. However, they have not shown any explicit measurement on human medical images.A recent work by Eck et al. used the concept of detectability as a task-based IQA model [65]. Their concept is superior to physical measurement of the image, because the ultimate purpose of medical imaging is detectability or diagnosis of a certain disease or abnormality. They developed a CHO model with six internal noise models for different classes of image reconstruction on CT imaging. They found that the addition of internal noise to the CHO model made the evaluation result closer to human performance. The detectability in their IQA model is based on a function of dose, size, contrast, and reconstruction algorithm in CT imaging. This is a practical study which applied the IQA in improving CT imaging, i.e. guiding dose reductions in the real CT protocols. This is of utmost importance in CT imaging where the concern is ionizing radiation dose to patients. They have also used their detectability IQA model to find out which type of image reconstruction method is better. They found, for instance, that the iterative reconstruction algorithm has a better detectability than the filtered back projection. However, their study only used phantom and simulated CT images, and did not use any real-time human CT images. Racine et al. also performed similar research with the same concept of detectability IQA model on CT images using a CHO model [66]. They have found a high correlation between their CHO model and human observers’ performance. However, their study was again applied on simple phantom images only, but not on any human images. Nevertheless, these two studies demonstrated a practical application of the IQA model in evaluating CT imaging in dose usage and reconstruction algorithm.The evaluation of performance for any IQA model is also one of the important steps in ensuring its effectiveness. Up to now, human subject evaluation in medical images is still commonly used as a reference point, provided that the evaluation was done by trained specialists like the radiologist. Therefore, the performance of IQA models were evaluated by comparing their results with the human evaluation statistically. Among the widely used statistical comparison categories are regression, correlation coefficient and error measurement. It is highly recommended to use a combination of metrics to assess model performance because each metric has its own merit. Table 2summarizes a list of research groups that used different evaluation methods for their IQA model. From this Table, it is apparent that all research groups used more than a single method in evaluating the performance of their IQA model.The regression model is used to fit two datasets. The correlation coefficients between them is then obtained. In general, there are categories of regression models: linear and nonlinear. Linear regression is easy to calculate but not practically useful because the majority of datasets are based on a nonlinear model. Some studies still use linear regression to ease calculation [23,36].A logistic function is used to produce a nonlinear regression for the quality scores calculated or measured by an IQA method. Let Y represents the original quality scores of an IQA method, and YLrepresents the quality scores after regression. The logistic regression function is therefore given as [21]:(6)YL=β112−11+expβ2Y−β3+β4Y+β5where β1, β2, β3, β4, β5 are the regression model parameters. Nonlinear least squares optimization is used to find the optimal parameters of β. The nonlinear regression model was recently used in both natural and medical IQA models performance evaluation [29,32,37,42].The correlation coefficient gives a statistical measure that illustrates similarity between two sets of data. The correlation coefficient values between 0.68 and 1.0 signify that the two sets of data have high correlation [67]. If an objective IQA method is compared with the human subjective scores, higher correction coefficient values mean a better IQA method. Two commonly used correlation coefficients are the Pearson Linear Correlation Coefficient (PLCC) [68] and the Spearman Rank Order Correlation Coefficient (SROCC) [69]. Both are widely used in assessing the performance of IQA models for natural images [29,37,70]. They have recently been used for evaluating performance of IQA models for medical images too [32,36,66].PLCC is also known as the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient. It is used to evaluate the prediction accuracy between two datasets, where one of them is the reference dataset. The PLCC between the reference dataset X and the quality scores after regression YL, is given by [68]:(7)PLCCX,YL=∑inXi−X¯∑inYLi−Y¯L∑inXi−X¯2∑inYLi−Y¯L2whereX¯andYL¯are the means for datasets X and YL, respectively. The reference dataset X is normally the human subjective scores.SROCC is used to measure statistical similarity between two datasets. It is the nonparametric rank-based correlation method. It evaluates the prediction monotonicity by using the following equation [69]:(8)SROCCX,Y=1−6∑i=1ndi2nn−1where diis the difference between each pair of values in X and Y; and n is the total number of data pairs. In Eq. (8), the original quality scores, Y, is used instead of YLbecause the logistic regression does not affect the results in this equation for SROCC. Sheikh et al. found that SROCC is not a good measure of IQA performance because it causes misleading conclusions during the comparison [29].Two commonly used error measurement metrics in model evaluation are Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Both are commonly used as a standard statistical metric to evaluate the prediction consistency between two datasets. And, both metrics calculate the errors between the reference dataset, X, and the objective quality scores after regression, YL. RMSE and MAE between X and YLare calculated using [71]:(9)RMSEX,YL=∑inYLi−Xi2n(10)MAEX,YL=∑inYLi−Xinwhere n is the total number of datasets. RMSE is also known as Root Mean Squared Deviation (RMSD).Many studies still use the traditional PSNR or SNR equations as their IQA model evaluation, as listed in Table 2. These two categories, RMSE/MAE and PSNR/SNR, are most widely used to evaluate the performance of the medical IQA models. Besides these, there are other types of error measurement method, i.e. Geometric Average Error (GAE) [29].There are comparatively more state-of-the-art NR-IQA methods proposed for natural images than for the medical images. Furthermore, the majority of published IQA on medical images were performed with artifically added distortion, but not much on the actual medical images except in the study by Mortamet et al. [60] which has a great potential for MRI but uncertain for other imaging modalities. It is clear from the studies reviewed above that, there are more challenges and difficulties in designing medical NR-IQA. One reason for this is that there are several distinctive differences between natural and medical images. First, natural images are usually in colors, whereas medical images are in gray scale. Second, the variation of luminance due to the natural or artificial lighting on the natural images is not present in medical images. Third, the noise distribution in natural images are commonly represented by additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) [72], whereas the medical images contain different types of noise distribution depending on the imaging modality. These distinctive features and a full awareness of what has already been done inform the recommendations made below.The various kinds of noise distribution in different images may need to be taken into consideration in designing the appropriate NR-IQA for medical images. The noise distribution in MRI varies according to the SNR of the image [73]. In general, MRI produces magnitude and phase images, which contain magnitude and phase information respectively. The noises in the MR magnitude images are governed by Rician distribution at low signal intensities (SNR<2); but they are close to Gaussian distribution if SNR>2 [73]. It is shown (in Fig. 4) that the probability distribution for measured pixel intensity, M, for SNR=0, 1, 2,…,6, where the Rician distribution is far from Gaussian for small SNR (≤1), but it is closer to Gaussian distribution for SNR>2. Within a MR image, there are regions without a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) signal, where the noises are governed by Rayleigh distribution. These are the “pure noises” without any signal from the scanned subject. Both Edelstein et al. [74] and Brummer et al. [75] also use Rayleigh distribution to represent the true noises in MR magnitude images. Gudbjartsson et al. found that the noises in MR phase images are close to Gaussian distribution independent of the SNR values [73]. Ultrasound images usually contain speckle noise (see Fig. 3c), which is a form of multiplicative and locally correlated noise governed by Gamma distribution [76]. X-ray radiography contains several random processes in either Poisson or Binomial pattern. The overall noise distribution in X-ray imaging is approximately following Poisson distribution [77]. Although CT use computerized x-rays to produce tomographic images of the human body, the noises on the CT images are governed by Gaussian distribution instead of poison distribution [78]. The various kinds of noise distribution in different images may need to be taken into consideration in designing the appropriate IQA for medical images.The artifacts produced by different imaging modalities in medicine – MRI, CT scan, X-rays, etc. – are different. Future design, therefore, also needs to consider the different artifacts across different modalities as discussed in Section 1. As far as we know, there is no NR-IQA model that directly measure a particular image artifact of an imaging system. Therefore, there is a potential in designing a new NR-IQA model that measures the artifacts as an alternative quality measure. The difficulty is how to design a universal NR-IQA for medical images across different imaging modalities. A cross-modality NR-IQA model is a new challenge for future research.The image characteristics of medical images are different, especially as regards magnitude and phase. In order to design a good NR-IQA method or to modify any existing NR-IQA method on natural images to the medical images, it is important to understand the image characteristics or the information contents of medical images. Fuderer used Shannon's theory to represent the image information content for MR images, and designed a model for the spatial spectral power density of the images [5]. Some imaging modalities (i.e. MRI) can produce both magnitude and phase images, which represent different information. Hence, there is an additional criteria to be considered when designing a new NR-IQA, whether it is applicable for both magnitude and phase images or specifically designed for a single image type. There is another question whether to design a NR-IQA to assess the whole image (inclusive of all pixels) or to focus on the quality measure of a ROI chosen for diagnosis purpose. All the NR-IQA on natural images were designed for the whole image. Among the ROI-based IQA for medical images are SNR and CNR. Mortamet et al. used an alternative way of measuring the air background of the MR images as a NR-IQA [52].Spatial resolution is less important than temporal resolution for functional imaging, i.e. functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). fMRI studies the function of a certain region of the brain, it measures the signal changes of a specific ROI throughout the scanning period. The spatial resolution is thus less important than the temporal resolution. In other words, the in-plane image quality for fMRI is less crucial compared to the speed of signal acquisition over the same slice. FMRI usually uses fast imaging techniques to achieve its purpose but would inevitably introduce localized reconstruction artifacts in the image, which seems to degrade the image quality. However, in most cases, the fast imaging technique will ensure that the artifacts would not fall on a particular ROI and not interfere with its ultimate detection. Hence, the conventional IQA is not applicable to functional images, but a different design of image quality method is recommended.Medical images need to be functional, not just academically sound. They need to be based on concepts that are viable given the medical setting but need to adopt a methodology that takes into account the human situation in medicine. The IQA model based on the concept of detectability is a better approach for medical IQA, as performed by Eck et al. [57] and Racine et al. [58]. However, they applied their detectability CHO model on phantom or simulated images only. Hence, the future research could involve the real-time human CT images. This idea will spark more potential research for other imaging modality in future, especially in assisting the improvement of new scanning sequences or parameters, image reconstruction, hardware design, etc. One possible drawback is that a distinct IQA model is required for each imaging modality instead of a universal model for all imaging modalities.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
