@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Differences in effective connectivity between children with dyslexia, monocular vision and typically developing readers: A DTI study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We quantified the microstructural attributes of the fascicles of both hemispheres.We examine the reading network regions of interest.We report differences in Fractional Anisotropy between dyslexic and nondyslexic.Differences are in the left Arcuate fasciculus and the genu of the Corpus Callosum.It exists different brain connectivity in reading network.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dyslexia,Diffusion tensor imaging,Corpus callosum,Arcuate fasciculus,Inferior fronto-occiptal fasciculus,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Non-invasive quantitative MRI methods, such as Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) can offer insights into diverse developmental brain disorders such as dyslexia, the most prevalent reading disorder in childhood. In this article, we quantified the microstructural attributes of the main fascicles of both hemispheres related to the reading network in three groups of Spanish children: typically developing readers (TDR or controls), dyslexic readers (DXR) and readers with monocular vision due to ocular motility disorders (MVR), to assess whether the dyslexic children neuronal network for reading shares similarities with the neuronal network for reading in children with impaired binocular vision due to ocular motility disorders or not. Diffusion anisotropy, and mean, radial and axial diffusivity of cross-sectional subregions of the main fascicles studied were computed using a validated DTI methodology. Our results reveal differences in fractional anisotropy (FA) values between the DXR and the non-dyslexic readers, with a decreased FA for the DXR and no significant differences between TDR and MVR groups in the left Arcuate fasciculus, and a tendency to higher FA values in the DXR group compared to the other two groups in the genu of the Corpus Callosum (CC). In the splenium of the CC a trend towards higher FA values was observed in the DXR and MVR groups versus the TDR. This study reveals a different brain connectivity pattern for reading in Spanish children with dyslexia from those with impaired binocular vision due to ocular motility disorders, which would support the hypothesis that ocular motility disorders are not a causal factor of dyslexia.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This study uses DTI to evaluate reading-related anatomical pathways in children's brains. In particular, children with dyslexia and children with impaired binocular vision due to ocular motility disorders have taken part in the testing, and then compared to a control group of typical developmental readers, grouped according to gender and age.From an evolutionary perspective, reading and writing are very recent inventions, in contrast to language. Reading is a complex process that involves various phonological, orthographic, syntactic and semantic processes that make it possible to interpret the meaning of written information.Developmental dyslexia is a disorder which has usually been defined as an unexpected reading difficulty which affects children and adults with no other intellectual deficiency or lack of motivation and who have sufficient access to education. An overall prevalence varying between 5% and 10% of the population has been reported, according to the study [1]. Thus, dyslexia is a specific learning disability which is now well established as a neurobiological disorder with a genetic origin [2,3].Dyslexia is a highly prevalent primary reading disorder that varies depending on orthographic transparency. Nowadays, learning and education are based on reading, and so any reading disturbance impairs correct educational development and knowledge. This means that a great number of children, parents, teachers and physicians have to deal with this important and complex issue, and so a better understanding of the underlying causes of this disturbance would facilitate prompt remediation and an improvement in the language development and learning of these children.Dyslexia is a neurological disorder with a genetic origin which is currently being investigated. Despite intensive research, the underlying biological and cognitive causes of reading impairment are still under debate. Although nowadays there is major consensus that the basis of dyslexia is a phonological processing deficit, some other major theories have been postulated to explain the causes of this impairment. Experts now tend to accept the Phonological Theory [1,4–7], which maintains that a deficit in the language system is causing these difficulties. Secondly, the so-called Visual Theory [8] points out that visual processing among dyslexics may fail due to a disruption in the magnocellular pathway, although other phonological deficiencies are not rejected. The latest theories related to this hypothesis emphasize a deficit that would affect attentional mechanisms controlled by the dorsal visual stream [9,10]. The Magnocellular Theory [11,12] posits an extension of the influence of the magnocellular dysfunction to other functions (e.g. auditory or tactile), claiming that it is not solely restricted to the visual pathway. More recently, some researchers have advocated an independent aetiology apart from the phonological deficit: a visual attention span deficit that may coexist with the phonological deficit in some dyslexic children (7%) [13–15].Many authors in optometric literature defend the view that children with reading disorders have an increased incidence of vision abnormalities and believe that vision therapy would improve reading abilities in children with dyslexia [16,17]. Indeed, reading disabilities have also been associated with ocular motility disturbances due to the similar eye movements of both dyslexic and reading beginners. However, no association has been proved between eye motility disturbances and reading abilities [18] or differences found between abnormal binocular function and reading ability [19]. This particular eye tracking in dyslexics has generally been regarded as being a result of dyslexia, yet it has sometimes been thought to have a causative role [20,21].Many studies have been carried out to date with the goal of identifying the neurological system that enables word reading [22], and the feasibility of detecting the areas responsible for this complicated task with neuroimaging has been shown. Mastering the skills of accurate and fluent reading requires the activation of a complex neural network that involves the collaboration of distant cortical regions besides proper communication between these areas. Previous studies have shown special interest in the connectivity within the white matter that enables there to be connections between cortical eloquent areas of the reading network [23–25]. Traditionally, two main fascicles have been related to the reading network: the Arcuate fasciculus as the main pathway of the phonological route and the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus as the main pathway of the orthographic route [26,27]. Nevertheless, some research includes the superior longitudinal fasciculus as part of the fibre bundles of the orthographic route [28]. Recent research has also postulated that the corpus callosum may be the compensatory route in children with dyslexia [29]. Currently Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) allows the integrity of these white matter pathways to be examined non-invasively via four measures: Fractional anisotropy (FA), as an index of white matter integrity; Mean Diffusivity (MD) as a measure of the average molecular motion and/or the overall mean-squared displacement of molecules independent of any tissue directionality; Radial Diffusivity (RD) that corresponds to diffusivity in directions perpendicular to the principal axis of diffusion and has been associated with the degree of myelination; and Axial Diffusivity (AD) that corresponds to the diffusivity along the principal axis and has been associated with the axon diameter [30,31].The aim of this research is to assess whether ocular motility disorders are directly responsible for dyslexia. For this purpose, we have selected a group of children with functional monocular vision due to ocular motility problems which have compromised the stereopsis and saccadic eye movements in binocular vision. DTI technique has been applied, considering the four measures mentioned before (FA, MD, RD and AD) in the main fascicles of both hemispheres related to reading network, to compare the reading network between this group of children with monocular vision due to ocular motility problems and a group of dyslexic children related to a group of normal readers of the same age, to see whether the pathways and mechanisms used by children with monocular vision are equal to those used by normal readers or whether they are closer to those used by dyslexics instead. For this reason, the comparison of a dyslexic group and a group with monocular vision due to ocular motility disorders is bound to give us an insight into the aforementioned theories in terms of anatomical disposition of fibres.The paper is organised as follows: first of all, the Section 2 gives details of the experiment. The findings of the study are then presented, followed by a discussion and an outline of the various conclusions.This research has been conducted at all times in accordance with the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki) and requirements stipulated by the Galdakao Hospital Ethics Committee of Clinical Research. As such, participation always followed the receipt of informed written consent signed by parents or guardians. The aims and protocols of the study were explained to all participants prior to any activities.The cohort consisted of 66 children between 9 and 12 years recruited from the University Hospital of Cruces paediatric ophthalmology and neurology departments. Local students also took part in the study. In both cases, parents were contacted for their written consent. Participants were all Spanish native speakers and right-handed.Subjects were divided by age into three groups. Selection took place according to the exclusion/inclusion criteria listed below:Inclusion criteria: Dyslexic children were only included when they had not received treatment or psycho-pedagogical support for literacy and when their Wechsler Intelligence Scale – Fourth edition (WISC-IV) score showed their Intelligence Quotient (IQ) fell within the normal range, (>75). All children with monocular vision were had normal reading ability. Members of the control group did not exhibit signs that their literacy was impaired by ocular pathologies.Exclusion criteria: No children were included in the study if they had previously had a neurological disease or severe head trauma, impaired sensory-motor coordination, psychiatric illness, chronic drug treatments, social deprivation, inadequate schooling or intolerance to MRI scanning (claustrophobia, lack of cooperation, etc.). Members of the dyslexic group were screened for abnormalities in vision, with a refractive error corrected with normal visual acuity and no identifiable motility abnormality on clinical examination and only detected by videonystagmography not being considered anomalies.Children with monocular vision secondary to ocular motility disorders were identified during an examination by a paediatric ophthalmologist. During the same examinations the dyslexic children were also checked for ophthalmological problems. Tests also checked for far and near visual acuity (spontaneous and corrected), and far and near binocular vision (using the Worth and vectographical tests and TNO test respectively). Cover and cover–uncover tests took place to measure monocular vision secondary to ocular motility disorders. Also carried out were slit lamp and eye fundus examinations and graduation via cycloplegy.The group of readers with monocular vision secondary to ocular motility disorders (MVR) consisted of children with strabismus (14), monocular microphthalmia (1 female), nystagmus (2) and paralysis of the extraocular muscles (Fell's syndrome) (1 female). All the above had functional monocular vision due to a suppression phenomenon of the non-dominant eye and suffered from an impairment of the binocular coordination of saccades [32,33].Excluded from the other two groups were those with ophthalmological problems, such as visual acuity less than 20/20, far binocular vision problems, TNO less than 60, anomalies in the slit lamp or fundus examination or refractive errors (hypermetropia >3.5D, any myopia magna, or astigmatism >1.5D).Children were assessed by a paediatric neuropsychologist with three types of test:•The WISC-IV [34] test measured intelligence. All children achieved IQ scores above the threshold which indicates possibility of intellectual disability (75).Reading tests: scored reading tests included the assessment battery readers processes PROLEC-R (8–11 years) or PROLEC-SE (12–16 years) (2007). The standardised score of below 2 standard deviation (<-2SD) on the PROLEC-R/SE tests was used to categorise children as dyslexic readers (DXR). If a child had prior specific treatment for dyslexia, they were not included.Detecting possible psychological or profound sensory or neurological impairment, or family or educational issues, as behavioural evaluation was used based on the BASC (Behaviour Assessment System for Children, 2004) test.where lateral dominance was unclear, subjects underwent the Harris hemispheric dominance test (2001) to determine the lateral dominance. If the subject was left-handed they were not included.Having been through the ophthalmologist's examination and having had their test performance standardised, children were allotted to one of three groups: readers with typical development (TDR or controls), dyslexic readers (DXR) or readers with monocular vision (MVR).Nine children did not fulfil the inclusion criteria. Seven children had reading problems despite scores of above 2SD, including one with an IQ of 69. One child was left-handed. Another committed mistakes with the recorded DTI images.This process led to the formation of the following groups: DXR group, 20 (8 female); MVR group, 18 (8 female); TDR group, 19 (8 female). Over all, the study included five children with ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder) 2 in the DXR group, 2 in the TDR group and 1 in the MVR group. See Table 1Subjects were scanned using a Philips 3.0-T Achieva system with a 32-channel head coil (Philips Medical Systems, Best, the Netherlands), and underwent an anatomical acquisition, a high-resolution structural T1-weighted 3D volume, using a spoiled gradient recalled sequence (SPGR-3D, TR/TE 7.4/3.4ms; flip angle, 8; matrix size, 228×227; field of view, 250×250; number of slices, 301; in plane resolution 1×1×1mm; NSA 1; Total acquisition time: 458). These anatomical scans were used to confirm the location of the DTI measurement in respect of conventional brain landmarks.Following the anatomical scan, subjects underwent a DTI sequence consisting of an axial single-shot EPI (echo planar imaging) with SENSE acquisition (reduction factor of 2) which lasted 417; 60 slices, 2mms/th with no gap, were collected to cover the entire cerebrum and brainstem of each subject (TR/TE 6819/81ms). The acquisition matrix was 112×112, reconstructed to 128×128 with a field-of-view of 224×224mm for a 1.75×1.75 2mm in-plane resolution. Diffusion-weighting was applied along 15 spherically-distributed axes with b-value=800s/mm2, in addition to a less diffusion-weighted image.Image analysis was performed using Oxford Centre for Functional MRI of the Brain (FMRIB) (http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) Software Library (FSL), version 5.0.5 [35]. Binary masks of every subject's brain size and shape were calculated using the Brain Extraction Tool (BET) [36]. Subsequently, maps of fractional anisotropy (FA) were worked out for each subject using the function FDT (FMRIB's Diffusion Toolbox) package, with the diffusion tensor being obtained for each voxel. TBSS (Tract-Based Spatial Statistics) [37] was then applied and individual whole-brain FA data was aligned via non-linear registration with the most representative subjects brain space and then affine-aligned into specific template according to this study (children's study template). All the subjects were then registered in a common space, and a mean FA image was generated and thinned to create a mean FA skeleton representing the centres of all common tracts for all the subjects, with a threshold set at FA=0.20. After individual values of FA had been aligned, they were projected onto the mean skeleton.All coordinates are given in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space.Between-group statistical analyses were carried out in three different steps, in the first iteration we used anatomical regions to test for differences in the areas we hypothesised as most important. In the second iteration we ran a brain-wide analysis to check for minor changes between the groups, and finally with the output of this iteration we drew masks of the regions where contrasts showed statistically significant differences and we executed a ROI-based analysis using those masks. We shall now explain each of these steps thoroughly:For the first iteration, the 4 chosen areas were analysed according to anatomical criteria as a study objective – corpus callusum, superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi and the lower fronto-occipital fasciculus. Different ROIs were drawn within these areas with the help of neuroadiologists that served as a starting point for the inter-group statistical analysis. The masks that defined these ROIs were obtained in some cases by dividing the fasciculi defined by the Atlas JHU White-Matter by FSL into subregions, and these were adjusted to the tract average of the sample being studied (skeleton). The individual values for each participant were extracted for each region and from this the group contrast for the aforementioned ROIs was calculated.In addition to being able to adjust the marks from the atlas to the white matter, the brain was also segmented in the FSL, FAST tool (FMRIB Automated Segmentation Tool), whereby the masks correspond perfectly to the white matter.Additionally and given that the regions are very large, coarse analyses were run to learn more about the data and gain a general overview of the groups’ anatomical disposition. These last contrasts sketched out the areas where differences between groups were greater. For this DTI voxelwise analyses on the whole brain (Brain Wide) we ran a permutation-based inference tool for nonparametric statistical thresholding with FSL´s “randomize” function [38]. The number of permutations was set at 5000. Between-group comparisons for FA values were performed using two-sample t tests. The statistical maps of each group comparison were thresholded at p<.05 corrected for multiple comparisons at a cluster level using the threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) option [39].After visual inspection, we used uncorrected statistical (p<.05, uncorrected) maps to visualize and select those areas within the contrasts that might have been hidden by the correction. This was done in order to avoid false negatives. From these uncorrected output results we were able to select and draw the areas of interest using features from the FSL package, under the supervision of neurophysiologists and neuroradiologists. For ROI analysis we selected subregions located within the 4 mentioned areas where the contrasts surpassed the aforementioned threshold. Once the masks of each ROI had been defined, we used them to extract the individual mean values of FA, MD, AD and RD. Individual data obtained from a within-subject study were then used for a more precise inter-group analysis, and for comparisons with the performance metrics of previous reading tests.SPSS (IBM Corp. Released 2011. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 20.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp) was used for these a posteriori specific ROI-based statistical measurements.Socio-demographic and neuropsychological features were compared between groups via a non-parametric test (Kruskal-Wallis H test) and Pearson's Chi-Square test for categorical variables.An ROI-based analysis consisted of a Shapiro–Wilk test measuring data distribution and a Levene's test analysing homogeneity in variance. Normality and homogeneity of variance could not be assumed for all the variables studied. As such a non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis (KW) Test was employed to compare the three groups, before a post hoc Mann–Whitney (MW) test was employed to compare pairs of groups. This acted as a safeguard against Type I errors. No correction was applied for multiple comparisons.Relations between functional activation and reading ability were measured. To do so, the respective activation values for each condition's reading accuracy and speed scores were used. Spearman's rank-order correlation was used to analyse correlations. When necessary, group correlations for specific groups were analysed by splitting the analysis.A value of p<.05 was considered statistically significant for all the tests mentioned above.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In our research we have conducted a DTI study of white matter microstructure to explore the connectivity along the neuronal reading network in three groups of children – children with dyslexia, children with monocular vision due to ocular motility disorders and children who were typical readers – to assess whether they share features that would support the hypothesis that visual abnormalities are responsible for reading disorders or, conversely, that dyslexia is independent of visual impairments. Our final goal is to help to understand the underlying neurobiological dysfunction associated with dyslexia, which will help children diagnosed with dyslexia to receive appropriate support and individualized evidence-based educational interventions.For this purpose we have studied the four above-mentioned measures (FA, MD, RD and AD) in the main fasciculi related to the reading network of both hemispheres. We have focused on the study of the left Arcuate fasciculus, responsible for connecting the eloquent areas of the phonological route, and the Inferior Fronto-Occipital Fasciculus (IFOF), the association bundle of the orthographical route, since some fMRI studies suggest the existence of a direct orthographically-based reading route along the left occipitotemporal cortex when the phonological route is impaired [40].We have also studied the corpus callosum at the level of both regions, anterior or genu and posterior or splenium, as it is the main commissural bundle connecting the two cerebral hemispheres, to assess whether, as other studies describe [41], when there is a deficit along the left phonological route there would be compensation with its homologous route in the right hemisphere.Furthermore, we have correlated the DTI values obtained in the above fasciculi with the scores obtained from the clinical assessments, until now considered the gold standard for the diagnosis of dyslexia.Starting with the left Arcuate fasciculus, we divided the bundle by measuring the FA values in two regions of interest (ROI); one anterior and central region which corresponds to the medial direct fascicle, related to processing of the phonological form of words [42], and another one corresponding to the indirect lateral posterior fascicle, related to the phonological aspects of speech perception [43,44]. In the first central ROI we found significant differences for the three groups of readers and in children with dyslexia compared to the other two groups of children, with these children with dyslexia evidencing lower FA values; but unlike other studies, we found no significant differences in the values of RD [45,46]. It is also noteworthy that there were no significant differences between TDR and MVR groups. Our results reveal a decreased fractional anisotropy for readers with dyslexia in the left Arcuate fasciculus, and more specifically in the component which directly connects the posterior temporal with inferior frontal areas, in contrast to other research which showed a functional disconnection between temporal areas and the inferior parietal lobe, mainly sustained by the posterior Arcuate fasciculus [47].In the posterior ROI within the indirect lateral posterior fascicle of the left Arcuate fasciculus there was also a tendency towards lower FA values in the DXR group compared to the other two groups, although we did not find significant differences.Regarding the correlations with the clinical assessments and in contrast to the results described in previous studies [48,49], we only found correlations in the MVR group, between the FA values of the Arcuate fasciculus and time in both pseudoword and word treading tasks.These findings are consistent with many previous DTI studies in dyslexia, which predominantly observed fractional anisotropy group differences and correlations with reading in the left hemisphere [49–52].Conversely, no fractional anisotropy group differences were found in either the right Arcuate fasciculus or the IFOF of both hemispheres.The corpus callosum (CC) is the largest interhemispheric commissural white matter bundle in humans. The anterior CC, or genu connects the frontal lobes. The posterior CC, or splenium, is populated by a mixture of medium and large, heavily myelinated, axons that connect the temporal, parietal and occipital cortices. Recent neurocognitive development theories suggest that connectivity between homologous regions of the left and right hemispheres may be part of a compensatory network rules employed by individuals to assist in performing difficult cognitive tasks [53].Considering the results of FA values of the corpus callosum, regarding the values for the genu we obtained significant differences among the three groups, with a tendency to higher FA values in the DXR group compared to the other two groups, significantly with the MVR group. These findings would be consistent with those reported in other studies explaining some compensatory mechanism to the homologous frontal areas related to phonological decoding in the right hemisphere [1,54,51,55].FA values in the splenium of the corpus callosum showed no significant differences between groups, although a trend towards higher FA values in the DXR and MVR groups versus TDR was observed, with higher RD values between DXR compared to MVR. These results could translate into some kind of compensation by these both groups throughout the splenium and forceps major of the corpus callosum, responsible for connecting the temporal, parietal and occipital areas of both hemispheres, as other authors have demonstrated in previous research [41,29].The correlation with the clinical assessments showed a correlation in the three groups between the FA values in the genu of the corpus callosum and accuracy and time in word reading tasks. In the splenium a correlation was observed for the DXR group between the FA values and time in both words and pseudowords reading tasks.We also found other FA values we think are worth highlighting. In the left cingulum bundle we found FA values significantly higher in DXR and MVR groups than the TDR group, with values of RD significantly lower among TDR compared to DXR, commonly interpreted as evidence of a lesser degree of myelination [45]; and a correlation between these FA values and accuracy in the pseudowords reading task, with a tendency towards lower FA values for the DXR group versus the other two groups in the right cingulum bundle. These values are difficult to interpret because the cingular bundles are not part of the neural circuitry for reading and as we have not found other researches with similar results, they would have to be considered in future researches.Therefore, outlining the results obtained in the FA values from the foremost fascicles related to the reading network in our three groups, and in line with other reports [56], the left Arcuate fasciculus appears to be the main bundle associated with reading ability. In our research only the DXR group has an impairment in the left Arcuate fasciculus, as Paulesu previously proposed in his theory of disconnection (1996) and has been subsequently supported by others researchers [57,58]. Based on our results we hypothesise that readers with dyslexia could possibly compensate their impairment mainly through both minor and major forceps of the corpus callosum. Nevertheless, although DXR and MVR groups do not share the same connectivity in the network for reading, both groups of readers enjoy greater posterior interhemispheric communication that can be explained as an occipito-parietal compensatory mechanism we hypothesised in the magnocellular pathway, since the MVR group does not have an impairment in the left phonological route. Our results would support the hypothesis proposed in recent articles published on this topic [21,59–61], that visual magnocellular dysfunction is not causal to dyslexia, but rather, the consequence of hampered reading.Our results suggest the following conclusions. While reading, the brain connectivity in the neural network of Spanish children with dyslexia and of Spanish children with impaired binocular vision due to ocular motility disorders is different. According to these results, the greatest difference was in the degree of impairment to the phonological route which is more severe children with dyslexia. Activating the reading network of the contralateral hemisphere through the corpus callosum could be used to address this occurrence.Dyslexia is neither caused by ocular motility disorders nor by visual magnocellular dysfunction. Instead, dyslexia occurs when reading is impeded. As such, interdisciplinary treatment should include greater phonological awareness and language development.This research was partially supported by the Spanish Government (Carlos III Health Institute, FIS Project PI08/01684) (URL:http://www.isciii.es) and the publication fees by the Basque Government Department of Education (eVIDACertified-GroupIT579-13) (URL: http://www.hezkuntza.ejgv.euskadi.net).