@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genetic algorithm-based method for mitigating label noise issue in ECG signal classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method for mitigating label noise issue in ECG signal classification.It is based on a completely automatic genetic optimization process.Statistical separability and number of invalidated samples are considered.Experiments are conducted on real signals from the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database.Improvements in terms of classification accuracy are demonstrated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ECG signal classification,Genetic algorithms,Mislabeling issue,Multiobjective optimization,Training sample validation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Classification of electrocardiographic (ECG) signals can be deteriorated by the presence in the training set of mislabeled samples. To alleviate this issue we propose a new approach that aims at assisting the human user (cardiologist) in his/her work of labeling by removing in an automatic way the training samples with potential mislabeling problems. The proposed method is based on a genetic optimization process, in which each chromosome represents a candidate solution for validating/invalidating the training samples. Moreover, the optimization process consists of optimizing jointly two different criteria, which are the maximization of the statistical separability among classes and the minimization of the number of invalidated samples. Experimental results obtained on real ECG signals extracted from the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database confirm the effectiveness of the proposed solution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last decades, growing attention has been given in the biomedical engineering community to the problem of automatic analysis of electrocardiographic (ECG) signals. The great interest for ECG analysis derives from its role as an efficient and noninvasive tool for detecting and monitoring cardiac diseases. In particular, significant effort has been spent in the development of efficient and robust systems for ECG signal classification in order to detect automatically heartbeat abnormalities.For such purpose, different solutions based on pattern recognition approaches have been proposed in the literature. Most of the attention has been given on improving the accuracy of the classification process by acting mainly at two different levels: (1) signal representation and (2) optimization of the discriminant function. In terms of signal representation different types of features have been extracted from the acquired ECG signals in order to have a better discrimination among the classes. Some examples of features are given by high-order statistics [1], morphological features [2], temporal intervals [2–4], wavelet transform coefficients [3–5], frequency domain features [6], and statistical features [7]. Moreover, given the high number of features that is usually involved, some feature reduction techniques have been applied to project the features into a lower dimensional feature space, such as principal component analysis [4,8] and independent component analysis [8]. The problem of discriminant function optimization has been addressed by considering different classification approaches. Although linear models have shown good results [2], in the last few years more attention has been given to nonlinear approaches. In particular, different works have focused on neural networks [3,4,8,9] and kernel methods such as support vector machines (SVMs) [1,5,7,8]. Moreover, classification improvements have been obtained by combining classifiers with optimization processes, such as those based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) [10,11].Although these works have demonstrated their effectiveness, they are based on an essential assumption that is the samples used to train the classifier are statistically representatives of the classification problem to solve. Therefore the quality and the quantity of such samples are very important, because they have a strong impact on the performance of the classifier. However, the process of training sample collection is not trivial since it is based on a human user (cardiologist) intervention and so it is subject to errors and costs both in terms of time and money. In general, scarce attention has been given to this problem in the literature. Only in the last few years there has been a growing interest in developing semi-automatic strategies for the problem of training set construction.A first problem is given by the scarcity of available training samples due to complexity and cost that characterize the training sample collection process. Accordingly, this constrains the classification process to be carried out with a small number of training samples, thus leading to weak estimates of the classifier parameters and potentially bad classification performances, in particular if class distributions are overlapped. A solution to this problem is represented by active learning [12], which has been proposed recently for ECG signal classification [13,14]. Considering a small and suboptimal initial training set, few additional samples are selected from a large amount of unlabeled data. These samples are labeled by the human user and then added to the training set. The entire process is iterated until a stopping criterion is satisfied. The aim of active learning is to rank the learning set according to an opportune criterion that allows to select the most useful samples to improve the model, thus minimizing the number of training samples necessary to maintain discrimination capabilities as high as possible.Another problem in real application scenarios is represented by the mislabeling issue due to errors in the process of sample labeling. Since the presence of mislabeled training samples has a direct negative impact on the classification process, the development of automatic techniques for validating the collected samples is crucial. Few solutions for coping with this issue have been proposed in the machine learning community. They are based on two main approaches. The first one admits the presence of mislabeled samples, but aims at designing a classifier that is less influenced by this presence [15]. The second one tends to identify and remove the mislabeled samples from the training set [16–20]. The process of mislabeled sample removing was done by considering different classification approaches, such as k-nearest neighbors (kNNs) [16], C4.5 [17], and classifier ensemble [18], or by adopting geometrical graph theory [19]. In [20], a clustering technique based on expectation maximization algorithm was used to estimate for each training sample a probability vector of class membership. The confidence on the current label was used as a weight during the construction of the classification model. Although the promising performance exhibited by these approaches, to the best of our knowledge the problem of mislabeled samples has been not considered in the context of ECG signal classification.The objective of this paper is to investigate the problem of training sample validation for ECG signal classification. In particular, the proposed approach takes inspiration from the strategy proposed in [21], in which the mislabeled sample detection issue was viewed as an optimization problem where it was looked for the best subset of training samples. This strategy, proposed specifically for classification of remote sensing images, supposes that classes follow a Gaussian distribution. Although this assumption is often verified in the remote sensing context, it is not true in the case of ECG signals. For this reason a more general method, i.e., applicable also to non-Gaussian distributions, is proposed in this work. The optimization problem is formulated within a genetic algorithm (GA) [22,23]-based framework, thanks to its capability to solve complex pattern recognition problems [24,25]. Each chromosome is configured as a binary string, which represents a candidate solution for validating/invalidating the available training samples. The genetic optimization process consists of optimizing jointly two different criteria, which are the maximization of the statistical separability among classes and the minimization of the number of invalidated samples. The former is based on kNN classification. The latter allows to get at convergence a Pareto front from which the human user can select the best solution according to his/her prior confidence on the reliability of the collected training set.The proposed approach is validated experimentally on real ECG signals from the well-known MIT-BIH arrhythmia database [26]. The obtained results show that the proposed automatic validation strategy is able to detect the mislabeled samples with a high accuracy. Moreover, the removal of the detected mislabeled samples has a good impact on the accuracy given by the state-of-the-art support vector machine (SVM) [27] classification.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we summarize the basic idea of the multiobjective genetic algorithm and describe the proposed strategy for automatic training sample validation. Section 3 presents the experimental results obtained on real ECG signals. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
