@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Current source mapping by spontaneous MEG and ECoG in piglets model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
.The study proposed a novel way to remove the background signal by normalized PCA decomposition.The PCA was employed oppositely to increase the local information.Compared with the Gradient method, the normalized PCA decomposition can be used to locate the lesion in cortex, since the real cortex is far less-than-ideal model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Principle Component Analysis,Background activity,Lesion,Piglet neocortical model,MEG,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The previous research reveals the presence of relatively strong spatial correlations from spontaneous activity over cortex in Electroencephalography (EEG) and Magnetoencephalography (MEG) measurement. A critical obstacle in MEG current source mapping is that strong background activity masks the relatively weak local information. In this paper, the hypothesis is that the dominant components of this background activity can be captured by the first Principal Component (PC) after employing Principal Component Analysis (PCA), thus discarding the first PC before the back projection would enhance the exposure of the information carried by a subset of sensors that reflects the local neuronal activity. By detecting MEG signals densely (one measurement per 2×2mm2) in three piglets neocortical models over an area of 18×26mm2 with a special shape of lesion by means of a μSQUID, this basic idea was demonstrated by the fact that a strong activity could be imaged in the lesion region after removing the first PC in Delta, Theta and Alpha band, while the original recordings did not show such activity clearly. Thus, the PCA decomposition can be employed to expose the local activity, which is around the lesion in the piglets’ neocortical models, by removing the dominant components of the background activity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) measures the weak magnetic field produced by small current flow in the brain. MEG signals can be transformed to obtain a first-order estimate of coherent current flow below a 4-channel superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) array [1]. Cohen et al. has shown originally that the outputs from two orthogonally oriented pairs of planar gradiometer detectors can be used to measure the magnitude and direction of the current located below the center of such a detector [1]. The two pairs of gradiometers can be emulated by the microSQUID (μSQUID), by combining the outputs from an orthogonal pair to measure the gradient of Bzalong the x-axis,ΔBz/Δx, and by combining the outputs from the other pair to measureΔBz/Δy. Both of these gradients are maximum below the center of the detector array. It can be shown that both the magnitude and phase of the current vector at the center of the detector array can be correctly estimated to a scale factor. Therefore, the magnitude I of a current is given as(1)I=4πR3μ0dΔBzΔx2+ΔBzΔy2where R is the distance from the current vector to each coil, d is the separation between the diagonally opposite sensors and μ0 is the permeability of free space. The phase ϕ is given by(2)arctanΔBz/ΔxΔBz/ΔyCohen et al. believed this model could be applied for the dc current imaging that produces the dc magnetic field in entire human body [1]. Henceforward, this model for detecting the current source beneath its center is believed to establish a base for imaging cortex activity magnetically. If every coil contains only the local information, then the gradient should reflect the center current flow beneath the two coils.However, real cortex is far from the dc current model as above. Due to the distance from the sources, a coil could never reflect only the local information. In particular, there are many random sources firing simultaneously in the cortex. The non-stationarity of EEG and MEG is well documented [2]. Thus, the approach above needs improvement for current localization in cerebral cortex with MEG.The strong spatial correlation across the recording sites was reported in MEG data [3–5]. The previous work already learnt that spontaneous MEG measurement from pig cortex detected by our 4-coil SQUID system was highly correlated [6]. The generation of such activity is not clear. It is perhaps caused by spontaneous potential or the sufficient external noise. The lead field of 4-coil SQUID is believed to produce high correlation. Besides that, there are bleed across the measurement area, which may be also one reason for the correlation. Based on the analysis above, the high correlation could be hardly related to local tissues. This correlated activity occurred over the whole cortex making it difficult to specify local activity. Therefore, that removal of the highly spatially correlated components might be better to reveal local activity.When preprocessing multi-channel data, Principle Component Analysis (PCA) is usually used as a denoising approach to improve the signal to noise ratio (SNR) by keeping the first few PCs while discarding the residuals [7]. An opposite use of the PCA, namely Principal Component Elimination Method (PCEM), was previously proposed to remove the spontaneous MEG, which is considered as noise in the analysis of evoked data, and enhance the SNR for evoked MEG measurement by eliminating the 1st PC [8]. In this paper, spontaneous MEG over the piglets’ neocortex was scanned by a 4-channel μSQUID array with two orthogonally oriented pairs of planar gradiometer detectors in the recording plane of about 18mm by 26mm with 2mm step. It is hypothesized that the activity around the border of the lesion in the neocortex was strong local activity, which was orthogonal to the background recordings. Based on such a hypothesis, the utility of PCA preprocessing was investigated in animal MEG recordings at revealing local activity after the background activity has been removed. Because MEG and EEG share many similar characteristics and are often analyzed using the same methods and tools, the results should be applied broadly to both MEG and EEG.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
