@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of an experimental model of in vitro cardiac tissue using phase space reconstruction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The in vitro cultures of cardiac cells are valuable models to study the arrhythmias at the cellular level.The possibility to reconstruct a mathematical model from experimental data in order to characterize it from a dynamical point of view is performed.Phase space reconstructions in normal and arrhythmic signals highlight strange attractors.The time lag, the fractal and correlation dimensions could be used for classification feature.The embedding dimension is robust against external perturbation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Phase space reconstruction,Experimental cardiac model,Strange attractors,Time lag,Embedding dimension,MEA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The in vitro cultures of cardiac cells represent valuable models to study the mechanism of the arrhythmias at the cellular level. But the dynamics of these experimental models cannot be characterized precisely, as they include a lot of parameters that depend on experimental conditions. This paper is devoted to the investigation of the dynamics of an in vitro model using a phase space reconstruction. Our model, based on the heart cells of new born rats, generates electrical field potentials acquired using a microelectrode technology, which are analyzed in normal and under external stimulation conditions. Phase space reconstructions of electrical field potential signals in normal and arrhythmic cases are performed after characterizing the nonlinearity of the model, computing the embedding dimension and the time lag. A non-parametric statistical test (Kruskal–Wallis test) shows that the time lag τ could be used as an indicator to detect arrhythmia, while the embedding dimension is not significantly different between the normal and the arrhythmia cases. The phase space reconstructions highlight attractors, whose dimension reveals that they are strange, depicting a deterministic dynamics of chaotic nature in our in vitro model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
World Health Organization expects that the annual deaths due to cardiovascular diseases will increase from 17 million in 2008 to 25 million in 2030 in the world [1]. Among them, cardiac arrhythmias are known to be responsible for many cardiovascular deaths, while atrial fibrillation plays specifically a major role in arrhythmic disorders. Although there exists a rich body of literature studying cardiovascular diseases, a limiting factor is the poor availability of experimental models to reproduce arrhythmias, which could help to understand the triggering mechanisms at the cellular level. In order to overcome the limitations of in vivo heart studies (availability, heart beating, etc.), cultures from cardiac muscular cells were developed [2]. This kind of in vitro cardiac cultures keeps the general properties of the heart (electrophysiological, mechanical, etc.) and represents thus a promising experimental model for the studies of cardiac electrophysiology and arrhythmia. For example, it can be used to study the mechanism of action potential propagation phenomena in cardiac tissue and leads to study how and why disorders of the lethal rhythm take place, as the cardiac fibrillation, the reentry, etc. Moreover, the extracellular recording of electric activity of such cultures with the MEA (multi-electrodes array or micro-electrodes array) makes possible to monitor the contractile cardiac preparations for a longer time. In addition, applied to the cardiac cultures, the MEA technology has a better spatial resolution than the mapping procedure by fluorescence and is less invasive than the conventional electrophysiology methods (intracellular recording or by patch-clamp) [3–6]. In our previous works, we validated [7–9] the use of MEA technology to study the electrical impulse propagation (extracellular field potential, EFP) in cardiomyocytes culture under normal conditions. Specifically, our preliminary results showed that it is possible to generate arrhythmias (spiral waves SW) in culture by electrical stimulations [10,11], in agreement with results in [12] observing that rapid stimulations could alter cardiac conduction and thus induce arrhythmia. However, one question rises to be answered: Is the experimental model stable under electrical stimulations? Our objective is therefore to study the dynamics of the experimental model by characterizing acquired signals from cardiac cell cultures in normal conditions and in case of cardiac arrhythmia. In addition, a qualitative assessment of the robustness of the model to noise and to measurement error is provided. The physiological signals, generally acquired as time series, have significant nonlinear characteristics that conventional analysis methods (dominant frequency (DF) [13], amplitude analysis [14], wavelet transform (WT) [15]) often fail to identify. In fact, the behavior of biological systems depends on many parameters variations and becomes almost unpredictable. Methods from chaos theory and nonlinear dynamics give the possibility to study these special behaviors and are therefore suitable for physiological signal processing. Among them, the phase space reconstruction method is a valuable tool to study this kind of dynamical systems [16]. The phase space consists of a set of typical trajectories of the system, each point corresponding to a system state. It gives information such as the existence of attractors or limit cycles for selected parameters values.In this paper, we will use phase space reconstruction to study the stability of the cardiomyocytes experimental model under electrical stimulations. The paper is organized as follows. In Section2, we present the cardiomyocytes culture and we describe the electrical stimulation process to obtain arrhythmic phenomenon. In Section3, the nonlinearity of the experimental data is investigated, the reconstruction of phase space is discussed, including how to define and evaluate the corresponding parameters. Finally, the main conclusions are summarized in Section4.The MEA can be used to record extracellular field potential (EFP) of cardiac cells which are grown directly on it (Fig. 1, more details of culture preparation of the cardiac cells of the newborn rats are in [2]). The region of interest of a typical MEA is about 700μm to 5mm long. In this area, 60 electrodes are aligned in a matrix form with an inter-electrodes distance of 100μm. The planar electrodes have a diameter of 30μm. There are also eight pairs of electrodes devoted to the electrical external stimulation. The first experiments are carried out in normal conditions, which means that the cells are in the nutrient medium and are not stimulated (see signals from extracellular field potential in Fig. 2(a)). Each of 60 EFP signals is acquired with a maximum sampling frequency of 50kHz per channel and a 12 bits resolution. The recorded data are then reconstructed as 2D activation maps to study the field potential, then placed according to their current position on the MEA (8×8 form).Two methods are generally used to induce arrhythmic signals in heart or in cardiomyocytes culture: injection of specific drugs such as aconitine and acetylcholine [17] or by vagal or electrical stimulation [18]. In this work, the arrhythmia has been caused by electrical stimulation. The isolated healthy heart is not very sensitive to the initiation of tachyarrhythmia and atrial fibrillation. Namely, the vulnerability to atrial fibrillation is reduced in the isolated heart or cardiac cultures, which is caused by the lack of activity of the parasympathetic system. Despite this limiting factor, rapid pacing (even with low energy levels) can alter cardiac conduction and induce arrhythmia [12,19–21]. In fact, the electrical stimulation can also be an efficient method of atrial defibrillation. In recent years, the concept of electrical stimulation or sub-threshold stimulation with low amplitude and high frequency became more and more known and accepted [22–24]. It would be interesting to test this concept on an experimental model, nevertheless, it requires to qualify the behavior of the experimental model under electrical stimulation. The culture is stimulated by a pulse train (amplitude 200μV, frequency 100Hz, excitation duration 5min), sent by an electrode located at the edge of the MEA. The pacing is carefully chosen higher than the natural frequency (1,5Hz) of the cardiac cell of the newborn rats, in order to disrupt its electrical activities. This stimulation protocol impairs the electrical activity of cardiomyocytes represented by recorded irregular and disordered field potentials (see Fig. 3(a)).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
