@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of higher order statistics for atrial arrhythmia classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Paper compares the classification performance of normal, AF and AFL.HOS cumulant and bispectrum methods are compared.ICA coupled with KNN performed better.It provided 99.50% accuracy and 100% sensitivity.System has potential applications in cardiovascular screening and diagnosis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electrocardiogram,Atrial fibrillation,Atrial flutter,Classifier,Higher order spectra,Independent component analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Atrial fibrillation (AF) and atrial flutter (AFL) are the two common atrial arrhythmia encountered in the clinical practice. In order to diagnose these abnormalities the electrocardiogram (ECG) is widely used. The conventional linear time and frequency domain methods cannot decipher the hidden complexity present in these signals. The ECG is inherently a non-linear, non-stationary and non-Gaussian signal. The non-linear models can provide improved results and capture minute variations present in the time series. Higher order spectra (HOS) is a non-linear dynamical method which is highly rugged to noise. In the present study, the performances of two methods are compared: (i) 3rd order HOS cumulants and (ii) HOS bispectrum. The 3rd order cumulant and bispectrum coefficients are subjected to dimensionality reduction using independent component analysis (ICA) and classified using classification and regression tree (CART), random forest (RF), artificial neural network (ANN) and k-nearest neighbor (KNN) classifiers to select the best classifier. The ICA components of cumulant coefficients have provided the average accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value of 99.50%, 100%, 99.22% and 99.72% respectively using KNN classifier. Similarly, the ICA components of HOS bispectrum coefficients have yielded the average accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and PPV of 97.65%, 98.16%, 98.75% and 99.53% respectively using KNN. So, the ICA performed on the 3rd order HOS cumulants coupled with KNN classifier performed better than the HOS bispectrum method. The proposed methodology is robust and can be used in mass screening of cardiac patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Atrial fibrillation (AF) and atrial flutter (AFL) are the two most commonly encountered arrhythmia in the clinical practice. It still remains a challenge in the field of heart rhythm disorders to develop an automated diagnosis of AF and AFL. AF is an important public health problem affecting approximately 1.5% of the general population. Nearly 1% of people aged above 60 years, 5% of people aged above 70 years and 8% of people aged above 80 years suffer from AF [1,2]. The reported life-time risk of atrial fibrillation is 25% for men and 17% for women and the annual risk of stroke in people with AF is 3–4% [3,4]. AF attributes for 1/3rd of all hospital admissions with arrhythmia as principal diagnosis. Common causes for AF include rheumatic heart disease (RHD) (66%), hypertension (10%), cardiomyopathy (9%) and ischemic heart disease (7%) [1]. Atrial flutter or AFL is relatively less common and its epidemiology is less well known as compared to AF. The reported incidence of AF is 19.2 per 1000 person-years in individuals over 65 years of age and the incidence of AFL is 3.17 per 1000 person-years in those above 50 years of age [2]. The estimated prevalence in the United States in 2005 was 3.03 million for AF only, 0.07 million for AFL only, and 0.19 million for AF and AFL. The prevalence of AF and AFL is projected to increase considerably by 2050 and reach 7.56 million for AF only, 0.15 million for AFL only, and 0.44 million for AF and AFL [5].Electrocardiogram (ECG) is commonly used to distinguish and diagnose different atrial arrhythmia. The ECG is a non-invasive transthoracic interpretation of the electrical activity over time. A typical ECG cycle consists of a P wave, a QRS complex and a T wave. AF is characterized by the absence of P wave indicating lack of organized atrial activity. The atrial rate is usually 300–600 beats per minute (bpm), whereas the ventricular rate can be 170 or more. The heart rhythm in AF is classically described as “irregularly irregular” [6]. Unlike AF, in AFL there will be relatively organized rhythm characterized by the presence of “saw tooth” flutter waves. In AFL, the typical atrial rate is between 240 and 300bpm without an isoelectric baseline. The atrio ventricular conduction is most commonly 2:1, which yields a ventricular rate of approximately 150bpm [2,6].Accurate detection of both AF and AFL is necessary for high risk patients because both AF and AFL have different mechanism of generation, have different clinical implications and have different therapeutic options. Atrial fibrillation is predominantly associated with hypertension and valvular heart disease, and carries an increased risk of embolic stroke, heart failure, and cognitive dysfunction. For AF patients, anti-coagulation should be established and maintained indefinitely, at least for high risk patients. Use of anti-coagulation in AF is evidence-based and reduces the risk of life-threatening complications. However, studies have shown that the guideline recommendation on anti-coagulation therapy is not followed routinely in clinical practice. One major reason for the underutilization is believed to be the misdiagnosis of AF as AFL. Moreover, the subtle changes in the amplitude and duration of ECG cannot be clearly deciphered by the naked eye. The manual assessment of AF and AFL is tedious, time consuming and prone to inter-observer variability. Computer assisted diagnosis (CAD) will help to overcome these limitations. A recent prospective, blinded and multicenter study has reported that computerized algorithms are cost-effective and can play a significant role in the diagnosis of atrial arrhythmia by improving diagnostic accuracy and patient healing outcomes [7].In the literature various methods were proposed for the classification and discrimination of AF and AFL. Stridh et al., used Wigner Ville distribution to track the fundamental frequencies of fibrillatory waves for the characterization of AF by analyzing V1, V2 and V3 leads of ECG [8]. The ventricular activity was canceled from the ECG to obtain the atrial activities which were used to detect AF [9]. Mehra et al., discussed the detection of atrial tachyarrhythmia clinically, by using P–P, P–R and R–R intervals, so that the method can be used in therapeutic devices such as pacemakers and cardiac defibrillators [10]. Stridh et al. discussed three stage method of time frequency analysis for the detection of atrial tachyarrhythmia along with a good review of existing methods [11]. The dominant frequency of AF was tracked using hidden Markov model [12]. They tested the performance of their method by adding noise on the simulated AF signal. They showed the superiority of their method by the reduction of root mean square error associated with frequency tracking [12]. Guillem et al. conducted a study to identify the number of leads to accurately reconstruct the surface ECG potentials. They suggested that it was necessary to have a minimum of 23 leads to accurately reconstruct AF with the similar accuracy for normal sinus rhythm detection in 12 lead ECG [13]. The local activation times during complex AF is detected using wavelet decomposition of unipolar fibrillation electrograms [14]. The complex fractioned atrial electrograms (CFAE) were used to detect atrial fibrillation [15–17].Using nonlinear features such as Shannon entropy and sample entropy, the AF was detected using an iPhone 4S device [18]. The ECG from two abnormalities (arrhythmia and ischemia) were classified with 94.29% diagnostic accuracy using the principal components of linear predictive model output along with a detailed error probability analysis [19]. The principal components of discrete wavelet transform (DWT) coefficients have shown superior performance against the principal components of time domain ECG signal in providing higher classification accuracy [20]. Using the principal components of DWT coefficients the normal and arrhythmia ECG was classified with 95.60% accuracy using SVM classifier [21]. It was shown that the performance of k-means algorithm for classification can be further improved with a global optimization stage using genetic algorithm combined with supervised classifiers such as error back propagation neural network and support vector machine [22]. They demonstrated the diagnostic accuracy of 97.25% with third order polynomial kernel SVM and 95.97% with GA optimized k means algorithm. But all these studies classify the ECG into normal and abnormal classes, the subclasses of abnormal ECG beats were not classified. Also the data set size used in these databases is small. As an improvement the authors have performed a few studies using large data size and many abnormal classes are used. Using the principal components of ECG signal, the five types of ECG beats (normal, left bundle branch block (LBBB), right bundle branch block (RBBB), atrial premature contraction (APC) and ventricular premature contraction (VPC)) were classified with an accuracy of 98.11% using 34,989 ECG beats [23]. Same five classes were classified using principal components of bispectrum (the third order poly-spectra), with an accuracy of 93.48% using least square support vector machine classifier [24]. Principal components of third order cumulant coefficients were used to classify the same five types of ECG beats (normal, LBBB, RBBB, APC and VPC) and reported an accuracy of 94.52% using ANN [25]. Using independent components of discrete wavelet transform coefficients, the five ECG classes (normal, LBBB, RBBB, APC and VPC) were classified with an accuracy of 99.28% using probabilistic neural network (PNN) [26]. Same five types of ECG were classified using the principal components of discrete cosine transform coefficients of ECG beats and obtained an accuracy of 99.52% using PNN [27].All these methods were tested on a large database, using the entire MIT BIH database, and focused mainly on relatively benign arrhythmia. There is a need to develop CAD diagnosis systems specifically for more clinically relevant arrhythmias to aid the clinicians. These could be life-threatening malignant arrhythmias such as ventricular fibrillation and ventricular flutter and common arrhythmias with a risk of life-threatening complications such as AF and AFL where improved diagnostic accuracy significantly impacts costs and patient care. The standard methods such as time and frequency domain methods are linear methods and may not capture the hidden subtle complexities in these ECG signals clearly. A few studies are carried by the authors for discrimination of AF and AFL. Using fractal dimension of continuous wavelet transform the ECG beats from AF and AFL were classified with 100% diagnostic accuracy, however the data size used for this work is small [28]. The normal, AF and AFL ECG rhythms are classified using the independent components of bispectrum and reported 97.65% diagnostic accuracy [29].The nonlinear methods such as higher order spectra (HOS) provides high noise immunity, and captures well the minute variations in the time series [30,31]. It has been widely used in the seismology [32], detection of sleep studies [33], epilepsy detection [34,35], and medical image classifications [36,37]. The previous works though have provided good performances, but they studied benign and clinically less significant arrhythmia such as ectopic beats of atria (APC) and the ventricle (VPC). The aim of the current paper is the application of widely used HOS techniques, the bispectrum and HOS cumulants for the detection and classification of clinically important arrhythmia with life-threatening complications such as atrial flutter and fibrillations. The proposed approach includes comparison of two methodologies, (i) computation of independent components of 3rd order cumulant coefficients of ECG beats and their classification and (ii) computation of independent components of bispectrum, the third order polyspectra of ECG beats and its classification.In this paper, Section 2 provides materials used and methodology is discussed in Section 3. Results of the work is presented in Section 4 and discussed in Section 5. Finally the paper concludes in Section 6.In the current study two open source databases, MIT BIH arrhythmia database and MIT BIH atrial fibrillation database were used. They are explained below.It consists of 48 half hour duration data files of two channel ambulatory ECG recording. It is collected from 47 subjects between 1975 and 1979 at BIH arrhythmia laboratory [38,39]. The ECG recordings were digitized at 360 samples per second per channel with 11bit resolution over a 10mV range.It consists of 25 long term ECG recordings of human subjects with atrial fibrillation (mostly paroxysmal) [38,40]. Each data file is of 10h duration, and contains two leads of ECG. The signals were sampled at 250 samples per second with 12bit resolution over a range of ±10mV. The original analog recordings were made at Boston's Beth Israel Hospital using ambulatory ECG recorders with a typical recording bandwidth of approximately 0.1–40Hz.From MIT-BIH arrhythmia database and MIT-BIH atrial fibrillation database most of the prominent atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation episodes are chosen based on reference rhythm annotations. These beats are verified and confirmed by an expert physician. These segments consists of a few ECG beats (around 15–20 beats). However some of these segments are noisy. All the segments are subjected to DWT based denoising and then Pan Tompkins algorithm is applied to detect the QRS complexes. Then few beats are chosen from each segment such that they are far apart in the time, so that all varieties of morphology are captured. In this work, 887 AFL beats, 855 AF beats and 641 normal beats are used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
