@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-ganglion ANN based feature learning with application to P300-BCI signal classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The multi-ganglion ANN based feature learning (ANNFL) method is an unsupervised feature extraction method.This method can find an effective feature representation automatically for single-trial P300 signal.The ANNFL method reduces the training time of conventional three-layer auto-encoder and leads to better classification results in the P300-BCI paradigm of our study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Imitating-Reading BCI,Multi-channel signal feature extraction,Multi-ganglion artificial neural network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The feature extraction of event-related potentials (ERPs) is a significant prerequisite for many types of P300-BCIs. In this paper, we proposed a multi-ganglion artificial neural network based feature learning (ANNFL) method to extract a deep feature structure of single-trial multi-channel ERP signals and improve classification accuracy. Five subjects took part in the Imitating-Reading ERP experiments. We recorded the target electroencephalography (EEG) samples (elicited by target stimuli) and non-target samples (elicited by non-target stimuli) for each subjects. Then we applied ANNFL method to extract the feature vectors and classified them by using support vector machine (SVM). The ANNFL method outperforms the principal component analysis (PCA) method and conventional three-layer auto-encoder, and then leads to higher classification accuracies of five subjects’ BCI signals than using the single-channel temporal features. ANNFL is an unsupervised feature learning method, which can automatically learn feature vector from EEG data and provide more effective feature representation than PCA method and single-channel temporal feature extraction method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) can utilize the electrical signals generated by the central nervous system (CNS), and then translate these signals into users’ commands, which can control some external systems, such as personal computer, electrically propelled wheelchairs and prosthesis [1–5]. BCI system can provide a new bridge between the brain and the world that bypass the human body. Therefore, this device can be used as an alternative communication method to improve the life-quality of people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), stroke and some other neuromuscular diseases and may change the way we are communicating, entertaining and living remarkably in the future [6,7].The BCI systems can be divided into two main categories, noninvasive [3,4] and invasive [5], according to the signal acquisition methods. Because of the utilization conveniences, the most of recent work focuses on the field of noninvasive BCIs. The three main noninvasive BCI methods base on event-related potentials (ERP) [8,9], the steady-state visual-evoked potentials (SSVEPs) [10,11] and the slow cortical potentials (SCPs) [12].The Imitating-Reading BCI system is based on visual P300 signal, which is the most widely used ERP signal. P300 signals can be elicited by auditory, visual or somatosensory stimuli. The more unpredictable the odd stimulus is, the higher the amplitude of P300 signal is [13]. Farwell and Donchin first described the P300-BCI paradigm in their work [14]. Then the other researchers developed many efficient P300-BCI systems, some of the studies had test the performances of P300-BCI systems for people with ALS and stroke [15,16],The EEG signals used by BCIs as the carriers of communication are always non-stationary and contain lots of undesired signals. The key in improving the performance of a P300-BCI system is enhancing the real-time detection of the ERP signals elicited by target stimuli [17]. Then, for the whole system, building a good feature representation is an opportunity to achieve that goal.For that reason, many of the actual efforts in developing brain-computer systems go into the design of an appropriate representation for the EEG signal in order to provide promising classification performance. Researchers have proposed the applications of different advanced spatial, temporal and spectrum feature extraction methods to BCI systems. These methods include principal component analysis (PCA) [18], common spatial pattern (CSP) [19–22], wavelet transform method [23], blind source separation [24] etc. They can reduce the dimensionality of BCI signals’ feature space for the classification procedure.However, when training the feature extractors provided by these methods, like CSP methods, users need labeled EEG samples and to preserve the most distinctive information, the users should select part of these extracted features or assemble the features in different spaces manually based on his or her experience. Though the PCA methods do not need label information and it can find the principal component of a multi-dimensional data matrix, it cannot suit for the situations when the signal has a low signal noise ratio (SNR) and may cost an information loss of EEG signals.Meanwhile, Hinton and Salakhutdinov proposed an unsupervised feature learning method in their work [25]. They developed a multi-layer ANN composed by restricted Boltzmann machines to reduce the dimensionality of data and achieved a better reconstruction result than using PCA method. Researchers also proposed some other typical neural network for unsupervised learning, such as auto-encoder [26] and sparse coding model [27]. These methods have been applied to image processing and natural language processing [28,29]. Their works indicate that we can learn high-level representative features, components and patterns from data automatically by using unsupervised feature learning methods.The unsupervised feature learning method always involves with a large scale ANN that has a considerable number of connection weights to be adjusted in the training stage [30]. The training time is the bottleneck of this kind of method. To introduce the unsupervised feature learning method to the field of P300-BCI research and improve the real-time performance of this method, in our study, we design the multi-ganglion artificial neural network feature learning (ANNFL) method. A multi-ganglion ANN has three-level network structure (neuron level, ganglion level and ganglion–network level), the connections occur within neurons in the same ganglion. Then we apply ANNFL method to the feature extracting procedure of Imitating-Reading BCI system, which uses event-related potential as the carrier of communication between brain and computer.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the mental task of the P300-BCI study. We detail the ANNFL algorithm in Section 3 and give the experimental results in Section 4. Finally, we make a discussion in Section 5.The paradigm of the Imitating-Reading BCI was designed and implemented in the College of Biomedical Engineering of South-Central University for Nationalities. The visual ERP evoked mode of it was designed to imitate the natural reading behavior, which successfully restrains the internal or external disturbing effects like exogenous brain noises and ocular artefact, and the communication speed of this kind paradigm can exceed 90 bit per minute in online experiments [31,32].Five healthy subjects (Sub1, Sub2, Sub3, Sub4 and Sub5, three female, two male, aged 22–25) participated in this study, all participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Multi-channel EEG signals were recorded by BioSemi ActiveTwo system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). The sampling rate is 2048Hz and we rejected the trials in which the subjects reported they blinked eyes. Then we remove the baseline of each trial of EEG sample, filter the signals using a four-order IIR filter whose cut-off frequency is 30Hz, and then decimate the sampling rate from 2048Hz to 512Hz.According to the Imitating-Reading experimental settings [33], the subject who takes part in the experiment sits in an armchair at 40cm distance in front of a computer screen and wears a cap with 32 scalp electrodes located at standard positions of the international 10–20 system (see Fig. 1, not including the reference electrodes at earlobe). A small window (size: 30pix×30pix) is set on the center of a computer screen whose screen resolution is 1024pix×768pix. In the experiments, the subject should watch on the small window. It displays two kinds of visual stimulus symbols (see Fig. 2a and b). The symbol shown in Fig. 2a is a non-target stimulus, and in Fig. 2b a target stimulus. The target stimulus symbol has a vertical red line across it. Then one target stimulus and nineteen non-target stimuli compose a stimulus-symbol line (see Fig. 2c).In each trial of the experiments, the computer displays continuously the symbols of this line one by one in the small window, each stimulus stays in the window for 150ms, it looks like the line is “walking” though the window (see Fig. 3). The interval between each of the two trials is 1.5s, the participants can rest their eyes in the intervals.In each trial of stimulation, we change the position of the scarce target stimulus symbol. Therefore, the subject cannot predict when the computer might display it. In this mental task, the target stimuli can elicit P300 event-related potentials, while the non-target stimuli cannot. Moreover, watching the stimulus-symbol line move across the window is like reading a book, while you do not need to move head or eyes and the book can move itself.Consequentially, in the experiments, we can record two classes of EEG signals elicited by non-target and target stimuli. After signal preprocessing (remove the baseline, filter the signals and decimate the sampling rate from 2048Hz to 512Hz), in each trial, we use the EEG signals from 100ms to 400ms post a non-target stimulation and a target stimulation as non-target and target samples, so we can record one non-target sample and one target sample in each trial of Imitating-Reading ERP experiment. The performance of the Imitating-Reading BCI depends on how well the two classes of EEG signals can be classified. In this study, each dataset consists of 100 trials of target EEG signal samples and 100 trials of non-target EEG signal samples.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
