@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Review on EEG and ERP predictive biomarkers for major depressive disorder

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Studies involving aberrant EEG/ERP features used for MDD diagnosis are discussed.EEG/ERP studies involving prediction of treatment outcome for MDD are illustrated.EEG/ERP features are tested on common dataset for diagnosis and treatment prediction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Treatment outcome prediction,Major depressive disorder,Quantitative electroencephalography,Antidepressants,Event-related potentials,Response,Treatment efficacy,Nonresponse,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The selection of suitable antidepressants for Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) has been challenging and is mainly based on subjective assessments that include minimal scientific evidence. Objective measures that are extracted from neuroimaging modalities such as electroencephalograms (EEGs) could be a potential solution to this problem. This approach is achieved by the successful prediction of antidepressant treatment efficacy early in the patient's care. EEG-based relevant research studies have shown promising results. These studies are based on derived measures from EEG and event-related potentials (ERPs), which are called neurophysiological predictive biomarkers for MDD. This paper seeks to provide a detailed review on such research studies along with their possible limitations. In addition, this paper provides a comparison of these methods based on EEG/ERP common datasets from MDD and healthy controls. This paper also proposes recommendations to improve these methods, e.g., EEG integration with other modalities such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and magnetoencephalograms (MEG), to achieve better evidence of the efficacy than EEG alone, to eventually improve the treatment selection process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is characterized by persistent low mood and hampered functional disability and is often associated with higher treatment costs. MDD, which is commonly called depression, is chronic, recurrent and comorbid in nature. It has been reported to be a leading cause of disease burden, especially in women, in many countries [1]. Patients who receive adequate pharmacotherapy achieve remission with no symptoms or symptoms that are almost absent [2]. Less scientific evidence of the treatment selection and incomplete pathophysiological understanding have restricted MDD treatment as a subjective assessment process. High medical costs arise from non-response to the treatment because the initial treatments do not usually lead to recovery [3].Various theories have been presented to elucidate the underlying associated pathophysiological implications, and further details on the theories are reviewed by [4–7]. According to one such theory, abnormalities in the inter-neuronal signalling pathway can increase the vulnerability to environmental stresses and result in neuronal atrophy. This process significantly reduces the brain's volume, e.g., the hippocampus was consistently recorded as shrunken in MDD patients [8]. However, complete manifestations of the situation described in such theories could not be observed in every MDD patient.Treatment with antidepressants has been associated with low efficacy. A study called Sequenced Treatment Alternative to Relieve Depression (STAR*D), which involved patient treatment with various antidepressants in a sequential manner, revealed only modest rates of remission (20 to 30%) in the first attempt. Moreover, the response rates were even less (47%) in the study participants [2]. Multiple factors could cause low treatment efficacy. First, MDD is heterogeneous; one antidepressant might not be as efficient for a patient as it could be for another. Second, in the event of failure, re-selection or augmentation is subjective and also leads to multiple trial-and-error steps in sequential iterations until suitable antidepressants are identified. To improve the situation, objective assessment techniques are needed based on strong scientific evidence, for early disease diagnosis and prognosis.Objective techniques based on neuroimaging modalities are being incorporated during the treatment selection process with improved efficacy. Such techniques generate sufficient evidence to predict the treatment outcome prior to its onset, and therefore, these factors are characterized as predictive biomarkers. The modalities such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) have shown promising results towards being diagnostic in MDD treatment; however, there are pros and cons. Among these, EEG offers higher temporal resolution than fMRI, has a low cost and is suitable for small clinical environments. It is also more feasible for patients with claustrophobia [9], in addition to being easier to obtain hands-on training. The issue on its low spatial resolution can be partially resolved by the increasing number of electrodes/sensors, with up to as many as 1024. However, a smaller number of electrodes is easier to manage and is desirable for patient care. In contrast, fMRI provides a higher spatial resolution. However, it is not feasible in small setups for quick assessments. In short, EEG provides a stronger base for the development of predictive biomarkers. Therefore, in this paper, we restricted our discussion to methods that involve EEG/ERP only. The current review paper addresses two main application areas in which EEG/ERP can be utilized: (1) MDD diagnosis based on EEG/ERP abnormalities, and (2) prediction of treatment outcomes based on quantities/features extracted from EEG/ERP. The first part will include a review on the EEG and ERP abnormalities found during MDD that can help to discriminate MDD patients and healthy controls. The second part provides a brief account of features that are extracted from EEG and ERP that have shown a relationship to clinical responders (R) and nonresponders (NR) to treatments with antidepressants. The limitations associated with each type are also highlighted.The EEG signals recorded from the human scalp could have different neuronal sources deeper inside the brain. Estimating these deep sources from the EEG signals is an inverse problem that can be ill-conditioned, which can lead to the existence of multiple solutions for the deep sources. These solutions are based on assumptions about the hypothetical neuronal sources inside the brain and could result in false localizations. EEG-based techniques for brain source localization (BSL) such as Low Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography (LORETA) have been proposed to estimate or localize neuronal electrical activities inside the brain based on multichannel surface EEG recordings [10]. However, over the past decade, various extensions of LORETA were developed, for example, the standard LORETA (sLORETA) [11] and standardized shrinking LORETA-FOCUS (ssLOFO) [12]. A substitute to the inverse modelling approach is beam-forming technology [13]. Recently, a method based on a local spatial Fourier transformation of EEG measurements was offered [14,15]. Yet another technique, 2q-Exo-MUSIC (2q-th ordered extended multiple signal classification), has been developed to localize distributed sources that have a large number of dipoles with highly synchronized activities [16]. Details of the different techniques that involve discussing the BSL problem have also been reviewed [17,18].Electrophysiological signals contain information about neural activities inside the brain at different frequencies, which range from delta (0.4–5Hz), theta (5–8Hz), alpha (8–12Hz), low beta (12–18Hz), high beta (19–30Hz) and gamma (30–70Hz). Electrophysiological signals can be helpful during the diagnosis or quantification of physiological states. For example, the automatic diagnosis of epileptic seizures [19,20], assessment of depth of anaesthesia [21] and quantification of sleep stages known as polysomnography studies are well established [22]. In addition, EEG data are helpful in studying the elevated states of the resting brain [23]. Furthermore, EEG data that are saved and processed digitally are called quantitative EEG (QEEG). At the same time, event-related potential (ERP) studies include the analysis of neuronal data acquired during the performance of an experimental activity to observe aberrant cognitive processes inside the brain. An ERP signal is acquired by grand averaging the various epochs of similar types, including either visual or auditory stimuli. Averaging suppresses the background noise in the signal and effectively improves the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The grand averages result in various prominent positive and negative peaks that occur at the time points of 100, 200 and 300 milli-seconds (ms), called N100/P100, N200/P200 and P300, respectively [24]. A schematic diagram of a P300 context updating model has been illustrated [25]. P300 is generated if the stimulus is different from the previous ones; otherwise, components such as N100/P200 can be observed (Fig. 1).Depressive disorders are associated with changes in normal electrophysiology and neurocognitive processes. These changes include frequency abnormalities, differences in the activation of the left and right hemispheres (known as asymmetry), aberrant cognitive brain behaviours and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis dysfunction. These factors are discussed in the following subsections.Abnormalities in the EEG/ERP activations in different frequency bands have been studied during the discrimination of MDD versus healthy controls and for the prediction of treatment outcomes. The power computations from individual frequency bands have shown relevance to the pathophysiology of depression. For example, elevated EEG alpha activity during resting has been commonly observed [26]. Similarly, elevated absolute alpha power has been reported in the literature [27–30], while other studies have described increases in the relative power [31,32]. This increase in the EEG activity was commonly observed in frontal, parietal [28,33] and occipital areas [34]. In addition, early stages of depression were characterized by the presence of elevated alpha activity [35]. However, some of the studies could not find alpha power differences between the MDD patients and healthy subjects [36,37]. Moreover, an increased beta band activation in depressed patients has also been reported [38,39]. Regarding the prediction of treatment outcomes, excessive alpha values were associated with a response to antidepressant treatment [40]. Similarly, excessive theta values were found to be correlated with treatment nonresponse within the MDD group [41–43].Although an extensive discussion on these activation abnormalities including the different frequency bands is beyond the scope of this review, a brief viewpoint is that the absence of consistent findings could be due to methodological differences across studies and inherent heterogeneity of the populations under investigation. The non-specificities of these findings have made clinical applications almost impossible.During MDD, alterations that are associated with EEG alpha asymmetry were studied extensively as a vulnerability measure. Furthermore, it was hypothesized that MDD manifested hyperactive right prefrontal cortex and hypoactive left prefrontal cortex. Davidson et al. [50] investigated alpha asymmetry during depression and reported a relative hyper-activation of the right prefrontal cortex. Later, they considered ‘approach’ and ‘withdrawal’ as being fundamental to the EEG asymmetry [44], where both the withdrawal and approach systems were orthogonal. In addition, the approach system facilitated appetitive behaviour and resulted in positive effects, whereas the withdrawal system motivated negative emotions and aversive stimulation [45]. The decreased left-sided frontal EEG activation was considered to be related to a deficit in the approach system. Based on these observations, it was concluded that the study subjects who have such symptoms were considered to be at risk of negative emotional states and depression in response to environmental stress. In contrast, EEG activation of the right-side frontal cortex was related to withdrawal of related emotions and the pathophysiology of depression [44]. In a recent study, alpha EEG asymmetry was found to be significantly higher in MDD patients compared to healthy controls [46]. A number of studies reported a decrease in the right frontal area relative to the left side [47–50].However, EEG asymmetry was considered to be an unreliable indicator for discriminating MDD and healthy subjects. This consideration has been based on the finding that increased right frontal activity in postmenopausal depressed women could not be replicated [51]. Many other studies failed to reproduce the observations of EEG asymmetry during MDD [52,53][54–56].EEG coherence is a measure that can suitably examine synchrony across brain regions. In addition, it represents the coupling of activity between two nodes that are functionally linked, but not time-locked to a specific event [57,58]. EEG coherence has been successfully used to examine spatial integration both at short- and long-distances in the brain [59,60]. It was first examined in clinical populations with depression or dementia [61]. However, it has not been extensively studied with MDD patients compared to controls. In a study, Fingelkurts and colleagues [62] examined 12 medication-free depressed outpatients and used the structural synchrony to analyse nine categories of functional connectivity. Furthermore, Leuchter and colleagues [63] have extended the study conducted by Fingelkurts and colleagues. Specifically, they have concluded an increased neurophysiological connectivity in depression compared with a normal condition. In a recent study [64], MDD is characterized by increased EEG functional connectivity within frontal brain areas. Hence, EEG coherence has been suggested as a potential marker of distributed neuronal communication for MDD.However, the EEG coherence like any metric derived from EEG does not directly measure brain activity. Connectivity of brain region is inferred from the EEG recorded at surface sites overlying the various cortical regions. Moreover, there is no single technique that has proven to be ideal to measure the interaction between two brain regions. Coherence measures are susceptible to both electrode reference effect and volume conduction [65–67].The ERP component P300 that is achieved by grand averaging various auditory stimuli of a single type is known as an auditory evoked potential (AEP). AEPs have been shown to have a positive correlation with the cognitive abilities and auditory processes of the brain [68,69]. In addition, depression has been associated with a delay in the P300 component [70]. Similar findings were found in some other studies in which a delay in P300 was only found in MDD patients compared with the control [71–73]. A decrease in the P300 intensity in the right hemisphere during LORETA analysis has also been reported [74]. Longer P300 latencies were observed in depressed patients compared to healthy controls for visually evoked stimuli [75]. The relationship between the P300 response and responses under antidepressants was reported as the normalization of P300 latency after 4 weeks of antidepressant intake [76]. Moreover, the normal P300 amplitude predicted the response to electro-convulsive therapy [77]. However, no significant differences were found in the P300 amplitude among the treatment responders, non-responders and controls [78].Hyperactivity of the HPA axis during MDD is one of the main findings in psychoneuroendocrinology [79]. The HPA axis is a major endocrine stress response system that helps during challenging situations and thereby maintains mental health and stability [80]. The HPA axis triggers a stress response by releasing certain chemicals, such as adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol, which are generated from the hypothalamus, pituitary and adrenal glands. In addition, cortisol has been consistently found during depression [6]. This finding warrants highlighting the EEG and ERP and their relationship with HPA axis dysfunction.EEG and ERP studies have revealed neurobiological changes due to cortisol administration in healthy subjects. It was concluded that both exogenous and endogenous cortisol administration have specific effects on episodic memory processing [81]. Studies that focused on EEG correlations with episodic memory resulted in greater activation of the frontal and parietal lobes at 800ms to 1100ms post-stimulus for healthy subjects compared to the depressed subjects. In addition, a correlation between the cortisol levels and EEG laterality was observed during an episodic memory task. EEG and ERP studies of cortisol administered to healthy subjects depicted qualitative changes in the ERP waveforms associated with episodic memory over the frontal scalp region [82,83]. Moreover, altered ERP components were related to an error processing task [84]. However, these associations could not be replicated. For example, a single dose of cortisol could not alter the ERPs in a face recognition memory task. However, a short-term memory task could easily modulate the related ERP components [85]. Hence, we can infer the complexity of the cortisol as being impacted by multiple factors, for example, the types of stimuli, dosage levels and time-dependence on the EEG.Recently, the automated classification algorithms that involve neuroimaging techniques are gaining importance in diagnosing different types of mental ailments [86]. Specifically speaking, EEG data in combination with machine learning (ML) techniques have been utilized for the identification of MDD [87–89]. These techniques have utilized non-linear EEG-based quantities. Ref. [87] utilized Katz's and Higuchi's fractal dimensions (HFD) as a measure of non-linearity and complexity in the EEG data. Another study reported a combination of spectral asymmetry and HFD features for discriminating the depression conditions [90]. In addition to EEG-based studies, ERP features such as the P600 component were utilized for the same purpose [91].The advantages of incorporating ML methods when compared with conventional techniques include the automatic identification of EEG/ERP patterns that are specific to diseased and control conditions. The ML techniques allow identification of such patterns for individual subjects and are therefore superior to the conventional methods, which are discriminative at the group level only. The evidence-based treatment management for individual MDD patients is possible by incorporating ML techniques during the diagnosis and treatment selection. Moreover, the high accuracies shown by ML techniques motivate their clinical utility as well. However, generalizations of these findings require further validation with larger populations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study addresses the problem of identifying predictive EEG- and ERP-based biomarkers for the treatment of MDD. MDD is a serious mental illness and is highly prevalent. Unfortunately, the treatment for MDD is still based on subjective assessments with trial-and-error treatment approaches for identifying suitable medication. There has been considerable effort by the mental health care community to develop personalized approaches for the treatment of MDD. These approaches are based on identifying biomarkers that could predict an effective medication for a specific MDD patient. However, the methods developed in this respect are either ineffective due to having low prediction accuracies or their findings cannot be generalized due to having a small number of subjects used in the respective studies. In this review, all of these methods are reviewed comprehensively. During this process, the limitations are identified and suggestions are provided to improve the situation.For the studies reviewed here combined with previous studies [144,145], several features derived from EEG and ERP have been associated with treatment response. EEG/ERP has certain advantages over other neuroimaging modalities in terms of its cost effectiveness and temporal resolution. Additionally, there is portability and adaptability of the modality, i.e., using EEGs for clinical purposes makes it possible to have quick acquisition of neuronal data. A psychiatrist/practitioner can use this approach with little hands-on training. In addition, wireless EEG caps are more feasible for data acquisition than caps that have cables. Despite all of the benefits, EEGs have less spatial resolution than fMRI. LORETA and the latest techniques (sLORETA, ssLOFO, 2q-Exo-MUSIC) provide solutions to this problem. However, these techniques might not be suitable in the context of clinical utility. For example, the original LORETA method is very sensitive to the assumed underlying mathematical model, a fact which can lead to erroneous results when the model contains errors. However, recent techniques are robust in cases when more than single neuronal sources inside the brain are to be estimated, or under low SNR conditions.To answer the question posed by the clinical utility of EEG/ERP-based biomarkers, the techniques discussed in this paper have provided promising research results. However, more solid evidence, such as treatment outcome prediction, is required to translate them into clinical practice. This could be achieved through generalizing the findings discussed in this paper. Existing QEEG biomarkers have shown responses to different antidepressants, but none of them can explain the neurobiology of MDD development [114]. In addition, some of the biomarkers (theta cordance, ATR index, LDAEP) have defined thresholds and cut-offs to discriminate between treatment response and nonresponse.The classification ability provided by the EEG cordance and ATR index make them potential candidates for clinical use. The ATR (with a threshold value) could be a differential indicator of treatment response for two different types of antidepressants. The theta cordance could be a ‘quick check’ of the treatment efficacy, e.g., as early as after one week. Based on a threshold, an inefficient treatment could be augmented or changed entirely. A QEEG biomarker, for example, rEEG, achieved better results than in the STAR*D study, i.e., the selection of the treatment based on individual disease conditions. However, only a few studies have reported the efficiency of the QEEG biomarkers. Further investigation to prove their utility is required. Similarly, ML techniques have proven their efficacy but only with a small sample size, and thus further replication of the results with a large sample size is required.Future studies should focus on validation for clinical purposes based on the following key points:(i)ML techniquesExploratory techniques such as data mining could be suitable to mine offline data for the identification of specific patterns that are common to either R or NR. Data mining can be employed on large databases such as those used in the case of rEEG. The data will provide a unique opportunity to learn statistical tools such as support vector machine (SVM), which can be used clinically for choosing prescriptions and predicting treatment outcomes for a new patient.Fusion of modalitiesA multimodal approach would be a better choice to acquire neuronal data; such an approach would involve a combination of EEG, fMRI and MEG [146] or fMRI and MEG [147]. EEG-fMRI fusion involves a higher level of temporal detail and can be achieved through EEG and fMRI spatial resolution. Data acquired from multimodalities can be analysed based on newly developed techniques, for example, EEG and fMRI [148]. Unfortunately, the fusion creates artefacts in the recorded data and hence hampers the data analysis, e.g., simultaneous acquisition of EEG and fMRI causes production of an artefact in the EEG data called the ballistocardiographic effect [149], which must be addressed.Fusion of methodsVarious QEEG biomarkers discussed, such as the theta cordance and ATR index, can be combined and fused in multiple ways to improve the efficiency of training a classifier, for example, the use of available off-line data provided by the rEEG database.Metric measuresThe majority of the MDD prediction studies do not report the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. It is important to have these measures for validation of the predictive methods shown in this paper. The validation must be performed with larger datasets.In conclusion, several EEG/ERP technologies, especially from the resting EEG, have the potential to provide treatment outcome predictions. Although it is premature to judge whether EEG/ERP-based quantities would predict treatment outcome with their promises, the research results thus far have provided positive results. Further studies are necessary to generalize and validate the current findings for the purpose of clinical practice.