@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Combined surface and intramuscular EMG for improved real-time myoelectric control performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have investigated whether targeting muscles that are involved in the rotation of the forearm could improve the performance of myoelectric control systems that include both wrist rotation and opening/closing of a terminal device.The motivation for this investigation was to demonstrate the important contribution of deep muscles in movements where these muscles are required.We have shown for the first time, using a Fitts’ Law approach that targeting deep muscles plays an important role in improving the myoelectric control system.This work advances, in a comparative manner, the assessment of intramuscular based targeted for control purposes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fitts’ Law test,Targeted EMG,Pattern recognition,Intramuscular EMG,Real-time control,Wrist rotator,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The four main functions that are available in current clinical prostheses (e.g. Otto Bock DMC Plus®) are power grasp, hand open, wrist pronation and wrist supination. Improving the control of these two DoFs is therefore of great clinical and commercial interest. This study investigates whether control performance can be improved by targeting wrist rotator muscles by means of intramuscular EMG. Nine able-bodied subjects were evaluated using offline metrics and during a real-time control task. Two intramuscular (targeted) and four surface EMG channels were recorded concurrently from the right forearm. The control was derived either from the four surface sources or by combining two surface channels combined with two intramuscular channels located in the pronator and supinator muscles (combined EMG). Five metrics (Throughput, Path Efficiency, Average Speed, Overshoot and Completion Rate) were used to quantify real-time performance. A significant improvement of 20% in Throughput was obtained with combined EMG (0.90±0.12bit/s) compared to surface EMG alone (0.75±0.10bit/s). Furthermore, combined EMG performed significantly better than the surface EMG in terms of Overshoot, Path Efficiency and offline classification error. No significant difference was found for Completion Rate and Average Speed. The results obtained in this study imply that targeting muscles that are involved in the rotation of the forearm could improve the performance of myoelectric control systems that include both wrist rotation and opening/closing of a terminal device.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of surface recordings in the control of upper limb prosthetic devices dates back for decades [1]. Clinically available prostheses make use of conventional control schemes that include proportional control, in which the velocity of a selected prosthesis function is proportional to the level of the myoelectric activity [2]. Direct control can be simple and intuitive if the control sites can be selected so that each function corresponds to the physiologically appropriate muscle. However, to implement one physiological degree of freedom (DoF) intuitively, two independent signal sites are needed. This is one of the main reasons why current commercially available prosthetic devices only provide very few controllable DoFs. To overcome this limitation, two main research streams have emerged; pattern recognition [3–10] and model based force estimation [11–16] of multiple DoF, with the main purpose of increasing the amount of information extracted from muscle signals and to eliminate the need for isolated EMG signals.The performance of pattern recognition based control schemes has been sufficiently demonstrated in the literature that the main focus has now largely shifted to considerations about clinical robustness [16,18]. In this regard, researchers are investigating the clinical usability of pattern recognition with studies related to the influence of proportional contractions [19], limb position [20,21] and electrode shift [22] on pattern recognition, just to mention some of the challenges that face these types of systems [17]. Other studies have focused on the ability of pattern recognition to resolve dynamic [23] and simultaneous [23,24] movements, as a necessary step to assess its potential use and added value compared to the current clinical use of conventional control schemes.Joint EMG – torque models have shown high correlation between features of the EMG and joint torque, with high predictive capability during single and simultaneous DoF [11–16]. In general, the estimators have proven able to track the torque profile well with a coefficient of determination (R2) above 0.9. Furthermore, usability studies combining pattern recognition and proportional control with real time feedback of user performance, have also been reported [25–27].The four main functions that are available in current clinical prostheses (e.g. Otto Bock DMC Plus®) are power grasp (PG), hand open (HO), wrist pronation (WP) and wrist supination (WS). Improving the control performance of these two DoFs is therefore of great clinical and commercial interest. Despite high overall classification accuracies and R2, WP and WS have challenged classification schemes as well as force estimation using surface and untargeted intramuscular EMG [13,23,28], mainly due to the fact that the primary muscles of these movements are deeper in the forearm than the muscles that extend and flex the wrist. The solution has often been to use many electrodes in order to cover the entire circumference of the forearm and make maximal use of muscle crosstalk to improve performance. However, space, comfort and cost constraints limit the number of electrodes that can realistically be placed when fitting amputees clinically. Kamavuako et al. [15] showed that targeting the pronator and supinator muscles using intramuscular electrodes greatly improved the estimation of force during WP and WS. That analysis, however, was performed offline with no comparison to surface EMG and did not include user feedback.The aim of this study was to assess whether including intramuscular EMG from the deeper pronator teres (PT) and supinator (ST) muscles improves the overall performance of a myoelectric control system using a Fitts’ Law tracking test [29]. Fitts demonstrated that any human motor task conveys a finite amount of information that is limited only by the capabilities of the control system and exhibits a tradeoff between speed and accuracy. The control system combines pattern recognition and the ability to provide proportional control.The experiments were conducted on nine able-bodied subjects (7 male/2 female, mean age: 26.5 years old). The procedures were in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the University of New Brunswick's research ethics board. Subjects provided their written informed consent prior to the experimental procedures. All subjects had no history of upper extremity or other musculoskeletal disorders.The intramuscular EMG was recorded using two bipolar wire electrodes from the ST and PT muscles (hence the term targeted). Intramuscular wire electrodes were made of Teflon-coated stainless steel (A-M Systems, Carlsborg WA, diameter 50μm) and were inserted into each muscle with a sterile 25-gauge hypodermic needle. The insulated wires were cut to expose 3mm of the wire. The needle was inserted into each muscle and then removed to leave the wire electrodes inside the muscle. Muscle identification and needle guidance were confirmed using an ultrasound scanner (SonoScape A6, SonoScape Co. Ltd.). Fig. 1a shows the position of the PT muscle around one fourth proximal to the elbow. The PT muscle is seen between the brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis, not as deep as the ST muscle. Fig. 1b shows the position of the ST muscle with its half-circle like shape below the extensors. Intramuscular signals were analog bandpass filtered between 0.1 and 4.4kHz. Surface EMG was recorded using four bipolar electrodes (Ag–Ag/Cl, Red Dot™, Canada) placed over the flexors and extensors compartment respectively. On the flexor side, one channel was placed over the flexor digitorum profondus (FDP) and flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU). On the extensor side, the other channel was placed over the extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) and the extensor digitorum communis (EDC). These two surface channels were combined with the two intramuscular channels to create the combined EMG channels. Taking advantage of the large size of the electrode, care was taken to capture signals at the flexor compartment of the proximal forearm where the PT muscle is most superficial as confirmed by ultrasound. Based on the probe position shown in Fig. 1a, sliding the probe more proximal to the elbow shows the PT muscle to be more superficial. Targeting the ST muscle is difficult using surface electrodes; however care was taken to place the channel at the shortest distance between SP and the skin. Surface EMG signals were analog bandpass filtered between 10 and 500Hz. All signals were amplified (AnEMG12, OTbioelletronica, Torino, Italy), A/D converted using 16 bits (NI-DAQ USB-6259), and sampled at 10kHz. A reference electrode was placed close to the carpus.EMG signals were collected during unconstrained contractions corresponding to HO and PG (DoF1), and WS and WP (DoF2). The experiment was carried out in two trials with a 5-min rest in between. Subjects were prompted to elicit comfortable and sustainable contractions corresponding to five classes of motion; WS, WP, PG, HO and no motion. During training, two repetitions of 2s were collected for each motion, during which the unconstrained subjects dynamically increased (ramped) from a low level contraction to a moderately hard level. Dynamic ramping during training has been shown to improve the robustness of proportion pattern recognition based control [19,30]. For the Fitts’ Law test, subjects were required to move the cursor from a neutral position (axes origin) to a randomly ordered target location of distance, D, and width, W. The user was required to hold the cursor within the target for a full second (dwell time) in order for the test to be considered complete. If unsuccessful after 15s, the test timed out and was considered incomplete. The user cursor was then reset to the neutral position between each test. DoF1 was used to control vertical movement (cursor up and down) while DoF2 was used to control horizontal movements (cursor left and right). As required by Fitts’ Law, different indices of difficulties (ID) were tested, obtained by combining different target distances and widths as shown in Eq. (1) and Table 1.(1)ID=log2DW+1where ID is the index of difficulty (in bits), and D and W are the normalized units of distance and width, respectively.Each ID was repeated twice per motion. A full trial included the concurrent collection of surface and intramuscular data for training, and separate completion of the Fitts’ Law test using either the four surface channels (surface EMG) or two channels of each type EMG as control signals (referred to as combined EMG). During combined control, the two intramuscular channels were combined with two surface channels (recording from FCU/FDP and ECU/EDC respectively). This selection was the same for both Fitts’ test and offline data analysis. The selection order of the control signal was randomized.After the Fitts’ Law tests, more data were collected for offline analysis. Subjects were prompted to elicit comfortable and sustainable contractions corresponding to nine classes of motion: WS, WP, HO, PG, simultaneous WS+HO, WS+PG, WP+HO, WP+PG and no motion. Four repetitions of 2s were collected for each motion, during which the unconstrained subjects held a medium level contraction to capture signals at a steady state. The purpose of collecting a larger offline data was to provide a basis for comparison with other offline pattern recognition studies.Intramuscular and surface EMG signals were digitally high-pass filtered (3rd order Butterworth filter) with a cutoff frequency at 20Hz to attenuate movement artifacts. Four time-domain features were extracted from signal intervals of 160ms in duration (incremented by 16ms); waveform length (WL), mean absolute value (MAV), zero crossing (ZC), and slope-sign change (SSC) [4]. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was chosen for classification. For the Fitts’ Law test, the proportional control signal was derived from the same window by averaging the MAV values across all four channels used for each control strategy [25,31]. For the surface EMG based control, all four surface channels were used; and for the combined EMG based control, two surface and two intramuscular channels were used. The obtained value was mapped in order to control the velocity of the cursor in a given direction, as determined by the output of the LDA. The metrics used to quantify the performance of the test are shown in Table 2.For offline analysis, data were processed using a fourfold validation procedure. Each fold was comprised assigning one repetition as testing data and the remaining three repetitions as training data; the mean of the four classification errors was reported. The only difference between the control schemes was that in one case four surface channels were used and in another case two surface channels were combined with two intramuscular EMG. All other signal segmentation and processing were identical for both cases.For each performance metric the non-parametric Friedman's test was used to quantify the difference between surface EMG and the combined EMG based control. P-values less than 0.05 were considered significant. Results are presented as mean±standard error.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A real-time Fitts’ Law testing approach was employed in this study in order to assess the contribution of targeted deep muscles for a control system that requires both forearm rotation and open/close of a terminal device. In general, it was possible to control the cursor using either four surface channels or a combination of two surface and two intramuscular channels. The combination of surface and targeted intramuscular EMG based control approach performed significantly better than surface EMG alone when compared using both offline and real-time metrics. These results therefore suggest that the Throughput (and by extension, overall performance) of myoelectric control systems that combine wrist rotation with a terminal device can be improved by targeting the associated muscles. However the results should be confirmed in future studies, including amputee subjects when possible.