@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Experimental investigation on minimum frame rate requirements of high-speed videoendoscopy for clinical voice assessment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Voice assessment was studied using laryngeal imaging via high-speed videoendoscopyFrame rates impact the assessment of clinical vocal fold vibratory featuresGlottal edge, mucosal wave, aperiodicity and contact are most sensitive to frame rateThe recommended frame rates for laryngeal imaging should be 8000 frames per secondThe minimum frame rates for laryngeal imaging should be 4000 frames per second

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High-speed videoendoscopy,Frame rate,Clinical voice assessment,Laryngeal imaging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigated the impact of high-speed videoendoscopy (HSV) frame rates on the assessment of nine clinically relevant vocal-fold vibratory features. Fourteen adult patients with voice disorder and 14 adult normal controls were recorded using monochromatic rigid HSV at a rate of 16,000 frames per second (fps) and spatial resolution of 639×639 pixels. The 16,000-fps data were downsampled to 16 other rate denominations. Using paired comparisons design, nine common clinical vibratory features were visually compared between the downsampled and the original images. Three raters reported the thresholds at which: (1) a detectable difference between the two videos was first noticed, and (2) differences between the two videos would result in a change of clinical rating. Results indicated that glottal edge, mucosal wave magnitude and extent, aperiodicity, contact and loss of contact of the vocal folds were the vibratory features most sensitive to frame rate. Of these vibratory features, the glottal edge was selected for further analysis, due to its higher rating reliability, universal prevalence and consistent definition. Rates of 8000fps were found to be free from visually perceivable feature degradation, and for rates of 5333fps, degradation was minimal. For rates of 4000fps and higher, clinical assessments of glottal edge were not affected. Rates of 2000fps changed the clinical ratings in over 16% of the samples, which could lead to inaccurate functional assessment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
High-speed videoendoscopy (HSV) is emerging as a potentially valuable assessment tool for visualizing the vocal folds in motion. However, lack of practical guidelines for the use of HSV is one barrier to wide-spread implementation of HSV in clinical settings. Voice researchers have access to ultra-high-speed cameras that can capture vocal-fold vibrations at rates over 20,000 frames per second (fps) [1]. However, there is a large disparity between high-speed technologies available in a research setting and commercial HSV systems available in the voice clinic, with frame rates usually ranging between 2000 and 5000fps. Previous research suggests that an insufficient frame rate may bias the visual assessment of clinically relevant features [1–3]. Vibratory characteristics, such as mucosal wave and glottal edge, may become blurred or imperceptible at higher velocities due to temporal averaging inherent in HSV technology [1,3]. Additionally, cross-terms due to temporal aliasing may be substantial at lower frame rates [4,5].Clinicians use visual perception when applying laryngeal imaging for functional voice assessment. Insufficient frame rate may alter a clinical feature the same way as a pathophysiological mechanism. This is due to several factors: (1) frame rates are limited by the camera sensitivity: sensitivity determines the minimum integration (exposure) time, thus, longer integration time leads to image blurring of the faster-moving components in the image [1]; (2) low frame rates may limit the visual information by offering an insufficient number of images per cycle; and (3) low frame rates also limit the speed of slow playback, causing it to fall below the threshold for the perception of apparent motion, which requires images to be presented at a rate of about 16fps or higher to be perceived as continuous, flicker-free motion [6]. Therefore, if vocal-fold vibrations are captured with an insufficient frame rate, the accuracy and reliability of the visual evaluations of HSV may be jeopardized. Further, objective measures of clinically relevant features are being developed and validated based on these clinically established visual vibratory features. Objective measures would also be affected by the artifacts resulting from insufficient frame rates. However, before developing valid objective measures it is imperative to ensure that the visual measures used in clinical practice are not inaccurate and unreliable due to technical factors, such as insufficient frame rates. Therefore, it is highly important to first establish the technical accuracy and reliability of visual assessment of vocal-fold function.The purpose of the current study is to investigate the threshold at which the HSV frame rate visually degrades clinically relevant vocal-fold vibratory characteristics. The questions addressed in the study are: (a) Which clinically relevant vibratory features are most sensitive to the HSV frame rate?; (b) Does higher fundamental frequency (Fo) require higher frame rates?; (c) Which phonatory behaviors require higher frame rates?; (d) Are the frame rate requirements different based on gender and pathology?; and (e) What are the recommended and minimum frame-rate requirements for clinical voice assessment?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
