@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of cortical rhythms in intracranial EEG by temporal difference operators during epileptic seizures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nonlinear combinations of temporal difference operation.Seizure onset analysis.Seizure offset analysis.Efficient detection of long-duration seizures.Simultaneous peaks and troughs across focal iEEG channels are more after the offset than during the seizure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Difference operation,Epilepsy,GABA,Intracranial electroencephalogram (iEEG),Power spectrum,Seizure offset,Seizure onset,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Brain oscillations have traditionally been studied by time-frequency analysis of the electrophysiological signals. In this work we demonstrated the usefulness of two nonlinear combinations of differential operators on intracranial EEG (iEEG) recordings to study abnormal oscillations in human brain during intractable focal epileptic seizures. Each one dimensional time domain signal was visualized as the trajectory of a particle moving in a force field with one degree of freedom. Modeling of the temporal difference operators to be applied on the signals was inspired by the principles of classical Newtonian mechanics. Efficiency of one of the nonlinear combinations of the operators in distinguishing the seizure part from the background signal and the artifacts was established, particularly when the seizure duration was long. The resultant automatic detection algorithm is linear time executable and detects a seizure with an average delay of 5.02s after the electrographic onset, with a mean 0.05/h false positive rate and 94% detection accuracy. The area under the ROC curve was 0.959. Another nonlinear combination of differential operators detects spikes (peaks) and inverted spikes (troughs) in a signal irrespective of their shape and size. It was shown that in a majority of the cases simultaneous occurrence of all the spikes and inverted spikes across the focal channels was more after the seizure offset than during the seizure, where the duration after the offset was taken equal to the duration of the seizure. It has been explained in terms of GABAergic inhibition of seizure termination.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain functions are manifested through cortical rhythms or oscillations of different brain regions, which in turn are reflected in the electrical signals coming out of those regions. Time-frequency analysis has so far remained the most popular paradigm in analyzing the rhythmic brain signals. Other techniques, such as windowed root mean square values of the time domain signals were also used to measure dynamic changes in oscillation (for a review see [1]). The most basic aspect to look into here is how the signal is changing with respect to time. Differentiation of the signal with respect to time should be an ideal tool for this purpose. Epileptic seizures are the phenomena that create distinctive oscillatory patterns in the brain electrical signals. First and second order temporal derivatives were proved to be suitable for analyzing those patterns [2,3]. But these were simple linear operators and only seizure onset detection was studied. In digitized signals derivative becomes difference operation. In this paper we will use the words derivative and difference interchangeably.Electrographic seizure signatures vary widely from patient to patient. They may even vary significantly in the same patient from occurrence to occurrence [4]. Moreover, there are artifacts in EEG signals which are in many ways similar to seizures and therefore liable to mislead automatic seizure detection schemes to produce false alarms. Efforts for automatic seizure detection have been further complicated by difference in opinion among the experts about seizure characteristics [5]. Detection of electrographic seizure onset in iEEG is important for localization of epileptic zone [6], which is essential for surgical evaluation. Surgical intervention in the epileptic zone can be beneficial for 8–10% of the total epilepsy patient population [7]. For determining the exact zone to be surgically removed, the patient has to be implanted with intracranial electrodes, simultaneous iEEG signals from which are to be monitored for several days on end for occurrence of seizures. An efficient online automatic detection scheme for this purpose will complement and support the efforts of the clinical staffs engaged in continuous monitoring of the patient [8]. Besides, such schemes will also be helpful for the design of any possible automatic seizure intervention mechanism [9,10], in which accurate automatic detection is the first stage.Numerous automatic seizure detection schemes for scalp EEG and iEEG signals have been proposed [2–4,8,11–16]. A substantial portion of efficient detection methods can be classified into three broad categories namely, (1) template based, (2) transform based and (3) operator based. In a template based seizure detection scheme a (possibly patient specific) template of seizure onset pattern is to be identified. In the next stage that pattern is searched in the signal to be monitored in order to detect a seizure onset [4]. In this sense we can also call the template based methods as the geometric feature based methods for the time domain signals. There are many patterns for seizure onset in the EEG signals (see [17] for a review). Wavelet transformations of those patterns are expected to yield reliable features leading to identification of seizure onset in test EEG signals [14,18]. Fourier transformation based power spectrum analysis at certain frequency bands is also an efficient way to indentify the seizure part of the signal from the non-seizure part [19]. Traditionally, electrographical seizure onset used to be identified and is still identified by visual inspection alone of the EEG signals by certified epileptologists, which is considered the gold standard in seizure detection [19]. This is possible because of sudden very characteristic changes in the signal pattern at the time of electrographical seizure onset (with or without clinical manifestations). Different mathematical operations on the signal, particularly temporal difference operations (first difference, second difference, absolute value of first difference known as ‘line length’, etc) are capable of accentuating this change compared to the background signal leading to easier detection of seizure onset [2,3,13,20]. Another effective operation is variance operation within a sliding window, which is quite efficient in capturing the change in signal patterns due to seizure onset relative to the background signal [3,21].The task of automatic seizure detection becomes extremely complicated due to the presence of artifacts, many of which resemble seizure patterns. Computer algorithms are still lagging behind the human experts in distinguishing between seizure and artifact patterns. Scalp EEG is lot more prone to contamination by artifacts compared to iEEG [22]. Still iEEG signals often contain enough artifacts, particularly from malfunctioning electrodes [14,23,24], to make seizure detection in them extremely challenging. Moreover, iEEG signals offer larger variation in patterns and larger fluctuations in frequency and amplitude compared to the scalp recordings [14]. In this work we will concentrate on iEEG only, although all the techniques developed should be applicable to seizure detection in scalp EEG as well. Also the sources of iEEG are far more precise than the scalp EEG. Any algorithm with high seizure detection accuracy on EEG signals is likely to produce a lot of false positives due to the seizure like artifacts. So, for a good detection algorithm, reduction of false positives becomes an additional challenge. A number of heuristics have been developed to eliminate false positives due to the artifacts [3].Both template based and transform based detection schemes depend on appropriate choice of template and transformation function respectively. On the other hand spikes and sharp waves form the most commonly observed epileptiform transients [25]. Sharp waves have also been identified as a dominating seizure onset pattern in iEEG [17]. Exactly these are the patterns which get enhanced under temporal difference operations. Slow waves may also be predominant pattern in iEEG during some seizures [17], which will not be enhanced by temporal difference operations but will rather be suppressed, because difference operations work as high-pass filters. In this work we used a nonlinear combination of temporal difference of up to third order, which substantially enhanced seizure onset patterns relative to the background, leading to efficient detection [26].Temporal difference operations also offer us an opportunity to investigate into the dynamics of seizure offset. Difference operations can identify peaks and troughs in a signal irrespective of their shape and size [27]. With the help of this it was shown that the number of simultaneous peaks and troughs (of all shapes and sizes) across focal channels is more after the seizure offset than during the seizure, where duration after the offset was taken to be equal to the seizure duration. This observation was possible due to detection of peaks and troughs irrespective of their shapes and sizes. These after offset peaks and troughs are of very low amplitude and may have been created due to GABAergic inhibition.Basically here we have shown that the temporal difference operations can be utilized to extract meaningful information from cortical rhythms. We have accomplished that by taking two different nonlinear combinations of first, second and third temporal difference operators. The paper has been organized as following. In the next section we will describe the difference operation based electrographic seizure enhancement algorithm. In the same section we will also describe difference operation based simultaneous peak and trough detection algorithm across multiple channels. In Section 3 we will describe the data. In Section 4 we will present the results of applying the developed algorithms on the dataset.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
