@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Skin temperature variations as a tracer of microvessel tone

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Detailed comparison of wavelet correlation and Fourier coherency is presented.We measured simultaneously LDF and skin temperature in rest conditions.Pulsations of blood flow and skin temperature are correlated for 0.01–0.1Hz.Phase shift between LDF and ST pulsations at low frequencies is found.Microvascular oscillations are reconstructed from skin temperature records.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wavelet analysis,Cross-correlations,Microcirculation,Skin blood flow,Skin temperature oscillations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The problem of frequency-by-frequency cross-correlation detection is studied using two characteristics of blood microcirculation: blood flow and skin temperature. Skin blood flow variations are measured by Laser Doppler Flowmetry (LDF) and Skin Temperature (ST) – by a high-resolution (0.001K) temperature recorder. The wavelet cross-correlation (WCC) is compared with Fourier coherence and demonstrates certain advantages for the frequency-by-frequency analysis of biomedical nonstationary signals. The WCC analysis of the LDF and ST signals performed for 17 healthy subjects reveales a high correlation in the low-frequency range 0.01<ν<0.1Hz. The WCC function provides the phase difference between the oscillations of LDF and ST signals. This phase shift is used to estimate the effective depth of temperature wave generation. Taking into account the decay rate of temperature oscillations at each frequency and the LDF-ST phase shift, we perform an inverse wavelet transform for the frequency band that corresponds to active mechanisms of vascular tone regulation. This technique allows us to recover the filtered ST signal from the LDF signal and vice-versa. It is shown that the ST pulsations mirror the functional state of the microcirculation system and the ST monitoring can be used for microvessels tone control within the frequency ranges corresponding to endothelial, neurogenic and myogenic activities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Skin vasomotion is cross-sectional rhythmic oscillations of the microvessels responsible for skin microcirculatory blood flow. Experimental and clinical findings confirm that vasomotion is dependent on various physiological mechanisms, which cause pulsations in different frequency ranges [1]. Skin blood flow oscillations, with frequency intervals of 0.6–1.6Hz and 0.2–0.6Hz are respectively associated with heart and respiratory activities. It has been suggested that skin blood flow oscillations with the most interesting frequency interval of 0.009–0.1Hz are connected with myogenic, neurogenic and endothelial activities [2]. A spectral decomposition is required to distinguish the contributions of different physiological mechanisms. However, the experimental data from biological organisms are “living in time”. This creates barriers to keep the properties of the examined system constant and leads to the nonstationarity and poor repeatability of the experimental results. In addition, biomedical time series are mainly short and noisy.The energy distribution over frequencies is given by the power spectral density (p.s.d.), which is correctly defined in classical Fourier analysis for periodic or decaying signals. The Wiener–Khinchin theorem establishes the p.s.d. for a chaotic but stationary signal [3]. The signals under discussion are neither periodic nor stationary. The wavelet transform introduced in the late 1980s [4] is a way to analyze the nonstationary signals. The wavelet transform uses some self-similar functions localized in both physical and Fourier spaces instead of harmonic functions (see i.e. [5]). Wavelets are known as an effective tool for p.s.d. estimation, especially for nonstationary, short and noisy data. Of special interest for the studies under discussion is wavelet cross-correlation (WCC) analysis, which is used to recognize the frequency-by-frequency (or scale-by-scale) mutual correlation of two signals. The WCC method has been developed for analyzing astrophysical data, which have common features with biological data, namely, they are rather limited and noisy and are derived from the complicated non-linear systems [6,7]. It should be noted that the results of the wavelet analysis need accurate interpretation, because the wavelet transform is based on the decomposition on functions with their own spectral portrait, and this influences the results obtained. The purpose of this study is to clarify the interrelation between the wavelet and Fourier cross-correlation analyzes and to reveal the advantages of the WCC and its applicability to the analysis of microcirculation variability.Different non-invasive methods are applied to examine “in vivo” blood microcirculation [8]. The most common technique is Laser Doppler Flowmetry (LDF) [9,10], where laser light is utilized to measure the blood flux in the area covered by a laser probe. The spectral analysis of LDF signal has been performed using the fast Fourier transform [1], and wavelets were suggested to reproduce better the low-frequency range of LDF spectra [2,11]. Recently, high-resolution skin thermometry has been applied as an alternative indicator of the microcirculation functional state [12]. This technique is very attractive because it is cheap and easy to operate, although the use of temperature monitoring in vasomotion studies is not obvious.Both LDF and Skin Temperature (ST) oscillations indirectly mirror somewhat blood flow oscillations. Wavelets were used in [13,14] to show the compatibility of both methods at low frequencies (below the respiratory frequency). The relationship between the blood flow and ST during vasoconstriction and vasodilation provoked by skin local cooling or heating has been studied in [15] and analyzed in terms of the wavelet-based time-localized phase coherence [16]. Measurements carried out on the volar side of the arm [13,15] or on the palm surface of the distal phalanx of the finger [14,17] and, irrespective of certain anatomical features (high arteriolovenular anastomosis content in the distal parts of limbs), gave similar results. Despite the terminological differences (wavelet cross-correlation [14] or wavelet phase coherence [13,16]), these studies employed the same mathematical technique, which is based on wavelet decomposition providing a complex characteristic for two signals relationship.In this paper we compare the low-frequency pulsations of LDF and ST data series, collected simultaneously from distal phalanges of second and third fingers of 17 healthy volunteers. The significance of the correlation is estimated using surrogate data that has the same p.s.d. and the randomized phase [18]. Skin surface temperature oscillations are caused by blood flow pulsations in microvessels. Knowing the decay rate of temperature oscillations and the LDF-ST phase shift for each frequency, we can recover the blood flow pulsations using the ST series. A similar problem was considered in [19], where the photoplethysmography-measured blood flow was compared with the temperature field obtained with the infrared camera. However, application of photoplethyzmography to determine the functional state of the microcirculation is under discussion [20], while LDF is the most common technique. It is important to study whether blood flow variations measured by LDF can be recovered from temperature signals, especially in the frequency band of interest. The previous studies of the relations between the ST and LDF oscillations ignored the skin temperature and optical signal phase shift for various vascular tone regulatory components. We will show below that the ST variations can be recovered from the LDF signal and vice-versa.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the subjects and the measurement procedure, in Section 3 we give the mathematical background, showing the relation of the corresponding formulae in terms of Fourier and wavelet decompositions, and introduce the algorithms. Section 4 includes the experimental results and statistics obtained for all subjects. In Section 5 we estimate the effective depth of temperature wave production and recover the ST variations from the LDF signal. Section 6 summarizes our study.The simultaneous LDF and ST measurements were carried out for 17 healthy volunteers (7 male and 10 female) under controlled environmental (temperature 24°C and humidity 50%) conditions. The mean age of the subjects was 35±5. The subjects were sitting in a relaxed position. They were not permitted to drink coffee, and there were no smokers or ex-smokers in the group. All subjects gave their informed consent.LDF was measured using a laser Doppler monitor (Moor Instruments FloLAB Server, UK, VP-1 probe) with a near-infrared laser (wavelength 780nm) and probe optical surface, attached to the tissue pulp of the index finger. The probe design minimized interference from external light sources. A bandwidth of 22kHz was used, providing wide band measurement of red blood cell velocities, with easily discernible vasoconstrictor responses, and minimal damping of the pulsatile component of the LDF trace. LDF was measured in arbitrary perfusion units (p.u.). The sampling frequency was 40Hz.The temperature measurements were performed with a Microtest (FM Diagnostics, Russia) designed for recording temperature with a resolution 0.001K and sampling frequency 20Hz. An independent probe was used to control the environmental temperature.Both probes (LDF and ST) were attached to the skin surface of the distal phalanx of the second (LDF) and third (ST) fingers with double-sided adhesive discs, which avoided the disturbance of the blood supply of the skin that would arise with a clamp.All the subjects had 10min acclimatization period in the lab, and the duration of signal collecting was 20min. For the data analysis we preprocessed the data: resampled both data streams for the sampling frequency of 10 Hz (taking points in corresponding time without averaging) and removed the linear trend from the ST data (calculating linear fit for the original data), which occurred for some measurements in spite of the rather long adaptation period before the temperature series were taken.To illustrate the methodology of the frequency-by-frequency cross-correlation analysis, we use the typical data series of LDF and ST shown in Fig. 1. A cross-spectral analysis is required to estimate a correlation measure of the variations in different frequency bands.For a signal x(t) the energy distribution of oscillations over the frequency range is given by the p.s.d. Fxx(ν), which for a chaotic (but statistically stationary) signal is defined through the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function Rxx(τ) [21](1)Rxx(τ)=limT→∞1T∫0T(x(t)−x¯)(x(t+τ)−x¯)dt,(2)Fxx=∫0TRxx(τ)e−2πiντdτ,where T is the signal record duration. In practice, T is limited and the requirement T→∞ implies τ≪T, i.e. one can analyze frequencies ν≫1/T only.The p.s.d. (also called the Fourier spectrum) for the LDF and ST signals under discussion is shown by thin gray lines in Fig. 2. The peak near 1 Hz corresponding to the heartbeat frequency is significant in the LDF spectrum. An abrupt reduction in the ST fluctuation amplitude at frequencies above 0.5 Hz is caused by low thermal diffusivity of the skin, which acts as a low-frequency filter. The decay rate of temperature wave strongly increases with frequency and ST oscillations caused by the effect of the heartbeat and respiration on the blood flow completely vanish on skin surface. Recording of temperature fluctuations with the amplitude of about 0.0005°C is practically impossible due to the influence of the external thermal noise as well as the intrinsic noise. The limitation of the observation time leads to very indented spectra. Smooth spectra would be observed for T→∞, but under real conditions the observation time T≈20 min, which cannot be increased significantly. This hampers the detection of dominating oscillations in the low-frequency range.To identify correlations between two signals x(t) and y(t) (in our case these are LDF and ST), we calculate the cross-correlation function(3)Rxy(τ)=limT→∞1T∫0T(x(t)−x¯)(y(t+τ)−y¯)dt,and the corresponding cross-spectrum(4)Fxy=∫0TRxy(τ)e−2πiντdτ.In contrast to autocorrelation, the cross-correlation function is not an even function and its spectrum contains both real and imaginary parts.In Fig. 3, the thin lines show the absolute value and the phase of the LDF-ST cross-spectrum. The absolute value of the cross-spectrum Fxyhas the same structure as the auto-spectra Fxxand Fyyand does not contain new information. It is necessary to normalize the cross-spectrum to reveal the level of correlation of oscillations at separate frequencies. This function is called coherency [22] (or magnitude-squared coherence) and is defined as(5)Γxy(ν)=|Fxy(ν)|2Fxx(ν)Fyy(ν).However, the function Γxy(ν)=1 for any frequency ν, because it uses harmonic functions, which are defined for the whole time interval [0, T]. The correlation of two harmonic functions of the same frequency is certainly 1. In practice it is important to determine whether the phase shift of oscillations at the same frequency between two signals remains constant (are the two quasiperiodic signals synchronized or not?). That is the reason for application of different versions of the windowed Fourier transform, which can be interpreted as frequency filters to smooth the spectrum [23].The same result can be obtained by a transition from traditional Fourier to wavelet analysis, which is based on oscillating functions localized both in time and frequency spaces (for a textbook, see, e.g. [24]).We use below one of the most popular wavelets – the Morlet wavelet written in the form(6)ψ(t)=e2πite−t2/2σ2.The parameter σ defines the length of the analyzing function (the number of oscillations). For σ→∞ the function ψ(t) tends to the harmonic function and the wavelet transform approaches the Fourier transform.We define the continuous wavelet transform of the signal x(t) as(7)Wx(ν,τ)=ν∫−∞∞x(t)ψ*(ν(t−τ))dt,where * means the complex conjugation. The wavelet transform (7) of a one-dimensional signal gives a two-dimensional image on the time-frequency plane. Integrating the power over time gives the global wavelet spectrum(8)M(ν)=1T∫0T|W(ν,t)|2dt,which is the analogue of the Fourier spectrum.The wavelet spectrum (8) is a smoothed version of the Fourier spectrum and coincides with it for σ→∞. The wavelet spectra of LDF and ST data calculated for σ=2 are shown in Fig. 2 by thick lines. It is evident that the wavelet spectrum reveals the structure of the Fourier spectrum, dropping details, caused in part by noise and shortness of the data series.The wavelet cross-correlation, first introduced in [6] for solar data analysis, is a normalized wavelet cross-spectrum(9)Cxy(ν)=∫0TWx(ν,τ)Wy*(ν,τ)dτ∫0T|Wx(ν,τ)|2dτ∫0T|Wy(ν,τ)|2dτ.The absolute value of the complex function Cxy(ν) belongs to the interval [0,1], and characterizes the level of correlation of oscillations at the frequency ν. The phase(10)ϕ(ν)=tan−1ℑ(Cxy(ν))R(Cxy(ν))shows the mean phase difference of the corresponding pulsations.Fig. 4illustrates the behavior of the modulus of correlation function (9) calculated with the use of different wavelets, namely the wavelet (6) with σ=0.7, 1, 2, 10, 100 and ∞. For σ∼1 the curve is rather smooth and indicates the high correlation of LDF and temperature signals in the low-frequency band (ν<0.1 Hz). At high frequencies (ν>0.1 Hz) the correlation is weak. With the growth of σ the curve |Cxy(ν)| becomes more indented and increases, approaching the Fourier coherency Γxy=1, that is σ=∞.Thus, we see that the decrease of σ improves the statistics and reduces the spectral resolution, and we conclude that a small σ is appropriate for cross-correlation analysis. However the admissibility condition can be broken at σ<1. Below we analyze the correlation of the LDF and ST signals using the Morlet wavelet (6) with σ=1, which gives a compromise between the spectral and spatial resolution, convenient for the task under consideration.Unlike the modulus, the phase of Cxy(ν) is rather stable to the variation of the parameter σ. In the lower panel of Fig. 3, the phase behavior is shown only for two limiting cases, σ=1 and σ=∞. The phase for the Fourier transform (σ=∞) oscillates significantly (especially in the high-frequency range), but the average follows the curve obtained with σ=1.We remark again that considerable caution is necessary when interpreting the low-frequency part of the spectrum. At σ=1, for the lowest analyzed frequency of about 0.01 Hz the Morlet wavelet is only about five times shorter than the available data series. This means that the number of independent points for cross-correlation estimation becomes insufficient. Moreover, it is necessary to exclude the boundary region from consideration, since a part of the wavelet extends beyond the boundaries of the data series, which reduces the number of points.The significance of the correlation is verified by constructing the surrogate data in terms of the following algorithm [18]. We compute the Fourier transform and randomize the phases obtained. In order to get a real function (with no imaginary components) the phases were symmetrized before the inverse Fourier transform so that arg(f)=−arg(−f). The phase randomization is done independently of the LDF and ST signals. An example of surrogate data is shown in Fig. 5. We provide 70 pairs of surrogate data for each pair of experimental signals and calculate the averaged WCC shown in Fig. 4 together with the WCC for experimental data. The median value of the WCC for surrogate data for a signal of given length (20min) at the minimum frequency of interest is about 0.3 and decreases with frequency. The WCC of the experimental data reliably exceeds this value and indicates a significant correlation in the frequency range that corresponds to active mechanisms of blood flow regulation in microvessels (0.01–0.1Hz).Fig. 6gives examples of the absolute value of the WCC functions for 5 subjects examined. The presented charts, despite the considerable diversity in their behavior, have common features. At low frequencies a significant correlation (0.5 or more) is visible for almost all subjects. At high frequencies the correlation decreases, though appreciable decay occurs at different frequencies: subject 1 has the most extended range of correlation (up to about 0.3Hz), while subject 5 shows no correlation above 0.05 Hz and has a rather weak correlation at lower frequencies. One of the reasons for the general decrease of correlation at high frequencies is related to the properties of the skin, which acts as a low-frequency filter [14] (see also below Section 5). This results in fast decay of the ST spectrum: oscillations at frequencies above 0.5Hz are so weak that even the heart rate is not seen.A relatively high correlation is mainly observed in the low-frequency range without pronounced maxima. It is important to emphasize that the microcirculation regulation mechanisms are not provided by distinct variations at a fixed rate (in contrast to the pulse wave, which is associated with the heart rhythm). Thus, when discussing frequencies related to a certain regulation mechanism, one should consider the typical response time rather than the regular fluctuations. A relatively stable high correlation is observed for the frequencies corresponding to the endothelial mechanism. Note that ST measurements are most widely used today for diagnosing endothelial dysfunction [12,17].Despite these general patterns, the correlation function has its own features in each case. Some subjects have a high correlation in the frequency range associated with the myogenic mechanism (examples 1, 2 and 3). Examples with local maxima corresponding to several regulatory mechanisms are quite rare (example 4). Note that our sample collection includes the cases with generally low (example 5) and relatively high (examples 1 and 2) absolute values of the correlation function. This dispersion of the results is caused by the dependence of blood flow intensity on the large number of physiological factors, which are rather difficult to keep constant. In particular, the dispersion is caused by the morphological heterogeneity of skin microvessels and the variability of local, neurogenic and endothelial factors of blood flow regulation. In spite of the difference of WCC from subject to subject, the main properties are reproduced, namely, pulsations of ST and LDF records have high correlation in the frequency band 0.01–0.05Hz and are close to zero for frequencies higher than 0.2Hz.The median WCC function of LDF and ST signals over all data series (with median error) is shown in Fig. 7. For comparison, we show in the same figure the median correlation calculated for surrogate data. We conclude that the median values of the LDF and ST correlation are statistically larger than the correlation of surrogate data in the frequency range 0.01–0.1Hz (a significant excess is visible in the range 0.01–0.05Hz).The phase shift averaged over 17 subjects is presented in Fig. 8. In the low-frequency range there is a steady phase shift ϕ, which increases with frequency. So we observe that temperature pulsations follow the the blood flow oscillations. In the high frequency ranges (ν>0.1 Hz) the dispersion of the phase shift is rather large, which is caused by the small amplitude of ST pulsations and, as a consequence, by the low correlation. So, we are unable to draw any conclusions about the phase difference of pulsations at frequencies above ν=0.05 Hz marked in Fig. 8 by the vertical dashed line.The experimental results obtained here allow us to estimate the effective depth of temperature wave generation. The well-known solution of the 1D heat conduction equation with an harmonic oscillator at the origin describes a decaying wave(11)T(x,t)=T0e−αxcos(2πνt−αx),whereα=πν/χ, ν is the frequency of oscillations, t is the time, and χ is the tissue thermal diffusivity. The oscillations amplitude decays exponentially, and the phase shift increases with distance and frequency asxν. Fitting the low-frequency part (0.01<ν<0.05) of the curve ϕ(ν) in Fig. 8 by a root square function and using for the skin thermal diffusivity χ=(7±2)×10−8 m2/c [27], we obtain that the distance from the skin surface to the effective source of temperature oscillations is about 1.5–1.9mm. This estimation is consistent with the location of vessels, confirming the relevance of the correlation characteristics.Moreover, we can estimate the amplitude of temperature oscillations inside the tissue. For ν≈0.01Hz (endothelial range), this amplitude is of the order of 3δTe, where δTeis the amplitude of ST oscillations in the endothelial range. For ν≈0.1Hz the corresponding amplitude is about 35δTm(δTmis the amplitude of ST oscillations in the myogenic range). Assuming that the heat generated in peripheral tissues due to metabolic processes is negligible [25], we can suppose that temperature oscillations on the skin surface are mostly caused by vascular tone changes in the surface arterial network (vasomotion), which mirror the functional state of the microcirculation system. This estimation agrees with the physiological data. The integument consists of two mutually dependent layers, epidermis and dermis, which rest on a fatty subcutaneous layer. The thickness of the skin of the palms is 1.5–1.9mm, and the subcutaneous fat is 2–3mm thick [26]. Surface arteries supply blood to the skin (in the reticular dermis), and the flat network of major skin arteries is located at the dermis boundary in the subdermis. Temperature pulsations observed on the skin surface are caused by changes in heat transfer provided by the perfusion of blood, which has a higher temperature than the tissue, and the ST and LDF variations in the correlated frequency range should be related by formula (11). To check this suggestion, we first made the wavelet filtration for both the ST and LDF signals, using the inverse wavelet transform in the frequency band of interest (0.01<ν<0.1).(12)f(t)=1Cψ∫ν1ν2∫−∞∞W(ν,τ)ψ(ν(t−τ))νdνdτ,where(13)Cψ=12π∫−∞∞|ψˆ(ν)||ν|dν,andψˆ(ν)is the Fourier transform of the analyzing wavelet.As an example, we consider the LDF and ST signals presented in Fig. 1. The raw LDF and ST data are not correlated (see Table 1). After the inverse wavelet transform of the LDF and ST signals in the frequency band 0.1–0.01Hz, we obtain the filtered data (see Fig. 9a,b), which demonstrate a weak anti-correlation. Taking into account the decay rate and phase shift for each frequency (11), and using the inverse wavelet transform, we recover the temperature oscillations from the LDF signal (Fig. 9, c). The corresponding pairs of data series reveal a rather high correlation (0.73 and 0.79, see Table 1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
