@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of parametric estimation of head tissue conductivities using Electrical Impedance Tomography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Parametric estimation of scalp, skull, and brain conductivities is analyzed.Realistic head models including anisotropy are adopted.Convenient electrode pairs for the current injection are determined.The Maximum Likelihood Estimator is advisable in practical situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electrical Impedance Tomography,Cramér-Rao Bound,Maximum Likelihood Estimator,Electrical conductivity estimation,Skull anisotropy,Finite Element Method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study the theoretical performance of using Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) to measure the conductivity of the main tissues of the head. The governing equations are solved using the Finite Element Method for realistically shaped head models with isotropic and anisotropic electrical conductivities. We focus on the Electroencephalography (EEG) signal frequency range since EEG source localization is the assumed application. We obtain the Cramér-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) to find the minimum conductivity estimation error expected with EIT measurements. The more convenient electrode pairs selected for current injection from a typical EEG array are determined from the CRLB. Moreover, using simulated data, the Maximum Likelihood Estimator of the conductivity parameters is shown to be close to the CRLB for a relatively low number of measurements. The results support the idea of using EIT as a low-cost and practical tool for individually measure the conductivity of the head tissues, and to use them when solving the EEG source localization. Even when the conductivity of the soft tissues of the head is available from Diffusion Tensor Imaging, EIT can complement the electrical model with the estimation of the skull and scalp conductivities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electric models of the human head, as used in Electroencephalography (EEG) source localization, require an electrical conductivity map of the head. Usually, this map is built as a layered model, with each layer representing a different tissue. The shape of the layers is either assumed spherical, ellipsoidal, or obtained by segmenting Magnetic Resonance (MR) images. Then, the electrical conductivity values for each tissue are usually selected from existing studies [1–5]. However, there is a large variation in the values found in the literature, depending on the measurement method, and probably due to inter-subject variability [6]. The use of incorrect values in the head model could lead to erroneous solutions of the neural source estimation [7–9]. A possible solution to this problem is the use of Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) measurements from the subject under study to estimate the conductivity of the main tissues of the head. As EIT is portable and relatively cheap, this is an advantage over other methods such as MR (particularly, Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)) or Computed Tomography (CT) that could be used with the same purpose. Also, EIT can estimate the skull conductivity, which cannot be obtained from DTI. Most of the skull conductivity values found in the above mentioned literature are based on in vitro or in vivo measurements with a four electrode system. In EIT, the same electrodes and acquisition system of EEG could be used in combination with an electric current source to estimate in vivo the tissue conductivities.Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) on the head consists of injecting electrical currents on known points on the scalp and measuring the resulting electric potential distribution on the scalp to infer the electrical impedance map of the whole head volume. An inconvenience with EIT impedance mapping is that even when using an array with a large number of electrodes, the spatial resolution of the resulting map is quite low [10]. To overcome this, it is possible to combine the high spatial resolution of the MR segmentation in tissues, with the EIT technique to estimate the electrical conductivity of each layer [11,12]. In this way, parametric estimation tools are used to solve the EIT inverse problem (EIT IP), i.e. the construction of the conductivity map.The skull is highly resistive compared to the surrounding tissues, acting as an electrical shield between the scalp and the brain. It is mostly composed by a sandwich of two layers of compact bone with a layer of spongy bone in the middle [4]. Several models have been proposed for the skull adopting isotropic conductivities to each type of bone [13], a single homogeneous isotropic conductivity, localized but isotropic conductivities [14], or homogeneous but anisotropic models [9,13], where the tangential conductivity is higher than the radial (or transversal) one. The relevance of considering the skull anisotropy has also been analyzed [9]. Several studies measured the skull conductivity and its anisotropy ratio [1,2,15,16]. Existing reports show skull conductivity values ranging from 0.04S/m to 0.004S/m [1,2,4,16] (and even some values outside this range have been discussed). The radial:tangential anisotropy ratio was initially supposed to be 1:10 [1], but recent studies suggest that it is lower, ranging from 1:1.6 to 1:6 [3,9] considering the 1:10 ratio as an upper limit. Our hypothesis is that the ratio is still uncertain and a wide range of anisotropic conductivity ratios (from 1:1 to 1:10) is evaluated.The scalp is the first compartment that the current passes through, playing a major role in EIT [4]. It can also be modeled as inhomogeneous because it has zones with muscles, fat and different skin thickness. Homogeneous but anisotropic models with transversal to tangential ratio of 1:1.5 have been also used [8]. As the conductivity of this tissue is higher than the skull's, its relative inhomogeneities are usually neglected and a single isotropic conductivity is assigned to this layer. This value is also uncertain since only few studies have been performed to measure it [4]. So, EIT can also be applied to obtain a scalp conductivity estimate.The innermost cavity is the most complex as it includes cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), gray matter, and white matter. Assigning to it a single conductivity value is nowadays an oversimplification of the problem and recent studies also highlight the relevance of considering anisotropy within the white matter [8,9,17]. The diffusion of water over the tissues (MR-DTI) can be used to build an anisotropic conductivity map of the CSF, white and gray matter, by means of a linear transform of each tensor eigenvalue [18]. Averaged conductivity distributions can be used if the patient specific resonance is not available [19].We assess the performance of using EIT to estimate the conductivity values of the scalp, skull, and brain. For the first two tissues we analyze homogeneous isotropic and anisotropic conductivities, whereas for the brain, we assign a unique isotopic value or a realistic inhomogeneous and anisotropic map based on a DTI atlas. We use this to analyze the influence of the a priori knowledge of the tensorial map of the brain conductivity (that could be obtained from DTI) in the EIT parametric estimation. The Cramér-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) is computed for the unknown parameters, allowing us to quantify the performance of the method independently of the specific algorithm used to estimate the conductivity values, and to detect convenient electrode pairs for the current injection. This builds upon our preliminary study [20], where we analyzed convenient pairs using a simple spherical head model with a particular estimation algorithm. In contrast to other studies [11,12], in this work we use detailed realistic head models including the estimation of the anisotropic components of the tissue conductivities. To the best of our knowledge, our parametric EIT estimation analysis introduces accounting for anisotropic components of the scalp and skull conductivity tensors. Finally, we compute the Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE) to solve the EIT IP using simulated signals with additive noise and we show that its performance is close to the bound even for a limited number of measurements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results of this work strengthen the idea of using EIT as a routine together with EEG in all cases where EEG source localization is going to be studied. Also functional EIT and Magnetoencephalography may take advantage of using this combination of EIT and MR imaging to obtain improved impedance models of the head. We also showed that the MLE might be used to estimate the conductivities with a practical number of independent measurements.As the skull conductivity value, or values assigned to homogeneous or inhomogeneous models remain undefined, EIT appears as a low cost and easy to implement method to obtain these parameters for each particular subject. The combination with DTI not only improves the performance of EIT, but also completes the conductivity model of the head providing the conductivity of the skull, which cannot be obtained from DTI. In functional EIT the brain function is studied by detecting impedance changes due to increased oxygen consumption in active neurons [31]. In this case the frequency of the injected current can be arbitrarily chosen and for high frequencies the characterization of the tissues could require more parameters, such as the electrical permittivity. EIT can also be applied to head models that require the estimation of a larger number of parameters, such as models with more layers.The use of better skull models, e.g. including its sutures or local variations, is planned as future work. In the case of local variations the use of several electrode pairs would be necessary and the use of the CRLB to choose the most convenient pairs may lead to important savings in measurement time.