@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic detection of the expiratory and inspiratory phases in newborn cry signals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper presents a segmentation system of newborn cry signals based on Hidden Markov Models.The proposed system is able to detect the audible expiratory and inspiratory parts from other acoustic activities.Experimental results show the effect of certain parameters on the performance of the proposed system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
HMM,Automatic segmentation,Newborn cry signals,Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients,Viterbi algorithm,Baum Welch algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An analysis of newborn cry signals, either for the early diagnosis of neonatal health problems or to determine the category of a cry (e.g., pain, discomfort, birth cry, and fear), requires a primary and preliminary preprocessing step to quantify the important expiratory and inspiratory parts of the audio recordings of newborn cries. Data typically contain clean cries interspersed with sections of other sounds (generally, the sounds of speech, noise, or medical equipment) or silence. The purpose of signal segmentation is to differentiate the important acoustic parts of the cry recordings from the unimportant acoustic activities that compose the audio signals. This paper reports on our research to establish an automatic segmentation system for newborn cry recordings based on Hidden Markov Models using the HTK (Hidden Markov Model Toolkit). The system presented in this report is able to detect the two basic constituents of a cry, which are the audible expiratory and inspiratory parts, using a two-stage recognition architecture. The system is trained and tested on a real database collected from normal and pathological newborns. The experimental results indicate that the system yields accuracies of up to 83.79%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With early newborn screening, a serious illness can be diagnosed such that treatment can begin before severe problems appear, and in certain cases, sudden mortality or disability can be prevented. Clearly, the presence of disease must be detected at an early stage. Systematic screening combined with better diagnostic tools is therefore required to meet future medical challenges, with the aim of supporting clinical decision-making and improving the effectiveness of treatment [1]. These tools have evolved considerably in recent years in terms of improving screening and symptom evaluation, and the newborn cry signal has been the object of strong research interest for the past three decades.Researchers have amassed enough evidence to conclude that a cry signal contains relevant information on the psychological and physiological condition of the newborn, formal relationships have been established between the acoustic features extracted from the cries and the health problems of the child [2–5]. Various studies are currently under way to devise a tool that analyzes cries automatically, to diagnose neonatal pathologies [6–8].We are involved in the design of an automatic system for early diagnosis, called the Newborn Cry-based Diagnostic System (NCDS), which can detect certain pathologies in newborns at an early stage. The implementation of this system requires a database containing hundreds of cry signals.The overwhelming problem that arises when working with such a database is the diversity of acoustic activities that compose the audio recordings, such as background noise, speech, the sound of medical equipment and silence. Such diversity could harm the analysis process, as the presence of any acoustic component other than the cry itself could result in the misclassification of pathologies by reducing the NCDS system performance. This is because the NCDS would decode every segment of the recording signal, whether it is part of a cry or not. In this case, unwanted segment insertion in essential crying segments would lengthen the process of classification unnecessarily and leave the system prone to error. An important subtask of the NCDS is the manipulation of the newborn cry sound, and what is needed to perform this subtask is a segmentation system. Until now, few works have been carried out in this area. In this paper, we propose an automatic segmentation module designed to isolate the audible expiration and inspiration parts of cry sounds to serve as a preprocessing step of our NCDS.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Related work is presented in Section 2. The HMM and the HTK are reviewed briefly in Section 3. The training corpus and the testing corpus are described in Section 4. In Section 5, the architecture of the proposed system is presented, and details of the individual blocks are described in five subsections. Section 6 contains the implementation of the system, the obtained results, and the discussion. Finally our conclusions are presented in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper presents our preliminary results in our ongoing work to develop a tool for the automatic segmentation of newborn cry signals designed to detect the audible expiratory and inspiratory components of the newborn cry.The authors have demonstrated the effect of some parameters on the performance of the proposed segmentation system. The difficult issues inherent in the manual labeling process are somewhat alleviated in the automated procedure. The system has two main stages, which are feature extraction and training and recognition, which both are performed using the HTK.This research has revealed that the performance of our automatic newborn cry segmentation system is enhanced by making a number of design improvements:•Use of an HMM topology with a larger number of states to obtain a higher accuracy rate.Use of multiple mixtures of Gaussian components for a more robust segmentation process.Use of a larger number of filter banks and MFCC parameters to achieve better trajectory modeling.Consideration of the impact of window size.We applied several parameter variations to find the optimal configuration for our segmentation system. By comparing the experimental sets, we found that the best system performance is achieved using the following set of parameters: an MFCC feature vectors with 39 parameters, and an HMM of window size of 50ms and 7 states. We conclude that the current system's performance can be considered satisfactory. The automatic segmentation system is convenient to operate and gives consistent results. In general, it could be used to create a starting point for further manual refinement if desired or a post-processing stage. The system has been used on recordings of varying types of content with an acceptable degree of success.Our system gives an accuracy of more than 83%, however, it has some limitations owing to a lack of training data. Consequently, additional manually segmented data need to be added to the training corpus, which should improve the accuracy rate of the system. In the future, its applicability and performance are expected to continue to grow. Based on the results we have obtained, future work can be aimed at improving the system's segmentation performance, which could be achieved by better training of some unit models and adding some post-processing techniques to the system. Many more parameters should be incorporated in any future study to address the problematic issues that were noted in this study.The tool that we have developed is also part of the effort to develop our automatic Newborn Cry-based Diagnostic System (NCDS). It will serve as the front-end processing unit for the NCDS to improve this system's recognition performance.