@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Energy efficient EEG sensing and transmission for wireless body area networks: A blind compressed sensing approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The problem is to recover multi-channel EEG signals from partial undersampling.Prior techniques used fixed basis for sparsifying the signals, followed by Compressed Sensing based Recovery.In this work, we proposed to learn the sparsifying basis in an adaptive fashion using the Blind Compressed Sensing framework.To improve the results even further, a low-rank penalty is imposed along with sparsity constraints.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The problem of recovering multi-channel EEG signals from their randomly under-sampled measurements is addressed. The objective is to reduce the energy consumed by sensing, processing and transmission in an EEG wireless body area network. Our work is based on the Blind Compressed Sensing (BCS) framework, however instead of exploiting only the sparsity of the multi-channel ensemble in a learned basis, we also make use of the ensembles’ approximate rank deficiency. Our proposed formulation requires solving new optimization problems. To solve these problems, we derive algorithms based on the Split Bregman approach. The resulting recovery results are considerably better than those of previous techniques, in terms of the quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years there has been a growing interest in tele-monitoring the health conditions of the elderly growing population. Some of these people require constant medical attention and are thus dependent on others, e.g. on paramedics. Employing paramedics for personal care however is expensive and can be out of reach for the majority of populations in most countries.These issues could be overcome by monitoring the health signals from a remote location. Imagine a scenario where the patient wears some sensor nodes that acquire his/her biomedical signals and these signals are transmitted instantaneously to a remote facility where the signals are monitored and analysed. Current systems for acquiring some common signals like EEG and ECG are however wired, cumbersome and need trained personnel to use them. We cannot expect the elderly population to undergo such training. For them, the acquisition devices must be simple, portable and wireless.We envisage a system whereby wireless sensor nodes are used to collect the data and transmit them wirelessly. As the sensor nodes do not have the computational capability to compress the signals, the sampled signals are transmitted to a local smartphone (and not directly to a remote destination). This is because the transmission to a remote location wirelessly would consume a lot of power. The smartphone would process the collected data, compress them and transmit them to the remote medical facility for further analysis. Today's smartphones are packed with powerful processors and can easily carry out the aforesaid tasks.The main constraint in such a wireless body area network (WBAN) is the energy consumption at the sensor nodes. Since the desired device is a portable wireless system, the battery would be small. Therefore the sensor should be designed such that the battery lasts as long as possible. There are three power sinks in a WBAN—sensing, processing and transmission. The energy required for transmission is the highest; therefore every effort needs to be made to reduce the transmission cost. One can save the transmission energy by compressing the signal. However, modern compression techniques require considerable processing power; the portable sensor nodes are not endowed with such capabilities and hence such compression techniques cannot be implemented directly at the sensor nodes.To overcome this issue, prior studies have proposed Compressed Sensing (CS) based compression techniques [1–5]. Here the signal (at the sensor node) is first compressed by projecting it onto a lower dimension by a random projection matrix. This is a simple operation (matrix vector product) and can be implemented on a DSP chip. The resulting compressed signal is then transmitted (to a local smartphone in our framework) where the original signal is recovered from the compressed one via CS recovery techniques. The assumption is that, the computational power at the receiving point (in our case the smartphone) is not a bottleneck.Most studies that address the measurement of biomedical signals over WBANs, concentrated on EEG signals. It is known that EEG signals are important health indicators for stroke and trauma; recent studies also indicate that EEG signals can be used for studying dementia and Alzheimer disease. Therefore the monitoring of these signals is of utmost importance. In this work, we concentrate on the acquisition aspects of EEG signals. Our work however is general enough to be applicable for any other multi-channel signal acquisition.The initial studies [1–5] on EEG signal transmission over WBANs did not account for inter-channel correlations. The EEG signals are acquired by 32, 64 or more probes. The signals acquired by these channels are correlated with each other. Using the correlation information to recover the signal ensemble from their compressive measurements yields better results, as shown in [6]. In [7], it is shown that removing the correlation between the different channels by subtracting the signal average yields a sparse representation of the signal, which in turn leads to better compression. However such a scheme is not energy efficient as considerable power is consumed in inter-node communication during the computation of the signal average. The study in [8] addresses a very specific problem in stroke monitoring; it is shown that in order to detect strokes one does not need to transmit the full EEG signal ensemble, rather a few features are extracted (with minimal computation) from a few EEG channels and only those features are transmitted for further analysis. This work however does not apply in general; moreover medical practitioners are trained and accustomed to see the full EEG signal rather than some abstract features.The aforesaid studies [1–8] have only concentrated on reducing the transmission energy. They did not attempt to reduce the sensing or processing energy. Reducing the sensing energy has so far been only addressed in [9]. In [9], it is argued that the only way to reduce the sensing energy is to acquire a smaller number of samples. These should be acquired by under-sampling each channel in a random sampling fashion. This does not only reduce the sampling power consumption but also the processing energy—as the signals are under-sampled they are automatically compressed, no energy needs to be spent on matrix-vector products as required by prior techniques [1–8]. However, for the case of random under-sampling, standard CS approaches do not yield very good results. In [9] an alternate recovery approach based on the theory of low-rank completion is proposed.There are a few subsequent (unpublished) works by the authors of this paper [10–12]. In [10], it is shown how to model intra-channel and inter-channel correlations within the Kronecker Compressed Sensing (KCS) framework to recover EEG signals from their under-sampled measurements. In [11], it is shown how sparsity based techniques could be combined with low-rank matrix completion techniques to improve EEG signal recovery. In [12], it is shown how dictionary learning techniques could be combined with sparsity based techniques to address the said problem. The aforesaid work [12] is just a precursor to this paper.The standard CS approach exploits the sparsity of the signal represented in a transform domain in order to recover it from its compressed measurements; e.g. EEG signals have sparse representations in the wavelets, DCT, Gabor transform domains. However, such transforms do not yield very good results for randomly under-sampled EEG signals. In [9–12], it is pointed out that CS requires the measurement and the sparsifying basis to satisfy the incoherence condition; a failure to do so causes poor recovery. In [12], it is shown that, following the recently proposed idea of Blind Compressed Sensing (BCS) [13], it is possible to achieve better recovery results by learning the sparsity basis. Our current work is an extension of [12]—here we propose more sophisticated models to achieve better reconstruction by combining BCS with low-rank recovery methods [9].The rest of the paper is organised into several sections. CS and BCS are briefly introduced in the next section. Our proposed method is described in detail in Section 3. The optimization algorithms required for solving our problem are derived in Section 4. The experimental results are shown in Section 5. The conclusions of our work are discussed in Section 6.Compressed Sensing is concerned with the problem of solving an under-determined system of linear equations when the solution is known to be sparse. Practical systems are always corrupted by noise. Therefore in practice, CS studies the solution of the following problem:(1)ym×1=Am×nxn×1+ηm×1,m<nandη∼N(0,1)Here the solution x is known to be k-sparse, i.e. has only k non-zero values and the rest are all zeroes. CS solves (1) with a very high probability via l1-norm minimization:(2)minxy−Ax22+λx1For l1-minimization to succeed, the number of measurements (m) should bem=Cklogn/k[14].Practical signals like EEG are never sparse, but have a sparse representation in the transform domain, e.g. EEG is sparse in a wavelet, DCT or Gabor basis. When the transform is orthogonal or tight-frame, the signal and its transform domain representation can be succinctly represented via the analysis-synthesis pair:(3a)analysis:α=Wx(3b)synthesis:x=WTαhere α is the sparse transform domain coefficient vector and W is the sparsifying transform.When EEG signals are compressed, the measurement operator A is a random matrix (in most cases a sparse binary ensemble); in the case that the EEG signals are undersampled, A constitutes a Dirac sampling operator. The compressed/under-sampled signals are recovered by exploiting their transform domain sparsity by solving:(4)minαy−AWTα22+λα1Recovering the signal from the transform coefficients is trivial; one needs to apply the synthesis equation (3b).So far, we have discussed the single measurement vector problem. In EEG and for some other biomedical signals (e.g. ECG), the data are acquired over multiple channels. In such cases, the data acquisition can be expressed as:(5)yc=Acxc+ηchere c denotes the cth channel and there are C channels in all. In a more compact fashion, (5) can be represented in the multiple measurement vector (MMV) form as follows,(6)vec(Y)=Avec(X)+vec(N)here Y, X and N are formed by stacking the yc, xcand ηc's as columns, respectively; A is the block diagonal matrix formed with Ac's along the blocks.Blind Compressed Sensing (BCS) follows from previous studies in dictionary learning [14–17]. Dictionary learning claims that, when the sparsifying dictionary is learnt from the data, better reconstruction results are achieved than those obtained using fixed transforms like wavelet or DCT. However, dictionary learning is an offline technique, i.e. the sparsifying dictionary is first learnt from examples (training data), and the learned dictionary is later used for signal recovery. BCS on the other hand is an online method, i.e. BCS simultaneously learns the dictionary and recovers the signal. It assumes that the signal (X) is sparse in a learned dictionary D, i.e.(7)X=DZwhere Z is the sparse coefficient matrix.BCS estimates both D and Z via the following optimization:(8)minD,Zvec(Y)−Avec(DZ)22+λ1Z1+λ2DF2This is a non-convex problem since it is bilinear in the variables D and Z.In [12] a simple extension to this basic BCS framework is proposed. Therein it is argued that since the EEG channels are correlated, they should have a common sparsity signature across all channels, i.e. in all the channels the coefficients will be non-zero at the same positions. This in turn would lead to a row-sparse Z. Therefore instead of employing a simple l1-norm to promote sparsity, a mixed l2,1-norm penalty was imposed on Z to obtain a row-sparse solution.(9)minD,Zvec(Y)−Avec(DZ)22+λ1Z2,1+λ2DF2

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
