@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Retinal image registration using topological vascular tree segmentation and bifurcation structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a new retinal image segmentation approach using topological vascular tree.We propose a registration approach using bifurcation structure.We outperform conventional retinal image segmentation and registration approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Retinal image,Image registration,Image segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new retinal image segmentation and registration approaches. The contribution of this paper is two-fold. First, the conventional vessel-tracking methods use local sequential searching, which can be easily trapped by local intensity discontinuity or vessel rupture. The proposed method uses global graph-based decision that can segment the topological vascular tree with 1-pixel width and fully connection from retinal images. Staring from initial multi-scale ridge segmentation, the disconnected vessels are retrospectively connected and then spurious ridges are removed using a shortest path algorithm on a specially defined graph. The hypothesis testing is defined in terms of probability of pixel belong to foreground and background, which enables that the false detections could be removed. Second, the conventional point-matching methods largely depend on the branching angles of single bifurcation point. The feature correspondence across two images may not be unique due to the similar angle values. In view of this, structure-matching registration is favored. The bifurcation structure is composed of a master bifurcation point and its three connected neighboring pixels or vessel segments. The characteristic vector of each bifurcation structure consists of the normalized branching angle and length, which is fairly robust to be against translation, rotation, scaling, and even modest distortion. The experimental results are presented to demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Retinal image analysis is an intense field of research and development in the context of biomedical imaging analysis and computer-assisted diagnosis, due to its capability of automated localization and delineation of structures of interest [1]. This paper studies two fundamental challenges of retinal image analysis: segmentation and registration. Examination of blood vessels in the eye allows detection of eye diseases such as glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy [2]. Image registration is the process of establishing pixel-to-pixel correspondence between two images of the same scene [3]. Retinal image registration is challenging due to the difficulties of modality-varying and time-varying intensities of retinal images.Retinal vasculature is instrumental in diagnosis and treatment of diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and arteriosclerosis. For example, ophthalmologists examine the deterioration of diabetes by observing the changes in retinal vessels, such as curvature, width, and the presence of abnormal ruptures. As manual vessel labeling is tedious, the automatic detection and analysis of vasculature becomes a promising tool in screening of retinopathy. In this paper, a retrospective correction approach to obtain connected vessel segmentation is proposed. Staring from initial multi-scale ridge segmentation, the proposed approach retrospectively connects the disconnected vessels and removes spurious regions using a shortest path algorithm on a specially defined graph. Unlike the conventional vessel-tracking approaches, our approach is based on a global graph-based decision.There are several challenges in retinal image registration. The first difficulty refers to multimodal registration which means medical imaging with different modalities, such as fluoroscein angiography, indocyanine green angiography, and red-free. The second is temporal registration of images taken at different times. In view of this, this paper proposes a new structural feature for feature-based retinal image registration. Different from point-matching techniques, the proposed method is a structure-matching approach. The bifurcation structure is composed of a master bifurcation point and its three connected neighbors. The characteristic vector of each bifurcation structure consists of the normalized branching angle and length. It is invariant against translation, rotation, scaling, and even modest distortion. Further analysis and simulation demonstrate that it can greatly reduce the ill-posed nature of the matching process.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a brief overview of related works in the area of retinal image segmentation and image registration is presented. Then, a topological vascular tree segmentation method is proposed in Section 3. The feature-based registration algorithm using the proposed bifurcation structure is developed and analyzed in Section 4. Experimental results are reported in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has proposed a new retinal image segmentation approach and a new image registration approach. First, an image segmentation approach is proposed using bifurcation structure-matching, which is composed of a master bifurcation point and its three connected neighbors. The simplicity and efficiency of the proposed method make readily to be applied alone or incorporated with other existing methods to formulate a hybrid or hierarchy scheme. Second, a feature-based retinal image registration approach has been proposed in this paper. The proposed approach exploits a shortest path algorithm to produce the topological vascular tree with 1-pixel width and fully-connection. Furthermore, the proposed approach exploits the single-source shortest path algorithm that searches the good paths for all ridges to connect the isolated ridge, which enables that the false detection could be removed via hypothesis testing.