@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Denoising of multichannel MCG data by the combination of EEMD and ICA and its effect on the pseudo current density maps

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The combination of EEMD and ICA proposed and used for multichannel MCG signal denoising.Reduces the computational complexity associated with EEMD alone and effectively enhances the signal quality.The effect of ICA alone, wICA, and EEMD-ICA on the magnetic field map and pseudo current density maps is investigated.The EEMD-ICA combination yield robust source estimate on the PCD map.The EEMD-ICA can be applied to beat-to-beat analysis of MCG signals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Preprocessing,Empirical mode decomposition,Intrinsic mode functions,Wavelet-independent component analysis,Magnetic field map,Pseudo current density map,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The signal preprocessing is prerequisite for reduction of noise and for better estimation of sources from the measured field distribution of multichannel data, since different measurement channels may be contaminated by different types of artifacts and noise. Toward this, we use a combination of independent component analysis (ICA) and ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD) to denoise the multichannel magnetocardiography (MCG) data. In this technique, MCG time series data is first subjected to ICA to obtain the statistically independent components (ICs) and subsequently the EEMD-interval threshold based denoising is applied to the ICs prior to the reconstruction of the signal. We compare the results obtained from EEMD-ICA with those obtained using the conventional ICA alone and also using the wavelet enhanced ICA (wICA). We illustrate the effect of these denoising techniques on the pseudo current density (PCD) maps, which aid in visualizing the source location. The results obtained from the EEMD-ICA are seen to be decidedly superior compared to those obtained by ICA alone and wICA methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Magnetocardiography (MCG) is a non-contact and non-invasive technique [1,2] to study the electrophysiology of the human heart and provides information complimentary to the conventionally used electrocardiography (ECG). MCG measures the magnetic field associated with the electrical activity of the heart using highly sensitive superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs). The measured MCG signals are generally contaminated by different types of parasitic noise such as baseline wander, powerline interference and artifacts like the subject's breathing, movement, etc., that distort and impair the quality of the signal. To have a clinically useful data, these artifacts need to be eliminated at the signal preprocessing stage; this stage plays a crucial role in the improvement of signal-to-noise ratio and contributes to increasing the reliability in the estimate of the electro-physiological source localization through inverse computation. In this context of preprocessing, various filtering methods [3] and signal preprocessing tools such as wavelet [4] are often used for eliminating the artifacts. Recently, the empirical mode decomposition (EMD) [5] has been proposed for the purpose of signal denoising [6]. However, the EMD is prone to mode mixing [7] which could be mitigated by another noise-assisted data analysis method, called the ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD) [7]. The application of the EEMD method in the context of ECG signal denoising has been reported [8] and is based on the reconstruction of the signal of interest from the partial sum of selected intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). In an earlier work [9], we applied the threshold based EEMD method to denoise the MCG signal corresponding to a single channel MCG measurement. Although the EEMD method was shown to be better than the wavelet based method for signal denoising, the cost of computation is significantly higher even for handling single channel data; the computational burden increases further when the number of channels to be denoised is increased. The independent component analysis (ICA) [10–12] is another widely used method for the elimination of artifacts in the case of multichannel data with a large number of channels [13]. However, ICA, by itself is not adequate to suppress the artifacts completely, and hence combination of wavelet and ICA (wICA) [14] and also EMD and ICA (EMD-ICA) [15] have been proposed to enhance the quality of the reconstructed signal. In the context of EEG, the artifact removal using wICA has been reported [14,16–18] for the multichannel data.As is well known, a limitation of the wavelet based method is that it requires a set of predefined basis functions to decompose the signal and also that it cannot be applied to nonlinear signals. Further, it fails to account for local variations of the oscillation [19] during the process of decomposition. The limitation of the EMD based method is that the IMFs suffer from mode mixing. The EEMD overcomes the above limitations and the combination of EEMD-ICA achieve a significant enhancement in the quality of the denoised signals compared to that of ICA alone. The use of EEMD-ICA is shown to have the additional advantage of reduced computational burden when applied to the multichannel data with a large number of channels. We compare the results obtained by the EEMD-ICA with those obtained by the wICA method [16]. In the present work, we use the EEMD denoising method [9] as an intermediate step to denoise only the independent components that contain cardiac features but still corrupted by noise (and not for denoising of each individual channel data). We compare the efficacies of signal denoising by the above techniques on the construction of pseudo current density (PCD) maps [20,21] which represent the actual 3D current distribution in 2D maps and which provide empirical source estimates in the form of underlying electric currents.This paper is organized as follows: the EEMD and ICA methods that are routinely used for signal decomposition and denoising are briefly discussed in Section 2. The application of EEMD-ICA to the experimentally measured MCG data and the influence of noise and the signals denoised using the aforesaid denoising techniques on the pseudo current density maps is discussed in Section 3. Finally, the conclusions are presented in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have used a combination of EEMD and ICA methods to denoise the multichannel MCG data and have compared the results with those obtained by the conventional stand alone ICA and also the wavelet enhanced ICA (wICA) artifact suppression methods. We have illustrated the use of the EEMD-ICA technique in the enhancement of the signal quality of denoised signal, for the experimentally measured multichannel MCG data. We note that the EEMD-ICA technique is superior for suppressing the artifacts and enhancing the signal quality when compared to the stand alone ICA and the wICA methods. Further, the effect of signal denoising on the construction of PCD maps was investigated and it was found that the PCD maps constructed from the signals denoised by the EEMD-ICA method yielded a clearer and well resolved source estimate when compared to the ICA alone and wICA methods. Also, the effect of denoising techniques on the solution of the inverse problem was investigated. In the context of multichannel data with a large number of channels, EEMD-ICA method also has the advantage of lower computational burden compared to that for the stand alone EEMD by requiring application of EEMD to each independent component instead of each channel. The EEMD-ICA can be used for the analysis of beat-to-beat cardiac data to detect the abnormal changes from one beat to the other without requiring the conventional averaging techniques to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. Although the guidance of periodic cardiac feature helps in identifying non-artifact independent components by visual inspection, a future consideration will be taken into account for this limitation of visual inspection to identify artifacts and non-artifacts. Also, study of combination of multivariate EEMD [32] and ICA for denoising multichannel MCG data is in preparation.