@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Online detector of movement intention based on EEG—Application in tremor patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An EEG system that anticipates voluntary movements of tremor patients is presented.The system will be part of a multimodal Human–Robot Interface to cancel action tremor.More than 50% of the movements were anticipated with 1.4 (SD = 0.4) false detections/min.Adaptive vs. fixed designs are compared for the system function along different days.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Event-related desynchronization (ERD),Electroencephalography (EEG),Voluntary movement,Tremor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Patients with tremor can benefit from wearable robots managing their tremor during daily living. To achieve this, the interfaces controlling such robotic systems must be able to estimate the user's intention to move and to distinguish it from the undesired tremor. In this context, analysis of electroencephalographic activity is of special interest, since it provides information on the planning and execution of voluntary movements. This paper proposes an adaptive and asynchronous EEG-based system for online detection of the intention to move in patients with tremor. An experimental protocol with separated self-paced wrist extensions was used to test the ability of the system to detect the intervals preceding voluntary movements. Six healthy subjects and four essential tremor patients took part in the experiments. The system predicted 60±10% of the movements with the control subjects and 42±27% of the movements with the patients. The ratio of false detections was low in both cases (1.5±0.1 and 1.4±0.5 false activations per minute with the controls and patients, respectively). The prediction period with which the movements were detected was higher than in previous similar studies (1.06±1.02s for the controls and 1.01±0.99s with the patients). Additionally, an adaptive and fixed design were compared, and it was the adaptive design that had a higher number of movement detections. The system is expected to lead to further development of more natural interfaces between the assistive devices and the patients wearing them.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electroencephalography (EEG) systems assisting patients with motor disabilities have achieved relevant advances in human–machine interfaces during the last decade [1–4]. EEG measures the cortical activity directly related to movement intention and motor awareness [5]. Therefore, its integration with other sensor modalities that track actual human movements (like electromyography (EMG) and Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs)) makes it possible to characterise a volitional movement from its planning to its execution [6]. This is desired in systems controlling neuroprosthetic (NP) or neurorobotic (NR) devices that aim to assist patients with motor disabilities as naturally as possible, i.e. reducing the impact of the assistive technology.The application of such natural interfaces improves human–machine communication by encouraging user's involvement [7,8]. This will eventually lead to better recovery of the lost functionality in the affected limb. A natural human–robot interface must meet three objectives: (1) the system must reliably distinguish the user's intentions to move from the periods of non-intended activity (when the robot is in an idle state), (2) it must react with minimum latency with respect to the user's intentions to move [8], and (3) the assistive technology must rely on the biosignals that appear when the user performs an action in a normal way, i.e. the user does not need to concentrate on artificial mental strategies to control the device.Here we present an Online EEG-based Detector of the Intention to Move (ODIM). This system distinguishes resting states from intervals preceding the execution of upper-limb movements in patients suffering from tremor. It is intended to be integrated in a multimodal Human–Robot Interface (mHRI) that provides the EMG/IMU-based systems with information on the patient's movement intention [6]. This application helps to meet the aforementioned requirements of a natural interface. First, given that EEG holds information on the patient's intentions to move, it enables the IMU/EMG-based movement tracking systems to detect voluntary actions. Besides, providing the IMU/EMG systems with predictive information on voluntary action is useful to detect movement onset with short delay (this can be complicated if tremor is present before the movement begins). Finally, the ODIM proposed here is based only on the EEG patterns present before a subject self-initiates a movement with the upper-limb. Therefore, learning artificial mental strategies to command the interface is not required.The integration of EEG in such a mHRI is hence justified. Nevertheless, the EEG-based system must demonstrate its ability to anticipate intended actions and also its robustness against false activations during long periods of non-activity. Additionally, the system must demonstrate its suitability for tremor patients. The EEG movement-related patterns in the most typical tremor-related pathologies may be somewhat different to those observed in healthy subjects [9–12].Two EEG patterns are suitable for movement intention detection. The Bereitschaftspotential (BP) refers to a reduction of DC signal amplitude starting about 2s before the onset of the voluntary movement. The BP presents a steeper decay 400ms before the movement starts, known as “late BP” [13]. The Event Related Desynchronisation (ERD) over the sensorimotor cortex refers to the decrease of EEG signal power in the contralateral alpha and lower-beta rhythms starting around 2s before the onset of voluntary movements [14–16]. Although both EEG processes appear approximately 2s before the onset of voluntary movements, using the BP to detect the intention to move presents an important drawback: the early part of the BP (until 400ms before the movement starts) presents small amplitudes (2–3μV) [17], barely detectable in a single-trial analysis. Therefore, robust online single-trial detection of the BP relies on “late-BP” detection. This makes it difficult to predict the onset of the movements using the BP. ERD, on the other hand, overcomes this problem since the switch between the synchronised and the desynchronised states is faster and more pronounced [17,18].Several previous works have dealt with the problem of detecting the intention to move [19,17,20,21]. On the one hand, [19] and [21] use the BP to locate the onsets of voluntary movements performed with the ankle and the arm, respectively. A high percentage of movements is detected, although no anticipation is achieved due to the characteristics of the BP. On the other hand, Bai et al. [17] use subject-specific ERD-patterns to detect the intention to move in healthy subjects. High prediction periods (0.62±0.25s) are obtained with an average precision of 75±10%, but a small number of movements is detected with most subjects analyzed (less than 50% of the movements are detected with the best subject). Importantly, most of these studies provide results of paradigms in which rest intervals preceding voluntary actions last on average5˜s, thus reducing the chances of the systems to generate false detections.Here, the ODIM is tested with an asynchronous and continuously validated paradigm on 6 healthy subjects and 4 patients with Essential Tremor (ET), the most common tremor-related neurological disease [22]. It achieves better performance than previous studies in terms of number of detections and specificity, and it does it with an experimental paradigm with long (>15s) intervals of resting condition, thus ensuring a rigorous evaluation of the specificity of the system. Additionally, the adaptive design taking advantage of the synchronised acquisition of EEG and IMU information is compared with non-adaptive alternatives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
