@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cirrhosis classification based on MRI with duplicative-feature support vector machine (DFSVM)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new CAD system for cirrhosis detection from normal hepatic tissue MR imaging.We extract six texture features with different properties for charactering regions of interest.Feature selection and classification are carried out with proposed DFSVM.The impact of the most valuable features is well strengthened.The high prediction performance can be got based on clinical data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cirrhosis detection,Computer-aided diagnostic (CAD),Duplicative-feature support vector machine,Feature selection,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a sensitive diagnostic method in improving the diagnostic capacity for hepatic cirrhosis and determining the accurate characterization of hepatic cirrhosis. But hepatic MRI has some shortcomings in detection and classification hepatic cirrhosis in clinical, especially using non-enhanced MRI for diagnosing early hepatic cirrhosis. And computer-aided diagnostic (CAD) system, including quantitative description of lesion and automatically classification, can provide radiologists or physicians an alternative second opinion to efficiently apply the abundant information of the hepatic MRI. However, it is expected to character comprehensively the lesion and guarantee high classification rate of CAD system. In this paper, a new CAD system for hepatic cirrhosis detection and classification from normal hepatic tissue non-enhanced MRI is presented. According to prior approach, six texture features with different properties based on gray level difference method are extracted from regions of interest (ROI). Then duplicative-feature support vector machine (DFSVM) is proposed for feature selection and classification: Firstly, the search process of DFSVM imitates diagnosis of doctors: doctor will take a more feature for consideration until the final diagnoses regardless of whether the feature is used in advance. So our algorithm is consistent with the process of clinical diagnosis. Secondly, the impact of the most valuable features will be well strengthened and then the high prediction performance can be got. Experimental results also illustrate the satisfying classification rate. Performance of extracted features and normalization are studied. And it is also compared with typical classifier ANN.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hepatic cirrhosis increases the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma and is the leading causes of death by disease. Hepatic cirrhosis is characterized by the presence of widespread fibrosis and regenerative nodules in the liver [1]. And the fibrosis and nodules formation causes distortion of the normal hepatic architecture, resulting in characteristic texture patterns. Examining hepatic cirrhosis has been performed with various medical imaging modalities in clinical, such as ultrasonography (US), computer tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [2]. MRI is more sensitive than CT and US in improving the diagnostic capacity and determining the accurate characterization of hepatic cirrhosis [3]. However, information obtained from MRI is of quite a variety, and it is difficult for radiologists to interpret MR images of the hepatic tissue, especially by non-enhanced MRI. Computer-aided diagnostic (CAD) system, as an alternative second opinion, has become one of the major research subjects in medical imaging, including MRI, CT, and ultrasound imaging [3]. So recent years, the evolution in medical image processing and artificial intelligence techniques has provided researchers the opportunity to apply CAD systems to classify hepatic tissue based on MRI [2,4,5].Nowadays a few researches concerning hepatic cirrhosis with MRI and CAD are reported as MRI has just been popular in clinical recently. Texture analysis is the primary method at present and usually based on region-of-interest (ROI). Gobert Lee has applied unsupervised classification to distinguish cirrhosis from non-cirrhotic hepatic tissues [1,6] based on texture features. And the area under the curve (AUC) obtained by unsupervised classification is 0.704. However, as labels (diseased or non-diseased) can provide beneficial priori knowledge, supervised classification is another helpful method. Zhang [7] integrates the shape and texture features of the hepatic tissue and applied a three-layer feed-forward artificial neural network (ANN) for classification. In testing of the whole hepatic tissue regions, 82% cirrhosis and 100% normal cases were correctly differentiated from 18 test cases.CAD for hepatic cirrhosis always consists of a two-step process: the first step involves feature extraction and effective feature selection, and the second step is to train classifier based on the selected features and identify cirrhosis. In feature extraction step, texture analysis techniques have been proved to be critical [1,6–9]. As each feature reflects different property of the medical image, we found that it is beneficial to efficiently combine them based on feature selection. Typically, feature selection refers to remove the irrelevant and duplicative features and increase the classification accuracy. Then duplication is usually been regarded as garbage feature and useless in classification. However, in our study we find that duplication can be used as an effective method to improve the classification performance. It is also studied that duplication cannot be simply reduced to a weighted feature.And as for classification, ANN is one of a powerful computational tool for learning the relationship between the input, such as clinical parameters and radiological findings, and the output, such as interstitial diseases [4,7,10]. Although NN has many successful examples in practice, its generalization ability is an important bottle-neck. And NN is really sensitive to parameter changes, which make it cost long time for stable results. In recent years, since support vector machine (SVM) is capable of generating a hyper plane to separate two classes and providing good generalization, it has become the most popular machine learning classifier in biomedical engineering [11–13].In this paper, six texture features of non-enhanced MRI hepatic tissues are applied in feature extraction step. However, each feature reflects different property of the image and has different effects on classification. Therefore, an efficient feature evaluation and feature selection method is required to get the minimum possible error in the classification. Numbers of study focus the feature selection problem in pattern classification area [14–19]. A common method of feature selection is sequential feature selection, which is to build up a suboptimal feature subset incrementally starting from the empty set (forward selection: SFS) or to start with the full set (backward selection: SBS) of features and remove duplicative features successively. In this paper, a new sequential features selection method named duplicative-feature SVM (DFSVM) is proposed. Unlike classical sequential feature search approaches, DFSVM not only choose important features but also strengthen the impact of the most valuable ones. So DFSVM can improve the classification performance, which is proven by our experiments. And the generalization of SVM also guarantees high sensitivity and specificity of our algorithm. Then, a new CAD system for detection hepatic cirrhosis from normal hepatic tissue MRI is presented and DFSVM algorithm is proposed for classification. To compare with typical classifier ANN is also studied.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes related medical image and machine learning approaches, which includes support vector machines, feature extraction. And the DFSVM is proposed to classify hepatic tissues. Section 3 presents the experiment results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, DFSVM algorithm is proposed for classification and adopted for detection cirrhosis from normal hepatic tissue MR imaging. Six GLDM based texture features are extracted from medical MRI. Experimental results show that DFSVM can select important features and strengthen the specific feature by duplication caused by sampling with replacement in iteration. Our proposed DFSVM is compared with typical feature reduction approaches such as PCA, LDA and Weight-InformGrain, and also compared with typical classifier ANN. The experiment result shows that DFSVM gets both high sensitivity and high specificity. Duplication is also studied that it cannot be simply reduced to an integral-weighted feature.As the candidate feature set is small, less iteration can get the satisfying result. However, with more candidate features, it is necessary to accelerate the training process. In Step 2 of DFSVM, each candidate feature is picked out according to the rank order. So, our future work will involve abbreviating iteration based on above rank order.