@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis and modelling of glucose metabolism in diabetic Göttingen minipigs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Model development of glucose metabolism diabetic Göttingen minipigs.Establishment of animal model for long-term trials with Göttingen minipigs.Development of mathematical model for future control design.Verification of mathematical model by blood glucose measurements in diabetic minipigs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Diabetes mellitus,Streptozocin-induced diabetes,Göttingen minipigs,Physiological animal model,Compartmental modelling technique,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces an improved physiological animal model with diabetic Göttingen minipigs, which focuses on the application of human therapy devices and metabolic system analysis. Based on measurement data-sets collected by metabolic test procedures, a new mathematical minipig model is developed. The model consists of 16 differential equations and describes the diabetic porcine glucose metabolism according to the human model published by Sorensen. In the future, the mathematical model will be used as a basis for controller design and the physiological model for experimental control performance evaluation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The term diabetes mellitus covers all glucose metabolic disorders, including a reduced or lacking natural pancreatic production and release of the hormone insulin. In particular, type 1 diabetes patients suffer from an absolute insulin deficiency. In the absence of exogenous insulin administration, the blood glucose concentration will be far higher than the normoglycaemic range. In the long run, high blood glucose concentrations may induce secondary micro- and macrovascular complications of diabetes.To prevent these sequelae, for many decades attempts have been made to develop an automatic blood glucose control system, generally referred to as an “artificial pancreas”. In this case, the blood glucose concentration is measured continuously by means of a sensor, and insulin is infused continuously via a pump. A control algorithm between the sensor and actuator calculates the insulin dose required by the patient, thereby implementing a true closed-loop system.However, despite continuing research, the only components commercially available for such a system are a programmable insulin pump [1] and a short-term (i.e. days) subcutaneous continuous measurement device for the glucose level. Although considerable progress has been made [2–4], a long-term blood glucose sensor with reliable measurement is still lacking. The proposed control strategies for blood glucose regulation have mainly been developed and evaluated in silico by means of simulation platforms, since clinical safety is not yet sufficiently guaranteed. On these platforms, real patients are replaced by mathematical glucose models published by e.g. Dalla Man et al. [5,6], Hovorka et al. [7], Kanderian et al. [8,9], Kovatchev et al. [10], and Sorensen [11]. For reviews see e.g. [12–15]. Initial clinical closed-loop studies, under high safety measures, have recently been published by e.g. Kovatchev et al. [10] and Elleri et al. [16,17] focusing on nocturnal glucose control.Due to the potential high risk of malfunction in closed-loop applications, animal trials are indispensable. Pigs (being omnivores) are suitable for research on diabetes as their glucose metabolism is comparable to the human system, except for a slightly lower basic blood glucose concentration (40–80mg/dl in pigs vs. 80–120mg/dl in humans), [18–21]. Overall, animal studies tend to accelerate the development of therapeutic devices and increase the safety for test persons in clinical trials. One reason for this is that the devices can be tested and their function evaluated in living organisms, before applying them to humans. However, such animal trials are only a prerequisite for human studies and are never a replacement for them [10]. Preliminary results of closed-loop control applications in sedated and ambulatory Yorkshire swine have verified the use of a bihormonal control algorithm which injects both insulin and glucagon for blood glucose regulation [22,23]. Subsequently, the developed controller has recently been applied to patients in clinical trials [24]. However, the metabolic behaviour of young Yorkshire pigs is similar to that of human adolescents, and not to that of human adults.The aim of this paper is to introduce a new mathematical model of the glucose metabolism of diabetic Göttingen minipigs. Compared to Yorkshire swine, full-grown Göttingen minipigs have the advantage that they serve as a model for an adult rather than an adolescent organism.In this paper, the term “model” is used in two ways. First, an extended physiological animal “model” and the corresponding experimental protocols are introduced in Section 2, where diabetic Göttingen minipigs serve as a proxy for type 1 diabetes subjects. Second, a new mathematical “model” of the diabetic porcine glucose metabolism is developed in Section 3, which captures the metabolic behaviour by means of compartmental modelling. The mathematical model can be used to improve understanding of the minipigs’ metabolic system and to design control algorithms for a closed-loop blood glucose regulation. The parameters of the mathematical model are selected based on physiological knowledge and mathematical identification methods. Finally, in Section 4, the model behaviour is evaluated by means of a Clarke-Error-Grid analysis.The aims of the animal study are•to verify the diabetes induction in Göttingen minipigs based on the protocol developed and published in [25],to investigate the applicability of human insulin pumps and glucose sensing devices in the animals, andto analyse the glucose metabolic disturbance response to external glucose and insulin impulses.During the entire study, the blood glucose concentration is the only physiological signal which was determined frequently. These experimental in vivo data are used as a basis for mathematical modelling of the glucose–insulin metabolic system in Streptozocin (STZ)-induced diabetic Göttingen minipigs (Section 3).The study protocol is summarised in Fig. 1(a). Following an animal preparation phase, an acute diabetes mellitus was chemically induced and, subsequently, the behaviour of the disturbed glucose metabolic system was analysed. After euthanasia, the porcine pancreata were histologically analysed to prove destruction of β-cells in the minipigs leading to a diabetic state. The entire study protocol was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the State Agency for Nature, Environment and Consumer Protection, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.For the present study, n=8 female Göttingen minipigs aged 2–3 years and weighing 40–70kg at arrival were used. The minipigs were housed at the Institute for Laboratory Animal Science and Experimental Surgery, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Germany, in accordance with animal welfare guidelines. Having confirmed the absence of health problems after 1 week in quarantine, all 8 animals were included in the study.Before start of the study and following quarantine, the animals had 4 weeks of acclimatisation to get used to the housing, to the animal technicians, and to the daily contact with the researchers. Subsequently, two central venous lines (Cavafix® Certo 475, B. Braun Melsungen AG, Melsungen, Germany) were implanted in each animal to simplify blood drawing. In the absence of a reliable sensing blood glucose device, blood had to be drawn manually, and blood glucose concentration was determined by means of a blood gas analyser (ABL 810 Flex, Radiometer Medical ApS, Herlev, Denmark). To avoid blood clotting in the catheters during the study, 1ml of a sodium chloride solution with 280IU heparin was injected as buffer after each blood sampling.To monitor the general physical conditions of the animals, EDTA blood and serum were analysed daily including the C-reactive protein as an inflammatory parameter, and amylase, lipase and creatinine to evaluate pancreatic function as well as renal function. Body weight (BW) was measured weekly.Following one week of rehabilitation after catheter insertion, an acute diabetes mellitus was induced by means of STZ infusion. Thereby, based on the protocol of Strauss et al. [25] 150mgSTZkg−1 BW (#S0130, Sigma–Aldrich®, Germany or #572201 Streptozocin, Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) were applied. The drug was dissolved in a freshly prepared sodium citrate buffer [25], and the saturated solution was administered to the animal at an infusion rate of 100ml/h.The STZ infusion was followed by an intensive care phase of 36 h including frequent blood glucose sampling every 30–45min. To reduce the risk of acute low blood glucose concentrations (hypoglycaemia), which might be induced by insulin release due to complete β-cell destruction, 5–20% of glucose solution was continuously infused in one of the catheters as described in [25]. At 48h after STZ infusion, the minipigs had increased fasting blood glucose levels without intervention so that the manual insulin therapy was started. Diabetes induction was followed by 10 days of reconvalescence before the metabolic system analysis tests could be performed.For insulin therapy, an insulin catheter connected to a pump (Accu-Chek® Combo Spirit, Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) was applied subcutaneously, and for continuous monitoring of glucose concentrations one of the two sensors (Guardian® REAL Time with Enlite® Sensor, Medtronic Minimed, Fridley, MN, USA and G4™ Platinum, Dexcom™, San Diego, CA, USA) was also inserted subcutaneously. Both the insulin pump catheter and the sensor were placed directly behind the respective ear and secured by three stitches and a patch to prevent dislocation. As the continuous glucose sensors are based on a consuming electrochemical reaction, they had to be replaced about every 3 days. At the same time, the insulin catheter was also replaced in order to reduce the risk of infection.To investigate the impulse response of the diabetic metabolic system in Göttingen minipigs to glucose and insulin disturbances, new experimental protocols lasting 7.5 h were performed every 2–3 days (Fig. 1(b)). This allowed one to observe the effect of orally administered or intravenously injected glucose on blood glucose concentration, in this study referred to as an oral or intravenous glucose tolerance test (GTT). Subsequently, the impact of subcutaneously or intravenously injected insulin impulses (boli) on the blood glucose concentration was monitored which is referred to as insulin tolerance test (ITT).The insulin pump stopped the basal infusion rate automatically 4h before the system analysis test started, so that the impact of remaining insulin in the body was reduced to a minimum. At t=−60min and t=−10min, blood glucose was measured to determine the quasi-steady state of the system just before glucose was applied either orally or intravenously including amounts of(1)doral=(1g glucose per kg BW+1g minipig diet)(2)div=0.25g glucose per kg BW.For the subsequent 210min the blood glucose trajectory was monitored before (within a period of 120min) two identical insulin amounts were injected either subcutaneously or intravenously including amounts of(3)usc=uiv=2IUinsulin.In total, the blood glucose concentration was tracked during the time interval [tstart, …tend] with a sampling rate of one measurement every 15min.After having euthanised the animals, the pancreata were removed for histological analysis. Small specimens from different organ sites were stained with standard haematoxylin–eosin (H.E.) and immunohistochemistry, similar to the protocol described in [25]. Figure 2presents two histological images of: (a) a healthy reference pig taken from another study with permission and (b) one of the diabetic pigs. The arrows indicate stained Langerhans’ islet cells in the nondiabetic and diabetic minipig.The complex compartment model of a generic human developed by Sorensen [11] was chosen as a basis since this is the only model which describes glucose metabolism while taking into consideration the two hormones, insulin and glucagon. The model consists of virtual body compartments in which mass distributions of the observed substances are described by balance equations. The blood stream between the compartments is assumed to be responsible for mass transport, and all blood flows and blood volumes are assumed to be time constant.Figure 3(a) shows a basic compartment i of the Sorensen model. The compartment is divided into a vascular blood space ‘V’ and an interstitial (bloodless) fluid space ‘I’ separated by the vascular wall (dashed line). The mass distribution of substance X in the vascular and interstitial space can be described by the following differential equations:(4)Vascular blood space:ViVX·dXiV(t)dt︸Mass change=QiX·(Xin(t)−XiV(t))︸Convection−ViIXTiX·XiV(t)−XiI(t)︸Diffusion(5)Interstitial fluid space:ViIX·dXiI(t)dt︸Mass change=ViIXTiX·XiV(t)−XiI(t)︸Diffusion+(rin(t)−rout(t)).︸Mass in- and outflowThe mass changes are affected by convection induced by the constant blood streamQiXthrough the compartment, by diffusion across the vascular wall characterised by the time constantTiX, and by external mass inflows and outflows rin(t) and rout(t) from and to unconsidered compartments, respectively. It is assumed that the inflowing blood stream has concentration Xin(t) and the outflowing blood stream has concentration XiV(t) of substance X, which corresponds to the concentration in the vascular space ‘V’. In both spaces, the distribution volumes are given byViVXandViIX. The same nomenclature is applied to the minipig model described in the following paragraphs.Figure 3(b) summarises the complete minipig model. The blood circulation is described by a reduced 12th-order nonlinear model based on the Sorensen approach [11]. The model is extended by two additional submodels for the interstitium and the gastro-intestinal tract. These 2nd-order systems describe the time-delayed impact of subcutaneously injected insulin (interstitium) and orally uptaken glucose (gastro-intestinal tract) on the blood glucose concentration. In the following paragraphs, the model structure is explained in more detail.The newly proposed reduced 12th-order nonlinear model for the porcine blood circulation consists of three submodels that distinguish between the masses of glucose and the counteracting hormones, insulin and glucagon. The resulting model structure with the three subsystems is shown in Fig. 3(c) where the interactions of the three systems are indicated by the thick grey arrows. The solid black lines mark the blood flow and the other arrows represent characteristic mass inflows and outflows. In the following paragraphs, the system interactions are explained in more detail by the model equations.Both the glucose and the insulin submodels each consist of three compartments representing the following body parts:P(plasma): Compartment ‘P’ summarises the blood flow and blood volume distributions in the heart, brain, lung, kidneys and gut.(liver): Compartment ‘L’ describes the effect of the liver as one of the most important organs of the glucose metabolic system. Depending on the availability of insulin and glucagon in the liver compartment, glucose can be stored in or released from the liver.(muscles): Compartment ‘M’ presents the muscle and adipose tissue cells which is divided into the vascular (MV) and interstitial (MI) space, as glucose consumption by the muscle cells is an insulin-induced process.Due to lack of measurement data, the glucagon model consists of one body compartment which is taken from the Sorensen model [11].For the entire model, the following two exogenous inputs are considered:(6)Usc(t)=fIbasalUscbasal(t)+fIbolusUscbolus·δ(t)(7)Uiv(t)=uiv·δ(t).The subcutaneously delivered insulin input Usc(t) consists of a continuously applied basal infusion rateUscbasal(t)and discrete-time insulin boliUscbolusmodelled by the dirac-impulse function δ(t).fIbasalandfIbolusare the insulin bioavailabilities depending on the application mode according to [5,26]. The intravenous insulin input Uiv(t) is modelled solely by a dirac-impulse function of the impact height uiv. The remaining glucagon secretion rate of the natural pancreasSΓN(t), which is normalised to the basal glucagon concentration, is the third input of the entire system.System disturbances are represented either by the intravenously injected or orally ingested glucose mass rates, called Div(t) or Doral(t):(8)Div(t)=div·δ(t),(9)Doral(t)=doral·δ(t)with the impact heights div or doral. The two additional models for the gastro-intestinal tract and the interstitium are connected to the blood circulation model by the glucose appearance rate from the gut rGGA(t) (see Eq. (30)) and the insulin appearance rate rISC(t) (see Eq. (40)). The output of the glucose metabolic system is the plasma glucose concentration GP(t).Although most of the human model parameters can be transferred to the minipig model, some parameters are newly introduced due to model reduction and species adaptation. The following paragraphs introduce the three submodels for glucose, insulin and glucagon. In Sections 4.2 and 4.3, the parameters are identified (see also Tables A.2–A.5) and the resulting model behaviour is evaluated. To determine the initial conditions of all model equations, the steady-state of the model is calculated by means of the function fsolve of the MATLAB/Optimization toolbox with the basal blood glucose concentration set toGPB=90mg/dl.The glucose model consists of three compartments which are described by the following mass balance equations:(10)VPGdGP(t)dt=QLGGL(t)+QMVGGMV(t)−QPGGP(t)−Uii−rRGE(t)+Div(t)+rGGA(t)(11)VLGdGL(t)dt=QLGGP(t)−GL(t)+rHGP(t)−rHGU(t)(12)VMVGdGMV(t)dt=QMVGGP(t)−GMV(t)−VMIGTMGGMV(t)−GMI(t)(13)VMIGdGMI(t)dt=VMIGTMGGMV(t)−GMI(t)−rMGC(t).Here, the parametersVPG,VLG,VMVGandVMIGare the glucose distribution volumes in the corresponding compartment spaces, and the glucose concentrations in the compartments are given by GP(t), GL(t), GMV(t) and GMI(t). The constant glucose mass flow through the plasma compartmentQPGis split into the mass flow through the liverQLGand through the musclesQMVG.The plasma glucose concentration GP(t) is affected by insulin-independent and time-constant glucose consumption Uii of the brain cells, the gut and the red blood cells (RBC)(14)Uii=UiiBrain+UiiGut+UiiRBC·kUii.With the new parameter kUii, the glucose consumption can be adapted to the minipig's individual metabolism (see Table A.5).Furthermore, the renal glucose excretion rate rRGE(t) is defined according to the original model from Sorensen [11](15)rRGE(t)=kr,1+kr,2·GP(t)ifGP(t)≥GPth71(1+tanh(0.011·(GP(t)−GPth)))·kfifGPth>GP(t)>00else.The parameters kr,1, kr,2 and the renal excretion thresholdGPthare tuning parameters. The amplification factor kf is newly introduced as an additional tuning parameter to adapt the renal excretion rate to the porcine metabolism (see Table A.5).In accordance with [11], the hepatic glucose production rate rHGP(t) with its basal valuerHGPBis given by(16)rHGP(t)=WHGPG(t)WHGPI(t)WHGPΓ(t)rHGPB(17)WHGPG(t)=1.42−1.41tanh0.62GL(t)GLB−0.497(18)dWHGPI(t)dt=1τIWHGPI∞(t)−WHGPI(t)(19)WHGPI∞(t)=1.21−1.14tanh1.66IL(t)ILB−0.89(20)WHGPΓ(t)=WHGPΓ0(t)−f2(t)(21)df2(t)dt=1τΓWHGPΓ0(t)−12−f2(t)(22)WHGPΓ0(t)=2.7tanh0.39ΓN(t).WHGPG(t),WHGPI(t)andWHGPΓ(t)are the multipliers of the hepatic glucose concentration GL(t), insulin concentration IL(t) and glucagon concentration ΓN(t) which are normalised to the corresponding hepatic basal valuesGLBorILB.The hepatic glucose utilisation rate rHGU(t) is also defined according to [11] with the basal valuerHGUB(23)rHGU(t)=WHGUG(t)·WHGUI(t)·rHGUB(24)WHGUG(t)=2.83+2.83tanh1.6GL(t)GLB−1.48(25)dWHGUI(t)dt=1τIWHGUI∞(t)−WHGUI(t)(26)WHGUI∞(t)=2.0tanh0.55IL(t)ILB.The multipliers of glucoseWHGUG(t)and insulinWHGUI(t)are both dependent on the normalised hepatic concentrations of glucose and insulin.The glucose consumption rate of the muscle and adipose tissue rMGC(t) is newly defined. It is now affected by the interstitial insulin concentration IMI(t) and the insulin sensitivity factor kIS(27)rMGC(t)=kIS·IMI(t)VMIIwhich is reported in Table A.5.Digestion delays the effect of oral glucose uptake on the blood glucose concentration which is modelled by the following 2nd-order system(28)dM˙ing,1G(t)dt=(Doral(t)−M˙ing,1G(t))Ting,1(29)dM˙ing,2G(t)dt=(M˙ing,1G(t)−M˙ing,2G(t))Ting,2(30)rGGA(t)=fGM˙ing,2G(t).Here,M˙ing,1G(t)andM˙ing,2G(t)are the glucose mass flows in the stomach and gut, respectively, and Ting,1 and Ting,2 are the time constants. rGGA(t) is the glucose appearance rate from gut in the blood stream, and fG is the glucose bioavailability according to [6]. Ting,1, Ting,2 and fG are given in Table A.5.The mass balance equations of the insulin submodel are the following:(31)VPIdIP(t)dt=QLIIL(t)+QMVIIMV(t)−QPIIP(t)−rRIF(t)+Uiv(t)(32)VLIdIL(t)dt=QLIIP(t)−IL(t)−rHIF(t)(33)VMVIdIMV(t)dt=QMVIIP(t)−IMV(t)−VMIITMIIMV(t)−IMI(t)+rISC(t)(34)VMIIdIMI(t)dt=VMIITMI(IMV(t)−IMI(t))−rMIF(t).The constant parametersVPI,VLI,VMVIandVMIIare the distribution volumes of insulin in the corresponding compartment spaces. Furthermore, the insulin concentrations in the compartments are given by IP(t), IL(t), IMV(t) and IMI(t), and the insulin-carrying blood streams are given byQPI,QLIandQMVI.Insulin has a half-life period of about 5min which is taken into account by the insulin filtration rates of the kidneys rRIF(t) and of the liver rHIF(t)(35)rRIF(t)=mK·IP(t)(36)rHIF(t)=mL·IL(t)·QLI.Additionally, insulin is partly incorporated into the cells represented by the filtration rate rMIF(t)(37)rMIF(t)=md·IMI(t)after having connected to insulin-attracting receptors at muscle cells to let glucose molecules pass the membrane. Here, mK and md are renal insulin clearance and muscular dissociation rates, respectively, and mL is the hepatic fractional clearance rate.The effect of subcutaneously injected insulin is modelled by a 2nd-order system that distinguishes between mass flows of nonmonomeric (inactive) insulinM˙sc,1I(t)and monomeric (active) insulinM˙sc,2I(t)(38)dM˙sc,1I(t)dt=((1−xU)Usc(t)−M˙sc,1I(t))Tsc,1(39)dM˙sc,2I(t)dt=(M˙sc,1I(t)+xUUsc−M˙sc,2I(t))Tsc,2(40)rISC(t)=M˙sc,2I(t).Here, Usc(t) is the extracorporeal insulin administration rate according to Eq. (6); xU describes the distribution factor of active and inactive insulin, and rISC(t) marks the appearance rate of active insulin mass in the blood stream. Tsc,1 and Tsc,2 are the time constants which are reported in Table A.5.The pancreatic glucagon production rate rPΓP(t) increases the glucagon mass in the single-spaced compartment, and the plasma clearance rate(41)rPΓC(t)=rMΓC·ΓN(t)decreases it. The glucagon concentration in the compartment ΓN(t) is normalised to the basal values indicated by the superscript “N” and the resulting model equations are(42)VΓdΓN(t)dt=rMΓCrPΓPN(t)−ΓN(t)(43)rPΓPN(t)=WPΓPG(t)WPΓPI(t)=SΓN(t)(44)WPΓPG(t)=2.93−2.1tanh4.18GP(t)GPB−0.61(45)WPΓPI(t)=1.31−0.61tanh1.06IP(t)IPB−0.47.The glucagon distribution volume(46)VΓ=VPI+VLI+VMVIis assumed to be equal to the sum of the insulin distribution volumes according to [11]. Here, both the pancreatic glucagon productionrPΓPN(t)and the pancreatic insulin secretion rateSΓN(t), which are assumed to be equal, are also normalised to the basal release rate. Additionally, the pancreatic glucagon production depends on the glucose-related and insulin-related weighting factorsWPΓPG(t)andWPΓPI(t).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presented an extended physiological animal model with diabetic Göttingen minipigs as a proxy for type 1 diabetic humans. STZ application reliably induced an acute and sustained diabetes in all n=8 minipigs. In addition, a new mathematical model of the diabetic porcine glucose metabolism was introduced based on the well-known nonlinear human model by Sorensen, which was reduced and adapted to the new species. According to the Clarke-Error-Grid, the mathematical model shows satisfactory behaviour with respect to GTTs and ITTs, although the model complexity was reduced compared with the original human model.These animal trials represent an intermediate step between in silico and in vivo studies with diabetic humans, to accelerate the development of therapeutic devices and control algorithms, and to increase the safety for test persons in clinical trials. In the future, the mathematical and physiological models will be applied for controller design and evaluation of experimental control performance.