@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Noise robustness analysis of sparse representation based classification method for non-stationary EEG signal classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Evaluation of noise robustness of sparse representation based classification (SRC) method.Generation of new noisy test signals by adding two noise sources into the EEG test signals.Demonstration of the improved classification accuracy of the SRC for noisy test signals and online dataset.Illustration of the suitability of the SRC for non-stationary EEG signal classification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain–computer interface (BCI),Electroencephalogram (EEG),Sparse representation based classification (SRC),Common spatial pattern (CSP),Non-stationarity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the electroencephalogram (EEG)-based brain–computer interface (BCI) systems, classification is an important signal processing step to control external devices using brain activity. However, scalp-recorded EEG signals have inherent non-stationary characteristics; thus, the classification performance is deteriorated by changing the background activity of the EEG during the BCI experiment. Recently, the sparse representation based classification (SRC) method has shown a robust classification performance in many pattern recognition fields including BCI. In this study, we aim to analyze noise robustness of the SRC method to evaluate the capability of the SRC for non-stationary EEG signal classification. For this purpose, we generate noisy test signals by adding a noise source such as random Gaussian and scalp-recorded background noise into the original motor imagery based EEG signals. Using the noisy test signals and real online-experimental dataset, we compare the classification performance of the SRC and support vector machine (SVM). Furthermore, we analyze the unique classification mechanism of the SRC. We observed that the SRC method provided better classification accuracy and noise robustness compared with the SVM method. In addition, the SRC has an inherent adaptive classification mechanism that makes it suitable for time-varying EEG signal classification for online BCI systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain–computer interface (BCI) systems provide a new communication and control channel between people and external devices [1]. In these systems, users can control an external device using their intention or imagination without making any real muscle movement. Therefore, these systems are very helpful for people who are suffering from severe motor diseases. The electroencephalogram (EEG) is widely used for measuring brain signals in BCI systems because of its low cost, no space restriction, and high temporal resolution compared with other equipment such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and magneto encephalogram (MEG) [2,3]. However, scalp-recorded EEG signals are very sensitive to noise. In particular, in the case of motor imagery based BCI, which uses induced EEG signals while the subject imagines limb movements [3,4], the instability of imagery task, non-stationarity of signals, and lack of concentration are among main obstacles to effectively process the EEG signals. In addition, it is difficult to collect a large set of training samples because of the subject's fatigue. The raw EEG signals are associated with high dimension owing to the large number of EEG channels; hence, it is difficult to collect volume of data samples that are large enough for good training. Therefore, EEG signal processing is very important and many research efforts have been focused on this issue [5–7].The signal processing steps in BCI can be categorized as preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification. In the preprocessing step, the artifact detection and rejection are conducted. The purpose of feature extraction is to make a meaningful low-dimensional data, i.e., a feature vector, from the original high-dimensional data. This feature vector should be distinguishable for different classes. Typically, the feature extraction is performed using a dimensionality reduction method. The principal component analysis (PCA), independent component analysis (ICA), and common spatial pattern (CSP) are popular methods for dimensionality reduction in the motor imagery based BCI systems [7,20].Another important signal processing step is classification. In the BCI systems, the purpose of classification is to translate the extracted feature of a user's intention into a computer command, which can then be used to control external devices. Typically, this translation is done using the classification algorithms, which are adopted from pattern recognition area. Frequently used classification methods in the EEG based BCI systems are linear classifiers such as linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and support vector machine (SVM) [6]. In many BCI studies, the SVM has been recognized as a robust classification method with generalization ability and has shown to provide the best classification results [6,14,15].Recently, in the field of pattern recognition, the concept of sparse representation based classification, namely SRC, has been introduced [8]. The basic idea of SRC is to parsimoniously represent a test signal y via the so-called sparsification step, i.e., y=Ax, where A is a dictionary whose columns are a collection of training signals. This sparsification step leads to the representation of the test signal y with the training signals from the same class predominantly. The L1 minimization algorithm is employed to perform the sparse representation of the test signal with a given set of training signals.The robust classification performance of the SRC framework has been shown in various applications such as face recognition [9,12,13,24], digit classification [8], and speech recognition [10]. Particularly, in [9], Yang et al. presented that SRC obtains robust face recognition performance for occlusion and corruption on facial images. In addition, SRC has been successfully applied to the EEG based BCI application [11] and EEG based vigilance detection [28]. However, in the EEG signal classification, SRC is rarely studied. The previous SRC study for the motor imagery based EEG signal classification focused on algorithm construction and evaluated the classification performance compared with a conventional classifier such as LDA in [11]. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no literature to systematically evaluate the noise robustness and classification characteristics of SRC for the scalp recorded EEG signals.It is well known that EEG signals are non-stationary. The non-stationarity can be observed during the change in alertness and wakefulness, eye blinking, and in the event-related potential (ERP) and evoked potential (EP) such as motor imagery signals [32]. Because of the non-stationarity of the EEG, we can observe that the test feature positions vary from the original training feature positions in the feature space [6,16]. This is one of the major obstacles in EEG signal classification. Thus, a classifier that is optimized for a particular training data may not work for online BCI with a new test data.Recently, extensive research efforts have been devoted to overcome the non-stationary issue in the motor imagery based EEG classification. In [38–40], robust feature extraction methods were proposed for common spatial pattern (CSP), which is the most widely used technique for feature extraction in the motor imagery BCI. In the classification stage, supervised and un-supervised adaptive classification schemes were studied for the conventional LDA and SVM methods [16,27,41].In this study, our aim is to evaluate the robustness of SRC for non-stationary EEG signal classification. First, we compare the classification performance, i.e., classification accuracy and computation time, of the SRC with SVM, which has been known as the state of the art classifier in many studies. Second, we evaluate the noise robustness of the SRC and SVM methods. For this purpose, we generate noisy test signals which have different feature distribution with original test signals. The noisy test signals are generated with the addition of random Gaussian noise and scalp recorded background EEG signal into the original test signal. Then, we assess the noise robustness of both SRC and SVM methods. Third, in addition to the simple performance comparison, we examine working mechanism of SRC by analyzing advantages and disadvantages as the role of classifier compared with the conventional SVM. Moreover, we discuss why SRC outperforms SVM for the noisy test signal. Finally, we evaluate the SRC method using an online experimental dataset where non-stationarity occurs from training to testing sessions. Our work is intended to provide evaluation and analysis of SRC to researchers who want to apply the SRC framework to non-stationary EEG signal classification.This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the experiment and EEG signal processing methods such as feature extraction and classification are described. In addition, noise robustness analysis method is explained in this section. Section 3 shows the experimental results. In Section 4, discussions and analysis are provided. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we evaluated and analyzed the robustness of the SRC method against the non-stationarity of EEG signal classification. For this purpose, we generated noise corrupted EEG test signals using two noise sources such as random Gaussian noise and scalp recorded background noise. Then, we assessed the classification performance of the SRC when the noise power was varied. Using the experimental motor imagery based EEG and generated noisy test signals, we compared the classification results of the SRC with that of the SVM method, which has been considered as a robust classifier in many BCI studies. From the results, it was evident that the SRC showed superior noise robustness than the SVM for both Gaussian and background noise. Furthermore, the results of the online-experimental dataset showed that the classification accuracy of the SRC was better than the SVM. We analyzed that the robust classification accuracy of the SRC was due to a different classification approach compared with the conventional decision rule based SVM. Thus, the SRC showed an inherent adaptive classification mechanism for each test trial via optimal sparse representation of the training trials. In addition, we showed that the computation time of the SRC for a robust classification was on the order of milliseconds, which was acceptable for real time BCI systems.