@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Detection of the nipple in mammograms with Gabor filters and the Radon transform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper proposes a method for the detection of nipple in mammograms based on the converging characteristics of oriented patterns of the breast tissues towards the nipple.The method uses Gabor filters and Radon transform for the extraction of oriented patterns and linear structures representing breast tissues.The proposed method shows better performance over two of the existing techniques.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast cancer,Mammogram,Nipple detection,Gabor filter,Radon transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Detection of the nipple in mammograms is an important step in algorithms for the detection of breast cancer. However, locating the nipple position is a challenging task due to distortion and displacement of the nipple by breast diseases, improper imaging techniques, and variation of the characteristics of breast tissues with different imaging protocols or modalities. This paper presents a novel approach for the detection of the nipple in mammograms based on the converging characteristics of oriented patterns of the breast tissues towards the nipple. The oriented structures are extracted with a bank of real Gabor filters and are transformed into the Radon domain to analyze linear structures of tissue patterns to determine the nipple position. The performance of the method was evaluated with different types of images, such as scanned screen-film (from the mini-MIAS and DDSM databases), digital radiography, and computed radiography, and average errors of 7.71mm, 7.52mm, 9.23mm, and 12.10mm were achieved, respectively, with reference to the nipple location marked by an expert radiologist. The proposed method outperforms two recently developed approaches for the same application.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For the early detection of breast cancer, one of the leading causes of cancer-related death among women, mammography is the most effective X-ray imaging technique [1]. Radiologists as well as computer-aided detection (CAD) systems often use the position of the nipple as an anatomical landmark within the breast region in the interpretation of mammograms [2]. The nipple is considered as a reference point for the alignment or registration of different mammographic projections, current and prior mammograms, or right and left breast images to compare the corresponding regions for detecting lesions visible in the mammogram or changes that have occurred in the breast tissue patterns, or for the reduction of false positives in lesion detection.However, locating the nipple is difficult due to the variation in image quality taken by different imaging systems, improper imaging while projecting from 3-D to 2-D, and distortion and displacement of the nipple due to breast diseases. Most often, the nipple is compressed flat and nearly invisible in a mammogram, as it is projected in an area with low radio-opacity where the film and digitizer noise are high [3].A few works have been reported in the literature for automatic localization of the nipple [3–13]. Semmlow et al. [4] discussed the problem in the context of screening xeromammograms and proposed a special shape-based spatial filter to identify the central region of the breast boundary. The lowest point of the boundary was then assumed to represent the nipple location. Several researchers considered the intensity profile of the skin-air boundary of mammographic images for the detection of the nipple [5–7,10]. Chandrasekhar and Attikiouzel [7] developed a method for automatic detection of the nipple by observing that a sudden change in intensity is visible at the nipple location, i.e., the average gradient is high along the direction normal to the skin-air interface near the nipple. With a dataset of 24 mammograms from the mini-MIAS (Mammographic Image Analysis Society) database [14] they obtained an error of less than 1mm for 96% of the mammograms tested. Another approach was developed by Mendez et al. [6], who applied three principles to detect the nipple: the maximum distance to the breast border, the maximum gradient at the median-top section of the breast, and the maximum second derivative across the median-top section of the breast. They reported a geometric mean error of 13.5mm with 156 images from a local database.In many mammographic images, nipples are not clearly visible. Often, it is difficult to maintain the contour of the nipple while segmenting the breast region. For such images, nipple detection algorithms that are dependent on the breast boundary are not suitable [3]. To avoid this problem, Petroudi and Brady [8] applied a multiscale approximation of the gradient along the inner and outer region of a band (fat band) surrounding the breast boundary. Inspecting the changes of intensity of the nipple in mammograms based on its position, Mustra et al. [12] first identified whether the nipple is inside or outside of the breast profile, and then applied an intensity-based approach to find the nipple location. An average error of 1.35mm was noted with 144 craniocaudal (CC) digital radiography (DR) breast images.Based on the converging characteristics of breast tissues, such as lobules, ductules, lobes, and ducts, toward the nipple, Zhou et al. [9] and Kinoshita et al. [11] developed techniques for the detection of the nipple. The two-stage method introduced by Zhou et al. [9] used graylevel information around the nipple, the geometric shape of the nipple, and texture features of breast tissue or ducts which converge toward the nipple for the detection of the nipple. They achieved a mean error of 2.5mm with 367 digital mammograms. Using the morphological top-hat filter followed by the Radon transform for the detection of the nipple, Kinoshita et al. [11] obtained an average error of 7.4mm with 1080 mammograms. Casti et al. [13] developed a nipple detection method using geometrical constraints, analyzing the gradient vector field by mean and Gaussian curvature measurements, and local shape-based conditions. With a dataset of 566 images, they achieved an average error of 6.7mm.A completely different multiatlas-based, computationally complex method was proposed by Iglesias and Karssemeijer [3], in which the nipple location was detected via registration of each of the annotated mammographic images (atlases) with the target image. The method attained an error of about 12mm with more than 2000 images. Recently, a simple yet efficient heuristic approach in which CC and mediolateral-oblique (MLO) mammograms were handled separately for the detection of nipple, was proposed by Jas et al. [15]. The results obtained had an average error of 11.03mm with 500 images of the Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM) [16].Although several methods have been proposed for automatic detection of the nipple, none can guarantee successful detection with low error over all types of breast tissues (fatty, glandular, or dense) and over all types of mammograms, including scanned screen-film (SF), DR, and computed radiography (CR). Therefore, in the present study, a new approach is proposed for the localization of the nipple, based on the converging characteristics of normal breast tissues toward the nipple. This paper is an extended version of our recent preliminary study [17]. In the proposed approach, a bank of 180 real Gabor filters is applied, followed by the Radon transform, to detect linear oriented tissue structures present in the given mammographic image. Then, based on the convergence characteristics of breast tissues, the nipple is detected. Application of Gabor filters for nipple detection, analysis of oriented structures in the Radon domain, and evaluation of the results with a detailed analysis using large datasets containing different types of images are the main contributions of this paper.The remaining paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides detailed information on the images used in the present study; Section 3 presents the details of the proposed methods; and results and discussion followed by conclusions are presented in the next three consecutive sections.Four sets of mammographic images from different types of imaging systems were selected for evaluation of the proposed method.The first set includes 270 randomly selected mammographic images containing normal and abnormal cases from the mini-MIAS database [14]. All the images are MLO views. The spatial and graylevel resolution of the images are 200μm×200μm and 8bits/pixel, respectively.The second set consists of 270 images, including 80 images with signs of cancer and 190 normal images, randomly selected from the DDSM [16] database. The graylevel resolution of all the images is 12bits/pixel. The selected dataset includes images of different spatial resolution (50μm/pixel, 43.5μm/pixel, or 42μm/pixel).Two local databases of 175 DR images, including 77 images of abnormal cases and 98 normal images collected from the Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India, and 100 CR images (including 37 images with masses and 63 normal images) collected from Quadra Medical Services Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata, were also selected for the study. Each DR image is of size 2560×3328 pixels with the spatial resolution of 70μm/pixel and graylevel resolution of 12bits/pixel. The CR images have a size of 1792×2392 pixels with 12-bit intensity resolution and 97μm/pixel resolution. Both the DR and CR sets include MLO and CC views. Statistics of all types of selected images in terms of density and abnormality are provided in Table 1.For the verification of the results, reference nipple locations were marked by one of the authors (J.C.), in terms of the coordinates of the nipple, with the help of an experienced radiologist (A.S.).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a new method for detection of the nipple in mammograms, using Gabor filters and the Radon transform, was proposed. Results of the method with different types of images and comparison with two recently published nipple detection algorithms by Jas et al. [15] and Kinoshita et al. [11] show its improved and robust performance. Experimental results also confirm that among the various types of mammograms tested, CR images are the most challenging images. Abnormalities or dense tissues may cause increased detection error. It should also be noted that the good level of accuracy provided by the proposed method leaves room for improvement. In the future, other characteristics of the nipple, such as geometrical or boundary characteristics, will be combined with the convergence characteristics of oriented patterns for more accurate detection.