@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A phenomenological model of EEG based on the dynamics of a stochastic Duffing-van der Pol oscillator network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
EEG can be represented as the output of Duffing-van der Pol oscillator model.Eyes-closed and eyes-open EEG data are distinct realizations of the model.Stochastic models are better in terms of power spectra and information entropy.Model may be used for characterization of distinct brain states and disorders.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EEG,Stochastic dynamics,Nonlinear oscillator networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, we propose a novel phenomenological model of the EEG signal based on the dynamics of a coupled Duffing-van der Pol oscillator network. An optimization scheme is adopted to match data generated from the model with clinically obtained EEG data from subjects under resting eyes-open (EO) and eyes-closed (EC) conditions. It is shown that a coupled system of two Duffing-van der Pol oscillators with optimized parameters yields signals with characteristics that match those of the EEG in both the EO and EC cases. The results, which are reinforced using statistical analysis, show that the EEG recordings under EC and EO resting conditions are clearly distinct realizations of the same underlying model occurring due to parameter variations with qualitatively different nonlinear dynamic characteristics. In addition, the interplay between noise and nonlinearity is addressed and it is shown that, for appropriately chosen values of noise intensity in the model, very good agreement exists between the model output and the EEG in terms of the power spectrum as well as Shannon entropy. In summary, the results establish that an appropriately tuned stochastic coupled nonlinear oscillator network such as the Duffing-van der Pol system could provide a useful framework for modeling and analysis of the EEG signal. In turn, design of algorithms based on the framework has the potential to positively impact the development of novel diagnostic strategies for brain injuries and disorders.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There has been a significant increase during the last two decades in the analysis of the human brain electroencephalography (EEG) recordings as a tool to aid with the diagnosis of brain injuries and neurological disorders. The increase can be mainly attributed to availability of new analytical techniques for signal processing and data analysis that can more accurately capture temporal brain dynamics and which aim to reveal patterns that can explain abnormalities. Quantitative analysis of EEG recordings can provide functional information about the underlying neurophysiology associated with the injury or disease, leading clinicians to better and more specifically targeted treatment options. Hence, a fundamental understanding of the dynamics of the EEG signal and the correlation between the characteristics of the signal and different stages of a brain related injury or disease is an important open problem.It has been generally established that the EEG signal is non-stationary [4]. Hence, decomposition of the EEG signal using a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) with sliding windows and wavelet transform approaches have been the most widely employed approaches to capture the time varying spectral properties of the EEG signal [3,11,12]. However, the EEG signal has nonlinear properties that cannot be captured by linear transformation methods [37]. Hence, nonlinear dynamic approaches have been introduced to capture the EEG nonlinear properties mainly through computationally complex time series analysis [22]. Nonlinear modeling and analysis of the EEG signal has been addressed in the literature (see, for instance, Ref. [37] for a review). Approaches based on a neural mass model [21,41], coupled oscillators [5,25], continuum models [23], nonlinear non-stationary model [9,31], and random neural networks [2] have been reported. Other approaches based on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods [19] and Markov process amplitude [43] have also been used for nonlinear analysis of EEG signal. Chaotic phenomena and stability aspects have also been considered [10,32]. From a stochastic perspective, limit cycle oscillators [7,18] as well as stochastic synchronization [6] and stochastic approximation [13,38] methods have been considered in EEG modeling. Interestingly, these research works suggest that a limit cycle behavior at each of the brain frequency bands seem to represent the EEG signal far better than a description based on chaotic phenomena.In addition to the dynamics in the time and frequency domains, information content, characterized by information entropic measures, has received attention as an important aspect of EEG analysis [37]. Information entropic measures such as Shannon entropy [34] quantify the information content in a signal and higher entropy is often associated with more randomness and chaotic behavior [1]. Information entropy may also be viewed a measure of complexity in a dynamical system. In the context of the EEG, the key idea is that higher information content in the EEG corresponds to better brain function [35]. Consequently, it has been reported that variations in information entropic measures may be used to detect functional abnormalities in the brain caused by disorders or injuries [36]. This suggests that information content of the EEG signal, measured in terms of Shannon entropy and its variants, could play a significant role in identifying distinct states of the brain. Furthermore, recent work by McBride and colleagues demonstrate the effectiveness of both spectral and entropy analyses in classification of early Alzheimer's disease [27,29] and mild traumatic brain injury [28].The key to success of EEG modeling is the development of an analytical framework that not only captures the non-stationary and nonlinear characteristics of the signal but also provides better tools for distinguishing pathological and normal brain states [39]. However, despite the significant amount of research in this area including the aforementioned efforts, a comprehensive framework is currently absent. Motivated thus, in this article we present a novel phenomenological framework to study the EEG, modeling the signal as the stochastic response of a coupled nonlinear oscillator system. It is emphasized that the model is purely phenomenological and that no correlation between actual neuronal activity in the brain and the dynamics of the model is implied. The first key question here is whether the coupled oscillator models can output signals with similar spatiotemporal characteristics as the EEG. Should the answer be in the affirmative, it then leads to the interesting question of whether a correspondence could be established between changes in the EEG due to the brain condition (e.g. resting, injured, etc.) and variation of parameters in the model. Hence, an important application is that potentially the model parameters themselves can be used to identify a brain state and furthermore the changes in model parameter can trace the progress of a brain disorder or injury.Preliminary results presented recently at a conference by the authors [17] suggested that a coupled nonlinear Duffing oscillator model with only two degrees of freedom can capture the linear characteristics of the EEG signal in the major brain EEG frequency bands. While the results supported the idea of modeling the EEG using a coupled oscillator network, they also highlighted the need for improved models that can generate outputs to match actual EEG data with reference to multiple metrics. Hence, a coupled system of Duffing-van der Pol oscillators [8,24,42] is proposed in order to capture its self-exciting stochastic limit cycle behavior and match its information entropic measures.Actual EEG data obtained from normal healthy subjects in the eyes-open (EO) and eyes-closed (EC) cases are utilized for our study. A global optimization routine based on a multi-start heuristic algorithm is adopted to match the output of the stochastic ODE model with each individual EEG recording. A deterministic Duffing-van der Pol model is considered first in order to determine the model parameter values for which the output matches best with the EEG data. Next, a stochastic version of the model is considered and optimization with respect to the intensity of white noise is carried out to match the model output with the EEG data in terms of power spectrum and Shannon entropy. The models for the EC and EO cases are then studied statistically and in terms of their nonlinear dynamic characteristics. It is then discussed why the authors believe this approach has immense potential for identifying brain EEG with pathological disorders compared with normal brain states thus may have practical implications for the development of novel diagnostic strategies.The EEG signals analyzed in this study were recorded through a single-dry electrode device at position Fp1 (based on a 10–20 electrode placement system) with a Bluetooth enabled telemetric headset. The headset's effective sample rate is 125Hz. Frequencies below 1Hz and above 60Hz (near Nyquist frequency) were filtered out by the device hardware. However, comparison of the device with those from widely accepted EEG recording devices, verified an accurate and reliable frequency range of only within 2–30Hz. The recording device eliminated frequently observed artifacts including line noise. Other high-amplitude artifacts such as eye-blinks were removed using an artifact detection algorithm [16]. The EEG recordings in this study are obtained from a random selection of normal healthy subjects during the resting eyes-closed (EC) and eyes-open (EO) conditions some of which have been used in our previous studies [15,16]. We considered EEG recording blocks of 40-s duration which provided approximately 5000-sample signals. Note that, the recording lengths were chosen in order to avoid encountering large fluctuations in the time dependent properties of the EEG signal. Nonlinear analysis based on arbitrary choice of recording lengths to determine the non-stationary properties of the EEG is a formidable but interesting subject for future research.Next, in order to compare the EEG signal and the output signal generated by the proposed models, the time-varying power spectra in the major brain EEG frequency bands were extracted, as listed in Table 1. To this end, short time Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) with sliding window was performed on the EEG signal and the power spectrum in each frequency band was computed [15] noting that a good model must produce signals that can match the power spectrum of all frequency bands. However, selecting all frequency ranges could lead to increased complexity with no significant payoff in the results. Hence, the power spectrum was computed in seven bands, including the lower and upper band ranges of δ and β and the full ranges of θ, α, and γ frequency ranges, as presented in Table 1. The frequency range subdivisions were carefully selected to segregate the unreliable lower δ and the wide range of β band. Note that, while the γ band has the widest range, it has very little power.The EEG has been modeled in the literature based on a variety of assumptions including nonlinearity (both chaotic and non-chaotic), non-stationarity, and randomness of the signal [13,31,38]. There have also been attempts to understand the EEG as the manifestation of limit cycle oscillations and other periodic solutions [7,18]. While such approaches are meritorious in certain respects, models that can effectively reproduce a majority of the significant characteristics of the EEG remain elusive. In recent work reported at a conference [17], we proposed a system of coupled stochastic oscillators as a viable model for EEG, inspired by a previous work [30]. Comparing the model output with EEG recorded during EO and EC resting conditions, it was shown that a coupled system of 10 harmonic oscillators was able to reproduce a signal with similar power spectrum to the EEG. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that employing a far fewer number of coupled Duffing oscillators led to better results thereby buttressing the case for nonlinear stochastic models for the EEG. However, it was also observed that the width of frequency content obtained from the aforementioned models was less than satisfactory. In addition, a coupled Duffing system does not exhibit self-excited oscillatory behavior displayed by limit cycles and which appears to be a better description of EEG [7]. In view of these considerations as well as the potential role of relaxation oscillations in EEG modeling, we present a phenomenological model of the EEG based on a coupled system of Duffing-van der Pol oscillators subject to white noise excitation [8,24].The dynamical equation of a single Duffing-van der Pol oscillator is given by:(1)x¨+kx+bx3−∈x˙(1−x2)=F(t),where x is the position of the oscillator,x˙is the velocity, k is the linear stiffness coefficient, b is the nonlinear stiffness coefficient, ∈ is the van der Pol damping coefficient, and F(t) represents the external excitation. Parameter b indicates the strength of the Duffing nonlinearity resulting in multiple resonant frequencies. Parameter ∈ indicates the strength of van der Pol nonlinearity and determines the extent of self-excitation and the shape of the resulting limit cycle.In this work, we consider an array of coupled Duffing-van der Pol oscillators excited by white noise generated through a normally distributed random variable and is applied to the model via Wiener process. The schematic of this coupled model is shown in Fig. 1. Based on our earlier work [17], it was concluded that a system of two coupled Duffing-van der Pol oscillators serves as a sufficiently accurate model to capture the power spectrum and nonlinear self excited limit cycle behavior of the EEG signal. The dynamical equations of the model are:(2)x¨1+k1x1+k2(x1−x2)+b1x13+b2(x1−x2)3−∈1x˙1(1−x12)=0x¨2−k2(x1−x2)−b2(x1−x2)3−∈2x˙2(1−x22)=μdW,where x1,x˙1,x¨1and x2,x˙2,x¨2are, respectively, the positions, velocities and accelerations of the first and second oscillator. Similarly, k1, b1, ∈1 and k2, b2, ∈2 are, respectively, linear stiffness, cubic stiffness, and van der Pol damping coefficient of the first and second oscillator. Parameter μ represents the intensity of white noise and dW is a Wiener process [14,20] representing the additive noise in the stochastic differential system. Thus the stochastic excitation is introduced into the system through its influence on the second oscillator, F(t)=μdW.Using the notationx˙1=x3andx˙2=x4, the two second order equations of motion in Eq. (2) are converted to four state equations representing the model as a first-order system of stochastic differential equations:(3)x˙1=x3x˙2=x4x˙3=−(k1+k2)x1+k2x2−b1x13−b2(x1−x2)3+∈1x3(1−x12)x˙4=k2x1−k2x2+b2(x1−x2)3+∈2x4(1−x22)+μdWThe initial conditions for both models were selected such that the first oscillator starts at rest with no displacement and the second oscillator being displaced by one unit:(4)x1(0)=0,x2(0)=1,x3(0)=0,x4(0)=0.We reiterate that the primary goal of our effort is for the output of the stochastic Duffing-van der Pol model to match both the frequency content and information content of the EEG signal. Thus, we would like to be able to match both the signal power spectrum and the variability in the actual data through variations in parameters of the model including noise intensity. Hence, an optimization procedure is required to choose appropriate parameters of the model for the optimal match between the model output and the EEG signal.The objective function of the optimization was chosen as a weighted average of the root mean squared of the errors in power spectrum of each selected brain frequency bands in Table 1 and error in Shannon entropy which is measured based on a sliding temporal window technique [35]. The optimization is formally presented as(5)minpJ=∑j=1m(PEj−POj)2+wSE−SO,where J is the cost function, p represents the decision variables of the optimization,PEjandPOjare the frequency band powers of the normalized EEG signal and the model output, respectively, m represents number of frequency bands (m=7), SEand SOrepresent the Shannon entropy of the EEG signal and the model output, respectively, w is a weighting factor, and | | represents the absolute value. Note that, the model output is chosen to be the velocity of the last oscillator, x4, since it is directly impacted by the noise. The magnitude of the output signals were simply matched through normalization of both the model output and the EEG signal with respect to their standard deviations. The decision variables are selected as the collection of all the model parameters in Eq. (3):(6)p=[k1,k2,b1,b2,∈1,∈2,µ].The optimization problem is subject to constraints represented by the state equations, i.e. Eq. (3), and lower and upper bounds for the decision variable. These bounds were defined as:(7)0<ki≤1e4,0<bi≤12ki,0<∈i≤13ki,i=1,2,0≤μ≤2.Since we are essentially seeking a response similar to stochastic limit cycles, the constraints for biand ∈iare imposed in to avoid the chaotic regime [26]. Practically, these constraints maintain a periodic response for the deterministic system when μ=0. Noise intensity is also constrained to avoid a response dominated by random noise and suppression of the power spectral properties.A global optimization search method is chosen based on a multi-start algorithm. This method finds global optima for constrained nonlinear programs where local optima are derived based constrained nonlinear programming [40]. The initial guesses for the global optimization search were randomly generated within the bounds defined in Eq. (7).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article, we presented a phenomenological model for the EEG based on a coupled system of stochastic Duffing-van der Pol oscillator network subject to white noise excitations. The effort was motivated by our recent preliminary results in the same direction using a coupled system of linear harmonic oscillators and an alternative approach using Duffing oscillators. Model parameters in both the deterministic and stochastic cases were optimized with respect to actual EEG data obtained from normal subjects under the resting eyesclosed (EC) and eyes-open (EO) conditions. The procedure yielded model outputs that were in very good agreement with the actual EEG signals with respect to the frequency content (power spectra) as well as information content (Shannon entropy) and this is a key result of our work. The relative significance of the optimal parameter values obtained from the optimization scheme was verified using statistical analysis. In another important conclusion from our efforts, significant qualitative differences that distinguish the EEG signals in the EO and EC cases were derived exclusively from the model output based on a phase plane analysis. Our results clearly indicate that (1) the stochastic double Duffing-van der Pol oscillator model output signal can accurately represent the frequency and information entropy content of the EEG signal and (2) the model parameter differences for EC and EO are statistically significant leading to qualitatively and quantitatively distinct models for each case. In summary, the results in this article indicate that a phenomenological framework based on a coupled system of stochastic Duffing-van der Pol oscillators could provide a novel, promising approach to the modeling and analysis of the EEG signal.The authors have previously shown that EEG signal characteristics in both frequency and time domains can be effectively quantified using short time Fast Fourier Transform with sliding windows [15] and wavelet transform [16]. The properties determined through these techniques along with information metrics other than Shannon's Entropy (such as the Kullback–Liebler metric) could be used to further analyze the time varying properties of the EEG signal using the model introduced in this article. Another important open question is the applicability of the model for EEG recordings of arbitrary duration. It is also well known that the interaction between noise and nonlinearity can engender very interesting effects and the implications of phenomena such as stochastic resonance for EEG signal analysis opens up exciting avenues for further research.A potential application of the model is that it can be used as a synthetic EEG signal generator for research and education. Perhaps the most intriguing potential application is to study the progression of brain disorders and injuries through the evolution of the model parameters. Indeed, it would be of much interest to apply the framework to EEG data obtained from pre and post singular events such as the onset of mild Traumatic Brain Injury, for instance. Applying the framework to identify residual signatures of such events on the EEG in terms of information theoretic and other metrics would be of immense value, particularly since the EEG often appears indistinguishable from the normal under visual inspection, shortly after certain events [36]. Extrapolating further, it is then conceivable that the framework could be used to predict the likelihood of recurrence of similar events based on quantitative and qualitative assessment of such signatures. The framework could also be used to better understand discriminant features and other information encoded in the EEG in the case of progressive neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's disease; such features could remain latent under visual inspection of the EEG. Hence, the results of this article have the potential to open a door toward developing better diagnostic and interventional strategies for brain injuries and diseases. The authors conclude with the hope that the present effort provides an impetus for research in the above and also other directions.