@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bag-of-words representation for biomedical time series classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel feature representation is proposed for biomedical time series classification.The representation is extended from the bag-of-words model in text document analysis.The proposed bag-of-words representation is effective and discriminative.The representation is able to capture both global and local structural information.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bag of words,Codebook construction,k-Means clustering,EEG,ECG,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automatic analysis of biomedical time series such as electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrocardiographic (ECG) signals has attracted great interest in the community of biomedical engineering due to its important applications in medicine. In this work, a simple yet effective bag-of-words representation that is originally developed for text document analysis is extended for biomedical time series representation. In particular, similar to the bag-of-words model used in text document domain, the proposed method treats a time series as a text document and extracts local segments from the time series as words. The biomedical time series is then represented as a histogram of codewords, each entry of which is the count of a codeword appeared in the time series. Although the temporal order of the local segments is ignored, the bag-of-words representation is able to capture high-level structural information because both local and global structural information are well utilized. The performance of the bag-of-words model is validated on three datasets extracted from real EEG and ECG signals. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method is not only insensitive to parameters of the bag-of-words model such as local segment length and codebook size, but also robust to noise.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of modern technology and reduction of hardware cost, a large amount of biomedical signals such as electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrocardiographic (ECG) are collected every day. These biomedical signals are very useful for monitoring human's physical condition. It is however a challenging task to efficiently and effectively analyze these signals. Traditionally, these signals are manually analyzed by professional experts. However, there are several disadvantages of the manual analysis. Firstly, comparing to the large amount of biomedical signals, the number of professional experts, especially the ones with extensive experience is very limited. Secondly, inspection and monitoring of long-term biomedical signals such as EEG and ECG signals are always very time consuming. It is difficult to keep a high level of concentration during a lengthy inspection, giving rise to an increase in the false hit rate by the operator. Finally, it is frequently needed to find inter-reader variability in the manual inspection and monitoring by experts. Therefore, an automated system that can assist professional experts to analyze long-term biomedical signals is very valuable in real-word applications.Automatic analysis of biomedical time series such as EEG and ECG signals based on machine learning techniques has been applied to a variety of real-word applications. For instance, EEG signals are automatically analyzed for epileptic seizure detection [1–3], brain computer interaction [4–6], human mental fatigue detection [7] and emotion recognition [8]. ECG signals that provide useful information about heart rhythm are used to study heart arrhythmias [9,10]. It is essential to extract meaningful features to represent individual time series in the aforementioned applications. Some methods [11,12] directly describe time series in time domain while some others extract features from transformed domain [13,14,10]. For instance, Zadeh et al. [12] extracted morphological and timing-interval features from ECG segments to classify heartbeats. Guo et al. [13] extracted line length features based on Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) to detect epileptic EEG segments.Most of the previous representations extract local temporal or frequency information to characterize time series, which are very effective for short time series or time series with periodic waveforms. However, they may have limited ability to capture structural similarity of long time series which have repetitive waveforms, for instance, electrocardiography (ECG) and electroencephalography (EEG) signals. In order to capture the high-level structural information of time series, Lin [15] proposed a bag-of-patterns (BoP) representation by converting a time series to a words string using the Symbolic Aggregate approXimation (SAX). The temporal order of local segments, i.e., local patterns, in a time series is ignored and all the local segments in the time series are histogrammed to construct a bag-of-patterns representation. The bag-of-patterns representation is effective to capture the structural similarity of time series. However, one drawback of the bag-of-patterns representation is that its dimension may be very high, which limits its application for large datasets. For instance, when the size of the alphabet τ and the number of symbolsware 4 and 8, respectively, the dimension of the bag-of-patterns representation could reachτw=65,536.In this work, motivated by the success of the bag-of-words model in text document analysis [16,17] and image analysis [18,19], we propose a simple yet effective bag-of-words representation whose dimension is much lower than the bag-of-patterns representation to characterize biomedical time series such as ECG and EEG signals. The bag-of-words representation is able to capture high-level structural information of time series due to the utilization of both local and global information. Furthermore, it can be used to process time series with different lengths attributing to the fact that it is constructed incrementally.The bag-of-words model was originally developed for document representation. The basic idea is to define a codebook that contains a set of codewords and then represent a document as a histogram of the codewords, each entry of which is the count of a codeword occurred in the document. Although the order information of words is ignored, the bag-of-words model is still very effective to capture document information because the frequency information of codewords in documents are well explored. Recently, the bag-of-words model is extended to analyze images and videos in computer vision [18,19]. Local patches extracted from images or videos are treated as words and the codebook is constructed by clustering all the local patches in the training data. Similar to the extension of the bag-of-words representation in computer vision, we here extend the bag-of-words representation to characterize biomedical time series by regarding local segments extracted from time series as words and treat the time series as documents.In the bag-of-words representation, a time series is treated as a text document and local segments extracted from the time series as words. The general flowchart of the proposed method is demonstrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, we continuously slide a window with a pre-defined length along the time series to extract a group of local segments. Then, we extract a feature vector from each of the local segments using DWT. Next, similar to the bag-of-visual-words model in images and videos analysis [18,19], all local segments from the training time series are clustered by k-means clustering to create a codebook, i.e., the cluster centers are treated as codewords. Then, a local segment is assigned the codeword that has the minimum distance to the local segment, and the time series is represented as a histogram of the codewords. Finally, the bag-of-words representation is used as input for classification.The main contribution of the paper is twofold: (i) a simple yet effective bag-of-words representation that is originally developed for text document representation is extended for analysis of biomedical time series such as ECG and EEG signals; (ii) a series of experiments was conducted to investigate the effectiveness and robustness of the bag-of-words representation for ECG and EEG signals classification.The structure of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the proposed method including the bag-of-words representation, distance measures and classification method is described. Section 3 describes the experimental setup. Experimental results are reported and analyzed in Section 4. Discussion and conclusion are given in Sections 5 and 6, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
