@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An automatic SSA-based de-noising and smoothing technique for surface electromyography signals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An automatic SSA-based de-noising and smoothing technique is presented.The method allows the automatic elimination of the noise present in sEMG signals.The methodology is robust to variations in the selected window length.Results are comparable to traditional MOVAG, RMS and low-pass Butterworth filtering.The method can improve the accuracy of the processing and analysis of sEMG signals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Singular spectrum analysis,Electromyography,Automatic smoothing,Signal processing,Cluster analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The surface electromyography (sEMG) signal is a low amplitude signal that emanates from contracting muscles. It can be used directly to measure muscle activity (once noise has been removed) or it can be smoothed for some other application, e.g., orthoses or prostheses control. Here, an automatic heuristic procedure is presented which applies singular spectrum analysis (SSA) and cluster analysis to de-noise and smooth sEMG signals. SSA is a non-parametric technique that decomposes the original time series into a set of additive time series in which the noise present in the acquired signal can be easily identified. The proposed approach constitutes an alternative to the traditional smoothing procedures, such as moving average (MOVAG), root mean square (RMS), or low-pass Butterworth filtering that are used to extract the trend of the signal. To assess the quality of the method, the results of its application to a non-stationary sEMG signal are compared with those of other step-wise filtering and smoothing techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electromyography is a technique used to detect and analyse the electrical signal that emanates from muscle contractions [1]. This type of signal (Fig. 1(a)) is typically contaminated by various sources of noise. Although several methods have been developed to reduce skin-caused artifacts and to improve the placement and securing of sEMG sensors, one of the most effective methods of dealing with noise contamination is to filter the noise out of the signal while retaining as much as possible of the region of interest in the frequency spectrum [2]. The typical sEMG frequency spectrum ranges from 0 to 450Hz (Fig. 1(b)), depending on different factors [1]. Various recommendations have been put forward for the boundaries of the bandpas filters [3–5]. Those boundaries range from 5 to 20Hz at the low frequency end to 400–450Hz at the high frequency end, and in most cases the appropriate choice is far from trivial. The traditional method to de-noise sEMG signals is to use digital Butterworth filters [6]. Nonetheless, more advanced filtering techniques such as discrete wavelet transforms [7], Wiener filtering [8], and empirical mode decomposition [9,10] have also been used to that end. Besides, singular spectrum analysis (SSA) has been applied in this field to detect the signal onset in EMG recordings [11]. Although these methods have proven useful, their main drawback is the complexity of devising an automatic and systematic procedure, i.e., a mother wavelet function must be selected when using discrete wavelet transforms, the filtering function parameters must be chosen when using the Wiener filter, etc. The objective of the present communication is to demonstrate the advantages of SSA-based methods and cluster analysis for de-noising sEMG signals. SSA is a non-parametric technique that decomposes the original time series into a set of additive time series in which it is possible to distinguish the information stored in the signal from the noise components. Once the noise has been removed, the SSA-based method also allows the sEMG signal to be smoothed so as to obtain the trend of the signal. The methods recommended for smoothing sEMG signals include moving average (MOVAG), root mean square (RMS), and low-pass filter (e.g., 2nd-order low-pass Butterworth using a cutoff frequency of 6Hz). We here present a heuristic for the automatic de-noising and smoothing of raw sEMG signals, and compare it with the classical approaches in the literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, an SSA-based heuristic algorithm for the automatic elimination of the noise present in sEMG signals has been presented. The method also allows these signals to be smoothed to extract the trend. The cluster analysis followed by the sequential application of SSA to the resulting reconstructed signal provide a powerful complement in the automation of the process. The SSA algorithm decomposes the original signal into independent additive components of decreasing weight, allowing the trend latent in the signal to be separated from the random noise inherent to the sEMG acquisition system. One of the main advantages of the proposed method is that only a single parameter has to be selected beforehand – the window length L. Even then, however, the results are robust to variations in this parameter. In sum therefore, this automatic de-noising and smoothing technique may contribute to improving the accuracy of the processing and analysis of the complex signals acquired in sEMG. Future work will focus on real time applications of the proposed method as it is possible to apply the procedure with quite narrow time windows.All the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest associated with this publication.