@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multilead ECG data compression using SVD in multiresolution domain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a multiscale SVD based compression algorithm for multilead ECG data.Algorithm exploits intra-beat and inter-lead correlations of wavelet coefficients.A new thresholding technique is proposed.Algorithm outperforms in terms of CR and computational time.Simulations are done for WBSN applications by comparing with state-of-art methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multilead ECG (MECG),Multiscale SVD (MSVD),Multiscale relative energy density (MRED),DWT,MECG compression,Wireless body sensor network (WBSN),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, multilead electrocardiogram (MECG) data compression using singular value decomposition in multiresolution domain is proposed. It ensures a high compression ratio by exploiting both intra-beat and inter-lead correlations. A new thresholding technique based on multiscale root fractional energy contribution is proposed. It selects the singular values depending on the clinical importance of the wavelet subbands. The proposed method is evaluated with the PTB Diagnostic ECG database. This compression method is embedded with a pulse amplitude modulated direct sequence-ultra wideband technology for transmission of the MECG data. This may be useful in telemonitoring services for the wireless body sensor network. A comparative study of computational time complexity has also been carried out. The results show that the proposed method can be executed at least three times faster than the existing methods. The storage efficiency is enhanced by 19 times using this method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless body sensor network (WBSN) is an emerging technology in telemedicine [1]. Recently, compressive sensing (CS) based compression methods [2–5] for single lead electrocardiogram (ECG) and fetal ECG signals have been evaluated in WBSN system. These methods are suitable for on-body sensors due to their nonadaptive nature and fast sampling. For diagnostic decisions, however, cardiologists use multilead ECG (MECG) more often compared to single lead ECG [6]. The standard MECG data consist of 12-lead ECG signals. This requires about 5.76MB (12×16×500×60bits) storage volume for 1min duration MECG data sampled at 500Hz with 16bits/sample. This demands large memory space in WBSN systems. Also due to increase in number of leads, the energy consumption increases and transmission becomes inefficient for real-time applications. Hence, these CS based systems may not be suitable for multiphysiological signals because of their poor performance in compression ratio (CR, a maximum CR of 60–75% i.e. 2.5–4:1), and consequently, a low compression rate [7]. An efficient compression method for MECG data can resolve these issues. At the same time, it is also important to preserve the clinical information in the processed data.The existing ECG compression methods exploit intra-beat [8–10] and inter-beat correlations [11,12] present in the ECG signal. Recently, wavelet transform (WT) based compression methods have become popular [13–18]. The multiresolution property of the WT grossly segments the morphological features (P-wave, QRS-complex and T-wave) of the ECG signal into different subbands [15,16,19]. This has been exploited for preserving the clinical information in the compressed ECG data. Sharma et al. [17] have proposed a multiscale principal component analysis (MSPCA) based compression method. It uses only inter-lead correlation of the MECG data. This data can be presented in two ways. Either the rows and columns correspond to the ECG leads and their samples respectively or vice-versa. The correlation matrix (AAT, whereAis the data matrix) used in the PCA based method can capture either inter-lead or intra-beat correlation, depending on the arrangement of the MECG data.Wei et al. [12] have proposed a singular value decomposition (SVD) based compression method for single lead ECG data. A hybrid ECG compression method based on SVD and discrete WT (DWT) is proposed in [20]. For implementation of SVD, the single lead ECG samples are presented as 2-D array data. The signal segments corresponding to successive ECG cycles (or periods) are arranged in rows or columns of the 2-D array. As ECG signal is quasi-periodic in nature, it requires period normalization for such an arrangement. However, the MECG is a 2-D array data and the timing information across all the leads is same. Therefore, SVD can be directly implemented on this data without any period normalization. Such an implementation can help exploit both intra-beat and inter-lead correlation. Moreover, the clinical information concerning the ECG morphological features can be processed effectively, if multiscale analysis is added to this scheme. These features include the duration, amplitude and shape of the PQRST waves that are used primarily for clinical diagnosis [19,12,21,15]. This motivates us to propose a multiscale SVD (MSVD) compression method for MECG data. This work does not deal explicitly with the interbeat redundancy as it requires additional computations for QRS detection.The highlights of the proposed method are summarized as follows:•a multiscale SVD based compression algorithm for multilead ECG data has been proposed,it exploits intrabeat and interlead correlations of wavelet coefficients,a new thresholding technique is proposed,the algorithm outperforms the existing literatures for MECG data in terms of CR and computational time,simulation studies have been performed for WBSN applications by comparing with the state-of-art algorithms.Rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the proposed multiscale SVD (MSVD) method for MECG data and a new thresholding technique for singular values. Section 3 describes the compression performance and comparison with existing methods. Simulations study on transmission of MECG data by encoding generated bit streams for WBSN applications is presented in Section 4. Also the computational complexity of the proposed method is carried out. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
