@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bidimensional ensemble empirical mode decomposition of functional biomedical images taken during a contour integration task

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
FMRI data from a contour integration task are analyzed with empirical mode decomposition.Extracted textures show high discriminative power with a SVM classifier.Extracted intrinsic mode functions represent spatially localized activity distributions.Distributed activity in bilateral inferior temporal and superior occipital lobe is maximally predictive for the stimulus condition.Furthermore, results distinctly show the participation of frontal brain areas in contour integration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In cognitive neuroscience, extracting characteristic textures and features from functional imaging modalities which could be useful in identifying particular cognitive states across different conditions is still an important field of study. This paper explores the potential of two-dimensional ensemble empirical mode decomposition (2DEEMD) to extract such textures, so-called bidimensional intrinsic mode functions (BIMFs), of functional biomedical images, especially functional magnetic resonance images (fMRI) taken while performing a contour integration task. To identify most informative textures, i.e. BIMFs, a support vector machine (SVM) as well as a random forest (RF) classifier is trained for two different stimulus/response conditions. Classification performance is used to estimate the discriminative power of extracted BIMFs. The latter are then analyzed according to their spatial distribution of brain activations related with contour integration. Results distinctly show the participation of frontal brain areas in contour integration. Employing features generated from textures represented by BIMFs exhibit superior classification performance when compared with a canonical general linear model (GLM) analysis employing statistical parametric mapping (SPM).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing importance of functional imaging techniques in cognitive brain studies creates the need for adapting modern data mining and machine learning methods to the specific requirements of biomedical images, most notably functional magnetic resonance imaging techniques (fMRI). The latter are able to reveal neural processing and cognitive states during cognitive task performance. Also fMRI can be applied repeatedly as it does not apply harmful ionizing radiation to subjects [62,20]. The resulting large volume of such image series renders their analysis and interpretation tedious. This creates the need for robust and automatized techniques to extract the information buried in such images, to analyze them objectively and to classify them properly. Brain mapping using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is traditionally performed using voxel-wise statistical hypothesis testing. It is typically based on β – images resulting from a linear regression analysis, calculated by powerful tools like the widely used statistical parametric mapping (SPM). Such univariate approach ignores subtle spatial interactions. Alternatively, exploratory matrix factorization (EMF) techniques like independent component analysis (ICA) [8,10] and nonnegative matrix and tensor factorization (NMF/NTF) [11] provide a more global analysis taking such interactions into account. In general, voxel time courses, or corresponding spatial variations, of activity distributions in fMRI images represent non-linear and non-stationary signals.Recently, an empirical nonlinear analysis tool for such complex, non-stationary spatio-temporal signal variations has been pioneered by Huang et al. [23]. Afterwards an extension to multi-dimensional spatio-temporal signal variations was put forward by Nunes et al. [45], Mandic et al. [49] and, recently, especially by Wu et al. [64]. Such techniques are commonly referred to as empirical mode decomposition (EMD), and if combined with Hilbert spectral analysis, they are called Hilbert–Huang transform (HHT). They adaptively and locally decompose any non-stationary signal in a sum of intrinsic mode functions (IMF) which represent zero-mean, amplitude and (spatial-) frequency modulated components. EMD, and its two-dimensional counterpart 2DEMD, represent a fully data-driven, unsupervised signal decomposition which does not need any a priori defined basis system like Fourier- or Wavelet-based techniques. Furthermore, EMD satisfies the perfect reconstruction property. Thus it lacks the scaling and permutation indeterminacy familiar from blind source separation (BSS) techniques [12]. Owing to these characteristics, 2DEMD, and even more so its noise-assisted variant called ensemble empirical mode decomposition (2DEEMD), is highly promising in analyzing such spatio-temporal signal variations of a multi-scale nature. Note that, for fMRI purposes, EEMD could be even extended to a full 3D-EEMD of a whole brain volume, or even 4D-EEMD if time should be included as well. However, the computational load would increase considerably then which renders such analyses still impractical with large data sets.If two-dimensional IMFs, which represent the same spatial scale, are combined to more global bidimensional IMFs, henceforth called BIMFs, the latter reveal characteristic underlying textures of the multivariate spatio-temporal activity distributions, and provide proper features for classification purposes. Such automated feature extraction proofs especially useful in cognitive neuroscience research for later stimulus response classification. Only few studies have been performed yet to apply multi-dimensional EMD to biomedical images. Zheng et al. [69] reported the use of EMD for activation detection in fMRI images of the brain. Rojas et al. [53] report on applying EMD to Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) images to explore Parkinson's disease. Also very recently, Zemzami et al. [67] used a bi-dimensional EMD approach to decompose 3D biomedical magnetic resonance images (MRI) into bi-dimensional IMFs which then have been reconstructed into 3D volume image modes. Deng et al. [14] recently proposed an new method for fMRI analysis based on empirical mean curve decomposition. Kriegeskorte et al. [29] used searchlight approaches which use a multivariate predictive model in each local neighborhood in brain space. The classification performance is then reported at the center of the searchlight to build an information map. Also classification methods that analyze the brain as a whole, based on an SPM analysis, have been tested (e.g. [21,41]). Lately, there has been a growing interest in state-of-the-art feature extraction techniques for investigating whether stimulus information is present in fMRI response patterns, and attempting to decode the stimuli from the response patterns with a multivariate classifier. However, little is known about the relative performance of different classifiers on fMRI data. These techniques have been successfully applied to the individual classification of a variety of neurological conditions [31,16,26,61], and allow capturing complex multivariate relationships in the data. Multivariate machine learning methods allow for multi-voxel pattern analysis and can reveal patterns amongst voxels in fMRI data [22,43], and so may provide much more detailed information about brain activity, i.e. not only local increases but distributed patterns of activity are identified.This paper explores the potential of 2DEEMD to decompose fMRI images recorded while performing a cognitive task, more specifically a contour integration task while viewing oriented Gabor patches presented as visual stimuli. Further post-processing serves to reduce the dimension of the data sets and to transform the component images according to additional statistical constraints like orthogonality or independence. Feature quality is assessed by statistical measures of properly trained SVM and RF classifiers. First various parameters of the method like the number of sifting steps, the amplitude of added white noise, the number of extracted BIMFs, etc., of the algorithm need to be varied systematically to develop strategies for determining respective optimal values, followed by employing 2DEEMD to extract characteristic textures on different spatial scales. In a second step, features generated from the related volume intrinsic mode functions (VIMFs) are fed into the classifiers. The classifiers serve to corroborate the discriminative power of the extracted features, and by way of proper statistical measures, component images most discriminative for decision making can be identified. Subsequently, activity distributions related to these BIMFs or VIMFs, respectively, can be analyzed with respect to activated brain areas involved and available knowledge about visual processing and contour integration accumulated in the open literature. As during the scan the subjects are asked to indicate the presence or absence of a contour in the stimulus pattern, there are two classes to differentiate: contour true (CT) and non-contour true (NCT). From these results the performance of the classifiers as well as the sensitivity and specificity of their responses, can be deduced. These classification results will reveal those component images and their concomitant neuronal activity distributions, which best differentiate between the classes hence contain the most information as to where neuronal activations are localized in the brain which operate on contour integration tasks within visual processing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
