@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive sliding bandlimited multiple fourier linear combiner for estimation of pathological tremor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The analysis of frequency characteristic of physiological and pathological tremor is proposed.The algorithm incorporates Butterworth filter, WFLC, frequency modulation block and BMFLC.The method could estimate desired signals with sliding frequency band and zero-phase lag.One mechanical platform for simulating tremor and intention movements is developed.The method successfully extracts the voluntary motion from the raw measured signal.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pathological tremor,Biomechanical loading,BMFLC,Sliding frequency band,Zero-phase lag,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pathological tremor is a roughly sinusoidal movement and impacts individuals’ daily living activities. Biomechanical loading is employed as a potential method for tremor suppression with the accurate estimation of amplitude and frequency of tremor signals. In this paper, a study on tremor is conducted and the characteristics of tremor signals are analyzed. An adaptive sliding Bandlimited multiple Fourier linear combiner (ASBMFLC) algorithm is proposed to estimate the different desired signals with sliding frequency band and zero-phase lag. This method incorporates digital filter, Weighted-Frequency Fourier Linear Combiner (WFLC) and Bandlimited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner (BMFLC) with modification of fundamental frequency and limitation of frequency range. Based on the experimental tremor signals, WFLC, BMFLC and the proposed algorithm are evaluated, respectively. The experimental results show that the developed algorithm could adapt to the unknown dominant frequency for determining the interesting frequency band without prior information. Furthermore, the improved method could provide higher accurate estimation of tremor and extract the voluntary components from measured signals, compared with WFLC and BMFLC, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tremor, a roughly sinusoidal and involuntary alternating movement, is caused by the rhythmic contraction of muscles [1] and usually occurs in the wrist joint and elbow joint. In general, tremor can be classified into the physiological tremor and the pathological tremor. The physiological tremor occurs with low amplitude and high frequency, and impacts individuals’ precise actions [2]. Instead, the pathological tremor is associated with the disorder of neural systems and presents higher amplitude and broader frequency range with 3–14Hz. The pathological tremor is not life-threatening, however, it corrupts human daily life with an oscillatory disturbance [3].With the research of the tremor etiology, pharmacology and surgery were prevalently employed, but its negative effects were inevitable [4]. For developing other treatment methods of tremors, deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus or subthalamic nucleus of tremor patients [5], functional electrical stimulation (FES) of antagonistic muscles of joints to resist tremor [6–9] and biomechanical loading passively or actively acting in-parallel to the upper limb by external devices [10–13] were proposed. However, the high cost and potential danger impacted the application of DBS due to the limitations of technology. In FES, sEMG or EEG was introduced to predict and identify tremor movement, but the application of FES was also obstructed by the unstable biological signals [7]. When the clinical and functional test indicated that increasing the damping or inertia of limb could suppress tremor, biomechanical loading was developed [10]. Recently, wearable rehabilitation systems with constrained-layer damping [10,13] or with DC motors upper limb [11,12] were designed to suppress the tremor on wrist or elbow joint.The external assistive devices like the biomechanical loading or FES were controlled by tremor signals to compensate tremor. FES activates motoneurons or reflex pathways by stimulating sensory nerve fibers and employs muscles as actuators to resist tremor. The characteristical parameters are derived to generate adequate stimulation patterns and counteract tremor [6–9]. For example, the total number of stimulation bursts for flexors and extensors per second is determined by the tremor fundamental frequency. In the tremor suppression by biomedical loading, the value and frequency of damping or inertia are real-time modulated by the amplitude and frequency of tremor signals, respectively [10–13]. In this regard, the real-time estimation of instantaneous tremor parameters by algorithms is important to develop robust orthotic for tremor suppression without affecting the voluntary motion. Digital low-pass or band-pass linear filters were successful in attenuating tremor, but the inherent phase lag and amplitude attenuation degraded the performance in human–machine interaction system. Later, an adaptive band-pass filter (ABPF) was designed to extract tremor without phase lag by updating the center frequency of the filter according to the input signals [14], but the interesting band with zero-phase lag was limited to the center frequency and rather small which was not suitable to the multi-frequency tremor signals. A Hilbert–Huang transformation (HHT)-based filtering method was proposed to process the tremor recordings and to remove the nonlinear, non-stationary interference without priori-knowledge [15–17], but the characteristic of online computation had to be improved.However, adaptive combined methods could adapt to the frequency and amplitude of tremor with zero-phase according to the gradient descent algorithm (the least mean square (LMS)) [18]. Fourier linear combiner (FLC) formed a dynamic truncated Fourier series of desired signals based on the sinusoidal components [19,20]. FLC adaptively estimated the Fourier coefficients of inputs with known frequency and constructed the desired signals canceling periodic interference. The weighted fourier linear combiner(WFLC) algorithm could model any quasiperiodic signal as a modulating sinusoid, and track its frequency,amplitude and phase by incorporating frequency adaptation procedure into FLC. However, WFLC algorithm could only adapt to a single dominant frequency in the input signals. For the case of tremor signals modulated by two frequencies close in frequency domain, the performance of WFLC would degrade [21,22]. For canceling the low frequency components which decreased the accuracy of tremor estimation, a Benedict–Bordner filter was introduced before WFLC [3,23], but this method introduced phase lag. To overcome the drawbacks of FLC and WFLC, Bandlimited multiple Fourier Linear Combiner (BMFLC) comprised of several Fourier Linear Combiner was derived [24,25]. In BMFLC, the frequency band was divided into equal portions and BMFLC could track the multiple frequency components in the input signals with corresponding fundamental frequency. Main drawback of BMFLC lied in tracking signals with a fixed frequency band with prior experience of tremor signals [24]. This increased the number of weights and increased the susceptibility to noise, which degraded the real-time implement. The recursive least squares (RLS) and Kalman Filter were also introduced into BMFLC replacing the LMS algorithm to raise the comuputing speed and accuracy [26], but it didn’t improve the drawback of BMFLC with fixed frequency band. With the prior knowledge of the frequency band of the periodic motions, a combination of linear filtering and modified-WFLC or modified-BMFLC was employed to estimate the actual signals and the results were compensated without the phase-shifted and attenuation which was usually caused by filters [27]. However, this method didn’t invlove the characheristic that frequncy band slides with time and individual of tremor signals. In this paper, a method is proposed in which BMFLC is incorporated with WFLC and modification of frequency, so that the frequency band could slide in time or individual. The similer estimate of actual tremor signals could be achieved with fewer computation and time compared with existing algorithms, like BMFCL or WFLC.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 studies the characteristic of the tremor and design an algorithm for estimating the instantaneous tremor parameters. Section 3 describes the source of patholgical tremor signals and the mechanical platform for mimicking tremor incorporating with voluntary motion. Section 4 presents the results on tremor modeling and the extraction of voluntary motion by the proposed algorithm. Section 5 concludes the paper.During the filtering and estimation of tremor, the accuracy of the tracking algorithms was directly determined by the frequency range of tremor signals [28]. In this section, the tremor profiles of various subjects were analyzed to evaluate the tremor frequency range.In recent years, several studies indicate that physiological tremor might be caused by central nervous system with oscillatory activity, mechanical resonances or derangement of reflex loop [29]. Due to the multi-factors, the physiological tremor appears as a quasi-periodic component inherent in normal motions with a frequency range in 8–14Hz and an amplitude (100 μm) in 3D direction [24]. In ref. [25], 6 healthy subjects and 10microsurgeons are selected. The mean frequency range for surgeons and novice subjects are [9.33Hz, 11.6Hz] and [7.6Hz, 10.3Hz], respectively. While the tremor bandwidth of novice subject is about 2Hz (10–12Hz) and surgeon is about 3Hz (7–10Hz) during stationary and tracking tests. This research indicates that the tremor frequency band changes in different physiological tremors.Pathological tremor is defined as impair motor performance and is distinct from other involuntary movement disorders by its repetitive and stereotyped feature [30]. Significant insights of the oscillatory activity recorded in different parts of the nervous system are performed to explore the mechanism of pathological tremor. The study shows that the central neural oscillator is in charge of generating the abnormal rhythmic activation patterns of muscles [31]. Recently, analysis of tremor recordings on the pathological tremors is employed to conclude the general frequency band and the clinical features as depicted in Table 1.According the Table 1, pathological tremors are classified into essential tremor, Parkinson's disease (PD) etc. according to the frequency and amplitude. It illustrates that pathological tremors occur on different body segments and in different task or position-dependence. The significant result is that the dominant frequency band with different bandwidth changes in pathological tremors or body segments.To determine the dominant frequency and frequency band of pathological tremor, tremor signals downloaded from the website of Motus Bioengineering Inc [32] are analyzed. For example, essential tremor often occurs in hands, especially when you do simple tasks like drinking and writing. Essential tremor worsens with time and may be severe in some people. The signal of essential tremor accompanying voluntary movements of the wrist is illustrated in Fig. 1.Parkinsonian usually occurs while the body segment is maintained in a rest position and may disappear with action. For this reason, the profile of Parkinsonian’ extremities is more significant without the voluntary movements as shown in Fig. 2.Based on the frequency characteristic of pathological tremor recordings, pathological tremor is likely to have dominant frequency with a tremor bandwidth of 2–3Hz in contrast to the physiological tremor. In this procedure, the dominant frequency band comprised of many frequency components is determined. For example, the frequency range of essential tremor is about 6–9Hz with a low component (1Hz) and Parkinsonian tremor is 3–7Hz. The mean (standard deviation) band and bandwidth of Parkinsonian tremor are [3.25±0.46, 6.5±0.3] Hz and [3.25±0.6] Hz, respectively. However, the mean (standard deviation) band and bandwidth of essential tremor is [6.3±0.2, 10.83±0.43] Hz and [4.53±0.1] Hz. To generalize our analysis, we consider that the most important tremor information symmetrically disturbs to dominant frequency with bandwidth of 2–5Hz. As shown in Figs. 1(c) and 2(c), the dominant frequency of a certain tremor changes with time and frequency band also slides with the dominant frequency. Hence, the adaptive frequency band of algorithms should be determined so as to effectively combine the measured signals with inexpensive calculation.In the exoskeleton system for canceling tremor, the accurate estimation of the amplitude and frequency of tremor signals is important to generate anti-tremor forces attenuating tremors. In the modeling of tremor, Band-limited multiple Fourier linear combiner (BMFLC) described in reference [24] is developed to track modulated tremor signals within a band of frequencies. However, the cancelation of periodic interference with BMFLC depends on the frequency band (Δf) and the division of frequency band. Whereas, a proper Δf is usually determined off-line according to the priori experience of frequency characteristic of tremor signals and this is contrary to the real-time implementation of algorithms.According to the analysis of Section 2.1, the statistical frequency band of most pathological subjects is fixed in a large range, however, the instantaneous frequency band of tremor signals changes with time which could be found in Figs. 1(c) and 2(c). In the range emphasized by the ellipse, the color that denotes the dominant frequency band in the stage (5–10s of Fig. 1(c)) and (15–20s of Fig. 2(c)) transiently changes. The data in Table 1 reveal that different pathological tremor has its own frequency band and the same tremor has nonstationary frequency band. After summarizing the characteristic of pathological tremor recordings, we also find that the most important information of tremor symmetrically distributes around the dominant frequency with bandwidth (2–5Hz) which is shown in Figs. 1(b) and 2(b).If we directly select the prefixed range as the interesting frequency band of BMFLC to estimate tremor, a large frequency band will be selected to cover the main frequency information of most pathological subjects. BMFLC neglects the time-varying characteristics of tremor and involves many faint components which causes the parameters in the model not to be handled in real-time. Besides, the large frequency band also introduces redundant weights increasing susceptibility of algorithm to noise, comparing with the dominant frequency band with a bandwidth of 2–5Hz. In this context, BMFLC is developed to the adaptive sliding multiple Fourier linear combiner (ASBMFLC) and the adaptive band (Δf') with the dominant frequency as the center frequency replaces the fixed band (Δf) as shown in Figs. 1(c) and 2(c).Based on the characteristic of Butterworth filter, maximally flat frequency response in the passband, the measured signals are firstly filtered by a 4th Band-pass Butterworth filter with 2–14Hz to discrete the low and high frequency components at the first stage of ASBMFLC. Secondly, the filtered signals are combined by WFLC that is expressed in the references [19–22] and can estimate the dominant frequency without the phase lag. The dominant frequency information contained in WFLC is evaluated whether it is in the permissible range by the frequency modulation block and then the dominant frequency band is determined. Using the adaptive dominant frequency band, we reconstruct the fundamental frequency in BMFLC and a second set of amplitude weights operates on the raw signal tracking amplitude and performing the zero-phase tremor estimation, while the bandwidth is determined based on prior information. The flow chart of this algorithm is shown as Fig. 3.Due to the nonstationary characteristic of tremor, estimation algorithm of tremor should adapt to the changes in frequency and amplitude. However, the fundamental frequency of FLC is preset with prior experience. To solve this drawback, WFLC is developed based on the FLC to adapt to the time-varying frequency by a modification of LMS. Compared with FLC only operating at a fixed frequency, WFLC could adapt to periodic signals with unknown frequency, phase and amplitude [19–22]. The algorithm can be given as:(1)xnk=sin[nT∑r=0kw0r,]n=0,1.....Mcos[(n−M)T∑r=0kw0rn=M+1,M+2......2M+1(2)εk=Yk−WkTXk(3)w0k+1=w0k+2μ0εk∑n=1Mn[wnkcosnT∑r=0kw0r−wnMksin(nT∑r=0kw0r)](4)Wk+1=Wk+2μεkXkwhere Xkis the reference vector, ɛkis the error calculated by Eq. (2) which is employed to calculate the dominant frequency, skis the input signal. The amplitude and phase of input signal are estimated by the adaptive weight vector Wk, whereasw0kestimates the unknown frequency μ0 and μ are adaptive gain that tune the adaptation of frequency and amplitude, respectively [11,12]. However, WFLC cannot filter tremor components from the measured signals. In the past, WFLC was usually employed with FLC to track tremor signals. Using the frequency information from WFLC, a second set of amplitude weights operates on the raw signal to track the amplitude of the signal. Recent studies suggested that the frequency of most pathological tremor is in a large range. Therefore, we replace the FLC by BMFLC and choose a series of sine and cosine components with adaptive step-size fundamental frequency instead of harmonic frequency to form signals.The dominant frequency information calculated from WFLC is input into the modulation block. In the modulation block, the frequency band is determined by the dominant frequency and can be modulated as time. The sliding range of frequency band is presented in Fig. 4.where L is the interesting frequency band, the ωmin and ωmax are the minimum frequency and maximum frequency of all type pathological tremors. ωdominant, ω0 and ω1 denote he dominant frequency, the initial frequency and the cutoff frequency of interesting frequency band. The frequency band (blue lines) could slide as the dominant frequency (red line) in a range limited by ωmin and ωmax, which are introduced to prevent the interesting frequency band from sliding out the maximum range and high frequency noise. The relationship of ωdominant, ω0 and ω1 is given by formula (5):(5)ωdominant=ω0+ω12,ω0=ωdominant−L2,ω1=ωdominant+L2The selection of dominant frequency in the maximum frequency range can be expressed as (6).(6)ωdominant=ωwflc,ωmin+L2<ωdominant<ωmax−L2ωmin+L2,ωdominant<ωmin+L2ωmax−L2,ωdominant>ωmax−L2where the ωwflc is the frequency estimated by WFLC.Based on Fig. 4, once the frequency passband is determined, the frequency width will be divided into equal finite number of divisions just as shown in formula (7):(7)Δω=L2G=ω1−ω02GAnd then the distribution of frequency is shown in formula (8):(8)ωk=ω0+nΔω,n=0,1,2......G−1ωdominant,n=Gω1−(n−G−1)Δω,n=G+1,.....2Gwhere ωkis the fundamental frequency at instant k, and G is the scaling number that decides the step-size of the series. With increase in G, the divisions become smaller and the accuracy in estimation can be increased according to user requirement.The finite number divisions of frequency band are used as the fundamental frequency for the reference vector and can be expressed as (9):(9)xk=sin(ωkkT),n=0,1.....Mcos(ωkkT),n=M+1,M+2,......2Ma2M+1,n=2M+1where xkis the reference vector and M is the number of harmonics in the model with M=2G.The architecture of the improved BMFLC algorithm is then shown in Fig. 5Based on the architecture shown as Fig. 5, the sinusoidal and cosinusoidal components are used to track the unknown tremor signal at time instant k in equation formula (10):(10)yk=∑r=0Marsin(ωkkT)+∑r=M2M+1brcos(wkkT)+a2M+2The weights ar, brand a2M+2 are adaptive to the optimal value according to the unknown signal by the LMS algorithm [29]. The iterative update of weights and the combine of signals are given by Eqs. (11) and (12):(11)εˆk=sk−WˆkTxk(12)Wˆk+1=Wˆk+2μˆεkxkwhereWˆk=[a0,a1..aM,b1..b2M+1,a2M+2]Tand xk=[sin(ω0kT), ..sin(ω1kT), ..sin(ω1kT)]Tare the second set of weight vector and reference vector and operate on the raw signals performing zero-phase tremor estimation.εˆkis the error between the raw signals and the estimation signals used for estimating the instantaneous tremor frequency and amplitude. skis the input signal andμˆis the adaptive gain parameter. Thus, Eqs. (11) and (12) operate essentially as a BMFLC with a time-varying reference frequency band.If the frequencies of reference vectors are in the range of ω0, ω1, this proposed algorithm can track signals with multiple frequencies in the given band and could be approximately considered as a band-pass filter. a2M+2 is introduced into the reference vectors and the weight vector corresponding to a2M+2 is used to track the intentional components outside the band [20]. The separation of tremor is expressed as Eq. (13):(13)stremor=WˆkTxk−a2M+2In this way, the proposed algorithm could separate the intentional motion from tremor motion according to the predefined band (ω0, ω1). Although the pre-filter before the WFLC introduces a small phase lag in the output, only the frequency information from the WFLC is used for the actual estimation of tremor. Based on the fact that the frequency unlike amplitude of tremor signals tends to change slowly [28], the effect of the delay on final performance is negligible.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
