@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated control of inspired oxygen for preterm infants: What we have and what we need

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rapidly responsive adaptive FiO2 controllers may be advantageous in preterm infants.Predicting SpO2 variability and hypoxia in infants may enhance FiO2 control.Current controllers are limited by technologic shortcomings of infant monitoring.Embedded safety considerations are crucial in developing automated controllers.Further clinical research will be needed to improve automated oxygen controllers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Oxygen saturation,Hypoxia,Apnoea,Automated control,Preterm infants,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This review provides the first comprehensive technically focused image of algorithms developed for automation of inspired oxygen control in preterm infants. The paper has three main parts; the first provides an overview of the existing algorithms, the second presents the major design challenges of automation and the third proposes directions for future research and development of improved controllers. In the first section, the algorithms are classified in four categories, namely rule-based, proportional-integral-derivative, adaptive, and robust. The second section discusses variability in oxygenation, technologic shortcomings of infant monitoring and safety considerations as the three major challenges for designing automated controllers. The paper finally proceeds to suggest some future directions for improving automated oxygen control in the preterm infant. It suggests that based on the nature of the physiological system, an optimal algorithm must be capable of making continuous adjustments and it should be adaptive, including to alterations in severity of lung dysfunction and position on the oxygen saturation curve. It is also suggested that future controllers must utilise additional inputs for tasks such as oximeter signal validation and real-time prediction of hypoxic events.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Newborn infants, particularly those born prematurely, often need respiratory support in a period following their birth. This frequently includes supply of a warmed and humidified mixture of air and oxygen, delivered either via a stand-alone gas blender as part of non-invasive respiratory support, or by a blender incorporated into a mechanical ventilator. Regardless of the mode of respiratory support, adjustment of the fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) is critical, with the aim of keeping partial pressure of oxygen in the arterial blood (PaO2) in an optimal range. In the neonate, PaO2 levels that are too low (hypoxia) or too high (hyperoxia) are dangerous, being associated with an increased risk of mortality, retinopathy, brain injury and chronic lung disease [1]. A compelling argument thus exists for avoiding extremes of oxygenation in the newborn infant, especially for prolonged periods. Putting this into practice is challenging enough, but the difficulty is compounded by the lack of a direct, continuous and precise measure of PaO2 in the neonate. For this reason a proxy measure of oxygenation is used, that of oxygen saturation (SpO2) measured via a skin probe by a pulse oximeter, rather than PaO2 itself. Given that the SpO2–PaO2 relationship is far from linear, reliance on measurement of SpO2 to guide titration of oxygen therapy imposes an additional layer of complexity to the problem of optimising oxygenation in the newborn.The current approach to titration of oxygen therapy in the preterm newborn is that of manual adjustment of FiO2 by bedside caregivers in an effort to maintain SpO2 in the target range. It is well-established, however, that this method is not very effective [2,3]. Recent reports indicate that the average proportion of time spent within the target range during manual control, can be as low as 30–40% [4,5]. Accordingly, there have been efforts to automate this process [6]. While early efforts towards automation of FiO2 control for preterm infants date back to 1970s [7,8], manual control is still the common practice.Previous reviews of automated control of FiO2 have discussed the rationale and potential benefits and risks of automated control for preterm infants [6,9–13] as well as reviewing the available evidence from clinical trials [12–14]. These papers point to the potential for automated control to more effectively maintain oxygenation in a target range and reduce the workload of bedside caregivers. The need to perform large-scale clinical trials of automated control has also been highlighted, including a study of longer term outcomes in preterm infants receiving this form of support.The published reviews appear not to reflect the importance of the technical characteristics of automated oxygen control systems. The existing algorithms have not been comprehensively described, critically appraised and compared. Accordingly, the first aim of the current paper is to summarise and classify algorithms for automated control, and identify directions for future improvement. The second objective is to identify the main obstacles in developing automated FiO2 control devices, and suggest some potential solutions.During automated or closed loop FiO2 control, regular adjustments to the fraction of inspired oxygen are made based on a feedback of oxygenation. The control loop includes the control algorithm programmed in a computer or an embedded processing unit. This algorithm receives the oxygenation feedback and provides the suggested FiO2. The other part of the loop is composed of the infant to whom the air-oxygen mixture with the desired FiO2 is delivered and from whom the oxygenation measurement is obtained. The control loop is closed by the electrical and mechanical actuators which receive the proposed FiO2 from the algorithm and deliver the blended air-oxygen mixture.Published reports reveal four major approaches to algorithm design for inspired oxygen control in the neonate: (a) rule-based, (b) proportional-integral-derivative (PID), (c) adaptive and (d) robust approaches. These are defined and examined in detail below.Rule-based controllers make adjustments to FiO2 based on a set of rules which stem from expert knowledge. A rule-based controller may be in the form of a simple if-then loop or can engage fuzzy logic [15].Automation of oxygen control for preterm infants began with a simple rule-based controller proposed by Beddis et al. [7] and technically described in more detail by Collins et al. [8]. This servo-controller adjusted FiO2 in 5% single step increments or decrements at 1-min intervals if the measured partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) was out of the desired range, or took no action if the PaO2 was acceptable. Later rule-based algorithms [16–18] were similar in terms of making step adjustments in FiO2 with a period of inaction thereafter, but were significantly more elaborate in their decision-making. The algorithm of Morozoff et al. [16] used three error-based indices as inputs to a state machine controller.The controller inputs were the signs of the magnitude, velocity and acceleration of the error based on which the state machine determined a qualitative parameter called trend of the error. The value of the trend defined the next state of the machine, an FiO2 adjustment and a delay to give time for reaction to the adjustment. Although the authors defined the states and trends in a table, they did not present detailed information about transitions between the states, how the delay and adjustments were determined and what were the actual values of these outputs [16]. The state machine was updated every second.Along similar lines, the more recent controller of Urschitz et al. [17] utilised the concept of trend in its decision-making but defined it a totally different way. The algorithm made a decision based on “state analysis” (180s) and “trend analysis” (60s) followed by “no action” episodes (180s). There were five possible adjustments (−2%, −1%, 0, +2%, +5%) according to the state, which could be postponed according to the extracted trend. Qualitative descriptions (state and trend) were extracted from moving windows of the recorded oxygen saturation and allowed for accommodation of the variability in SpO2 for decision-making. There were five possible states (substantially above, above, normal range, below, substantially below), and three possible trends (increasing, stable, decreasing). The abstraction method was presented by Miksch et al. [19] and included linear regression steps; the basis of control algorithm was introduced by Seyfang et al. [20]. The authors stated that this controller was not designed to respond to acute severe hypoxic episodes [17]. The algorithm also called CLAC (Closed Loop Automated oxygen Control) has been clinically evaluated on preterm infants [21] and is commercially available in the Leoni Plus Ventilator (Heinen & Löwenstein GmbH, Bad Ems, Germany) which supports mechanical and non-invasive ventilation.The most recently developed rule-based algorithm [18] called PRICO (PRedictive Intelligent Closed loop control of Oxygenation) is similar to its predecessors [16,17] in making step adjustments followed by no-action episodes (at least 30s) and using the concept of trend along with the SpO2 readings in decision-making. However, PRICO uses the trend for identifying abrupt changes in SpO2 and fine-tuning the size of FiO2 adjustments to prevent possible under/overshoots. PRICO will be commercially available in Fabian ventilators (Acutronic Medical Systems AG, Hirzel, Switzerland) for mechanical and non-invasive ventilation including a device called fabian Therapy evolution dedicated to CPAP/O2 therapy [Elroy Zonneveld, Acutronic Medical Systems AG, Personal communications, January 2016].The application of a fuzzy logic controller to neonatal inspired oxygen control was first reported by Sun et al. [22], paralleling the efforts of Morozoff [23]. Fuzzy logic controllers are similar to simple rule-based controllers in using if-then pairs but they make it possible for a given set of inputs to correspond to more than one rule with variable extents. This work is performed using membership functions (Fig. 1) which define the extent of membership of a variable to subsets of a fuzzy set. The final control decision is then made in a procedure using the outputs of the relevant rules as well as the obtained memberships.Putative advantages of fuzzy control over classical control theory are (a) the applicability to systems which are hard to model mathematically and are nonlinear, (b) the capacity to incorporate expert knowledge in the algorithm, (c) the possibility to facilitate linguistic description of continuous variables associated with fuzzy subsets, (d) less noise sensitivity and more robustness, and finally (e) less complexity of the design and faster computations in real-time [22].In the first use of fuzzy logic for this purpose, Sun et al. [22] used ΔSpO2 and SpO2 slope (pulse oximetry) as inputs which were then fuzzified into 7 and 5 regions, respectively, using triangular membership functions. The error was defined as the difference between average SpO2 and the target SpO2 while SpO2 slope was obtained from a regression line; both were updated every 10 seconds. The fuzzification process created 35 combined regions which corresponded to 35 if-then fuzzy inference rules. The logic of the fuzzy inference rules was defined based on neonatologists’ knowledge. An example of these rules was the application of a very large FiO2 increment when both ΔSpO2 and SpO2 slope had negative values of high magnitude.Along similar lines, a more recent fuzzy logic controller incorporated within a medical device (Auto-mixer, Centro Médico Imbanaco, Cali, Colombia) [24] created a fuzzy inference system including 35 rules with the error and derivative of the SpO2 as its inputs. Unlike Sun et al. [22] however, the error was divided into five and the derivative into seven regions. In the following defuzzification stage, where Sun et al. [22] used a weighted-mean method to combine the outputs of the rules and to create a control action, by contrast Lopez et al. [24] prescribed 11 possible values for an adjustment ranging from −5% to +5% based on the pre-defined rules. Implementation of both controllers was performed using a look-up table to expedite the computation process in real time.The test conditions of rule-based controllers have been widely disparate, which must be taken into account in assessing their performance. Beddis et al. [7] tested their controller on 12 infants receiving supplemental oxygen via headbox, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV). Morozoff et al. [16] on the other hand studied only neonates that were intubated and requiring assisted ventilation. In many cases the tests were performed in two stages. As an example, Urschitz et al. [17] initially tested their algorithm on preterm infants supported with nasal continuous positive airway pressure but later [21] on patients receiving mechanical ventilation and CPAP. Similarly, Sun et al. [22] reported some preliminary clinical results, before testing the algorithm in open loop on 16 mechanically ventilated infants [25]. Lopez et al. [24] used a first-order model of FiO2–SpO2 relationship for their preliminary tests on their controller and later reported the results of a randomised controlled trial [26]. The patients in this trial received supplemental oxygen using nasal cannulae without mechanical ventilation. Finally, Hütten et al. [18] tested their controller on mechanically ventilated preterm lambs.One major issue with the performance of rule-based controllers is that step adjustments are followed by a lockout period with no action. It is thus possible that the response to a sudden change in oxygenation will be inappropriately postponed. Additionally, the different sets of rules based on clinical knowledge appear to be incompletely validated. A clinical comparison of the effectiveness of these algorithms would be the only way to assess their relative performance.PID control, the most popular form of control algorithm in industry, defines an error (e) which is the deviation of the process signal from the set-point. The value of the manipulated signal output (u) at each moment is proportional to the value of error, its integral and derivative (Eq. (1)), with a different multiplying coefficient (Kp, Ki, Kd) in each case. The integral term considers accumulated past error and can eliminate steady state error, whereas the derivative term is in essence a prediction of the future error [27].(1)u(t)=Kpe(t)+Ki∫e(τ)dτ+Kdde(t)dtA conventional PID algorithm was first applied to automated oxygen control by Tehrani and Bazar [28], and updated in 2001 [29]. These controllers were designed for infants given oxygen via an oxyhood or incubator, and were tested in simulation studies using a mathematical model of the neonatal respiratory system. For both algorithms, although oxygen saturation was measured, the PID algorithm used partial pressure of arterial oxygen derived from SpO2 as the input. One of the features of the earlier algorithm [28] was frequent adjustment of the setpoint of PaO2 within the range of 80–90mmHg while in the later version [29] a stepwise algorithm was incorporated to respond to abrupt desaturations, followed by a switch back to the PID algorithm for fine regulation.Beyond those mentioned above, Morozoff and Evans [30] described a “differential” feedback-control algorithm, which was studied in ventilated infants. The algorithm used the sign of the error as well as the velocity and acceleration of the filtered SpO2 to make FiO2 adjustments, followed by a delay in which no further adjustment was made. Based on the described inputs and function of the controller, and with a lack of further detail about the manner of reaching control decisions, this algorithm can hardly be considered a subset of PID family. The controller was too slow to properly respond to rapid desaturations and manual interventions were regularly necessary. The authors suggested that incorporation of an algorithm to identify and respond to rapid desaturations would improve performance. In the most-recently published and the only experimentally tested example of a non-adaptive PID algorithm for automated FiO2 control [31] the performance of three different controllers was compared. The results indicated that besides its need for manual tuning, the tuned PID algorithm performed comparably to a state-machine controller in terms of SpO2 targetting and manual interventions but not as well as an adaptive one.One major challenge in utilising a PID algorithm for control of FiO2 in preterm infants is tuning of its coefficients so that it remains stable and provides adequate oxygen to the patients despite the variability of the system that it controls within infants and over time.Adaptive control is an approach to control in which the behaviour of the algorithm is adjusted based on varying characteristics of the process and its signals [32]. This approach has been used in a number of the automated oxygen control devices for newborn infants described in the past 3 decades. One of the earliest and most significant contributions was made by Sano and Kikucki [33]. Their adaptive feedback controller was intended for newborn infants receiving supplemental oxygen in an incubator.In their study, the relationship between FiO2 and oxygen pressure inside the incubator (PiO2) was described by a first order differential equation, and the association between PiO2 and PaO2 was estimated by another first order equation. The second equation was then estimated as a linear equation (Eq. (2)) neglecting the time constant of the body compared to the incubator. The slope and intercept of the line described in Eq. (2) namely K1 and K2 were considered the changing variables during adaptive control. The two equations were then combined to create a discrete mathematical model of the PaO2 in response to FiO2. This combined model with average K1 and K2 for infants with lung disease was called the nominal model.(2)PaO2=K1×PiO2+K2A model reference adaptive control approach was then used, consisting of two parts, an adaptive compensator and an optimum digital controller (Fig. 2). The optimum controller was designed to make FiO2 adjustments to control the nominal model. The adaptive compensator on the other hand, was in charge of compensating the dynamics of the subject's respiratory system so that the combination of the compensator and the subject remained equal to the nominal model from the controller's point of view. In other words, the optimum controller assumed a constant nominal model of the system while the adaptive compensator adaptively updated itself so that the overall input-output model assumed by the optimum controller was realised. The controller was tested using an analytical model of the respiratory system, and in experimental animals. Despite sophistication of the approach and an apparent depth of physiological understanding on the part of the authors, this work is lacking for supporting clinical data and has shortcomings such as the restricted focus on delivery of ambient oxygen, and the reliance on transcutaneous partial pressure of oxygen measurement.In work inspired by Sano and Kikucki [33], Bhutani et al. [34] examined the performance of a PID algorithm developed within their group [35,36]. The sole adaptively tuned parameter was the slope of the PaO2–FiO2 relationship. This slope was iteratively calculated using SpO2 measurement, with the new value of slope being a weighted summation of the previous value and the current ratio of PaO2 (derived from SpO2) to FiO2. Again the focus was on infants receiving supplemental oxygen by hood. Studies on fourteen infants showed superior performance of the adaptive algorithm compared to both standard protocol-based and bedside manual control in terms of the time spent in the target range, SpO2 stability and reduced overshoots introducing adaptive approach as an efficient solution.A further adaptive oxygen controller for neonates was proposed by Morozoff et al. [37], operating on the basis of changes to the FiO2–SpO2 relationship. This method described the relationship by a curve which consisted of three lines with various slopes and covering various ranges of FiO2 and SpO2. The algorithm adjusted the lines periodically by evaluating the proportion of time that was spent within, over or under the target range. The controller made its periodic adjustments to FiO2 on the basis of the updated model (curve) at each time.Shortcomings of this work were the limited justification for the method of updating the lines, and for the determination of the magnitude of FiO2 adjustments based on the model. The algorithm was compared with manual control, a state machine controller and a PID controller in several infants and appeared overall to achieve the highest proportion of time in the target SpO2 range, with little need for manual intervention. However the study conditions including the target range were variable and the results were not presented in detail. Morozoff and Smyth [31] later included these algorithms in clinical experiments with similar findings.The most clinically tested algorithm thus far developed for automated oxygen control is also adaptive. Claure et al. [38], devised a hybrid algorithm which is a combination of differential feedback and rule-based control to maintain SpO2 in a target range. Both timing and magnitude of the FiO2 adjustments are calculated based on parameters such as current SpO2, direction and rate of variations in SpO2, severity and duration of the hypxoic/hyperoxic episode, current FiO2 and basal FiO2 during normoxia. Adjustments during hyperoxia are of lesser magnitude and speed than during acute hypoxia episodes.The algorithm is adaptive in the sense that FiO2 adjustments are directly proportional to the severity of lung dysfunction, as measured by the current baseline oxygen requirement. After the initial clinical study in mechanically ventilated preterm infants [38], several clinical trials have compared the performance of this algorithm with manual control in preterm infants [39–42]. Automated control was associated with a greater proportion of time in the target SpO2 range compared with manual control in all studies. Time spent in the hyperoxic range was reduced. In the early studies this appeared to be at the cost of more time spent in mild hypoxia [39,40], although in the two most recent studies time in mild hypoxia has been on par with or less than during manual control [41,42]. This algorithm is incorporated as an option (CliO2TM) in a mechanical ventilator (Avea, Carefusion, Seven Hills, Australia), and is approved for use in numerous countries. The (CliO2TM) option has not been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration and is thus not currently available in the United States.Finally, the most recent adaptive controller is called SPOC (SpO2 Controller) which will be commercially available in the Sophie Ventilator (Fritz Stephan GmbH, Gackenbach, Germany) for invasive and non-invasive ventilation [43]. SPOC employs the PID concept as the operating principle and makes several adaptive modifications. Firstly, the PID coefficients are scheduled depending on the range of the measured SpO2 and are adjusted according to the direction of its change, secondly the proportional coefficient of the controller is weighted exponentially depending on the baseline FiO2 requirement of the infant and thirdly a second PID loop can update the baseline FiO2 requirement of the patient every 5min. The controller makes moderate adjustments to FiO2 while saturation is in the target range but remains sensitive to the large changes in SpO2 by an increased proportional coefficient. A randomised controlled trial with cross-over design has been performed on this controller at the University of Ulm [Wolfgang Braun, Fritz Stephan GmbH, Personal communications, February 2016].Review of existing adaptive control algorithms reveals a gradual improvement. However in many cases particularly in older algorithms, the designs are based on numerous underlying assumptions. The first assumption is possibility of modelling the oxygenation system a certain way for instance by a single or three lines. The next assumption is that the variables which are used for the purpose of adaptation are predictive of the variations of the system e.g. proportion of time that was spent within the target range or severity and duration of hypxoic/hyperoxic episodes. Finally, it is assumed that the association of these input variables and the oxygenation dynamics is well known and accommodated by the algorithm. In the absence of independent studies on the extent of reliability of these assumptions, results of clinical trials are the only indirect references for assessing their appropriateness.A robust controller is a constant controller which is designed to remain stable and perform within a particular range of control performance despite an inexact process model and large parameter changes [32]. Two algorithms designed for automated oxygen control can be classified in this category. The first, by Dugdale et al. [44] was designed to respond to PaO2 measured using an in-dwelling oxygen sensor in neonates with respiratory distress syndrome. The algorithm was developed to account for dynamic characteristics of the system under study, and the potential differences between infants. A monotonic response in PaO2 was assumed (Fig. 3), and preliminary studies in 5 infants became a basis for calculation of system characteristics. The PaO2 response was represented by a delayed (T) and scaled (b) step function (Fig. 3). Variables ‘b’ and ‘T’ became the design parameters chosen to achieve stability criteria. The stability criteria were defined based on b and T.The control rule was very simple; the sampling interval was chosen equal to ‘T’ and the value of input to the system was equal to the summation of the previous input and ratio of the current error to ‘b’. Once the algorithm had been established, function of the controller was evaluated in seven premature infants receiving supplemental oxygen via a headbox and improved targeting compared to manual control was observed. The authors suggested that enhancing the safety aspects of their controller could make it appropriate for routine use. A further robust controller was described by Keim et al. [45]. Clinical data from premature infants was collected during recovery from hypoxia. A first-order transfer function was fitted to the observed FiO2–SpO2 relationships, and the parameters of the first-order model were estimated. An error model based on the estimated parameter ranges was created, and consequently developed into a μ-synthesis robust controller [46].A detailed description of this method is beyond the scope of this article but as a general statement, this design approach results in the controller in a mathematical optimisation process considering the stability and performance requirements. This work did not take the time delay of the response into account and the controller was not tested in clinical studies. Moreover, both the assumption of a first order model and the way the parameter estimation was performed had limitations which will be mentioned when discussing the oxygenation variability inherent in the premature infant.Performance of automated control algorithms can be measured in several ways, including proportion of time in the target range, time spent in varying degrees of hypoxia and hyperoxia when receiving oxygen, number of episodes of prolonged hypoxia and hyperoxia, as well as the number of manual FiO2 adjustments required. The analysis should examine the performance in the group of infants overall, but also focus on the most challenging cases (outliers) within the group. A comprehensive clinical study is required to compare the effectiveness of various algorithms. Until such a study would be carried out, investigating the relative performance of automated controllers to manual control based on the existing reports is a logical initial step. However, different levels of success in manual control among various clinical centres should be considered in assessing the relative effectiveness of the controllers. Results of clinical trials since 2000 are presented in brief in Table 1. The manual control outcomes are consistent with the results of independent investigations on target range achievement during manual control [2–4], and in part reflect the span of the target range.In addition to the published results, outcomes of the clinical evaluation of SPOC [43] on preterm infants are submitted as an abstract to the Pediatric Academic Societies Meeting 2016. The study performed on very low birth weight infants receiving nasal CPAP has indicated superior performance of SPOC over manual control [Wolfgang Braun, Fritz Stephan GmbH, Personal communications, February 2016].The recent clinical trials have all found automated control to improve time in the target SpO2 range compared with standard manual control, although in some cases the benefit has been modest. Furthermore, recent studies on automated controllers [41,42] have reported reduced duration of episodes of severe hypoxia as well as fewer occurrences of persistent and severe hypoxia. The variable extent of improvement in different trials may stem from factors such as the chosen target range and the approach to manual control, but also reflect the effectiveness of the algorithm itself. Further information about these trials can be found in a systematic review by Hummler et al. [14] and elsewhere [12,13].Analysis of the existing approaches reveals challenges which need to be overcome in order to significantly improve the performance of automated oxygen control in preterm infants. Three fundamental issues stand out, these being the variability in the biological system controlling oxygenation, technological shortcomings of both physiological monitoring and oxygen delivery and finally safety considerations including the need to choose an appropriate SpO2 target range. These challenges are discussed further below.The oxygenation response refers to the way in which SpO2 changes as a result of a change in FiO2. A variable oxygenation response means that a given FiO2 adjustment may lead to a different SpO2 response on different occasions. An automated control algorithm must remain stable and perform reasonably in spite of such variability. Although many existing rule-based controllers attempt to deal with this variability based on expert clinical knowledge, in the field of control engineering, design techniques are heavily dependent on characterising the system under control in the form of an input-output model, and quantifying the possible variations in it as a basis for controller design (as exemplified earlier).A first-order relationship between FiO2 and oxygen level in the blood (SpO2 or PaO2) has been assumed in algorithms used for automated control in various studies in the past [24,33,45], but the applicability and characteristics of a first order model have been insufficiently understood. In a study assessing the validity and predictability of this model in preterm infants receiving CPAP [47] we found that the first order model for the FiO2–SpO2 relationship was valid in 37% of 2369 FiO2 adjustments. We also found that first-order responses were more frequent among FiO2 increments than decrements, due largely to the non-linearity of the PaO2-SpO2 relationship [48,49] (Fig. 4).The shape of the PaO2–SpO2 relationship results in poor resolution of SpO2 for estimation of PaO2 at high levels of saturation; with wide variation in PaO2 for a single SpO2 reading (Fig. 4). Use of SpO2 may thus fail to detect a wide departure in PaO2 from an acceptable range and distort the first order behaviour. This non-linearity also affects the characteristics of the oxygenation response even when it can be represented by a first-order model. Additionally, parameters that influence the SpO2–PaO2 relationship such as temperature and acidity of the blood [50] can also influence the response.In a further study, [51] we characterised the oxygenation response by evaluating the parameters of the first order model, namely delay, time-constant and gain, among 993 adjustments with first order responses. We found that, notwithstanding significant intra- and inter-infant variability, for both FiO2 increments and decrements, more severe lung dysfunction (as evidenced by higher baseline FiO2), was associated with lower value of gain. This finding along with the effect of SpO2 starting point has important implications and potential applications for adaptation of an automated controller. Unlike many possible influencing factors which cannot be non-invasively measured and input to an automated controller, values of both FiO2 and SpO2 are available in real time. It is important to note that while our studies [47,51] explained some of the variability of the SpO2 response to FiO2 adjustments, in large part the variability remains unexplained, as does the cause of non-first order responses.A major issue with control of FiO2 in preterm infants is fluctuating SpO2, limiting the proportion of time a given target range can be achieved. Hyperoxia in preterm infants is related to unnecessarily high levels of FiO2[10] and automated controllers developed so far are relatively successful in managing this condition. Note that SpO2 values above target range (≥96%) when in room air are not considered hyperoxia, and simply reflect intact oxygen transfer. Hypoxia on the other hand has a legion of causes, including worsening lung dysfunction, transient airway blockage, diaphragmatic splinting and apnoea [52–54]. Decrease in lung volume and development of an intrapulmonary shunt as result of diaphragmatic splinting in expiration has been identified as one cause of hypoxia in mechanically ventilated preterm infants [53], with agitation and hypoventilation more generally being additional factors [10]. Agitation and hypoventilation are also important in the genesis of hypoxia in non-ventilated infants on non-invasive support, with apnoea being an important additional cause [55].Hypoxia imposes two challenges on the design of a controller. The first is that characteristics of hypoxic events, including their frequency and severity, should be considered in algorithm design. For instance controllers which make periodic FiO2 adjustments followed by wait episodes may not be optimally effective in treatment of infants with fast and frequent declines in SpO2. However, characteristics of each individual algorithm such as the length of the wait period as well as the sampling rate are influential factors in defining the reaction speed of the controller. The severity of a hypoxic event on the other hand defines the position on the oxygen dissociation curve, which as discussed earlier affects the oxygenation response and ultimately the magnitude of adjustment in FiO2 that is required.The second challenge is that the appropriate response to a hypoxic event should vary according to its cause. Apnoea-induced hypoxia is an example, with an FiO2 increment before apnoea cessation being unlikely to immediately increase alveolar partial pressure of oxygen, given that the infant is not breathing. Repeated FiO2 increments during apnoea would likely increase the risk of post-apnoeic hyperoxic overshoot. Identifying the cause of hypoxic events using additional inputs to the control algorithm may thus be useful in scheduling FiO2 adjustments. Identification of the causative mechanism of hypoxia may also be useful in prediction of the likely oxygenation response, and allow adaptation of the control algorithm accordingly.Apart from early automation efforts using PaO2 measured via indwelling umbilical artery electrodes or transcutaneous sensors as the feedback signal [7,33,44], more recent control devices have relied on SpO2 derived from pulse oximetry as the primary, indeed the sole input. This adaptation and the standardisation in general of pulse oximetry as the common method for prolonged patient monitoring is due to the ease of measurement of SpO2 together with the practical limitations of measuring PaO2. However, pulse oximetry has well-known shortcomings [56]. The non-linear SpO2–PaO2 relationship discussed earlier is the major inherent issue. If with technological advances the possibility emerges to measure PaO2 non-invasively and accurately for extended periods, this might be the preferred oxygenation input to guide automated oxygen control.Other practical shortcomings of monitoring SpO2, especially poor accuracy in low perfusion and most notably motion artefact, deserve consideration. Potential spurious readings caused by these factors may misguide a closed-loop control algorithm and lead to inappropriate FiO2 adjustments. Therefore, it is necessary that motion resistant technology is used and also signal validation considerations are embedded in control algorithms to identify and exclude such periods [57]. Among other issues with pulse oximetry, low accuracy even of newer generation devices at low saturation levels [58] and the problem of signal dropout are most prominent. These problems are particularly relevant during automated control when FiO2 adjustments are being made solely based on SpO2. In our recent study [59], since a majority of SpO2 dropouts during hypoxia recovered in relative normoxia, we concluded that blind FiO2 adjustments when the signal is missing would not be useful in most circumstances. However, there might be occasions that an FiO2 increment is required to prevent bradycardia.Apart from oxygenation, monitoring of respiratory motion (i.e. spontaneous breathing movements) is another area where technological advances can offer a benefit in automated FiO2 control for preterm infants. For instance alterations in respiratory pattern may assist in prediction of hypoxic events or differentiating various types of hypoxia. This information may in turn become a basis for making FiO2 adjustments e.g. temporary episodes of increased FiO2 to prevent/resolve hypoxia after brief apnoea and fast SpO2 declines [57]. Furthermore, other informative parameters such as estimations of the lung volume during non-invasive ventilation and phase shift between the thoracic and abdominal movements are potential outputs from respiratory monitoring. Continuous measurement of respiratory motion might thus provide future automated controllers with an unprecedented level of knowledge about the infant when making control decisions.The existing respiratory monitoring methods can be divided into contact and noncontact approaches. Contact devices including respiratory inductance plethysmography [60] and pressure sensor plethysmography [61] are capable of relatively reliably monitoring respiratory patterns but they are difficult to use continuously and may intervene the routine nursing care of the infant. Noncontact devices on the other hand are preferable in terms of minimal disturbance to the patient but they have not reached an adequate level of maturity for becoming a part of routine clinical care [62]. Examples of noncontact approaches include radar [63], vision-based [64] and thermal [65] methods. Despite the potential benefits, measurement of respiratory patterns beyond respiration rate is currently not a part of routine clinical care for preterm infants which might be due to the increased instrumentation and decision-making complexity caused by a new device.A high priority should be given to safety in the design of any medical equipment to be used in preterm infants, and it appears that attention has been paid to this concern in current automated oxygen control devices. In-built safety precautions currently include various alarms to alert bedside caregivers, along with rudimentary SpO2 validation procedures and suspension of algorithm function and default to a preset FiO2 if the signal is invalid.These actions have been triggered in response to repeated FiO2 adjustments in a single direction [7,44], sudden or rapid falls in SpO2[17,28], low quality SpO2 signal [17,18,21,26,39,43], low SpO2 values [17,66], SpO2 remaining outside the target range for a minimum duration [24], and missing signal or device disconnection [18,30,38,39,43].The process of automated oxygen control is complicated by the fact that a change in FiO2 alone may not always be the best action, and intervention of clinical staff may be necessary particularly in cases where a hypoxic event stems from impaired ventilation including apnoea [10,11]. Thus, rather than entirely replacing manual care, automated controllers should be thought of as providing “on-time care” for preterm infants, decreasing the workload of the nursing staff [9]. The potential for reduced attentiveness of the bedside staff, and failure to recognise deterioration of an infant's condition, are concerns which have been expressed [10,11]. Design of alarms to alert staff to persistent increase in oxygen requirement is thus important [13,43].Regardless of the type of control algorithm, another difficulty of oxygen targeting both in manual and automated control is the selection of the target range boundaries. Five recent large scale clinical trials involving thousands of preterm infants [67–69] have compared a lower oxygen saturation range (85–89%) with a higher range (91–95%). These studies individually [67,68], as well as a systematic review and meta-analysis of all five [70], suggested that the lower range resulted in a reduction in retinopathy of prematurity but an increase in mortality. Recommendations to avoid saturations below 90% have followed [70–73], but some uncertainty about the most appropriate target range remains [74]. Saugstad and Aune [70] also highlighted other unanswered questions, such as whether the target range should be altered for different gestational ages, or over time, or based on patient conditions.Apart from the longer term safety considerations, selection of the SpO2 target range may have more immediate consequences during FiO2 control, including on the incidence of hypoxia. Di Fiore et al. [75] found an association between lower target range and higher rate of intermittent hypoxia at certain postnatal ages. In another study of the effect of target range on outcome of automated control in 21 infants, a narrower and higher target range (90–93% vs. 87–93%) did not increase the time spent in the range of 87–93% but it made the SpO2 distribution tighter [76]. The optimal span of the SpO2 target range for automated control remains to be determined, and should be a topic for further research. A further related question for study in this context is where within the target range to locate the “set point”, and whether to attenuate error where SpO2 readings fall within the desired range.In light of the aforementioned challenges, a number of directions for future research can be identified. The largely unexplained variability of the oxygenation system is an area where further research is necessary. Using large datasets to develop a simulation of oxygenation in the preterm infant will potentially help to understand the relationship of predictor variables with response characteristics. A simulation of the oxygenation response would also allow the validity of the assumptions underlying existing adaptive controllers to be tested, and the performance of algorithms to be directly compared. The role of measurable predictors of hypoxic events as inputs to future adaptive control algorithms clearly deserves attention.As far as technological challenges are concerned, developments in pulse oximetry allowing for more reliable measurements in spite of motion, would directly improve the quality of automated control. Novel approaches such as multi-wavelength, wireless, reflective and in-ear pulse oximetry [77–81] could be investigated in this regard. Identifying a practical respiratory monitoring technique for preterm infants during automated oxygen control should be studied. The validity and precision of respiratory motion measurement, as well as the feasibility and tolerance of long-term monitoring need to be investigated.Based on our review, we propose that future automated control algorithms should accommodate the following features. Firstly, the base algorithm must be capable of responding to fast and frequent hypoxic events. Algorithms which can make instant and continuous adjustments to FiO2 are thus preferred to controllers making frequent but delayed stepwise adjustments. These algorithms may then be modified or tuned intuitively to match the requirements of infants. Secondly, the controller must be adaptive, so as to overcome the variability in the oxygenation system that might otherwise de-stabilise or at least degrade the performance of the controller. Parameters such as position on the oxygen saturation curve and severity of lung dysfunction should be incorporated in the algorithm.Thirdly, a controller should ideally utilise additional inputs to assist the algorithm in identifying the cause of hypoxic events, the prediction of response variability as well as validation of oximeter readings. An additional input for identification of apnoea will be an important advance. A sophisticated suite of alarms and/or actions are required, triggered by prolonged apnoea, equipment failure and respiratory deterioration, to name but three. The device must complement but not supplant the clinical acumen and attentiveness of the bedside staff, with the recognition that interventions other than adjustment of FiO2 may be required.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
