@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-frequency inversion in Rayleigh damped Magnetic Resonance Elastography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rayleigh damping (RD) model is structurally non-identifiable at a single frequency data without extensive a priori information.We propose two alternative approaches to overcome non-identifiability issue of the RD model.We compared simultaneous multi-frequency (MF) reconstructions with parametric reconstructions for a series of phantoms.Results indicate that accurate delineation of RD based properties using MF inversion is still a challenging task.We conclude that multiple input frequencies over a wide range are required for achieving robust practical identifiability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic Resonance Elastography,Rayleigh damping,Multi-frequency inversion,Parametric inversion,Model identifiability,Mechanical properties,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Magnetic Resonance Elastography (MRE) is able to identify mechanical properties of biological tissues in vivo based on underlying assumptions of the model used for inversion. Models, such as the linearly elastic or viscoelastic (VE), can be used with a single input frequency data and can produce a reasonable estimate of identified parameters associated with mechanical properties. However, more complex models, such as the Rayleigh damping (RD) model, are not identifiable given single frequency data without significant a priori information under certain conditions, thus limiting diagnostic potential. To overcome this limitation, two approaches have been postulated: simultaneous inversion across multiple input frequencies and a parametric approach, when only single frequency data is available.This research compares simultaneous multi-frequency (MF) RD reconstructions using both zero-order and power-law (PL) models with parametric reconstructions for a series of tissue-simulating phantoms, made of tofu and gelatine materials, tested at 4 frequencies (50Hz, 75Hz, 100Hz and 125Hz) that are commonly applied in clinical MRE examinations. Results indicate that accurate delineation of RD based properties and concomitant damping ratio (ξd) using MF inversion is still a challenging task. Specific results showed that the real shear modulus (μR) can be reconstructed well, while imaginary components representing attenuation (μIand ρI) had much lower quality. However, overall trends correlate well with the expected higher damping levels within the saturated tofu material compared to stiff gelatine in both phantoms. Depending on the phantom configuration, measured μRvalues within the tofu and gelatine materials ranged from 4.77 to 7kPa and 15.5 to 16.3kPa, respectively, while damping levels were 11–19% and 3.1–4.3%, as expected. Correlation of the μRand ξdvalues with previously reported result measured by independent mechanical testing and VE based MRE is acceptable, ranging from 48 to 60%. Both PL and zero-order models produced similar qualitative and quantitate results, thus no significant advantage of the PL model was noted to account for dispersion characteristics of these types of materials.The relatively narrow range of frequencies used in this study limited practical identifiability and can thus produce a potentially false assurance of identifiability of the model parameters. We conclude that application of multiple input frequencies over a wide range, as well as selection of an appropriate model that can accurately account for dispersion characteristics of given materials are required for achieving robust practical identifiability of the RD model in time-harmonic MRE.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In time-harmonic Magnetic Resonance Elastography (MRE), a single input frequency is a common experimental approach for mechanical property reconstruction. It is less time consuming and only requires a single patient examination. A number of studies investigated various models for both static [1,2] and dynamic [3–11] MRE methods using single frequency data. These models include linearly elastic [12–14], viscoelastic (VE) [15–20] and even poroelastic [21–23] models.Two main limitations prevent single frequency approaches from providing accurate approximations of the tissue response. The first is associated with the dispersive nature of the complex shear modulus at different frequencies and thus quantitative estimates acquired at a particular excitation frequency do not represent the true static (at 0Hz) values of material constants. The second arises from complex boundary conditions and undesirable wave interaction between propagating and reflected waves inside the tissue. This effect can cause amplitude nulls where no elasticity information is available. The first issue can be mitigated by simultaneous inversion of multiple wave data sets acquired at different excitation frequencies and finding an appropriate model that can accurately account for dispersion characteristics and associated frequency dependent behaviour [24]. However, the second issue presents challenging limitations to current inversion methods.Thus, a multi-frequency (MF) approach offers a number of benefits over a single frequency approach. First, it allows dispersion measurement of the rheological tissue parameters by analysing multiple propagating wave velocities corresponding to different driving frequencies. This can enable more accurate measurement of the viscosity which might be potentially useful in tissue characterisation. Second, it can avoid wave amplitude nulls accruing in single-frequency wave patterns. Previous MF elastography studies found a correlation between biological tissue response to various excitation frequencies in a form of power-law (PL). A PL implies frequency dependant behaviour of the VE parameters.More complex models, such as the Rayleigh or proportional damping (RD) model [25,26], capture this frequency dependant behaviour. However, they are not identifiable with single frequency data [27]. Hence, multiple actuation frequencies are required for more complex models, as well. Previous studies of MF applications have mainly utilized two parameter (Voigt model, Maxwell model) and three-parameter (Zener model, Jeffreys model) VE models [28–31], while the RD model has been previously discussed in the context of simulation studies for a homogeneous material [32,33]. Preliminary single-frequency RD MRE experiments compared reconstruction results for the RD and linear VE models with mixed results [34]. However, Petrov et al. [27] concluded that the RD model was not uniquely identifiable for single frequency data. Without a guarantee of a priori identifiability, the parameter estimates obtained might be unreliable or random. Two alternative approaches are suggested to overcome non-identifiability of the RD model: 1. simultaneous MF inversion and 2. parametric inversion, when only single frequency data is available.Consequently, a MF approach might contribute towards theoretical identifiability of the RD model [27] and is expected to produce more robust, data driven results than possible with a single frequency data. This study evaluates MF inversion in RD MRE in comparison to a parametric approach to accurately delineate the RD parameters and assess the efficacy of MF for RD reconstructions. Two alternative material models are also exploited, a zero-order model and a PL model.The RD model is implemented through Finite Element (FE) based solution of a nearly-incompressible linear isotropic Navier's equation, defined:(1)∇·(μ(∇u+∇uT))−∇(λ∇·u)−∇P=−ρ∂2u∂t2,where u is the displacement within the medium; λ is the first Lamé's parameter (λ=1/3 for a nearly-incompressible case), μ is the second Lamé's parameter, also known as the shear stiffness; ρ is the density of the material, ∇P is a pressure term, related to volumetric changes through the bulk modulus, K, via the relationship: ∇P=K∇·u.It can be discretised and defined:(2)Mu¨+Cu˙+Ku=f,for the mass, damping and stiffness matrices, M, C and K, respectively; displacement vector, u, and known sinusoidal input forcing, f. The RD assumption is facilitated through the RD definition:(3)C=αM+βK,where α and β are proportionality constants, α>0 and β>0. For a time-harmonic case, where input and resulting response aref(x,t)=fˆ(x)eiωtandu(x,t)=uˆ(x)eiwt, Eq. (2) in the frequency domain is written:(4)[−ω2(1-iαω)M+(1+iωβ)K]uˆ=fˆ.By assuming stiffness and density to be complex valued, e.g. μ*=μR+iμIand ρ*=ρR+iρI, Eq. (4) can be further simplified:(5)[−ω2ρ*M′+μ*K′]uˆ=fˆ,where M′ and K′ are normalised mass and stiffness matrices, respectively, defined:(6)M′=1ρ10⋯001⋯0⋮⋮⋱⋮00⋯1,K′=1μω120⋯00ω22⋯0⋮⋮⋱⋮00⋯ωn2.μRand ρRdescribe the real valued shear modulus and density in the undamped system, while μIand ρIrepresent two different damping components related to elastic and inertial effects, respectively; and can be expressed in terms of the RD parameters:(7)ρI=−αρRω,μI=ωβμR.The resulting damping ratio, ξd, is defined:(8)ξd=12βω+αω⇒ξd=12μIμR−ρIρR.Eq. (8) indicates that the stiffness proportional term (βω) contributes damping linearly proportional to the response frequency and the mass proportional term (α/ω) contributes damping inversely proportional to the response frequency. Therefore, the α and β coefficients govern the response to lower and higher input frequencies, ω, respectively.The RD model offers promising potential to better characterise complex damping behaviour in highly saturated medias as it accounts for an additional damping mechanism (ρI) arising from viscous effects. Those effects are typically observed in saturated structures due to high fluid content (commonly seen in biological tissues), and are associated with viscous attenuation arising from the inertial forces.Collecting real and imaginary terms from Eq. (5), yields:(9)[(μR−ω2ρR)+i(μI−ρI)]uˆ=fˆ.Assuming a known ρRvalue, Eq. (9) implies that μRis uniquely identifiable as a direct function of the real displacements: μR=fR/uR+μ2ρR. However, the model behaviour dictated by the imaginary part of theuˆcoefficient is determined by two model parameters, ρIand μI, which are both variables to be identified. Hence, both parameters have a model role, but there cannot be unique identification of those variables at one frequency without further a priori information.Simultaneous MF inversion performs simultaneous identification on motion data from two or more input frequencies. If two frequencies are used, one obtains two equations with two unknowns presuming ρIand μIcan be related between the two frequencies by a power law or other relation. Therefore, at least two frequencies are required for unique identification of the RD parameters. However, practical identifiability is not assured if both frequencies are similar and yield a very similar dynamic frequency response [35].In the MF mode of the reconstruction processing, the objective function (Φ), that minimises the difference between measured and modelled displacement, is computed as a sum across all input frequencies (Nωi) and measurement points (Nj):(10)Φ(θ)=∑ωi=1Nωi∑j=1Nj{(ujm(ωi)−ujc(ωi,θ))(ujm(ωi)−ujc(ωi,θ))H},whereujm(ωi)represents the complex valued measured displacement data at i’th frequency and j’th measurement point, ωi,ujc(ωi,θ)is the co-located displacement calculated by a forward simulation of the model using a current estimate of the properties (θ) at that particular frequency, and the superscriptHdenotes the complex conjugate transpose. The conjugate-gradient (CG) method is used to iteratively update the material property distribution by improving the agreement between FE computed displacements and MRI displacements.The material propertiesθacross 2 or more frequencies are computed using two available models:•Zero-order model, where there is no variation of material property value as a function of frequency.PL model, where the values of material properties are frequency dependant.The PL model for all three reconstructed parameters (μR, μIand ρI) is defined:(11)μR(ω)=μR0·ωγ,μI(ω)=μR0·ωγ,ρI(ω)=ρI0·1ωγ,where the static property values (at 0Hz) μR0, μI0 and ρI0 and a power component γ are calculated conjointly for each node within the imaging volume.In a parametric RD inverse problem approach either ρIor μIis set to a constant value or dependant function. This approach eliminates a variable, yielding a uniquely identifiable system of one equation with one unknown for uIin Eq. (9). However, it restricts the generality of the solutions.(12)uIuI⋮uIμI=fˆI+ω2ρIuIfˆI+ω2ρIuI⋮fI+ω2ρIuI,(13)−ω2uI−ω2uI⋮−ω2uIρI=fˆI−μIuIfˆI−μIuI⋮fI+μIuI.Two phantoms were created from tofu and gelatine. Tofu possesses a porous microstructure, composed of an organic solid matrix with pores of different sizes and shapes. Therefore, it has been proposed as a sonographic and elastographic tissue-mimicking material with acoustic and mechanical properties similar to some soft tissues [36]. Gelatine is also known to be used in a range of tissue-simulating materials.The first phantom (P1) was made of soft tofu slab of 105mm×80mm×45mm (Mori-Nu Silken Soft® ), with a single, stiff gelatine inclusion (10% concentration, Sigma Aldrich® porcine skin gelatine). The second phantom (P2) was a reverse configuration of P1, with stiff 10% concentration of a gelatine as the background and a soft tofu as the inclusion. Both phantoms had an external rectangular shape with the cylindrical inclusion located at the centre. For P1, the inclusion was generated by first removing a core from the soft tofu slab and then replacing it with a core extracted from a separate stiff gelatine slab. It was vice versa for P2.Piezo-electric actuation was utilized to introduce shear waves into the phantoms. The piezo-electric actuator used only produced frequencies over 50Hz and 50Hz, 75Hz, 100Hz and 125Hz were explored. The excitation frequencies used in this study were within a common range used in biomedical applications for dynamic soft-tissue elastography [7,37]. This frequency range is plausible for the dynamic in vivo MRE due to the relatively small attenuation of the shear strain waves (when propagating through biological tissues) compared to higher frequencies (>200Hz), as well as their wavelength in tissue-like materials is in the useful range of millimetres to tens of millimetres. Phantoms were positioned on the actuation plate attached to the piezoelectric driver. The actuation direction induced by piezoelectric driver was in the Y direction causing propagation of the shear strain waves in the phantom in the Z direction (refer to Fig. 1). Each excitation and MRI image acquisition with motion encoding were performed independently and were unmixed.MRE imaging experiments were performed on a 1.5T Philips MRI scanner. 20 coronal slices of 2mm thickness of 3D steady-state displacement fields were acquired by an spin-echo based phase-contrast sequence, extended with trigger timing and motion encoding gradients (MEGs), using the following parameters: repetition time (TR)/time to echo (TE)=480/10ms; field of view (FOV)=150mm×225mm×40mm and 2mm3 isotropic voxel. A 3D quality-guided phase unwrapping method [39] was applied to suppress phase wrapping. Reconstruction results were analysed to note the presence of statistically significant differences among the two types of materials and image quality analysis.The subspace-based nonlinear inversion (SNLI) algorithm [40,41] was used to estimate material properties from measured MR displacement data. Reconstruction computations were carried out on High Performance Computing (HPC) system Blue Fern P575. A total of 32 processors were employed in parallel message passing interface (MPI) environment using CG optimisation method. The average runtime for the reconstruction processing was 5h. Each parameter was interpolated at different resolution levels [42].MF inversion of material properties using an isotropic linearly elastic nearly-incompressible RD material model was performed using the following parameters: an isotropic subzone size of 24mm×24mm×24mm with the subzone overlap of 0.15%×0.15%×0.15%. Initial and final total variation (TV) weighting was 10−15 and 10−14 with TV delta set to 10−19. The initial and final spatial filtering (SF) weights were set to 0.25% and 0.15% respectively. Displacements were approximated on the mesh with 1.8mm×1.8mm×1.9mm voxel resolution, providing approximately 16 nodes per wavelength for the FE forward problem. Initial a priori estimates were: μR=3300Pa; μI=330Pa and ρI=−100kg/m3. The values for the initial parameter estimates were selected as starting points for optimisation processing so they would be within ±1 order of magnitude based on the range of values expected in these materials subject to the MF range applied. The real density (ρR) and the bulk modulus (K) were set to constants, where ρR=1000kg/m3 and K=107Pa to account for the nearly incompressible behaviour expected in a highly saturated media, such as the tofu.Parametric inversion across all frequencies was performed with the best estimate of μI=550Pa and ρI=−100kg/m3 based on testing a range of values and prior work with tofu. To minimise the risk of obtaining unrealistic solutions of the material property values, the parameter constraints were applied along with other regularisation techniques. The minimum and maximum values for constraints were set to: μR(1Pa and 20kPa), μI(1Pa and 10kPa), and ρI(−5000kg/m3 and −1kg/m3).Convergence was achieved for all material properties for phantoms reconstruction. Stabilisation of statistical indicators (median and interquartile range (IQR)) of parameter behaviour across all nodes was used to evaluate of the convergence for a particular parameter.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
