@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Respiratory cycle related EEG changes: Modified respiratory cycle segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Respiratory cycle related EEG change (RCREC) is a promising parameter in sleep analysis.RCREC is a change parameter that looks at EEG variability within respiratory cycles.A key step in quantification of RCREC is respiratory signal segmentation.We have introduced a new segmentation routine that significantly accentuates RCREC.A few technical points regarding the calculation procedure of RCREC are made.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Polysomnography,Respiratory cycle related EEG changes,Inspiratory/expiratory transition,Signal processing,Computer assisted,RCREC,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Respiratory cycle related EEG change (RCREC) is characterized by significant relative EEG power changes within different stages of respiration during sleep. RCREC has been demonstrated to predict sleepiness in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea and is hypothesized to represent microarousals. As such RCREC may provide a sensitive marker of respiratory arousals. A key step in quantification of RCREC is respiratory signal segmentation which is conventionally based on local maxima and minima of the nasal flow signal. We have investigated an alternative respiratory cycle segmentation method based on inspiratory/expiratory transitions. Sixty two healthy paediatric participants were recruited through staff of local universities in Bolivia. Subjects underwent attended polysomnography on a single night (Compumedics PS2 system). Studies were sleep staged according to standard criteria. C3/A2 EEG channel and time-locked nasal flow (thermistor) were used in RCREC quantification. Forty Seven subjects aged 7–17 (11.4±3) years (24M:23F) were found to have usable polysomnographs for the purpose of RCREC calculation. Respiratory cycles were segmented using both the conventional and novel (transition) methods and differences in RCREC derived from the two methods were compared in each frequency band. Significance of transition RCREC as measured by Fisher's F value through analysis of variance (ANOVA) was found to be significantly higher than the conventional RCREC in all frequency bands (P<0.05) but beta. This increase in statistical significance of RCREC as demonstrated with the novel transition segmentation approach suggests better alignment of the respiratory cycle segments with the underlying physiology driving RCREC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Respiratory Cycle Related EEG Change (RCREC) is a phenomenon characterized by significant changes in relative EEG power during different stages of respiratory cycles. RCREC was first reported by Chervin [1] in 2004 when investigating whether individual non-apnoeic respiratory cycles in children with sleep disordered breathing (SDB) are associated with brief changes in cortical activity. In their first study on a single child with sleep disordered breathing, quantifiable differences in delta, theta and sigma power between different stages of the respiratory cycle (early expiration, late expiration, early inspiration and late inspiration) were observed. Interestingly, these differences demonstrated change following adenotonsillectomy leading the authors to hypothesize that RCREC may represent brief microarousals and could offer a more sensitive measure of sleep disruption than standard EEG arousal scoring. In a second study they further tested this theory in nine paediatric subjects before, and a year after, adenotonsillectomy [2]. While this was a small sample and only five of the children had obstructive sleep apnoea, RCREC changes, but not changes in apnoea/hypopnoea indices (AHIs), predicted changes in Multiple Sleep Latency tests (MSLT) across the time points. It was also noted that RCREC existed in both obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) patients and controls, although its magnitude differed. More extensive studies in adult patients supported these data indicating that RCERC can predict objective sleepiness measured by MSLT in adults [3]. The relationship between RCREC parameters and neurobehavioral measures associated with OSA is also noted in the patent describing the system and the algorithm for RCREC quantification. In short, it is reported that RCREC parameters are more likely to be correlated with neurobehavioral measures such as IQ, children's memory scale (CMS) attention/concentration score, and Wechsler individual achievement test (WIAT)-mathematical reasoning score than are conventional polysomnographic variables such as AHI, EEG arousal index or minimum oxygen saturation [4]. The physiology driving RCREC is not yet fully understood however, the working hypothesis is that it represents subtle numerous inspiratory related microarousals [5–7].Details of RCREC derivation are described elsewhere [1]. In brief the technique applies the following steps to non-apnoeic (normal) respiratory cycles from the first 3h of scored sleep:1)A central EEG signal is band-pass filtered to produce frequency band specific EEG signals.Each respiratory cycle is divided into four segments based on the morphology (peaks and troughs) of the airflow signal.Frequency band specific average EEG power is calculated for each respiratory cycle segment and is then divided by the average EEG power of the whole respiratory cycle. Further, one is subtracted from the derived ratio. The following equation clarifies this procedure.(1)Sjf=(1/Lj)∑i=njnj+Lj−1Xif2(1/L)∑i=n1n1+L−1Xif2−1where Ljis the length of the jth respiratory cycle segment (j=1, 2, 3, 4 where 1 corresponds to early expiration, 2 to late expiration, 3 to early inspiration and 4 to late inspiration), L is the length of the respiratory cycle in samples, njis the starting sample of the jth respiratory cycle segment, n1 is the starting sample of the respiratory cycle andXifis the ith element in the frequency band specific EEG signal. The parameterSjfis the segment and frequency specific relative EEG power (e.g.S1δis the relative EEG power in the delta band and in the early expiration segment). Note that the above formula relates to a single respiratory cycle only.Taking into account all respiratory cycles leads to formation of the frequency band specific matrix Qffrom the calculatedSjfvalues(2)Qf=S1,1f⋯S1,4f⋮⋱⋮SM,1f⋯SM,4fwhere M is the total number of regular respiratory cycles.The significance of the difference between the four columns of Qf(i.e. the relative EEG powers in different respiratory cycle segments) is assessed using the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test. Fisher's F values are produced as a measure of this significance.Averaging over the columns of Qf, a frequency band specific RCREC parameter is defined as:(3)RCRECf=max(Qf¯)−min(Qf¯)where(4)Qf¯=S1f,¯S2f¯,S3f¯,S4f¯and(5)Sjf¯=1M∑i=1MSi,jfAs can be seen above, a crucial step in the quantification of RCREC is identification and segmentation of respiratory cycles. In the original work, after removal of abnormal portions of thermocouple generated flow signal, each respiratory cycle was divided into four segments based on its local maximum, minimum and the mid points between the two. Fig. 2illustrates this approach to segmentation. Local maxima marked the start of expiration and local minima were assumed to be the starting points for inspiration.Whilst segmenting the signal directly according to its extrema is intuitive, it may not be optimal. We were interested to test a novel approach to respiratory cycle segmentation to achieve greater significance in the relative EEG power differences and hence potentiate the ability of this measure to predict neurocognitive outcomes of sleep disordered breathing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
