@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An independent-BCI based on SSVEP using Figure-Ground Perception (FGP)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It is the first study published where perception for SSVEP-BCIs was evaluated in off/on-line tasks.An improvement in performance using the channel Oz in a SSVEP-BCI by FGP was noticeable.Channel Oz is the best channel for characterization of visual perception in SSVEP-BCIs.Visual selectivity through the perception and neural mechanism of spatial attention in an SSVEP-BCI was confirmed.This new BCI-SSVEP based on FGP has shown a new approach compared to the traditional way.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
SSVEP-BCI,Perception,Spatial attention,MSI,CCA,Brain signals,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The main idea of a traditional Steady State Visually Evoked Potentials (SSVEP)-BCI is the activation of commands through gaze control. However, the widely named “dependent” SSVEP-BCIs might not be applicable for patients with ocular motor impairments or severe neuromuscular problems. Nevertheless, an “independent” SSVEP-BCIs might be a potential approach to solve this problem. This study presents a novel independent-BCI based on SSVEP using Figure-Ground Perception (FGP), terminology widely known and used in Gestalt psychology for object recognition by means of changes in perception. This BCI proposes to identify two different targets that represent commands in a limited visual space without needing to shift the gaze by the paradigm of covert attention. For that purpose, the well-known example of Rubin's face-vase in FGP was used. The traditional EEG signal analysis consists of three steps: filtering, feature extraction and classification. In this work, two techniques were used for performance comparison, and the classification was obtained through a criterion of maxima for both techniques. Ten subjects participated in this study in offline tests and five subjects for online tests. The flickering frequencies were 15.0Hz (vase) and 11.0Hz (faces). Our results demonstrate that the electrode Oz is the best channel for characterization of visual perception, from a quantitative point of view based on the canonical correlation, after a channel analysis by independent way. Regarding the classification, MSI technique was more accurate in relation to CCA, in all the cases with same conditions, either using three electrodes or a single electrode (Oz), even for different window lengths. The online performance appeared to decrease as participants switched from Face (82.7%) to Vase (76%) stimulus. These results are consistent with our results in offline tasks. Muscular activity related to the eye movements was also evaluated using a commercial device of eye tracking (Eye Tribe). These findings strongly support the hypothesis of visual selectivity by means of perception and neural mechanism of spatial attention.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain-computer interface (BCI) is a technology which provides human with direct communication between the user's brain signals and a computer, generating an alternative channel of communication that does not involve the traditional way as muscles and nerves [1]. Among current BCIs, a noninvasive brain imaging method commonly employed is electroencephalography (EEG), which has the advantages of lower risk for human, in addition to be inexpensive and easily measurable, and with application for large human population [2,3]. Further, EEG provides electrical signals of high temporal resolution generated by neuronal dynamics from the scalp. Thus, a BCI records brain signals, and its features are then translated into artificial outputs or commands that act in a real world. Therefore, a BCI can be a potential alternative and augmentative communication (AAC) and control solution for people with severe motor disabilities [1,3,4].When the retina of the eye is excited by a stimulus at a certain frequency, the brain generates an electrical activity of the same frequency with its multiples or harmonics. This stimulus produces a stable Visual Evoked Potential (VEP) of small amplitude termed as “Steady-State” Visually Evoked Potentials (SSVEPs) of the human visual system. SSVEPs depend on the user's gaze direction and thus require muscular control [5]. To produce such potentials, the user gazes at one flickering stimulus oscillating at a certain frequency [5]. According to Regan [6,7], a flickering stimulus of different frequency with a constant intensity can evoke SSVEPs with a maximum amplitude in low (5–12Hz), medium (12–25Hz) and high (25–50Hz) or even higher frequency bands, separately.Advances in the detection of visual evoked potentials have evolved from traditional ways by analyzing the Fourier power spectrum known as Power Spectral Density Analysis (PSD) [8] to multi-dimensional ways [9,10] to detection and use of simulated signals [11,12]. A modified version of PSD called Spectral F-test [13] was also developed. This technique has the goal of determining whether the spectrum at a certain frequency is statistically distinct from its neighbors, considering that the spectrum in this neighborhood is white. Huang et al. [9] introduced the concept of Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) and application of Hilbert transform, which was collectively called Hilbert-Huang Transform (HHT), used to extract time-frequency information from a nonlinear and nonstationary signal. It was regarded as an important progress since the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). Since 2007, use of simulated stimulus signals (templates) have drawn attention in the recognition of SSVEPs due to efficiency, lower computational cost, good performance and training-free characters compared to traditional ways of feature extraction and use of thresholds or decision trees for classification [14]. Friman et al. [15] developed a technique called Minimum Energy Combination (MEC), which is based on finding combinations of strong electrode signals that remove noise and nuisance signals for EEG data. Lin et al. [11] introduced use of canonical correlation analysis (CCA) for multi-channel detection SSVEP, which consists of formation of pairs of linear combinations, called canonical variables. The target is found by maximization of the correlation between the two sets (a multichannel EEG signal and a “Fourier series” of simulated stimulus signals). In 2014, Zhang et al. [12] developed a new method called Multivariate Synchronization Index (MSI). MSI is a technique that estimates the current synchronization between mixed signals and reference signals as a potential index for recognizing the stimulus frequency.In a typical SSVEP-BCI, several stimuli flickering at different frequencies are presented to users. The subject overtly directs attention to one of the stimuli by changing his/her gaze attention [16]. This kind of SSVEP-BCI is commonly called as “dependent”, since muscle activities, such as gaze shifting, are necessary. However, patients with stroke trauma, poliomyelitis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), botulism, spinal cord injury (SCI), multiple sclerosis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome suffer from motor disabilities, which can disrupt their communication with the external environment, resulting in the so-called locked-in syndrome (LIS). Therefore, “dependent” SSVEP-BCIs might not be applicable for patients with traumatic brain injuries. Nonetheless, “independent” SSVEP-BCIs can be an alternative solution, as they are controlled by subject's attentions without requiring head neuromuscular control or eye movements. It means that the attention is performed of covertly form.Several studies have shown that people can covertly shift attention to different spatial location tasks [17–21]. Morgan et al. [17] initially studied the effect of spatial attention on SSVEP. In the work performed by Kelly et al. [18], it was shown that there was a reduction in 20% of precision when a volunteer does not perform eye movements compared to another who does it. In that study, the terms attended or unattended implied in an overt and covert attention, respectively. A similar procedure was performed using flickering letters in a CRT monitor by Kelly et al. [3]. Six out of eleven physically and neurologically healthy subjects demonstrated reliable control in binary decision-making, achieving at least 75% of correct selections in five sessions, each with approximately 12min duration. In Allison et al. [19], the hypothesis about overlapped stimuli can evoke changes in SSVEP was evaluated in a BCI. On the other hand, the modulation effects of SSVEP amplitude and phase response for covert shifts of attention was investigated by Zhang et al. [20] to one out of two dot sets with distinct colors. Finally, in an independent covert two-class SSVEP paradigm, a portable light emitting diode-based “interlaced squares” stimulation pattern was used, which was evaluated with twenty-four healthy subjects and six LIS patients [21]. The mean offline and online accuracies obtained for the healthy subjects were 85±2% and 74±13%, respectively, and patients with LIS obtained 60.75±8% accuracy in online tests.So far, we can appreciate researches about the development of systems based on independent BCIs separated in two groups: those that use bilateral flickers from checkerboards [3,17,18], and those with an approach based on overlapped stimuli or mixed in a reduced space [19–21].The classic Gestalt psychologists demonstrated the existence of an early autonomous process of visual organization, which produces percepts that do not always conform to previous knowledge or expectations about the stimulus, as small changes to the stimulus can induce extensive perceptual reorganization [22]. Recordings of border-ownership signals in visual cortex demonstrate how a stimulus is interpreted and reorganized [23]. Stephen E. et al. suggested that a slight modification of the conditions of the good continuation (which refers to the tendency for elements to be grouped to form smooth contours) may provide a spontaneous reorganization of shapes that might be observed in the area V2 of the visual cortex [22]. On the other hand, according to [24], the lateral and ventral occipito temporal areas are valuable for perceiving and recognizing objects and faces.In 1999, Leopold and Logothetis suggested that the multistable perception is mostly non-sensory in its origin [25]. Multistable perception is considered to be a powerful vehicle to recognize perceptual awareness from sensory processing that occurs in ambiguous figures such as the Necker cube [26]. In addition, the Rubin's face-vase illusion has mutually exclusive interpretation when is observed between dissimilar, and thus incompatible images, simultaneously presented to the two eyes (binocular rivalry) [27]. In both cases, perceptual awareness of physically identical stimuli alternates stochastically between two (or more) interpretations. For ambiguous figures, a single stimulus is presented to both eyes and perception switches (“reverses”) between each possible interpretation for every few seconds [28]. According to the theory of multistable perception, the perceptual reversals are the necessary consequences of a generalized high-level “exploratory” mechanism that directs spatial and selective attention in a way that forces lower level perceptual systems to periodically refresh [27].Regarding attention, the role of this in perceptual (re)organization is essential to be considered. Gestalt psychologists have pointed out that when attention is drawn to figures, the background regions of figures often go unnoticed [22]. How unattended objects are processed is difficult to derive from phenomenal reports by participants who cannot avoid paying attention to the stimuli that they are supposed to judge. In contrast, neuronal recordings show the processing of all stimuli, whether attended or not. Neuro-physiological studies investigating whether perceptual organization processes are preattentive, influenced by attention, or take place only under attention, have produced mixed results. In some situations, attention initiates a process of organization that reflects the intrinsic connectivity of the cortex. But in other situations, the organization emerges independently of attention, creating a structure for selective attention [22].Generally the visual attention is most controlled through eye movements, and the objects of interest are usually unambiguous. In multistable perception experiments, covert attention (without voluntary eye movements) may be altered by this central exploratory mechanism [25].In addition to changes in the figure in the field of multistable perception, a sub-concept emerges, where the figure appears nearer than the ground part, involving depth perception, and the ground appears to be occluded by the figure. This perceptual experience is named figure-ground perception [29]. Using this last concept, our work is presented here as a novel approach in SSVEP-BCIs. A portable stimulator based on LEDs designing the model face-vase is also proposed here. This kind of approach has the objective of being used for patients with severe motor disabilities where movements ocular are not required, with the information about the targets coming from visual lateral inhibition.Lateral inhibition is a term which describes the mutual interaction among the neural processing units of the same processing level of Bio Vision [30,31]. Characterized by the inhibition of behavior among the adjacent processing units, this interaction has positive effect on some of the early visual processing, such as edge enhancement and contrast enhancement. This creates a contrast in stimulation that allows increased sensory perception. Lateral inhibition was first found and confirmed by Hartline et al. who, by conducting electrophysiological experiments of the Limulus visual [32] and looking upon every ommatidia in the compound eye of the Limulus as a photo receptor, found that a receptor was inhibited by some other receptors in its proximity [31].Therefore, visual lateral inhibition is the process in which photoreceptor cells aid the brain in perceiving contrast within an image. Experiments are typically done with achromatic stimuli like those shown above, but a similar effect would hold for colored stimuli [31]. The contrast effect would be related to the distribution of macular pigment (MP) in humans. Macular pigment is a yellow pigment that is found in the inner layers of the central retina [33]. Humans have duplex vision: rods which operate in dim light and are mostly not screened by MP, and cones which operate at higher light levels and are screened by MP [33]. In dim light levels, the pigment migrates to the periphery and in high light levels the pigment concentrates toward the center screening the distal retina [34]. Details of this response can be seen in Fig. 1.For these reasons, we decided using blue and white colors in the photo-stimulation setup in order to create this contrast effect. Additionally, our previous research related to study of the effects of colored stimuli on Visual Evoked Potentials suggests that the blue color in 11Hz provides results of high precision and, at the same time, a high level of user comfort among different colored stimuli [35]. Furthermore, ours studies based on SSVEP and white stimuli offer quite promising results [14,36]. The flickering frequencies were 15.0Hz (vase) and 11.0Hz (faces). More details can be seen in Fig. 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present work, an alternative manner of presenting SSVEP stimuli was evaluated, in which a portable stimulator based on two flickering stimuli designing the model face-vase is also here proposed. This new concept of SSVEP-BCI is based on perception, where the well-known example of Rubin's face-vase illusion is used in order to create a bridge of communication for patients with severe motor disabilities. The contrast between a colored stimulus and other play an important role because this effect would be related with the visual lateral inhibition process, where photoreceptor cells aid the brain in perceiving contrast within an image. Thus, the visual attention in multistable perception experiments does not requires head neuromuscular control or eye movements.This study implemented an offline and an online SSVEP decoding system suggesting a new concept of analysis and stimulation that might be applicable in daily life.Results of this work provide individual analysis for each subject that can be useful for identifying the behavior of the subject during offline tests. An improvement in terms of percentage of classification was observed when we used vector features from the three electrodes (O1, O2 and Oz) compared to using a single electrode (Oz) with both CCA and MSI techniques. A comparison between different window lengths showed than the windows of 4s is more accurate compared to 1s.Furthermore, MSI technique was found to be more accurate compared to CCA in cases with same conditions, either using three electrodes or one electrode (Oz) in different window lengths. Fig. 9 presents a summary of this performance, where seven out of ten subjects reached an average accuracy higher than 60%. These seven subjects performed the tasks in a more suitable way related to the attention and focus change in perception; the other subjects were not considered in our analyses.The values of the ITRs are relative and dependent of setup parameters. The highest value achieved was 35.18bits/min using the MSI technique, with 1s of WL (values belonging to the subject 2). Our results demonstrate that electrode Oz is the best channel for characterization of visual perception from a quantitative point of view based on the canonical correlation analysis (CCA) after an analysis of channels by an independent way.On the other hand, our studies validated an online SSVEP decoding system using standard laboratories by using a structure built. Muscular activity related to the eye movements was also evaluated. An eye tracker device made it possible to observe and evaluate attention objectively and non-intrusively. The online performance appeared to decrease as participants switched from Face to Vase stimulus. The reason could be attributed to the fact that stimuli are located in different depths of field and the fact that our brains receives daily stimulation of human faces, which implies that our brains are highly trained to focus on face. As a consequence, the loss of focus could reduce visual attention and thereby lead to the decreased SSVEP amplitude. These results are consistent with our results in offline tasks.Finally, these findings strongly support the hypothesis of visual selectivity by means of the perception and neural mechanism of spatial attention. This new BCI-SSVEP based on Figure Ground Perception (FGP) has shown being a new approach compared to traditional SSVEP-BCIs, where the activation of commands is based on gaze control, and to independent SSVEP-BCIs based on bilateral selective attention. Thus, this study contributes directly to the research area of alternative or augmentative communication, oriented to people in locked-in syndrome, in final stages of ALS, or in other extreme case of paralysis situation.