@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measurement and characterization of glucose in NaCl aqueous solutions by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A general methodology to develop electrochemical impedance measurements in presence of non-linear distortions is employed.The significance of the measurements is assessment based on the noise level, the total standard deviation (the level of noise plus non-linearities), the experimental errors and the effect of using different sensors.A rational parametric model in the Laplace domain, based in the impedance spectral information, is proposed to estimate the glucose concentration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Modeling,Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy,Odd random phase multisine,Glucose sensor,Best linear approximation,Parametric model,Nonparametric model,Rational model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) allows measuring the properties of the system as a function of the frequency as well as distinguishing between processes that could be involved: resistance, reactance, relaxation times, amplitudes, etc. Although it is possible to find related literature to in vitro and in vivo experiments to estimate glucose concentration, no clear information regarding the condition and precision of the measurements are easily available.This article first address the problem of the condition and precision of the measurements, as well as the effect of the glucose over the impedance spectra at some physiological (normal and pathological) levels. The significance of the measurements and the glucose effect over the impedance are assessment regarding the noise level of the system, the experimental error and the effect of using different sensors. Once the data measurements are analyzed the problem of the glucose estimation is addressed. A rational parametric model in the Laplace domain is proposed to track the glucose concentration.The electrochemical spectrum is measured employing odd random phase multisine excitation signals. This type of signals provides short acquisition time, broadband measurements and allows identifying the best linear approximation of the impedance as well as estimating the level of noise and non-linearities present in the system. All the experiments were repeated five times employing three different sensors from the same brand in order to estimate the significance of the experimental error, the effects of the sensors and the effect of the glucose over the impedance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is a growing technique that generates high interest in biology and pharmaceutical industry. This technique presents several advantages: on-line detection, non-destructive and non-invasive sensing, easy integration and high-throughput screening. Pathologies such as diabetes type I and II require frequent monitoring of glucose levels in the blood. Hence, the development of techniques or new technologies that allow the glucose estimation is a topic of great interest.Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and dielectric spectroscopy have been employed to study the glucose influence in erythrocytes [1–5], aqueous or phosphate buffer solutions [1,6–11], complete blood or serum [1,12,10,11,13], over the skin [14,15] and, even, in animal and human experiments [10,16]. Some of the reported results present some drawbacks. For one side the electrode configuration is not always adequate, some articles report very high excitation levels infringing the condition of linearity in the data acquisition [17–19], while others do not mention the excitation level. In our experiments the linear condition is verified for each experiment as will be described in Section 2.In an EIS setup the two, three and four electrodes configuration are available. The two electrodes configuration measures the impedance between the counter and working electrode, including the impedance and polarization of both electrodes. This makes difficult to analyze the data results since the contribution of each electrode is not the same [17–19]. The four electrode configuration excludes the effect of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces but its common use is to measure junction potentials between two non-miscible phases or across a membrane [17–19]. The experiments developed in the present article are done employing a three electrode configuration system. The use of this configuration is aimed because allows measuring the potential changes of the working electrode, independent of changes that may occur at the counter electrode. This isolation allows that a specific reaction can be studied with confidence and accuracy [18,20].In general the impedance is obtained by imposing multiple frequencies, sweeping frequency by frequency, a sinusoidal excitation signal to the system and recording the resulting response signal. Doing such sweep requires a lot of time (proportional to the sum of periods of the excited frequencies [21]) where any change in the system, during the data acquisition, can affect the impedance estimation. In time domain impedance spectroscopy [22–26], the voltage excitation signal having a time-dependence shape (ramp, triangle, square function, etc.) is applied and the resulting current signal is measured. The conversion into the frequency domain allows calculating the impedance. This method has at least two drawbacks [25]. First, to obtain the equal spectral density and a good signal to noise ratio (SNR) along a wide frequency range, the excitation pulse must be very short, in the time, but with high amplitude. However, in practice, the excitation should be low to preserve the linearity affecting the SNR. And second, for this type of signals, only part of the energy is concentrated into a frequency range (the principal lobe), while another part falls outside. The energy out of the principal band will be “wasted” or lost in the analysis. It is, the impedance analysis is done in the principal lobe, while the signal present out of this lobe is discarded given that do not provide good SNR [25,26].In this article the employed excitation signal is an odd random phase multisine (ORPM), which allows control of the spectral excitation and reduces the measurement time. The time reduction allows measure the impedance in a stationary state, while the periodicity and control of the excitation frequencies of the multisine, allows identifying the noise level and the level of non-linearities in order to acquire the impedance in a linear or pseudo-linear state, as is described in Section 2.In a first attempt towards the in vivo identification of blood glucose levels, in vitro experiments are required. In this paper a sodium-chloride (NaCl) solution is used as a base solution given its prevalence in blood and its influence in the electrical conductivity process. During the experiments the concentration of the NaCl is constant and its impedance is evaluated over a number of physiological (normal and pathological) glucose levels. The impedance measurements are acquired in the frequency range of 1Hz to 30kHz. Range where groups as [1,6,9,10] and [11] have found important influences of the glucose in the impedance. In order to identify if the glucose concentration affects significantly the impedance spectra, the measured data will be analyzed regarding the uncertainty sources as is established by [27]. In our experiments the sources of uncertainty are the level of noise, the experimental repetition errors (ERE) and the sensor effect. Based on this, the effect of the glucose over the impedance (defined as the difference between the impedance at different glucose concentrations) is assessed regarding the different uncertainty sources. Based on our results the glucose effect (for the physiological glucose concentrations employed) are significant over the noise level and the ERE, but not to the sensor effect as will be described in Section 4.The parametric characterization of the impedance measurements allows centralizing all the information present in the data spectrum in a group of parameters that describe the whole system. In [6] the experimental impedance spectrum data is modeled by an equivalent circuit showing a correlation between the glucose and the parameter related to the charge transfer resistance. In [1] the spectrum data is analyzed concluding that the frequency of 1.17kHz optimizes the reaction of their sensors. In our attempt to estimate the glucose content based on the electrochemical impedance spectrum, a parametric rational model in the Laplace domain is developed employing a frequency domain approach [28]. The identified parametric model is analyzed based on the poles and zeros locations and their standard deviations. The developed model shows a clear relationship between the distance poles-zeros and the glucose content with low uncertainty. The results contribute to the use of EIS methods for potential development of glucose sensors. The paper is organized starting in Section 2 with an explanation of the measured methodology for electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in the presence of non-linear distortions. In Section 3 the experimental setup is described together with the methodology. Section 4 shows the impedance results and the analysis of the non-parametric model. In Section 5 the parametric model in the frequency domain is presented together the pole-zero behavior for the analyzed samples. Section 6 discusses the results and, finally, Section 7 gives the conclusions of the present work.The impedance (Z) of a system can be determined by applying a voltage signal (V) to the system and measuring the current (I) response. The word spectroscopy refers to the fact that the impedance is determined at different frequencies. The impedance (Z) is a complex value, since the response of the system can differ not only in terms of the amplitude but it can also show a phase shift between the excitation voltage and measured current signal.From the vast amount of existing broadband signals, in this work an optimized multisine will be used as excitation. This type of signal is flexible, since the user can control the number of excited frequencies and the amplitude of each frequency. This kind of signals allows short measurement time, proportional to the lower excited frequency and good quality of the measurements [21,29]. An example of such a signal is presented in equation (1)(1)u(t)=∑k=1NAksin(ωkt+ϕk)in which Akare the deterministic amplitudes of the different sine waves. ϕkare the random phases that are uniformly distributed in the interval [0, 2π[, and ωkare the excited frequencies of the multisine. This signal is periodic and consists of a sum of N sine waves that are harmonically related.From the different family signals that can be developed by (1) we use the odd random phase multisine signal. For this type of signals, only the odd harmonics are excited: Ak=0 for k=2n withn∈ℕand per group of 3 consecutive odd harmonics, one is randomly omitted. This creates an odd random phase multisine with a random harmonic grid that allows estimating the levels of the non-linear contributions as will be extended in the next section. The lowest frequency in the signal is the fundamental frequency. The maximum frequency is limited by the Nyquist theorem, and the minimum frequency will determine the measurement time. Proportional to the minimum excited frequency [21].Although it is well known that, in practice, systems are seldom perfectly linear, a linear model is very useful. It gives an intuitive comprehension of the general behavior of the system.A pure linear system satisfies the equation:(2)Y(jωk)=Go(jωk)U(jωk)where Y(jωk) and U(jωk) represent the output and the input signals respectively, Go(jωk) is the linear time-invariant transfer function of the system, and ωkrepresents the angular frequencies where the system is defined. For a nonlinear system, it is no longer possible to employ this relation exactly. However, if the system is mainly linear, the relationship between Y(jωk) and U(jωk) can be approximated by a linear-time invariant relation.In [28] it has been proven that if a nonlinear system is excited with a spectrally rich signal (as the ORPM), the frequency response function (FRF) of the nonlinear system can be approximated by the following equation:(3)G(jωk)=GBLA(jωk)+GS(jωk)+NG(jωk)where G(jωk) is the FRF of the system under test, GS(jωk) is the stochastic non-linear contributions of the FRF, NG(jωk) is the disturbing noise of environment and measurement equipment and GBLA(jωk) is the BLA of the system under test. The BLA consists of two parts:(4)GBLA(jωk)=Go(jωk)+GB(jωk)where Go(jωk), as in (2), is the underlying linear system and GB(jωk) is the bias or systematic non-linear contributions to the FRF. These last contributions do not depend on the actual phases of the random multisine, but they do depend on the applied power spectrum [28]. GB(jωk) is related to nonlinearities of the system and need to be low in order to develop measurements in a linear or pseudolinear state. The averageGˆBLA(jωk)is estimated as:(5)GˆBLA(jωk)=Yˆ(jωk)Uˆ(jωk)whereYˆ(jωk)andUˆ(jωk)are the output and input average spectra respectively, obtained along multiple periods of the excitation signal with the same phase realization.Due that the linear and non-linear distortions are periodic at periodic excitations [28] the variance of the excited frequencies (jωk) along the acquired periods provides an estimation of the noise contributions. It is:(6)σˆGBLA,n2(jωk)=1P−1∑p=1P|G[p](jωk)−Gˆ(jωk)|2where G[p](jωk)=Y[p](jωk)/U[p](jωk) is the FRF by period.Since both, the linear and non-linear response are periodic, the discrimination between them are not possible. However, at the output of the system, the total variance (noise plus non-linear distortions) can be estimated at the non excited frequencies (jωl) as:(7)σˆYˆ2(jωl)=|Yˆ(jωl)|2Since the non-linear distortions are periodic, the noise can be quantified by the sample variance(8)σˆY,n2(jωl)=1P−1∑p=1P|Y[p](jωl)−Yˆ(jωl)|2Finally, the nonlinear distortions at the non excited frequencies are:(9)σˆY,S2(jωl)=σˆYˆ2(jωl)−1PσˆY,n2(jωl)if the Eq. (9) is approximately zero the system is mainly linear.The interpolation of the levels of non-linear distortions (9) and the total variance (7), at the output, from the non-excited frequencies to the excited ones gives theσˆY,S2(jωk)andσˆYˆ2(jωk). This allows estimating the non-linear distortion on the measured FRF as(10)σˆGBLA,S2(jωk)=σˆY,S2(jωk)|U0(jωk)|2and the total variance as the sum of the level of the non-linear distortions and the noise level:(11)σˆGBLA,total2(jωk)=σˆGBLA,S2(jωk)+σˆGBLA,n2(jωk)This equation summarize the contributions of the noise and the non-linear behavior of the system over the BLA. In the case that the system be linear or mainly-linear, the first term of the right in the equation should be zero and the total standard deviation will be given for the noise contributions.One liter of saline solution (NaCL solution) at a concentration of 700mg/dL is used as a base solution. This solution was made using demineralized water from a Millipore MilliQ Element system and Sodium-chloride at 99% from VWR-laboratory. This base solution was divided in five sub-groups and glucose was added to obtain five different NaCl–glucose solutions at 0, 70, 120, 180 and 240mg/dL. The glucose was acquired from Sigma–Aldrich Laboratories with 99% of purity. The sample solution were stored into a refrigerator at 4°C.The glucose levels were chosen based on the physiological range, normal values and common Postprandial or random blood glucose tests. In [30] the glucose measurements taken in 74 normal people aged between 9 and 65 years old over a period of 3–7 days shows that glucose concentrations were between 70 and 120mg/dL for 91% of the day. In [31] the preprandial goal is set between 70 and 130mg/dl while the postprandial one is set <180mg/dL. Finally, patients with hyperglycemia present random blood glucose >200mg/dL [31].The electrodes used to contact the solutions were screen-printed electrodes from DropSens [32]. These electrodes consist of a working electrode of Platinum (4mm diameter), a counter electrode of Platinum and a reference electrode of Silver (Dropsens). The use of three electrodes configuration is aimed because allows measuring the potential changes of the working electrode, independent of changes that may occur at the counter electrode. This isolation allows that a specific reaction can be studied with confidence and accuracy [18,20]. The dimensions of the screen-printed electrodes are 3.4cm×1.0cm×0.05cm (Length×Width×Height). These sensors were chosen since they exhibit a high electrochemical activity and good repeatability [33]. The cell for screen-printed electrodes is a cylindric cell designed to perform batch analysis with large volumes of solution (5–8mL). The cell allows temperature control by mean of a thermostatic jacket. The dimensions of the cell are 5.8cm (height)×4.5cm (diameter). A detailed description of the sensors and cell can be found in [32].The Potentiostat Bank POS2 configured for three electrodes experimentation was employed, the signals were generated and recorded by a NI 4461 PCI DAQ card. The temperature was controlled by the pump Lauda Master Proline RP845.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
