@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Which wavelength is the best for arterial pulse waveform extraction using laser speckle imaging?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Improvement of laser speckle imaging devices by using macro-circulation data.Shorter wavelengths show better results than larger wavelengths.Image processing techniques have no influenced in pulse waveform extraction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Laser speckle,Arterial pulse waveform,Multi-spectral,Correlation,Fast Fourier transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A multi-wavelengths analysis for pulse waveform extraction using laser speckle is conducted. The proposed system consists of three coherent light sources (532nm, 635nm, 850nm). A bench-test composed of a moving skin-like phantom (silicone membrane) is used to compare the results obtained from different wavelengths. The system is able to identify a skin-like phantom vibration frequency, within physiological values, with a minimum error of 0.5mHz for the 635nm and 850nm wavelengths and a minimum error of 1.3mHz for the 532nm light wavelength using a FFT-based algorithm. The phantom velocity profile is estimated with an error ranging from 27% to 9% using a bidimensional correlation coefficient-based algorithm. An in vivo trial is also conducted, using the 532nm and 635nm laser sources. The 850nm light source has not been able to extract the pulse waveform. The heart rate is identified with a minimum error of 0.48 beats per minute for the 532nm light source and a minimal error of 1.15 beats per minute for the 635nm light source. Our work reveals that a laser speckle-based system with a 532nm wavelength is able to give arterial pulse waveform with better results than those given with a 635nm laser.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Laser speckle (LS) is an effect that results from an interference phenomenon and can be characterized as a random pattern of light intensities. Speckle patterns are created when coherent light is reflected by a surface with a rough structure, thus producing random phase variations at different surface locations [1]. The interference between different beams produces a granular pattern of intensities [2]. Historically, this has been considered to be a drawback when using coherent light sources because of the limiting effect on the spatial resolution. To overcome this problem many techniques have been developed [3–5].Beyond the limitations imposed by speckle, many useful applications of this interferometric effect have been proposed. LS-based techniques are successfully used to estimate two-dimensional blood flow [6,7], to investigate skin vibration [8,9], to measure water flow in plants [10], to assess vibrations modes of remote objects [11], to measure large-object deformations [12] and surfaces movement identification [13]. By using LS pattern analysis, it is also possible to extract information about the target roughness and displacement.In addition to the possibility of characterizing different materials using LS, the variations of speckle patterns over time (time-varying speckle) can be used to estimate the movement of a specific target [14]. The space-time statistical properties of dynamic speckle patterns depend on the velocity of the target. If the target is static, the speckle pattern does not change in consecutive images [15]. However, if the target is moving, the speckle pattern changes over time and the resulting images can grant information on the original kinetics of the reflecting media [16].One of the major features of this laser vibrometry technique arises from its truly non-contact nature. This is an unquestionable advantage when compared to other motion assessment techniques that require contact, particularly when the targets are sensitive to mass variations or external pressure [2]. Such is the case of biological systems, like arteries or skin, where the vibration profile can be affected by the forces exerted during the measurement procedure [17].The aim of the present work is to analyze which wavelength would be the most adequate to extract the arterial pulse waveform using the laser speckle effect. For this purpose, the paper presents an apparatus along with a group of methodologies that can be used to evaluate vibration of skin-like phantoms using 3 different optical wavelengths (532nm, 635nm, and 850nm). LS techniques are now widely used to monitor microvascular blood flow [18]. The detection, with a single system, of information from the macro and the microvascular levels would be of great interest.The methodology used (correlation coefficient) represents a more efficient computational method, compared to the one used by several authors (cross-correlation) [19–21]. The cross-correlation approach involves, in addition to the shifting of two images along all the possible positions, the identification of the maximum correlation peak. The proposed approach applies a one-dimensional correlation coefficient between two consecutive images. This type of approach was used by Nemati et al. [22,23] but using a different measurement site.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present work describes the study conducted to evaluate and quantify the effect of different coherent light sources in the evaluation of the arterial pulse waveform using laser speckle analysis techniques. The test performed in vivo showed that different light wavelengths have distinct abilities to extract the arterial pulse waveform.The combination of the proposed instrumentation and algorithms were able to identify the vibration frequency of a silicone membrane phantom. The L635 and L850 light sources achieved the best results with a minimum identification error of 0.5mHz in the vibration frequency. Although the minimum error of the L532 light source was about 1.3mHz, the results were close to each other. In all cases, the largest windows (81 and 27 pixels) achieved the best performances. Another important conclusion of this study was the fact that the L532 light was anisotropically scattered in the silicone membranes.The profile detection study aimed to simulate the movement of a biological tissue, like the skin of the wrist, when the pulse pressure wave travels in the radial artery. The estimation of the absolute value of the velocity profile was achieved with a mean error of 13.8% for the L532, 19.6% for the L635 and 15.8% for the L850. In this case, the L532 achieved the best results, which is probably due to its lower phantom penetration.In the case of biological measurements several adaptations were made to improve the results. The most significant was the limitation of the size of the acquired images in order to increase the sampling frequency. With a frequency rate of 50Hz, 12 distinct data-sets were acquired and processed with an algorithm based on the image correlation used in the bench-tests. The two pre-processing techniques that were applied (binarization and histogram equalization) proved to be ineffective. The L532 achieved the best results if we exclude the S3 data-set, which was most likely corrupted by motion artifacts. On the other hand the L850 was unable to properly record the arterial pulse waveform which indicates that wavelengths in the near infra-red are not suitable for this type of assessment.The shorter wavelength laser source (L532) showed better consistency in extracting the arterial pulse waveform. The lowest tissue penetration of the green light improves the signal-to-noise ratio when the laser speckle is used for skin vibration measurements. These results are promising for a future application of a system that combines blood flow measurement (red light) with artery distension information (green light) using multiple-wavelength light sources. However, more in vivo test, with more volunteers, are required to show the influence of the multi-spectral system. For example, obese individuals must be analyzed to test the infra-red light wavelengths for the case of deeper arteries and thick fat layers.The authors state that they have no conflict of interest to declare.