@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Geriatric depression symptoms coexisting with cognitive decline: A comparison of classification methodologies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Depressive signs in concurrent cognitive decline are detected through mining EEG resting-state activity.Random Forest, Random Tree, MLP Network and Support Vector Machines (SVM) are employed for data classification.Random Forest demonstrated the highest accuracy.Synchronization features significantly contributed to the decision tree formation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geriatric depression,Cognitive decline,Electroencephalography (EEG),Synchronization patterns,Random Forest,Random Tree,MLP Network,Support Vector Machines (SVM),Data mining,Elderly,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Geriatric depression is a pathological process that causes a great number of symptoms resulting in limited mental and physical functionality. The computation of oscillatory and synchronization patterns in certain brain areas may facilitate the early and robust identification of depressive symptoms. In this study electroencephalographic (EEG) data were recorded from 34 participants suffering from both cognitive impairment and geriatric depression (mean age 69.81) and 32 control subjects (mean age 70.33). Both groups were matched according to their cognitive status. The study aims at evaluating neurophysiological features of elderly participants suffering from depression and neurodegeneration. The current work focuses on the identification of depression symptoms that coexist with cognitive decline, the correlation of the examined neurophysiological features with geriatric depression combined with cognitive impairment and the investigation of the role of data mining techniques in the analysis of EEG data. The EEG features were estimated through synchronization analysis (Orthogonal Discrete Wavelet Transform). Depressive patterns were detected through data mining techniques. Random Forest, Random Tree, Multilayer Perceptron (MPL Network) and Support Vector Machines (SVM) were employed for data classification. The efficiency of the classifiers varied from 92.42 to 95.45%. Random Forest demonstrated the highest accuracy (95.5%). Both synchronization and oscillatory features contributed to the decision trees’ formation, with the former prevailing. Moreover, synchronization features significantly contributed to the decision trees’ formation. In line with previous neuroscientific findings, synchronization among right frontal–midline anteriofrontal regions showed great correlation with depressive symptoms. Evaluation of the classifiers indicated the Random Forest as being the most robust algorithm. Synchronization of certain brain regions is more indicative of identifying depression symptoms than oscillatory since synchronization features contributed the most to the formation of the classification trees.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Geriatric depression is a pathological process, which is characterized by lower functioning and a great number of symptoms such as diminished interest or pleasure in activities, insomnia or hypersomnia, fatigue or loss of energy and observable psycho motor agitation or retardation [1,2]. Major depressive disorder has been shown to be the same for elderly as for young people, providing that physical illness and dementia are not taken into account [1]. The burden of depression in the elderly is high, though it is rather difficult to compare prevalence studies due to differences in terminologies and definitions [1]. The level of severity of depression is determined by each patient's unique characteristics, according to which specific treatment can be proposed. Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) as a 30-item scale to screen depression was validated in nursing homes, but indicated poor sensitivity until patients with cognitive impairment were excluded [1]. The previous inference is justified by Guaguli et al., who suggest that cognitive impairment often coexists with depression in elderly patients [3]. Geriatric depression is often accompanied with cognitive impairments in multiple domains which may increase the risk of conversion to dementia and accelerate cognitive decline [4]. Cognitive deficits frequently accompany depressive symptoms in elderly people and the greater the severity of the symptoms; the more likely the consideration of pseudodementia becomes [1]. According to Unützer cognitive impairment, as well as chronic medical disorders, may complicate the diagnosis and treatment of geriatric depression, which is a rather hard task anyhow, even when cognitive deficit is considered mild. Failure to treat late-life depression can be correlated with increased morbidity and mortality from suicide in elderly populations [2]. The risk of suicide can be reduced through recognizing and treating depression. Geriatric depression as a presenting feature of a dementia is often resistant to treatment [2]. In elderly depressive patients suffering from Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) the probability of the initiation of the Alzheimer's disease clinical phase (AD) could be considered [5]. Regardless later manifestation of cognitive impairment, late-life depression may be considered as a risk factor or a potential prodromal state for AD [6]. Rapp et al. suggested that depression may affect cognitive decline in AD [4]. There is recent evidence that depression interacts with AD, since depressive elderly demonstrate increased amyloid pathology [6]. Wint suggested that the frequency of depressive episodes affects the possibility of developing AD, even though they have no shared pathology [7]. Consequently reliable diagnosis of depressive patients with MCI could result in early detection of neurodegenerative symptoms, thereby facilitating prompt commencement of intervention procedures.According to several studies in middle-aged or younger participants neurophysiological data can facilitate depression diagnosis [8–11]. Neurophysiological findings in small samples of depressed as compared to healthy participants (12 patients; 10 controls; mean age 43±14) through EEG brain oscillations during resting condition (closed eyes) have indicated that depression may affect brain activity in nearly the whole cortex, rather than only frontal or parietal areas [8]. The magnitude of the effect of depression was maximal in the posterior cortex and right hyperactivity in frontal, parietal and occipital brain areas was indicative of depression. Moreover depressed patients had more pronounced alpha and beta activity and less delta activity when compared to non-depressed controls [8]. Grin-Yatsenko et al. studied the spectral characteristics of resting EEG in a relatively large pool of some 111 adults (mean age 38.5) with mild depression and compared them with a large group of some 526 non-depressed participants (mean-age 35.1) [9]. The findings showed bilaterally increased occipital alpha activity, relatively higher alpha activity in the right parieto-temporal region, and increased theta values in the right and over the left hemisphere. Increases of beta power over the parietal region were proposed to serve as an informative parameter in diagnostics of the first stage of depressive disorder [9]. Leuchter et al., examined the resting state functional connectivity as measured by quantitative EEG in 121 non-medicated subjects with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) (mean age 41.5) and 37 healthy controls (mean age 37.4) [10]. MDD subjects showed higher functional connectivity compared to controls and expressed higher theta coherence involved connections between prefrontal and temporal regions and higher beta coherence between EEG channels overlying the dorsolateral prefrontal cortical or temporal regions [10]. Differences in frontal alpha power and synchrony were shown between the two groups of participants. On the other hand, cognitive impairment also affected the brain and it was crucial to study neurophysiological data that combined depression with cognitive decline. Ahmadlou et al., in an effort to evaluate frontal lobe dysfunction, which was associated mainly with impaired cognition, investigated EEG findings of 12 participants suffering from MDD and 12 healthy participants (mean ages 20 and 28 respectively) [11]. The results showed higher complexity of left, right and overall frontal lobes of the brain in MDD subjects in beta and gamma sub-bands and that beta band was more discriminative than gamma band in identifying MDD.Several studies have focused on EEG data evaluation of both physiological and pathological aging groups. Babiloni et al. recorded EEG data in normal elderly, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients [12]. In 155 MCI participants (mean age 72.1) occipital delta and alpha (8–10.5Hz) sources in parietal, occipital, temporal and “limbic” areas had an intermediate magnitude, showing a decrease of alpha power compared to normal subjects. Abnormal EEG rhythms were observed in people with pathological aging. Enhanced high-band alpha was detected, which might be mediated by a decreasing number of synchronizing inter-neurons in the target cortical modules [12]. EEG coherence analysis in AD has been applied for the examination of the association of cognitive decline with changes in functional connections between cortical regions. In AD patients, a decrease of alpha and beta coherence has been demonstrated in various types of dementia between both close and distant channels, showing functional disconnections among cortical regions [13]. However, quantitative analysis of EEG in normal and impaired elderly and in patients with MCI either continuously deteriorating or compatible with dementia of the Alzheimer's type indicated increased theta and delta in later stages of deterioration [14]. Structural imaging studies in late-life depression have identified volume alterations in prefrontal cortex [14]. Ajilore et al., measured cortical–subcortical network properties associated with Late-Life Depression (LLD) using graph theory-based methods in 73 healthy subjects (mean age 70.6) and 53 patients suffering from LLD (mean age 69.4) [15]. According to these findings, cortical–subcortical network properties were altered in LLD subjects thereby reflecting the underlying neuroanatomical substrates of the disease.According to the above studies, depression affected brain activity in frontal, prefrontal or temporal regions in middle-aged participants, who had also more increased beta activity when compared to non-depressed controls [8,10,11]. An increase of beta power over the parietal region was hypothesized to serve as an informative parameter in diagnostics of the first stage of depressive disorder [9]. In addition, depressive symptoms were correlated with relatively higher alpha activity in occipital and right parieto-temporal regions [9]. In elderly MCI participants [12] and AD patients [13] a decrease of alpha and beta coherence was computed in various brain areas. Moreover, in MCI or demented patients theta and delta power was indicatively high in later stages of deterioration [14].Although the aforementioned studies provide essential information for the understanding of such mechanisms, to the best of our knowledge, there is no neurophysiological study focusing on geriatric depression combined with cognitive impairment in elderly using EEG data and pattern recognition techniques. So the overall aim of the current work was to evaluate neurophysiological features of elderly participants suffering from depression and neurodegeneration and to identify depression symptoms that coexist with cognitive decline. A successful decoding of these could enhance the, diagnosis of depression coexisting with cognitive deficits and would improve the diagnostic capacity may enhance the diagnosis robustness in clinical routine practice. This study is based on the evaluation of EEG data of elderly depressive subjects with cognitive deficits and elderly non-depressive subjects with cognitive deficits. Motivated from previous studies where several data mining techniques have been widely used over the years for classifications of medical data [16–19], this piece of work proposes the exploitation of resting state (eyes-closed condition) EEG recordings combined with pattern recognition techniques [20] in an effort to enhance the predictive power of daily (neurological/neuropsychological) practice. Classification methods were selected based on previous findings according to the classifiers accuracy and robustness. No feature extraction methods were applied. The primary features were 57×57=3249 and the 12 oscillatory and 9 synchronization features where selected based on previous studies. Our aim was to evaluate the 21 features, examine their correlation with geriatric depression combined with cognitive impairment and to investigate whether data mining techniques, such as decision trees and artificial neural networks, could be that valuable in the analysis of such EEG data so as to aid in the extraction of potentially useful patterns and knowledge discovery for geriatric depression when examined in tandem with cognitive decline.The underlying hypothesis is that depression coexisting with cognitive impairment would affect both EEG oscillatory activity, as well as, synchronization. More specifically hyperactivity in right frontal and central areas could be indicative of depression. Moreover, we anticipate similarities in brain activity with findings from studies in elderly depressive participants. Delta bands are expected to be higher [15], while beta bands lower in depressive patients with cognitive decline [13]. Established knowledge on depression and dementia (whether that is preclinical, MCI or AD) is fused with novel data mining techniques, so as to strengthen the existing approaches and improve the differentiation accuracy. Classification trees are anticipated to provide higher accuracy and predictive power from both Random Forest (RF) and Random Tree (RT) algorithms. Furthermore, RF is expected to perform better and to provide feature evaluation information of great significance compared to RT due to the number of trees of the forest [21]. Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) are also examined due to their shown relevance for medical data and classification tasks [22,23], as well as, their evidenced credibility and efficiency [24]. Thus, a full comparison of different classification techniques is presented for the aforementioned analysis of EEG features, in an effort to obtain specific measures for the overall classification accuracy, the true positive (TP) and true negative (TN) rates, as well as, precision, recall, and area under Receiving Characteristic Curves (ROC) computations in an effort to evaluate their relative efficiency and reliability and their potential as diagnostic tools for geriatric depression.The study employed 66 (six male) elderly participants recruited from day care centers and the Greek Association of Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders. They formed two groups of participants. The first group consisted of 34 elderly participants diagnosed with geriatric depression and cognitive deficits. The second group, considered as the control group, consisted of 32 participants free of depressive symptoms but had the same cognitive deficits with the first. The two groups were matched on age and general cognitive status as measured by the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) and the Mental State Examination (MMSE) Tests. The majority of the participants (91.91%) were females. Inclusion criteria were determined as: age over 60, MMSE scores above 18, no history of neurological condition (e.g., epilepsy, stroke, etc.), severe depression or psychiatric disorder, not being currently medicated or being medicated for at least 3 months (stable medication), normal or corrected-to-normal vision and hearing, and being fluent Greek speakers and committed to the study throughout its duration. All participants were informed about the study, prior to their enrollment, and signed an informed consent form. During their participation, participants were excluded from any other study and/or training program. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Greek Association of Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders. Group details are given in Table 1. The differences between the 2 groups of participants regarding age, MMSE and MoCA were not statistically significant (all ps>0.05).Identification of depressive symptoms was performed through the Short Form of Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) and medical interview. The participants were screened through the Geriatric Depression Scale (short version). Participants with GDS score ≥6 were assigned to the depression group. The study aimed at the identification of geriatric depression symptoms. It was based on brain rhythmic activity, oscillatory features and synchronization patterns in certain brain areas, through electroencephalographic data and a neurophysiological resting state synchronization evaluation framework based on the notion of relative wavelet entropy (RWE). The participants’ cognitive status was assessed through the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test. MMSE, which is used for memory complaints of memory problems and is often combined with MoCA examination, which is used for mild cognitive dysfunction. Finally, the neuropsychological estimation of the patients was completed with Trail-Making Test Part A and B, Digit Span Task and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) test [25]. The neuropsychological analysis was beyond the scope of the present study since it is already studied in Bamidis et al., 2015 [26].Electroencephalographic data acquisition was performed through a Nihon Kohden JE-207A equipped with 57 active electrodes attached on an EASYCAP cap fitted to the scalp. Additionally, the study employed two reference electrodes placed at the earlobes and a ground electrode. Two bipolar channels were also employed for recording vertical and horizontal electroculigrammic activity. The sampling rate was set at 500Hz and all the channel impedances kept below 2kΩ during the recording procedure. The neurophysiological examination was performed in a quiet room with dim light and moderate temperature. Recordings were performed early in the morning. Participants were instructed to find a comfortable position in an armed chair and stay calm. The pre-proccessing procedure involved a high-pass, 4th order Butterworth filter with cut-off frequency at 1Hz, common average re-reference of the brain signals and then application of the Independent Component Analysis (ICA) algorithm for detecting and manually rejecting artifactual sources. The ICA algorithm was performed through the EEGLAB software [27]. Two experienced neurophysiologists visually inspected the data and rejected short data segments contaminated with noise. Finally, 20s of continuous, high-quality, artifact-free data were randomly selected as an input to the synchronization analysis algorithm.The synchronization analysis was based on the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT), since it is regarded as an ideal tool for robust time-frequency analysis of neurophysiologic data [28,29]. Wavelet analysis involves the selection of the basic wavelet's shape (mother wavelet) and then scaling and translation transformations form the entire wavelet family, Frequency analysis is achieved through the scaling mechanism, while time-dependent features are analyzed thanks to the translation of the mother wavelet. Synchronization analysis was performed for 150 time windows. The window length was 128ms. Periodization mode was employed and the wavelet coefficients were computed for each time window thanks to a decomposition scheme. The orthogonal basis of the DWT facilitated the perfect signal's reconstruction, while the discrete transform version discarded redundant information. The family of the bi-orthogonal wavelets of fifth order was selected since it is a suitable choice for resting-state EEG data [28,29].The aforementioned computations were performed through Matlab wavelet and signal processing functions. The window length was set at 128ms so as to be the minimum one containing at least one coefficient from each frequency band. The wavelet coefficients were computed for each frequency band based on Eq. (1). The coefficients’ computation was performed for each time window and for each EEG channel. The energy of each frequency band was computed by summing the squared wavelet coefficients (corresponding to a unique frequency band) of each decomposition level. In Eq. (1), j=1,…,5 denoted the decomposition level, Ckwas the wavelet coefficient and Ejwas the energy value for each frequency band:(1)Ej=∑k=1KCk2,j=1,…,5,The energy of the entire EEG signal (Etot) was computed as the summation of the energy of each frequency band as indicated in the following equation:(2)Etot=∑j=15EjThe relative energy for each frequency band was estimated by dividing its energy (Ej) with the Etot. This value represented the rhythm's contribution [30].(3)REj=EjEtotThe synchronization degree was then computed as the similarity between the energy distributions among EEG channel pairs. This notion was regarded as a directional metric of the generalized co-operation through rhythmic activity. It was computed as follows: The activity of each EEG channel was compared with all the others through channel pairs (bivariate measure). So, for each time window, N×N channel comparisons were performed, where N was the number of channels (N=57 in this study). The computations were performed through the formula of the Relative Wavelet Entropy (RWE), whereas pjand qjwere the energy distributions of the EEG channel forming each pair:(4)RWE=∑j=15pj×lnpjqjThese comparisons resulted in a synchronization matrix estimated for each time window. The average matrix of each participant was extracted then. A matrix value with large value is indicated through red color and represents a great desynchronization, whereas blue colors indicate greater synchronization. Self-similarity (comparison of a channel with itself) results in a zero value as depicted in the blue main diagonal line.In the current study oscillatory as well as synchronization features (Table 2) are analyzed based on already existing findings. Hyperactivity in right frontal, parietal and occipital brain areas could be indicative for depression [8]. Depressive patients have shown right-sided activations in both frontal and parietal regions [8]. Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) results in strong dominance of the right hemisphere [8]. Thus, our analysis includes synchronization features that combine right frontal and right parietal with other brain areas, since analysis of synchronization features in the right parietal–left frontal (P2–F7) and right frontal–anteriofrontal midline (F8–Afz) might improve depression diagnosis. During MDD anterior regions of the right cortex exhibit hyperactivity, whereas central brain areas show hypoactivity [9]. Synchronization features combining right anteriofrontal region with right central, right frontocentral and left centroparietal could be indicative for detecting depression. At temporal, parietal and occipital brain areas and in the midline parietal area significant differences between depressed patients and healthy controls have been revealed before [9]. These differences included higher amplitudes in theta and beta bands at parietal regions. The amplitudes in beta band for the components at midline parietal area were higher in subjects with depressive symptoms. In temporal-occipital regions theta and beta activity in EEG pattern increased in patients suffering from depressive symptoms [9]. Thus, in this study, synchronization features of choice were also those of the frontal midline–frontocentral and centroparietal midline-left frontocentral.Furthermore, as increases in beta power over the parietal region have been observed [9], thereby serving as an informative parameter in diagnostics of the first stage of depressive disorder, our study also included beta band in parietal and central regions.Additionally, as theta and delta activity increased in elderly patients suffering from cognitive declines in later stages of deterioration, delta coherence measured in centroparietal, parieto-occipital, occipital, central, temporal and frontocentral, and theta power computed in parieto-occipital and prefrontal areas were also included. Finally gamma coherence computed over anteriofrontal and frontocentral brain areas was also chosen.In the current study oscillatory and synchronization features (Table 2) were analyzed based on a priori information (already existing findings). Feature selection filters through the WEKA platform were employed but did not improve the accuracy of the classifiers. So, twenty-one (21) features that were selected according to previous studies were finally evaluated with the proposed classifiers.A key step of great significance is to choose the most appropriate algorithm. To this extent, the nature of the target and input attribute should be examined as well as the model's reliability. In addition the evaluation of oscillatory and synchronization features and their interactions should be estimated.A Random Tree (RT) is formed by a stochastic process. Classification trees of RF are simple representations of classifying instances. The data are described as:x,Y=x1,x2,x3,…,xk,Ywhere Y is the target dependent variable of classification (depressed or control) and x the vector, which is composed of the input variables x1, x2, x3 etc., that are used. All nodes of a Random Tree have exactly one incoming edge. A node with outgoing edges is called “an internal or test node”, whereas all the other nodes are called “leaves”. In our case, the leaves can be either depressive or control. Each internal node splits the instance space into sub-spaces according to a certain discrete function of the input attribute values. Binary decision trees are based on division of the input attribute domain into two sub-domains. The attribute domain is divided into two mutually exclusive and exhaustive sub-domains according to the attribute value or range for predictive class or additional attribute selection relatively. Instances are classified through navigation from the randomly selected feature (root) of the tree down to a classification outcome (leaf). According to Breiman et al., who developed the algorithm of Random Forest, the tree complexity has a crucial effect on its accuracy [31]. Tree complexity is measured by one of the following metrics: total number of nodes, total number of leaves, tree depth and number of attributes used. The resulting rule set can then be simplified to improve its comprehensibility to a human user, and possibly its accuracy [32]. Random Tree is easy to follow and can be converted into a set of rules.Random Forest (RF) is a collection of Random Trees. RF is an ensemble learning classification method. It runs efficiently on large databases and is suitable for detecting variable interactions. Ho of Bell Labs [33] first proposed the term random decision forests. RFs combine the “bagging” (bootstrap aggregating) idea with random selection of features [33,34]. Each tree is constructed from a bootstrap sample drawn from the original data set. The main purpose is to construct a collection of decision trees with controlled variance. A multitude of decision trees is constructed at training time, which output the class of each instance of the training set. Each tree of the RF gives a classification outcome (the tree votes for a class) and in the end the forest classifies each instance according to the predictions of all trees, which are finally aggregated through majority voting. Each tree is growing with a training set, which is formed by a specific number of cases sampled at random from the original data. The number of features is selected randomly for the construction of each tree and the best split on these variables is used to split the node. According to Breiman the forest error rate increases as the correlation between any two trees in the forest becomes stronger and the strength of individual trees decreases. Random Forest avoids over-fitting (failure to underline the relationship between data) due to random attribute selection [31]. Each tree is grown on about less than 2/3 of the training data. The left out data (1/3), named out-of bag error (OOB) is used to get a running unbiased estimate of the classification error as trees are added to the forest and for the estimation of variable importance. Random Forest offers visualization for high dimensional data and generation of a strong predictive model. In our study RF classification resulted in 7 trees (Fig. 1).The Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) network is an important class of the global feed-forward Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) [24,36–40], which involves mappings between an input and an output vector. The MLP Network consists of many layers of nodes in a directed graph and more specifically an input layer, one or more hidden layers and an output layer which represents the classification result. Each neuron in the input and hidden layers is weighted connected to all neurons of the next layer. A neuron computes the weighted sum of the inputs [24] and is compared with the threshold, in order the node to be activated [37]. In our case each neuron is activated through a sigmoid function and the learning process is based on data samples, which are composed of 21-dimensional input vectors and a binary output. The network is trained through backpropagation, a supervised learning technique, which is a gradient descent recursive procedure, for the adaptation of weights [38,39]. Once training data set is processed, the connection weights are altered based on the error in predicting correctly the outcome. In sum, the backpropagation MLP is a supervised ANN, in which input examples present the network and the corresponding desired output.SVM is a very popular method for binary classification of linearly and non-linearly separable data sets [40]. The Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm is a mapped approach of classification, since in non-linearly separated data sets, inputs are mapped to a usually higher dimensional space by function φ, where the classes are linearly separated (Fig. 2) [40,42–44]. In the aforementioned space, a hyperplane is constructed, which enables discrimination between the two classes (binary classification output), which in our case are “control” or “depressive”. SVM chooses the hyperplane, which maximizes the distance (the margin) from both classes. The points located on the interface of each class with the minimum distance to the separating hyperplane are the support vectors. SVM is described by an optimization problem [24]. In our case, the Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) technique is applied, which attempts to break up the SVM optimization problem into 2-dimensional sub-problems [41]. In order to formulate the problem for the determination of the hyperplane, it is not needed to know the function φ. Instead we need to know the dot product of the images of two mapped data samples in the usually higher dimensional space. Kernel function computes the dot product. Our dataset was analyzed by using the universal Pearson VII function based kernel (puk kernel), which results in great accuracy [40,45]. Puk can be used as a universal kernel and performed better than Linear, polynomial and RBF kernel functions.The mean energy values of oscillatory and the relative wavelet entropy of synchronization features were computed for both controls and depressed patients.Classification of features was performed in the WEKA platform for knowledge discovery and data mining [46]. There were 21 numeric EEG features which were analyzed. The attributes and the classifiers were evaluated through a 10-cross validation [47], which allows generalization of the outcomes to the full data due to the fact that 90% of the data is used as training set and 10% as a validation set each time [48]. To estimate performances in all models used, the following criteria were employed: accuracy, mean and relative absolute errors, area under ROC, True Positive Rate (TPR), False Positive Rate (FPR), False Negative Rate (FNR), Accuracy, Precision, Sensitivity and Specificity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
