@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Removal of correlated speckle noise using sparse and overcomplete representations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Developed a novel framework to apply sparse and overcomplete representations for the removal of speckle noise in real ultrasound images.Proposed a simple method for the estimation of the multiplicative noise present in real ultrasound images.The proposed de-speckling model is validated by using both the subjective and objective evaluation criteria.Results are compared with some of the state-of-the-art de-speckling methods.Results show that the proposed method outperforms some of the very efficient methods which have been also used for de-speckling for many years.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Speckle,De-speckling method,Sparse representation,Overcomplete dictionary,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, there has been a growing interest in the sparse representation of signals over learned and overcomplete dictionaries. Instead of using fixed transforms such as the wavelets and its variants, an alternative way is to train a redundant dictionary from the image itself. This paper presents a novel de-speckling scheme for medical ultrasound and speckle corrupted photographic images using the sparse representations over a learned overcomplete dictionary. It is shown that the proposed algorithm can be used effectively for the removal of speckle by combining an existing pre-processing stage before an adaptive dictionary could be learned for sparse representation. Extensive simulations are carried out to show the effectiveness of the proposed filter for the removal of speckle noise both visually and quantitatively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ultrasound (US) images are corrupted by the multiplicative speckle noise when the sound wave used in the imaging, needs to travel through heterogeneous tissue having different acoustic properties before reaching the transducer. Since the speckle tends to blur the finer anatomical details, the reduction of speckle is an important task in US image processing. Recently multiscale redundant representation has been used for the removal of speckle noise in synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images. The use of stationary wavelet transform (SWT) can be seen as one of the approaches towards this [1–4]. In [5], the authors proposed a versatile de-speckling technique for medical ultrasound images using SWT. One advantage of these approaches is that they produce a sparse representation of the signal over an overcomplete or redundant dictionary where the number of basis functions are more than the dimensionality of the input. The overcomplete dictionary is important for denoising because of its robustness to noise and other form of image degradations [6]. Another advantage is that the overcomplete dictionary is shift invariant which allows for small translation or scaling of local image features to result in smooth and graceful change in the distribution of activity among the sparse coefficients [7], a distinctive feature not present in the transforms with a fixed basis set [8]. The constraints of sparsity and redundancy also resulted in the introduction of denoising techniques using new multiscale representations such as curvelets [9], contourlets [10,11] and many more. The discovery of the matching pursuit [12] and the basis pursuit [13] algorithms and the analytical justifications of their optimality conditions [14,15] have lead to a new thrust in the application of sparse decompositions over redundant dictionaries for image denoising.In another approach called the example-based restoration [16], the dictionary is learned using a prior of sparsity and redundancy on the image itself. Aharon et al. [17] proposed the K-SVD algorithm as a generalization of the K-means algorithm for training a dictionary from a set of image-patches using the singular value decomposition (SVD) and sparse coding of image using orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP). This idea of learning a dictionary from a set of image-patches for sparse representation also appeared in [18].In [19], the authors proposed a K-SVD based denoising algorithm for the removal of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). They proposed a global image prior that ensure sparsity over patches in every location in the image and a maximum a posteriori estimator to estimate the true signal.The speckle noise in US images is multiplicative and correlated [20,21]. The K-SVD denoising algorithm is geared towards the removal of the AWGN. Therefore, applying the K-SVD directly on the US image will not be effective. There is a need for some pre-processing procedure which will modify the US speckle noise into the AWGN. In the so called homomorphic de-speckling (HDS) approach for US image denoising, the envelope detected image is first log-transformed to convert the multiplicative noise into an additive one followed by a suitable additive noise removal algorithm assuming that the noise is AWGN. In [20] it has been shown that such an assumption is oversimplified and leads to poor performance of any de-speckling method. They have proposed a pre-processing scheme to convert the correlated multiplicative speckle noise into AWGN.In [1], the authors proposed a K-SVD based method for the removal of speckle noise from both the intensity based and log-transformed based SAR images and also compared their results with the state-of-the-art soft-thresholding based methods. To our knowledge, the authors in [1] for the first time demonstrate the application of sparse and redundant representation for the removal of speckle noise from SAR images. This paper aims at exploiting the concept of sparse and redundant representation in order to de-speckle US images. Here the main challenge is to remove the multiplicative correlated speckle noise without any loss of finer anatomical details. In this direction, some preliminary work by the authors of this paper can be found in [22]. However, the main contributions of the present work are: (1) an extensive study on sparse representation and its application in denoising, (2) estimation of the noise and a tuning parameter, controlling noise smoothing and finally (3) more experimental results to establish our claims.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a short account on the various approaches on ultrasound de-speckling. Section 3 outlines a brief review of the sparse overcomplete representations and the K-SVD algorithms for the denoising of AWGN. Section 4 discusses about the speckle correlation and its statistical distribution under log transformation. The review of US image pre-processing is given in Section 5. Section 6 gives an account for the estimation of various parameters and also proposes a noise estimation algorithm. The proposed de-speckling algorithm is detailed in Section 7. Experimental results are discussed in Section 8 and finally, Section 9 concludes the paper.The speckle in medical ultrasound images is a signal-dependent and multiplicative noise as discussed earlier. In the following, we give a short account of the three major approaches, available in the ultrasound de-speckling literature which we mention here for reference.(a)Spatial filtering methods: A spatially adaptive filter for smoothing speckle in ultrasound image was proposed in [23]. A spatial filter based on local statistics of the log-transformed ultrasound images using unsharp masking can be found in [24]. These filters fail to remove speckle near or on the edges. Similarly, filters based on the region growing technique have been proposed in [25,26]. The disadvantage of these methods is due to the lack of a universal criterion to select a similarity property on which region growing can be carried out. Some other well known spatial filters are the Lee filter[27] and the Kuan filter[28]. These filters perform spatial averaging in the homogeneous regions and perform no filtering where edges and point features are present. This is achieved by introducing a coefficient of variation inside the moving window. In [29], an adaptive weighted median filter is used due to its robustness against impulsive type noise and edge preserving characteristics. Another nonlinear filtering method using an edge sensitive diffusion called the speckle reducing anisotropic diffusion (SRAD) was proposed in [30] to suppress speckle in ultrasound image while preserving the edge information. In [31], the authors proposed a SRAD based spatially adaptive maximum-likelihood (ML) filter for the de-speckling of medical ultrasound images. This filter outperforms the classical spatial domain filters and some of the diffusion based methods for de-speckling.Homomorphic filtering methods: All the above filters are applied directly on the image having the multiplicative noise model. The homomorphic Wiener filter proposed in [32] first converts the multiplicative noise into an additive noise through the logarithmic transformation on the speckled image. Then the Wiener filter is used to reject the resultant additive noise followed by the exponential transformation on the filtered image.Many multiscale methods based on the wavelet transform have also been proposed to de-speckle ultrasound images. These methods in general consist of five key operations: (1) logarithmic transformation (2) wavelet transformation (3) modification of wavelet coefficients using some thresholding (shrinkage) function (4) inverse wavelet transform and finally (5) exponential transformation. In the image denoising literature these methods are collectively referred to as the homomorphic wavelet based de-speckling methods (HWDS). The wavelet thresholding methods for the reduction of speckle can be found in [33,34]. These methods adopted a soft thresholding procedure which was originally proposed by Donoho [35,8] to remove noise within the finer scales and in the non-linear processing of feature energy for contrast enhancement. However, thresholding methods have two main limitations: (1) the choice of the threshold, the most important design parameter, is done in an ad hoc manner; and (2) the specific distributions of the signal and noise are not at all considered.To address the above issues, Simoncelli and Adelson [36] developed non-linear estimators in the wavelet domain, based on the formal Bayesian theory. They used a generalized Gaussian model for the subband statistics of the signal at different scales and thereby estimated the signal using a maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator. Achim et al. [37] developed a MAP estimator for the removal of speckle by modeling the signal wavelet coefficients by the alpha-stable distribution [38] and the noise wavelet coefficients by the Gaussian distribution for the wavelet decomposition at different scales. In [5], the authors proposed a versatile de-speckling method by modeling the noise wavelet coefficients by the generalized Nakagami distribution. Thus, the success of the Bayesian methods depends on the proper use of the statistical distributions to model the signal and the noise.The main limitation of the HWDS methods is that it assumes that the speckle noise in the log-transformed image is white and Gaussian. However, they are correlated [39] and also cannot be modelled well by the Gaussian distribution after the logarithmic transformation. A modified HWDS is proposed in [20] to overcome these limitations.Non-homomorphic filtering methods: There is yet another class of algorithms for the reduction of speckle which do not apply the logarithm prior to the application of the wavelet transform. These non-homomorphic methods filter the wavelet coefficients of the original speckle corrupted image without log-transformation. Pižurica et al. [2] proposed a versatile denoising method in this category using the UDWT for medical ultrasound images. It considers the correlation of useful wavelet coefficients across scales. This method does not rely on the exact prior knowledge of the noise distribution and is more flexible and robust compared to other wavelet based methods. In [4,40], the authors proposed non-homomorphic approaches for filtering synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images.The DWT and its shift-invariant version, the UDWT, are very successful for the sparse representation of one-dimensional signals. The performance of the DWT and the UDWT in images deteriorates because the 2D separable bases cannot have compact representations for lines and edges. The authors in [41] demonstrated that the localized structures such as step edges and the oriented structures like the lines and edges in the image cannot be described in terms of second order correlations alone. The localized and compact distribution of energy in images leads to the sparse structure meaning that any given image can be represented with a few number of basis functions out of a much larger set [41]. In sparse overcomplete representation, a signal is expressed as a linear combination of a small number of elementary vectors called atoms chosen from an overcomplete basis set usually called the overcomplete dictionary.Decomposing a signal using an overcomplete dictionary gives rise to an ill-posed problem, because it does not have a unique representation. Given an overcomplete system, the sparsest representation of a signal is the one that has the minimum ℓ0-norm. In other words, the signal has the fewest number of nonzero coefficients with respect to the overcomplete basis set. An important choice for the overcomplete dictionary is the basis set of an overcomplete transform. For such a transform, the number of basis functions is more than the dimensionality of the input signal. An overcomplete transform is also translation invariant and possesses greater robustness against noise and other forms of image degradations. The overcomplete transforms like the UDWT, the curvelets, the contourlets, etc. have been found to be very effective [42,43,7,9,10] in various applications of image processing.In some practical situations, the dictionary is built by taking a union of the basis sets of several transforms where each transform corresponds to an orthogonal basis or tight frame [44]. In [45], the authors use the combination of two dictionaries one for the representation of textures and the other for the natural scene parts assumed to be piecewise-smooth. However, to represent the characteristics of an image completely, many transforms are required [46,47] and the size of the dictionary needed for sparse representation becomes very large. An overcomplete dictionary of a reasonable size is needed for an efficient sparse representation and can be obtained by training on the image data. The trained overcomplete dictionary not only includes all kinds of characteristics in the image but also has a relatively smaller size.The sparse representation of a signal through overcomplete transforms have been widely used in image denoising. In [43], the UDWT was used for denoising of 1D signals. Sendur and Selesnick [48] proposed a bivariate shrinkage estimator applied to the magnitude of the dual-tree complex wavelet transform coefficients for image denoising. Portilla et al. in [49] proposed an image denoising method based on a local Gaussian scale mixture model in an overcomplete wavelet transform. Applications of sparse overcomplete representations for the removal of Gaussian noise from images are reported in [50,19,51]. In [1], the authors proposed a K-SVD based method for the removal of speckle noise from both the intensity based and log-transformed based SAR images and compared their results with the state-of-the-art soft-thresholding based methods.The sparse representation of a signal over a redundant or an overcomplete dictionary is an important topic that has got many applications in signal processing. It has been successfully used for the removal of additive white Gaussian noise from images. However, only a few works have investigated the use of sparse overcomplete representation techniques for the removal of the multiplicative speckle noise from coherent imagery. In fact, to the knowledge of the authors no other work has reported the application of K-SVD based sparse overcomplete representations for the de-speckling of medical ultrasound images.Consider image patches of sizen×neach arranged into a column vector xi∈Rn. Define an overcomplete dictionary Φ∈Rn×Ksuch that K>n. The sparseland model assumes that the dictionary is known and the xihas a sparse representation with a bounded representation error ɛ over such dictionary with no more than L atoms from the dictionary [19].Suppose x is an ideal noise-free image of sizeN×Narranged into a column vector of size N and y is its noisy version corrupted by AWGN with standard deviation σ. Let xibe obtained as the overlapping patches of x and yibe the noisy version of xi. Therefore, we can write(1)yi=Φα+ɛConsiderZ={yi}i=1MwhereM=(N−n+1)2the training dataset to learn the dictionary Φ. The likelihood function P(y|Φ) to estimate Φ is given by(2)P(y|Φ)=∏i=1MP(yi|Φ)The assumption taken here is that the individual signals are drawn independently from each other to make the problem tractable.The above likelihood function consists of likelihood functions for each example of the form(3)P(yi|Φ)=∫P(yi|α,Φ)P(α)dαwhere(4)P(yi|α,Φ)=const.exp{−12σ2yi−Φα22}The prior probability density function P(α) includes the notion of sparsity and is modeled by shaping it to be uni-model and peaked at zero with heavy tails [6]. Assuming a Laplacian distribution, we have(5)P(α)=const.exp(−λα1)Therefore, (3) can be rewritten as(6)P(yi|Φ)=∫P(yi|α,Φ)P(α)dα=const.∫exp{−12σ2yi−Φα22}.exp(−λα1)dαSince the evaluation of P(yi|Φ) in (6) requires integrating over all possible values of α, the authors in [6] suggested a simplification by assuming that the function P(yi|α, Φ) has tightly peaked maximum in α-space. Considering the above assumption and a log-likelihood function instead of the simple likelihood function in (2), the overall problem now becomes(7)Φ=argminΦ∑i=1Mminαi[yi−Φαi22+λαi1]In the above expression, it is assumed that the atoms in the dictionary are all normalized to have unit ℓ2-norm in order to prevent any trivial solution. Assuming that αiis nonzero only for a predefined threshold T0, the simplified version of the problem in (7) can be written as [17](8)minΦ,A{Y−ΦAF2}subjectto∀i,αi0≤T0where A=[α1, α2, …, αM],Y=[y1,y2,…,yM]and.F2denotes the Frobenius norm square.The K-SVD algorithm learns a dictionary by executing the following two stages iteratively, until convergence [17]. It considers overlapping image patches of sizen×nobtained from an image of sizeN×N, as the training set. Here, the size of each atom in the dictionary is equal to that of an image patch.Consider that the dictionary is fixed, the problem in (8) can be decoupled into smaller problems of the form(9)αˆi=argminαi{yi−Φαi22}subjecttoαi0≤T0Alternatively, the above problem can be rewritten as(10)αˆi=argminαiαi0subjecttoyi−Φαi22≤T0The above minimization problem is solved by using the Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) algorithm [52].The dictionary is updated one column at a time using the singular value decomposition (SVD). From (8), the term ΦA can be written as a sum of K rank-1 matrices. That is(11)Y−ΦAF2=Y−∑j=1KϕjαTjF2=Ek−ϕkαTkF2where Ekis the error matrix obtained when considering all the examples and the dictionary matrix with kth column (atom) removed andαTjis the jth row of the matrix A which uses the atom ϕk.In order to introduce the sparsity while updating each atom, the authors in [17] consider only those examples (signals) which use the kth atom in the dictionary to be updated and then define a new error matrix,EkRand substitute in (11) for Ek. The dictionary is updated one column at a time until all the columns (that is K) are finished using the following steps(1)RepeatFor an atom ϕk(k=1, 2, …, K)Consider the minimization ofEkR−ϕkαRkF2Perform SVD onEkRto obtainEkR=U▵VT.Update the kth atom as the first column of U.Update theαRkby the first column of V multiplied by ▵(1, 1).UntilKIn [19], the authors present a denoising method for images corrupted by AWGN using sparse representation over a learned overcomplete dictionary obtained by applying the K-SVD algorithm on overlapping patches of the image. The image x is assumed to have sparse representation in each patch of dimensionn×n. Addressing the denoising problem as a sparse decomposition technique per patch leads to the following energy minimization problem(12){αˆij,xˆΦˆ}=argminx,αij,Φμx−y22+∑ijRijx−Φαij22+∑ijλijαij0where the indices (i, j) mark the location of the patch in the image and λ is a parameter related to σ.αˆijare the sparse representations for the (i, j)th patch usingΦˆ. The operator Rijis an n×N binary matrix which extracts then×npatch of coordinates (i, j) from x.After fixing allαˆijandΦˆusing the iterative K-SVD algorithm, the denoised image is obtained by solving(13)xˆ=argminxμx−y22+∑ijRijx−Φˆαˆij22A simple closed form solution of Eq. (13) is a weighted averaging operation given by(14)xˆ=[μI+∑ijRijTRij]−1[μy+∑ijRijTΦˆαˆij]where I is the identity matrix. The denoised image is given byxˆ.Speckle is an interference pattern produced due to the coherent accumulation of the waves scattered from the point scatterers much smaller in size than the ultrasound wavelength in an homogeneous tissue. It appears as a spatially correlated noise and degrades image quality and interpretability.In order to understand the spatial correlation in US image, we consider a standard image formation model where the backscattered signal and the tissue reflectivity function obey a simple relationship based on linear system theory. Assuming linear wave propagation and weak scattering, the US image is considered to be the result of the convolution of the PSF of the imaging system with the tissue reflectivity function, given by [20,32](15)g(n,m)=h(n,m)*f(n,m)+u(n,m)where g(n, m), h(n, m), and f(n, m) denote the samples of the US image, the PSF, and the tissue reflectivity function, respectively. The term u(n, m) represents the samples of the measurement noise not covered by the convolution model.In the above equation, the received image g(n, m) is considered to be a filtered version of the true reflectivity function f(n, m). The spatial extent of the PSF is dependent upon the size of the ultrasound transducer aperture as well as the frequency of the ultrasound imaging. Since the PSF is essentially a finite bandwidth low-pass filter, it introduces non-negligible spatial correlation to the US image [21].To address the spatial correlation, first the US image is filtered with a whitening filter that decorrelates the data before taking the logarithmic transformation, resulting in another US image with pixels that correlate less than the original image.The speckle noise in US image is multiplicative and is modelled by [20](16)y(n,m)=g(n,m)v(n,m)where y(n, m), g(n, m), andv(n,m)represent the samples of the observed envelope image, original image, and multiplicative speckle noise, respectively. The indices n and m denote the axial and lateral indices of the image samples.The HDS approach converts the multiplicative noise into an additive one by taking the logarithm of both sides in Eq. (16). The log-transformed images satisfy the relation(17)yl(n,m)=gl(n,m)+vl(m,n)where yl(n, m)=lny(n, m), gl(n, m)=lng(n, m) andvl(n,m)=lnv(n,m). At this stage, the de-speckling of US image is simplified to the problem of removing an additive noise.The statistical model for the speckle noise depends upon the tissue composition and type. In [53], it is shown that when the speckle is fully developed, which is assumed when the number of scatterers per resolution cell is greater than 10, the image amplitude is widely recognized to follow a Rayleigh distribution. However, when the number of scatterers is low, their spatial locations are not independent, the statistics are likely to deviate from the Rayleigh model. The authors in [20] consider a general model which can account for the speckle statistics under different scattering conditions. They assume that the speckle noise samplesv(n,m)in Eq. (16) obey the generalized gamma (GG) distribution.Assuming the GG distribution for the speckle noise, the samples ofvl(n,m)in Eq. (17) follow a doubly exponential distribution that has the form of a Fisher–Tippet distribution (FTD) which is not Gaussian[20].Hence, any method developed to denoise the AWGN performs poorly in suppressingvl(n,m). So, pre-processing of the US image is necessary before using any HDS method to remove the speckle noise. In this work, we apply the pre-processing method suggested in [20] to whiten and Gaussianizevl(n,m).It is possible to suppress the speckle correlation by “undoing” the effect of the PSF through the process of deconvolution. As the PSF here is not known a priori, the deconvolution is blind. The decorrelation or whitening of the US image consists of the following two stages.Let Gl(ω1, ω2), Fl(ω1, ω2) and Hl(ω1, ω2) denote the log-magnitude of the Fourier transforms (FT) of g(n, m), f(n, m) and h(n, m), respectively. Neglecting the noise term in Eq. (15), the convolution model implies(18)Gl(ω1,ω2)=Hl(ω1,ω2)+Fl(ω1,ω2)Eq. (18) shows that Hl(ω1, ω2) could be estimated from Gl(ω1, ω2) by considering Fl(ω1, ω2) as the noise. Thus the estimation of the PSF becomes a filtering problem. The samples of Fl(ω1, ω2) obey the Fisher-Tippet distribution (FTD) [54,20] assuming that the samples of f(n, m) obey white Gaussian noise (WGN). The proof for the 1D case is reported in Appendix A. It can also be extended to 2D case easily.The FTD is similar to the WGN except for a relatively small number of samples having large amplitudes which contribute to its long tail. As a result, such a noise may be viewed as a WGN contaminated by occasional outliers/transients. These transients are reduced by a process called outlier shrinkage [55] and defined by(19)R(ω1,ω2)=sign(ΔGl(ω1,ω2))(ΔGl(ω1,ω2)−λ)+where R(ω1, ω2) is the robust residual. The term ΔGl(ω1, ω2) denotes the difference between Gland its median filtered version, λ is a predefined threshold, and the operator (x)+ returns x if x>0 and 0 otherwise. Finally (Gl−R) is filtered using Donoho's wavelet based soft-thresholding method [35] to estimate Hl. After the denoising, exponential transformation is taken on the result to estimateHˆ(ω1,ω2).Let Pg(ω1, ω2), Pf(ω1, ω2), and Pu(ω1, ω2) denote the power spectral densities (PSD) of g(n, m), f(n, m), and u(n, m), respectively. Also let H(ω1, ω2) denote the magnitude of the FT of the PSF. Assuming that the samples of the reflectivity function are independent of the noise, the following relationship can be derived.(20)Pg(ω1,ω2)=Pf(ω1,ω2)H(ω1,ω2)2+Pu(ω1,ω2)In an US image, the tissue is formed by a large number of small independent structures, therefore the samples of the tissue reflectivity function f(n, m) can be assumed uncorrelated [20] and its PSD, Pf(ω1, ω2) is equal toσf2. Assuming the samples of the additive noise u(n, m) also uncorrelated, Pu(ω1, ω2) is equal toσu2.This results in simplification of Eq. (20) to(21)Pg(ω1,ω2)=σf2H(ω1,ω2)2+σu2Thus the PSD of g(n, m) is the sum of the PSDs of the PSF and the additive noise. Since the PSD of the noise is constant, therefore the autocorrelation of the US image is completely defined by the PSD of the PSF. In [55], the decorrelation filter is defined as an inverse filter whose magnitude transformL(ω1,ω2)is given by(22)L(ω1,ω2)=1(H(ω1,ω2)2+ρ)whereρ=σu2/σf2is the decorrelation parameter which can be varied in order to get optimum decorrelation. Applying the inverse filter in Eq. (22) to an US image results in flattening of its power spectral density (PSD) and, therefore reduces the correlation between its samples.Considering the generalized gamma model for the speckle noisev(n,m), the decorrelated and log-transformed speckle noise obeys a Fisher-Tippet type of distribution. Therefore, the outlier-shrinkage has to be carried out in order to smooth out the transients. Once the spiky component of the log-transformed speckle noise is removed the noise corrupting the image can be approximately treated as AWGN.The sparse representation problem for denoising can be reformulated as(23)αˆ=argminα∥α∥0subjecttoy−Φα22≤(Cσ)2where C is a constant noise multiplier and σ is the standard deviation of noise. The selection of these parameters is very crucial for image denoising.In [56], the authors suggest a simple procedure to estimate C. It depends on the dimension of the patch. If we consider that (y−Φα) behave as a Gaussian vector then the term∥y−Φα∥22σ2follow a chi-square distributionχN2with N degrees of freedom. The cumulative distribution function FNof theχN2distribution is then thresholded to evaluate C as follows [51](24)FN∥y−Φα∥22σ2≤nC2=1Γn2∫z=0nC22zn2−1e−zdzSelecting(25)FN(nC2)=0.9leads to a good choice of the parameter C for any dimension n.To estimate the standard deviation σ of the noise, consider a generalized signal-dependent noise model given by(26)y(n,m)=g(n,m)+g(n,m)γ.u(n,m)+w(n,m)where g(n, m) is the noise-free image sample. The noise generating random process u(n, m) is assumed to be independent of g(n, m), stationary, uncorrelated with zero mean and varianceσu2. The termw(n,m)is the thermal noise (zero mean white and Gaussian). For a great variety of images, this model has been proven to hold for values of |γ|≤1.A purely multiplicative noise model has γ=1. In ultrasound imaging, the thermal noise contributionwis assumed to be negligible compared to the speckle term g.u.Let us rewrite the above noise model(27)y(n,m)=g(n,m)+g(n,m).u(n,m)If the variance of (27) is calculated on homogeneous pixels, in whichσg2(n,m)=0by definition. Considering the independence of g and u and the fact that u is zero mean and stationary, we can write for a homogeneous region in the image(28)σy2(n,m)=σu2.μg2(n,m)in which μg(n, m)≜E[g(n, m)] is the non-stationary mean of g. The interpretation of (28) is that on statistically homogeneous pixels the theoretical non-stationary ensemble statistics (mean and variance) of the observed image g(n, m) lie upon a straight line whose slope is equal toσu2. We propose a noise estimation algorithm based on the above discussion. The algorithm can be summarized as follows:Algorithm 1Noise Estimation•Divide the noisy image into 4×4 image blocks.Find the mean2 and variance of the blocks in the noisy image corresponding to the homogeneous regions in the image.Obtain a scatter plot between mean2 and variance.Fit a straight line using the least squares approach.The slope of the line gives the estimation of the noise variance.The overall block diagram of the proposed algorithm is shown in Fig. 1. After the US image is pre-processed using the procedure discussed in Section 4, the speckle noise behaves approximately as white. The decorrelated US image is then log-transformed to convert the multiplicative noise into additive noise. At this stage, the speckle noise is not Gaussian but approximated by a Fisher–Tippet type of distribution. The log-transformed decorrelated US image is now passed through the Gaussianization procedure to approximate the speckle noise as AWGN. At this stage, we can apply any AWGN removal algorithm to de-speckle the US image.The K-SVD algorithm discussed in Section 2 performs very well for the removal of additive white Gaussian noise. In this method, the denoising is achieved by a weighted averaging operation given by Eq. (14). However, this expression introduces a bias [1] if μ>0 becauseE[xˆ]=nμ+nE[x]. In addition, practically the K-SVD is not applied on the patch directly but on the mean centered patch in order to approximate only the high-frequency information of the patch and the mean of the patch is added subsequently to reconstruct the patch. Therefore, the modified formula to compute the weighted averaging operation for denoising the US image is given by(29)xˆ=[∑ijRijTRij]−1[∑ijRijT(Φˆαˆij+ylij)]where.represents the local mean. The algorithm is summarized as follows:Algorithm 2De-speckling algorithm using sparse representation•Preprocess the speckled image to remove the speckle correlation as discussed in 4.Estimate the noise of the decorrelated image using the proposed noise estimation algorithm discussed in 5.Take the logarithmic transformation of the decorrelated image.Apply the outlier shrinkage on the log-transformed image to Gaussianize the noise.Select the patch size and find the parameter C using Eq. (25).Apply the iterative K-SVD based denoising algorithm for the removal of additive white Gaussian noise discussed in 2.Compute the weighted averaging operation using Eq. (29) to obtain the reconstructed image.Finally, take the exponential transformation of the denoised output.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
