@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Removal of EOG artefacts by combining wavelet neural network and independent component analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A combination of ICA and WNN is introduced to eliminate EOG artefacts.This method corrects only EOG artefacts within a contaminated component.Minimal low frequency and underlying cerebral activity is lost.EEG quality is increased.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Eye activity has larger electrical potential than the average electroencephalogram (EEG) recording, thus making it one of the major sources of artefacts. Ocular artefacts (OA) must be removed as completely as possible with little or no loss of EEG to obtain a higher quality EEG. Using independent component analysis (ICA), the EEG is separated into independent components (IC) and the contaminated component is removed, thus removing the OA. However, ICA does not separate the sources completely and some of the meaningful EEG is lost. In this paper, a new method combining ICA and wavelet neural networking (WNN) is proposed. In this method, WNN is applied to the contaminated ICs, correcting the OA and thus lowering the data lost. The method was evaluated using simulated and real datasets and the results show that the OA are successfully removed with very little data loss.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There exist many signal sources known as artefacts that lower the quality of electroencephalography (EEG). Among all the artefacts, ocular artefacts (OA) are the most dominant. OA exist through eye movements and blinks which generates a signal greater in magnitude than EEG signals, allowing it to travel throughout the scalp, masking and distorting EEG signals [1–4]. In order to obtain higher quality EEG signals, these artefacts must be removed without distorting or removing any of the underlying EEG data. There are numerous methods to restrict OA. One of the simpler methods is restricting the eye movements and blinking of the subject by fixating on a stable point. However, during experiments it is difficult for the subject to perform this task especially for infants or persons with certain disabilities. Also, the effort of performing the task can have a significant impact on the acquired EEG data [5]. Another method is to recognize and remove contaminated trials from the study. Contaminated trials are recognized by detecting spike like signals with magnitudes greater than the EEG signal. The removal of these contaminated trials will however lead to loss of EEG data.Many complex methods for detecting and removing artefacts have been proposed. One such method, known as independent component analysis (ICA), makes use of blind source separation [4,6] to determine the original sources (or an estimate of the sources) of a set of signals where each signal is assumed to be a linear mixture of the sources. There exist different assumptions, such as non-Gaussian (NG), non-stationary (NS), spectral density (SD), and hybrid for the static model of the sources [7]. For this article an assumption was made that the signals are NG (sources are independent processes) and from [7,8] it was determined that INFOMAX, NG ICA tool, produces the best results assisting with OA removal and source separation thus it will be used throughout this article.ICA has become a popular method in removing artefacts from EEG data. This is accomplished through removal of the component (source) containing the artefact and remixing remaining sources. The disadvantage of ICA is that the components do not necessarily only contain artefact data, but also contains underlying EEG data [2]. Removing the contaminated component will thus lead to loss of EEG data. Addressing this issue, Wang et al. [4] combined ICA and a system identification technique to correct the contaminated component. The system identification technique, auto-regressive exogenous (ARX) uses a short period of clean EEG before the contamination as reference EEG for correction.Another method known as wavelet thresholding, based on wavelet transform, uses wavelets or wavelet packets to decompose a signal into sets of coefficients which represents the original signal in time and frequency domains. In the low-frequency sub-bands, large coefficients are produced if an OA is present in the original signal. These large coefficients are then decreased by a linear or nonlinear threshold to remove the OA [9]. The decomposition of the signal into detailed coefficients is a great advantage because it can isolate all types of waveform structure in time and space. Using this property, methods have been developed to automatically detect and label OAs [1,3,10].Neural networks (modelled after biological nervous system) are computational models that consist of an input layer, hidden layers and an output layer. The hidden layers consist of processing elements called neurons that are interconnected. These elements can be trained for specific functions such as signal correction or classification by changing the weights of the elements to obtain a specific input–output relationship. Neural network have been trained to detect and remove OA that are present in EEG [11,12]. Nguyen et al. [9] developed a wavelet neural network (WNN) algorithm, combining the powerful estimation characteristics of neural networks and the time–frequency properties of wavelet transforms. Experimental results on real and simulated EEG datasets proved promising.In this paper, an ocular artefact removal method is introduced that combines ICA and WNN. EEG data is decomposed into ICs and wavelet transform is used to detect contaminated ICs. Wavelet coefficients are generated from the detected OA and the lowest frequency band outlier coefficients are corrected by a trained neural network. Patterns related only to OA will be rejected and the underlying EEG data will be unaltered.In this paper the simulated data was used to test the performance of the ICA-WNN correction whereas the EEG dataset was used to validate it.The EEG signal generator model utilized in [13] was originally designed for research on the effects caused by drugs such as anaesthetics on humans and focuses on 3 areas. Firstly the EEG simulation assists with understanding the brain and how it functions. Secondly EEG simulation provides a means for which algorithms and equipment can be tested. Lastly EEG simulation can be used for educational or training purposes [13]. The EEG simulation model was used to simulate artefact free EEG data.In order to contaminate the simulated EEG data, OA had to be recorded. Contaminated EEG data was recorded for 5760-points (45s) by a 14 channel Emotiv epoc (Emotiv, San Francisco, USA) system at a sampling rate of 128Hz. Markers were placed at each instant an OA occurred. Considering that OA are situated in the lower frequency band, the recorded data was refined by applying a band-pass filter (FIR, 0-4Hz) and then broken into ICs using infomax, a blind source separation method [8]. OA at each marker was extracted from the ICs that were identified for containing OA.Contaminated simulated EEG were generated by randomly mixing the extracted OA from ICs with the artefact free simulated EEG. Using the clean and contaminated simulated EEG the WNN were trained and its performance was quantitatively evaluated.The ICA-WNN method was validated using data recorded in a motor imagery test [14]. The EEG data was recorded from 7 healthy subjects that took part in 11 different experiments. The data was collected using 128 channels sampled at 1000Hz and band-passed filtered between 0.05 and 200Hz. Subjects were seated in a comfortable chair with arms relaxed on the armrest. During the experiment, for 3s, 2, 3 or 6 letters appeared on a computer screen indicating to the subject what action they should imagine i.e., imagining a left hand movement action or an auditory sensation. Two types of visual stimulations were used to indicate the required action. Firstly the letters were indicated at a stable, fixed point, minimizing OA. Secondly the letters were indicated at random points on the screen inducing OA. Due to the lack of OA, datasets that were recorded using the first stimulus method were not used in validating the WNN.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An IC correction method using a WNN was proposed in order to remove OA. A combination of ICA, neural network and wavelet transform was used to detect and remove OA. The results from the simulation and motor imagery data set show that the OA can be successfully removed with minimal data loss.