@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Resting tremor classification and detection in Parkinson's disease patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study resting tremor through the local field potential signals.There appear to be two distinct subgroups of patients within the group-1.We propose a new approach for demand driven stimulation using the subtype of tremor.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parkinson's disease (PD),Tremor,Local field potential (LFP),Deep brain stimulation (DBS),Discrete wavelet transform (DWT),Artificial neural network (ANN),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Parkinson is a neurodegenerative disease, in which tremor is the main symptom. This paper investigates the use of different classification methods to identify tremors experienced by Parkinsonian patients. Some previous research has focussed tremor analysis on external body signals (e.g., electromyography, accelerometer signals, etc.). Our advantage is that we have access to sub-cortical data, which facilitates the applicability of the obtained results into real medical devices since we are dealing with brain signals directly.Local field potentials (LFP) were recorded in the subthalamic nucleus of 7 Parkinsonian patients through the implanted electrodes of a deep brain stimulation (DBS) device prior to its internalization. Measured LFP signals were preprocessed by means of splinting, down sampling, filtering, normalization and rectification. Then, feature extraction was conducted through a multi-level decomposition via a wavelet transform. Finally, artificial intelligence techniques were applied to feature selection, clustering of tremor types, and tremor detection.The key contribution of this paper is to present initial results which indicate, to a high degree of certainty, that there appear to be two distinct subgroups of patients within the group-1 of patients according to the Consensus Statement of the Movement Disorder Society on Tremor. Such results may well lead to different resultant treatments for the patients involved, depending on how their tremor has been classified.Moreover, we propose a new approach for demand driven stimulation, in which tremor detection is also based on the subtype of tremor the patient has. Applying this knowledge to the tremor detection problem, it can be concluded that the results improve when patient clustering is applied prior to detection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have studied resting tremor through the LPF signals collected from the subthalamus in patients diagnosed with tremor dominant idiopathic PD. All the patients present the same symptomatology RT in the frequency band between 4 and 6Hz. We aimed to look for the existence of sub-group(s) of patients (tremor sub-group). From our experimentation and as a result we showed the existence of two subgroups of patients within the group-1 of patients according to the Consensus Statement of the Movement Disorder Society on Tremor [40].It is acknowledged here that the total number of patients involved in this study is relatively small. That said, there were no cases which disproved the hypothesis and the results obtained are, we feel, strongly supportive. However the next step is to extend the study considerably in order to see if all PD cases fall into one or other of the two subgroups as categorized or if there appear to be any exceptions.Clearly the physiological causes of this can be a matter for further study and we would not wish to speculate on them here. In particular it would be interesting to study, at the neurological level, what are the particular causes for this distinction in relation to the underlying subthalamic activity. Nevertheless we hope that this result may be used as the basis to advance the research into types of patients and tremors in Parkinson's disease. Moreover, this research advance may help to develop improved and more specialized therapies to treat PD.Finally, using the obtained results, we propose a novel tremor detection mechanism that distinguishes between sub-groups of patients and obtains a higher performance (accuracy) than a detection system that treats all the patients in the same single group. Therefore, our proposed system seems an effective tool to assist in demand driven deep brain stimulation.In order to ensure that two different types of tremor exist in our patient dataset, we performed several clustering trials. In each experiment, we varied the training set of patients. Our goal here was to ascertain if the two groups (type A and B) observed in the initial configuration remain irrespective of whether a different set of patients is chosen for the training phase.In this appendix we present some of the tested configurations. Two different types are obtained in all the configurations. More precisely, in all of them patients RB and SW are from a different type than patients BE, EP, MA, DC and GB.The obtained results are summarized in Tables A1–A4. The following considerations can be extracted when we analyze in depth the data:•In Table A1 we can observe that patient DC has 16 instances in cluster number 6. In this cluster we do not find any instances of the remaining patients, so determination of type A or B is, in principle, doubtful. We finally classify cluster 6 as type A, because the majority of instances of that patient DC are type A. Furthermore, the other two patients that have instances in that cluster (patients BE and RB), have more instances within type A.In Table A4 and only observing the training results, it is questionable whether patient GC belongs to type A or type B, since the instances of this patient are mostly in cluster 2, which does not have instances from other patients.From this, we might conclude that a type C also exists. Nevertheless, if we observe the test results, we can clearly determine that cluster 2 belongs to type A – although this decision cannot be determined during the training phase. On the other hand, “this uncertainty” does not appear in the other tables evaluated, where all patients clearly show membership, in training and also in testing, to one of the existing groups (type A or B) – even this patient.Note that in this configuration we have not considered cluster 3 since the number of samples belonging to this cluster is negligible.In all the configurations we can observe that all the patients have instances in both types. But adding the total number of instances it can be seen that every patient clearly belongs to one type. This has been the criterion about membership of a patient to type A or type B.We have mentioned that although the patients clearly belong to one type, they have instances from the other type. If we pay more attention to this, it is remarkable that this fact is more noticeable for the patients of type A than for type B. That is, patients of type A have a membership, although clear, which is less strong than patients of type B.Summarizing, and after conducting in depth experimentation, we conclude that only two types of tremor exist in our patients dataset.