@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Atrial flutter and atrial tachycardia detection using Bayesian approach with high resolution time–frequency spectrum from ECG recordings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a novel method for automatic detection of AFL and AT.We use Bayesian approach followed by high resolution time–frequency spectrum.We found TQ interval of ECG by using a particle filter.For classifications of AFL, AT and NSR, we found that our approach resulted in accuracies of 0.89, 0.87 and 0.91.Our approach tracks the time-varying fundamental frequency of atrial activity with high-resolution time–frequency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Atrial flutter,Atrial tachycardia,Particle filter,Dynamic ECG model,High resolution time–frequency spectrum,Variable frequency complex demodulation,Electrocardiogram,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Contemporary methods of atrial flutter (AFL), atrial tachycardia (AT), and atrial fibrillation (AF) monitoring, although superior to the standard 12-lead ECG and symptom-based monitoring, are unable to accurately discriminate between AF, AFL and AT. Thus, there is a need to develop accurate, automated, and comprehensive atrial arrhythmia detection algorithms using standard ECG recorders. To this end, we have developed a sensitive and real-time realizable algorithm for accurate AFL and AT detection using any standard electrocardiographic recording. Our novel method for automatic detection of atrial flutter and atrial tachycardia uses a Bayesian approach followed by a high resolution time–frequency spectrum. We find the TQ interval of the electrocardiogram (ECG) corresponding to atrial activity by using a particle filter (PF), and analyze the atrial activity with a high resolution time–frequency spectral method: variable frequency complex demodulation (VFCDM). The rationale for using a high-resolution time–frequency algorithm is that our approach tracks the time-varying fundamental frequency of atrial activity, where AT is within 2.0–4.0Hz, AFL is within 4.0–5.3Hz and NSR is found at frequencies less than 2.0Hz. For classifications of AFL (n=22), AT (n=10) and normal sinus rhythms (NSR) (n=29), we found that our approach resulted in accuracies of 0.89, 0.87 and 0.91, respectively; the overall accuracy was 0.88.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The atrial tachyarrythmias atrial flutter (AFL), atrial tachycardia (AT), and atrial fibrillation (AF) represent the most common class of heart rhythm disorders presenting to medical attention [1–2]. Many algorithms have been developed to detect AF and can be categorized as being based on RR interval (RRI) variability [3–11]. Specifically, their aim was to quantify markedly increased beat-to-beat variability RRI time series in AF. Consequently, most algorithms showed sensitivity and specificity values higher than 90% for AF detection. On the other hand, automatic detection of AFL and AT is more challenging and has been less studied since the RRI characteristics of AFL and AT are regular, and the acquisition of the atrial signal (F-wave) is required.AFL is an atrial dysrythmia that generates a discernable P-wave, making it difficult to distinguish from normal sinus rhythm. Moreover, although AFL often results from distinct electrophysiologic mechanisms, namely focal automaticity and macro-reentry, the RR intervals and P wave morphologies associated with these arrhythmias are often quite similar. An atrial rhythm of approximately 130–240waves/min (i.e. 2.2–4Hz) is referred to as AT while a regular macroreentrant atrial rhythm of approximately 240–320 waves (i.e. 4–5.3Hz) is referred to as AFL [12]. Thus, the QRST cancelation or elimination (ventricular cancelation or elimination) in the ECG is critical for classification of AFL and AT by analyzing the atrial activity. In the TQ interval, electrical activity in the ECG is dominated by the atrial contribution while the ventricular component is a time series with missing data in the QT interval. The atrial signal is considered as a time series with missing data in the QT interval [13]. Some of the notable algorithms for QRST cancelation include spatiotemporal, the QRST cancelation technique, and average beat subtraction, but these require long ECG recordings (e.g. one minute of average beats or longer) [14–15]. Wave rectification, blind source separation, principal component analysis, and automatic mode switching are algorithms that have been developed to deal with the challenges of automated AT and AFL detection, but these methods are relatively crude, inconsistently effective, and with notable shortcomings [16–18]. Recently, Jacquemet et al. [19] proposed a new AFL detection algorithm, which reconstructs the spectrum of the atrial component of the ECG corresponding to TQ intervals, but they assumed that the TQ intervals are given. Hence, at present, no reliable and complete AFL detection algorithm is available because existing QRST cancelation algorithms are insufficient as described above.Recently, McSharry et al. introduced a powerful dynamic ECG model, which is capable of replicating many of the important features of the human ECG by generating different morphologies for the PQRST-complex [20]. Based on the dynamic model, Sayadi et al. [21] and Samenji et al. [22] used Kalman Filters (Extended Kalman Filter, Extended Kalman Smoother and Unscented Kalman Filter) as a Bayesian approach for ECG denoising and atrial activity analysis. Both demonstrated superior results compared with bandpass filtering, adaptive filtering, and wavelet transform over a wide range of ECG SNRs. We extended this concept to atrial signal (TQ interval) detection by using the Particle Filter (PF), which has been widely adopted in many estimation problems, as it is especially powerful for nonlinear and non-Gaussian problems [23–24]. It is widely known that the PF estimator performs better than any Kalman Filter estimator [25]. First, we modified the dynamic ECG model by generating only four waves for QRST (excluding P wave) complex, and predicted the prior density function by propagating parameters of peak amplitudes, peak widths, angular spreads and locations of each QRST wave. Since the ECG waveform itself and measurement noise are nonlinear and non-Gaussian, PF is more suitable than any Kalman Filter. Thus, our PF framework results in more accurate QRST wave detection than does a Kalman Filter algorithm. After finding the atrial signal, we use a high-resolution time-frequency method named variable frequency complex demodulation [27] in order to detect AFL and AT in the atrial signal.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
