@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Practical estimation method of the optimal scanning protocol for 180° data acquisition in parallel SPECT imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a method to select the optimal set of view over 180° before data acquisition.The method uses apriori information based on the attenuation map and an estimated activity map.The method has been verified and evaluated with mathematical and realistic physical phantoms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical imaging and processing,SPECT,Pi-scheme,180° Reconstruction,Reducing scanning angle,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) projections over 2π with non-uniform attenuation contain redundant information thus the scanning angle can be reduced to π which can be used to improve the imaging quality. The precondition of this reduction is the application of correction for gamma photon attenuation and the distance dependent spatial resolution of the detector during reconstruction. Despite the existing redundancy in the projections in opposite directions they cannot be treated identically because of statistical differences of the corresponding views. In this work we propose a new approximation method to select an optimal set of views over π with the best statistical properties. Using this set of views during the data acquisition the image quality can be improved. The paper also contains the verification and evaluation results of the proposed approximation method using a mathematical and two realistic physical phantoms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) [1] is a widely used nuclear medical imaging technique in the medical practice. In SPECT imaging a biomedical substance labelled with gamma photon emitting radioactive tracer is injected into the human body. During data acquisition the 2D projection of the 3D activity distribution is collected with a gamma camera. The real 3D activity distribution is reconstructed from the projections.Several physical factors cause artefacts in reconstructed SPECT images. The two most important factors, which should be corrected for, are gamma photon attenuation and the distance dependent spatial resolution (DDSR) of the detector [2,3]. Because of these two effects, the projections in opposite directions are different in SPECT therefore it is often supposed to collect projections over 2π in order to achieve an accurate image reconstruction. Despite the fact that the opposite views in SPECT are mathematically not identical there were several investigations to reveal latent redundancy. It has been shown that such a redundancy can be exploited and a stable reconstruction can be achieved with a data range over π in the case of uniform attenuation distribution [4]. Pan et al. have been developed a heuristic perspective [5–7] and revealed that projections over 2π in SPECT with non-uniform attenuation contain redundant information and the scanning angle can be reduced to π if gamma photon attenuation and the distance dependent spatial resolution of the detector is corrected for during reconstruction. Pan et al. referred to their results as short-scan SPECT image reconstruction. Short-scan SPECT image reconstruction means that only an angular interval over π is used during reconstruction. In pi-scheme SPECT the full angular range 2π is divided into angular intervals, and the data are acquired only over disjoint angular intervals whose summation without conjugate views is equal to π. So any pi-scheme scan have data at Θ or at Θ+π. By properly selecting different set of projection angles a various configuration of pi-scheme data can be generated. For demonstrations, Fig. 1shows examples of possible pi-scheme configurations.The reduction of the scanning angle in SPECT imaging may be desirable because it can maximize the number of detected photons and improve the signal-to-noise ratio in the emission data. The other advantage of the scan reduction is that it can reduce scanning time and thereby minimize patient-motion and other artefacts.In our previous work we investigated a Maximum Likelihood Expectation Maximization (MLEM) based image reconstruction method for short-scan SPECT images with non-uniform attenuation [8,9]. We have found that despite the existing redundancy in the projections in opposite views they can not be treated identically because of statistical differences of the corresponding views. In this work we have developed a new method to select an optimal set of views before starting data acquisition in order to provide the best reconstructed image quality. Fig. 2shows the normal protocol and the protocol using the pi-scheme scan. In this sense selecting optimal set of views means to find the angular positions that result in the best statistical data acquisition. The estimation of the pi-scheme configuration quality in this article is based on the assumption that projection images with higher number of events results in better image quality.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
