@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Frequency-spatial beamformer for MEG source localization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method for spatial localization of neuronal sources is introduced.It exploits the high temporal resolution of MEG.Spatial location is determined by the frequency of oscillation of the source.The algorithm is shown to exhibit improved spatial resolution over that of SAM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Statistical signal processing,MEG source localization,Spatial location,Data driven,Model-free,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article introduces a unique and powerful new method for spatial localization of neuronal sources that exploit the high temporal resolution of magnetoencephalography (MEG) data to locate the originating sources within the brain. A traditional frequency beamforming algorithm was adapted from its conventional application to yield information on the spatial location of simulated neuronal signals. The concept is similar to that used in signal source localization in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in which spatial location is determined by the frequency of oscillation of the MR signal. Whereas a traditional frequency beamformer uses the time course values of all sensors in the dataset to assign a power value for each possible frequency in the signal, it provides no information on the spatial location of those frequencies. Our approach assigns a power value to each location in the three-dimensional head volume. To compute this power value, the time courses of a subset of sensors closest to that location in space are used rather than all the time courses in the dataset. Our novel technique incorporates actual MEG sensor locations of the closest sensors at each location in space. The approach is relatively simple to implement, yields good spatial resolution, and accurately spatially locates a simulated source in low signal-to-noise environments. In this work, its performance is compared to that of the synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) beamformer and shown to exhibit improved spatial resolution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) measures the extracranial magnetic field generated by the brain's electrical activity in an attempt to obtain information on the underlying neural activity [1]. It is a brain imaging technology of unsurpassed temporal resolution which produces high resolution (order of milliseconds) one-dimensional time course data at, typically, 275 locations around the surface of the head. The locations of these 275 sensors are shown in Fig. 1. Utilizing this data to deduce the spatial location of underlying neuronal sources has proven to be challenging. In Fig. 1, the source of brain activation is depicted as the red mass inside the sensors. The group of circles around the perimeter represent the MEG sensor array of the CTF MEG system. The colors of these sensors indicate the signal strength projected from the source. The red and yellow sensors indicate strong detectable signals, while gray indicates a weak or no signal detected at that location.Recently, a novel MEG source localization technique was introduced that adapts a traditional frequency beamforming algorithm to yield information on the spatial location of simulated MEG sources [2]. A traditional frequency beamformer computes the frequencies present in a signal. It does so by computing a power value for each possible frequency in the signal and plotting this power value as a function of frequency. In computing this power value, the traditional frequency beamformere uses the time course values of all sensors in the dataset. Thus, it yields information on the frequencies present in the signal but provides no information on the spatial location of those frequencies. Our novel localization approach adapts this method by assigning a frequency power value to each location in a three-dimensional (3D) head volume. That is, at each location in the 3D head volume, the time course values of only the closest 21 sensors are extracted and used to compute a power value for a given frequency of interest. In this way, our approach provides a means of quantifying the strength of the frequency content of the signal as a function of its spatial location. In this research, we more fully develop the approach and compare its performance to that of the widely recognized synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) beamformer in accurately locating simulated MEG sources. In addition, in this approach we revise the method of inserting simulated activations to the traditional current dipole.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The concept for signal source localization used in MRI in which the frequency of oscillation of the MR signal enables its localization in space is applied here to provide a unique and powerful new method of MEG source localization. A traditional frequency beamforming algorithm has been adapted from its conventional application to yield information on the spatial location of neuronal signals. It is based on the premise that the strength of the frequency components of a signal will be strongest at the sensors in closest proximity to the signal, and is not influenced by the orientation of the dipole source. The algorithm performs well on simulated data in low signal-to-noise environments and provides relatively good spatial resolution. This data-driven approach is comparatively simple to implement and requires no signal model when applied to real data. It relies solely on the actual sensor time course values of a subset of sensors closest to a given spatial location.