@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Non-convex row-sparse multiple measurement vector analysis prior formulation for EEG signal reconstruction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We address the problem of Compressed Sensing based EEG transmission over WBAN.We propose a joint-sparse analysis prior framework for recovering the signals.The results show significant improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EEG,WBAN,Gabor basis,Compressed Sensing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work addresses the problem of reconstructing EEG signals from lower dimensional projections. Unlike previous studies, we propose to reconstruct the EEG signal using an analysis prior formulation. Moreover we use the inter-channel correlation while reconstruction which leads to a row-sparse analysis prior multiple measurement vector (MMV) recovery problem. To improve the reconstruction, we formulate the recovery as a non-convex optimization problem. Such a non-convex row-sparse MMV recovery problem had not been encountered before; this work derives an efficient algorithm to solve it. The proposed reconstruction technique is compared with state-of-the-art methods and we find that our technique yields significant improvement over others.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently Wireless Body Area Networks (WBAN) are being used for tele-monitoring. Various types of health indicating signals such as EEG, ECG, Pulse can be monitored thus. In this work, we are particularly interested in the acquisition and transmission of EEG signals over WBAN. The main challenge in this scenario is to reduce the energy consumption of the WBAN. In recent times, Compressed Sensing (CS) based techniques are gaining popularity in energy efficient compression and transmission of EEG signals [1–7].The prior studies on CS based compression and reconstruction schemes [1–7] suffer from certain shortcomings. It is not possible to fully understand these shortcomings without some understanding of CS. Understanding CS is also pertinent or understanding the differences between the prior works and our proposed improvement.Therefore we will briefly discuss CS in the next section. The contributions of prior works and their shortcomings will be discussed in Section 3. The proposed formulation is described in Section 4. We discuss the experimental results in Section 5. Finally the conclusions of this work and scope of further research are discussed in Section 6.Compressed Sensing (CS) studies the problem of solving an under-determined systems of linear equations where the solution is known to be sparse,(1)ym×1=Am×nxn×1+ηm×1,m<nandη∼N(0,σ2)Theoretical studies in CS shows that it is possible to solve (1) by minimizing the l1-norm of the solution in the following fashion [8,9]:(2)minxx1subjecttoy−Ax22≤ε,ε=nσ2This is a convex optimization problem and can be solved by quadratic programming.In applied Compressed Sensing, the solution ‘x’ to be recovered is the ‘signal’ of interest, A is the ‘measurement operator’ and y is the collected ‘measurements’. From now on we will be using to these terms.Natural signals are almost never sparse but are compressible in a transform domain, e.g. images are sparse in Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) or wavelet basis, speech is sparse in Short Time Fourier Transform, Seismic waves are sparse in Curvelet basis, EEG is sparse in Gabor basis and so on. Transforms which are orthogonal or are tight-framed are convenient for the CS community.(3)Orthogonal:STS=I=SSTTight-frame:STS=I≠SSTFor both orthogonal and tight-framed transforms, the analysis–synthesis equations are expressed as follows,(4)analysis:α=Sxsynthesis:x=STαUsing the aforesaid property, (1) can be expressed as,(5)y=ASTα+ηHere ASTis the measurement operator as seen by the sparse transform coefficients α. Since the solution is sparse, it can be recovered using l1-norm minimization (6). Once the sparse transform coefficient vector is obtained, the signal can be reconstructed from α using the synthesis equations.(6)minαα1subjecttoy−ASTα22≤εThis is called the synthesis prior formulation. It is well understood theoretically by CS researchers and is popular in many applied research areas as well.Unfortunately this synthesis prior formulation is too rigid. Not all transforms are orthogonal/tight-frame and hence the signals cannot be expressed as analysis–synthesis pairs. For example EEG signals are most compressible in the Gabor basis; but Gabor is not an orthogonal or tight-frame transform. In such a case, the analysis equation holds, but the synthesis equation does not; therefore even though α=Sx is sparse (S being the Gabor basis), it is not possible to synthesize x=STα. Therefore, for such transforms it is not possible to frame a synthesis prior problem such as (6).The alternate analysis prior problem is more generalized and can be formulated for any linear sparsifying transform (need not be orthogonal or tight-frame). The analysis prior formulation is as follows:(7)minxSx1subjecttoy−Ax22≤εHere S is the sparsifying transform and Sx is sparse.It must be noted that the analysis and the synthesis prior formulations are exactly equivalent for orthogonal transforms but they are different for tight-frame transforms. In practice it has been found that analysis prior yields better results [10,11].In spite of these advantages analysis prior is not popular in CS. It is only in recent times that the analysis prior problem is being noticed by the signal processing community [12,13]. Theoretical understanding in this topic is still not matured and there are only a few applied areas where this formulation is being applied. We will not get into the theoretical intricacies of analysis prior optimization. In lay man's terms, the analysis prior solves for the signal itself whereas the synthesis prior solves for the sparse transform coefficients of the signal.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
