@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Model interpretation of body surface potential QRST integral map variability in arrhythmia patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The diagnostic properties of a sudden cardiac risk assessment method was studied.Computations relied on a numerical heart and chest model.Ventricular repolarization dispersion was measured by QRST integral maps.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-dipolarity index,Numerical chest model,Numerical heart model,NDI spikes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A necessary but not sufficient prerequisite of malignant arrhythmias is the existence of elevated static or dynamic repolarization dispersion (RD) of the ventricular myocardium. The early detection of this type of spatiotemporal impairment might have a clinical importance. Body surface potential mapping, using high resolution QRST integral maps, provides a unique noninvasive method for the beat-to-beat exploration of spatial RD. The sound theoretically proven relationship of ventricular RD and QRST integral maps has been known for many years, offering a novel electrocardiological imaging possibility. However, a “yes or no” type risk assessment can be achieved even without solving the ill-posed electrocardiological inverse problem by computing the body surface potential QRST integral map non-dipolarity index (NDI). In this study a multi-element numerical heart and a piecewise homogeneous chest model was used to estimate the sensitivity of the NDIs on pathological ventricular RD patterns. The tests included the physiological RD pattern as a reference and additional 83 pathological ones classified into 3 major types. All the local action potential (AP) modulation types were systematically swept through the anterior, lateral, posterior, septal and apical segments of the left ventricle. Additionally the impact of impaired conduction system and the involvement of the right ventricle were tested as well. It was concluded that the source level origin of the extreme NDIs was located in the apical part of the heart, due to permanent myocardial necrosis, temporally refracter regions or reversed transmural AP patterns.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clinical evidences support that ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) are the most common causes of sudden cardiac death (SCD). In spite of the continuous developments (based on low ejection fraction, short and long term ECG records or exercise tests), still no reliable marker of arrhythmia prone situation does exist according to a recent scientific statement of the AHA/ACCF/HRS based on hundreds of clinical trials [1].Alternative risk assessment methods rely on the exploitation all the information accessible on the thoracic surface noninvasively. Abildskov et al. [2] suggested body surface potential mapping for the detailed characterization of alterations of ventricular repolarization, by the use of the QRST integral maps. Hubley-Kozey et al. [3] confirmed statistically the clinical utility of QRST integral mapping in risk assessment by averaged maps. The theoretical basis of the QRST integral map-based RD detection was proven mathematically by Geselowitz [4]. Later the impulse propagation and arrhythmias was discussed in details by Kléber and Rudy [5]. Other authors emphasized the importance of beat-to-beat estimation of repolarization lability [6,7]. As a feature extraction the Karhunen–Loeve (KL) expansion based single scalar non-dipolarity index (NDI) was introduced to separate high-risk and low-risk population based on averaged QRST integral maps [8]. The dynamics of body posture associated changes in ventricular recovery was studied by Kellerová using QRST integral maps [9].Within the new approaches it is worth mentioning the development of a simple but efficient arrhythmia vulnerability index, based on the averaged sum absolute QRST integrals of the Frank leads suggested by Tereshchenko et al. [10,11] with promising clinical performance. A different risk assessment approach based on the ECG signals of high-resolution body surface potential maps has been published recently [12,13].In our long term pursuit for an improved non-invasive SCD risk assessment, we used body surface potential QRST integral maps instead of conventional ECG signals, in order to grasp all the spatial RD information accessible noninvasively on the thoracic surface [14]. The novelty in our approach was the use of beat-to-beat QRST integral map analysis instead of time-averaged QRST integral maps to characterize the stochastically changing spatial RD irregularities (lability) through the train of subsequent cardiac cycles. We could demonstrate that the non-dipolarity indices (NDI), computed from the coefficients of KL expansion of the QRST integral maps, characterize sensitively the non-dipolar beat-to-beat variability of the subsequent maps. In [14] NDI plots sensitively separated the group of implanted cardioverter (ICD) patients with documented malignant arrhythmia vulnerability from the learning group of healthy subjects. In the arrhythmia group the beat-to-beat NDI values were highly uncorrelated, the corresponding NDI amplitude histograms showed skewed lognormal distributions, sometimes with extreme NDI values going up to 0.9. In healthy subjects the sequence of NDI values were correlated and the amplitudes remained typically in the range of 0.1–0.2 with slight quasi-periodic components due to the respiration related positional heart changes.Based on the Green's-theorem no unique conclusions can be drawn on the intramural source distributions using only the measurable body surface signals [15]. However, the relationship of body surface measurements and RD can be studied by computer models incorporating a priori knowledge provided by biological, cellular level measurements. In this conceptual study (and in its short version [16]) we attempted to give an action potential level (intramural) explanation of the observed normal and pathological NDI behaviour, with special regard to the generation of extremely large NDI spikes. To this end, numerical chest and heart models were used. We defined a model well characterizing the normal beats, subsequently step-by-step localized or extended RDs (transmural gradients) were generated by the modulation of model action potential (MoAP) parameters throughout the ventricles and their impact on the NDI sequences were analysed.Details of the simplified computer model of the human cardiac ventricles were described previously by Szathmáry and Osvald [17]. The model was defined in a 3-dimensional matrix consisting of 1mm3 cubic elements. The local functional properties of the elementary volumes were represented by simplified MoAPs. The overall geometry of cardiac ventricles was defined analytically by segments of ellipsoids representing their inner (endocardial) and outer (epicardial) surfaces. The parameters of the ellipsoids were derived from the gross dimensions of the right and left ventricles (RV and LV), given as input data of the model. To simulate the fine structure of physiological repolarization heterogeneity, ventricular walls were sliced into 5 layers, paralleling with the inner and outer surfaces (Fig. 1). The different fibre directions from the endo- to epicardial myocardium were not taken into account. The MoAP characteristics of model elements may be defined differently depending on their localization in respective layers.In the reference model, simulating the normal activation, the gross dimensions of ventricles and the parameters of activation were derived from data published by Durrer et al. [18] and Hutchins et al. [19]. Ventricular depolarization was started from predetermined elements on the inner endocardial surface of both ventricles, corresponding to regions of earliest activation (Fig. 2(a)). The spread of activation in the most inner layer, representing the Purkinje mesh, was three times faster than in the remaining layers of the walls (Fig. 2(b)). After depolarizing of model elements their consecutive repolarization is governed by their length and shape. The MoAP differences in respective layers cause a physiological transmural dispersion of cardiac action potential durations [20]. The activation and repolarization of the reference model, defined in this way corresponds well to generally accepted normal patterns of human heart activation.Different spatio-temporal activation and repolarization patterns were simulated by the numerical heart model. The spatio-temporal MoAP modulation focused essentially on the left ventricular myocardium, but the possible impact of bundle-branch disturbances were taken into account as well. This latter modulation was realized through the timing of activation wave initiation and by turning off certain initiation points (Fig. 2(a)). The model could also support pathological impulse pacings originated either from the endocardium or from the epicardium. The shape of ventricular tissue was unaffected by any kind of AP modulation.The model allows a layer-by-layer modulation of ventricular wall repolarization parameters (Fig. 3(a)). Another option of AP modulation is shown in Fig. 3(b) where an arbitrary local segment of the myocardium has modulated AP patterns. The geometry of these local heterogeneities is defined analytically by subsidiary ellipsoids. We should remark that the wavefronts initiated from the epicardium have a “reversed gradient” of AP durations, i.e. the longest AP corresponds to the epicardial layer, the shortest to the endocardial one, if not specified otherwise (Fig. 3(a)). Application of additional pacing points is possible in arbitrary points of the myocardium if required (Fig. 2).The spread of the activation wavefront is simulated by a cellular automaton. In each step of simulation the elementary dipole moments are computed as the potential differences between the adjacent cubic elements. Finally, the whole model of the cardiac ventricles’ myocardium is divided into 33 volume segments. In each segment the dipole moments from all corresponding elements are summarized in its gravity centre, so that multiple-dipole equivalent cardiac generator is created.The aim of the simulations was to explore possible permanent or transient ventricular AP distributions behind the pathological NDI(QRST) non-dipolarity indices measured in arrhythmia patients. The set of MoAP pattern modulations is summarized below. The simulation cases are indicated in compact form. Geometry of the heart and torso were supposed the same for all simulations in each time step applying the same transfer matrix all along the cardiac cycle.Type 1: reference (case: 1).Type 2 modulation: Starting point, MoAP and propagation velocity parameter modulations (cases: 2–33):•Switch-off a subset of physiological anterior and/or posterior starting points, without any changes in the MoAPs (cases: 2–5).Switch-off anterior (No. 2) or posterior (No. 4) starting point while the MoAP plateaus are prolonged or shortened by 40% in a small area around the relevant starting point (cases: 6–10).Combinations of slowing propagation velocity, with the above onset time modulations around smaller or larger areas of starting points No. 2 or No. 4 (cases: 11–22).Endocardial extra pacings at the mid-anterior, mid-lateral, mid-posterior and mid-septal endocardial surface simultaneously with the beginning of the regular ventricular activation onset (cases: 20–23).Epicardial pacings at the mid-anterior, mid-lateral and mid-posterior and mid-septal endocardial surface, with and without of AP modulations (cases: 24–33).Type 3 modulation: Large left ventricular lesions, combined MoAP modulations (cases: 34–58):•Modelling of large anterior, posterior and lateral lesions (cases: 34–46).Combined multi-parameter modulations in the left ventricle, including diffuse lesions (cases: 47–57).Combined multi-parameter modulations in the right ventricle (case: 58).Type 4 modulation: Apical modulations (cases: 59–84):•Modulations of MoAP amplitude, plateau and propagation velocity (cases: 59–64).Simulations of subendocardial, subepicardial and transmural infarctions (cases: 65–79).Apical-epicardial pacing with and without of MoAP and timing modulations (cases: 80–84).To compute the heart generated potentials on the thoracic surface, the multiple-dipole model of the cardiac generator is inserted in a realistically shaped piecewise homogeneous torso model (Fig. 4). Lungs are taken into consideration with 4× lower conductivity than general conductivity of the torso, ventricular cavities with 3× higher conductivity. The electric potentials on the body surface are computed in the surface points of the torso model using boundary element method (BEM), originally proposed by Barr et al. [21] and also used in current studies [22,23].The use of BEM for computation of body surface potential maps m(t) in Ne points on the body surface in each time instant t yields a linear matrix equation:(1)m(t)=Ag(t)where A is the time independent transfer matrix (i.e. the geometry and position of the heart and torso were fixed during the cardiac cycle), which represents the properties of the inhomogeneous torso as volume conductor and g(t) is a multiple-dipole generator (with Ns current dipoles) in a particular time step of the heart activation. The integral BSPM p representing the integral of m(t) over particular time interval could then be described by (2).(2)p=∫m(t)dt=∫Ag(t)dt=A∫g(t)dt=Aswhere s represents the time integrals of Ns dipole moments of modelled multiple dipole generator. Considering three orthogonal components of each dipole moment, the size of the transfer matrix A is (Ne×3Ns).The body surface potential maps are computed from the potentials in a regular mesh (12×16) on the body surface consisting of 192 points (Fig. 4).According to Geselowitz, the amplitude of QRST integrals at an arbitrary body surface point P is a function of the AP heterogeneity, in other words, it is the function of the gradient of the μ of MoAP areas (3) of the myocardium [4]. Consequently, beat-to-beat application of (3) provides a non-invasive tool that can be used to study the spatio-temporal variability of AP properties i.e. the RD.(3)∫QRSTϕ(P,t)dt=−k∭Vsz(P,r)∇μ(r)dVswhere(4)μ(r)=∫QRSTϕm(r,t)−ϕmr(r)dtwhere ϕm(r,t) is the membrane potential at time t; ϕmr(r) is the membrane resting potential at point r; Vsis the volume of sources (myocardium); k is a constant; and z is the vector of transfer coefficients between P and r.In a concise way QRST integral maps are characterized by the beat-to-beat sequence of NDI, based on the cicomponents of the KL expansion.(5)NDI=∑i=412ci2∑i=112ci2=PNDPD+PNDwhere PDis the BSPM signal power represented by the “dipolar” KL components (i: 1–3) and PNDis the BSPM signal power represented by the “non-dipolar” KL components (i: 4–12) according to Lux et al. [8].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
