@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust algorithm for brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) classification based on GARCH variances series

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Calculating two-level two-dimensional discrete wavelet transform of input image.Modeling of wavelet coefficients of detail subbands by GARCH statistical model.Using PCA and LDA to extract the proper features and removing redundancy.Applying KNN and SVM classifiers to determine the normal image or disease type.Outperforming recently introduced methods while having less number of features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic resonance image (MRI),Discrete wavelet transform (DWT),GARCH model,Principal component analysis (PCA),Linear discriminant analysis (LDA),K-nearest neighbor (KNN),Support vector machine (SVM),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a robust algorithm for disease type determination in brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) is presented. The proposed method classifies MRI into normal or one of the seven different diseases. At first two-level two-dimensional discrete wavelet transform (2D DWT) of input image is calculated. Our analysis show that the wavelet coefficients of detail sub-bands can be modeled by generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) statistical model. The parameters of GARCH model are considered as the primary feature vector. After feature vector normalization, principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) are used to extract the proper features and remove the redundancy from the primary feature vector. Finally, the extracted features are applied to the K-nearest neighbor (KNN) and support vector machine (SVM) classifiers separately to determine the normal image or disease type. Experimental results indicate that the proposed algorithm achieves high classification rate and outperforms recently introduced methods while it needs less number of features for classification.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain magnetic resonance imaging is an imaging technique that provides expensive information for clinical diagnosis and biomedical research by producing high quality images of the anatomical structures of brain. The diagnostic values of magnetic resonance image (MRI) are greatly magnified by the automated and accurate classification methods [1].There are several studies on the brain MRI, in which classification and segmentation of brain MRI to determine the disease type are two important issues. Classification approaches are supervised methods that use support vector machine (SVM) [2,3,4], artificial neural network (ANN) [1,5], and K-nearest neighbor (KNN) [5–7] for classification. Self-organization feature map (SOFM) [2] and fuzzy c-means [8,9] are two approaches utilized in the segmentation applications. It is shown that supervised applications have higher accuracy than the unsupervised applications [1].In most of the algorithms introduced for MRI classification, the input brain MRI is classified as normal or abnormal [1–7]. In [1], the authors used two-dimensional discrete wavelet transform (2D DWT) up to three resolutions and principal component analysis (PCA) for feature extraction. Abnormal class consists of seven different types of brain diseases. Finally, back propagation neural network (BPNN) with two hidden layers was used to classify images, where the scaled conjugate gradient (SCG) algorithm [10] is utilized to train neural network. Chaplot et al. [2] used the coefficients of the approximation sub-band of two-level 2D DWT of brain MRI as features in which Daubechies 4 filters were used as the decomposition filters. They considered Alzheimer disease as abnormal class. Then, the wavelet coefficients were applied to the self-organization map-based (SOM) neural network and SVM for classification. Their experiments showed that the SVM with radial basis function and polynomial kernel has better efficiency than the neural network and SVM with linear kernel. Hackmack et al. [3] used the magnitude of multi-scale dual-tree complex wavelet transform for feature extraction from brain MRI and then the linear SVM determined whether the brain suffers from multiple sclerosis or is healthy. The results demonstrate that the low frequency scales contain more information than the high frequency scales. El-Dahshan et al. [5] used the approximation sub-band of a three-level 2D DWT of brain MRI to calculate the feature vector. The dimensionality of feature vector was reduced by PCA from 1024 to seven and then the KNN and feed forward neural network were separately used for classification. Glioma, Metastatic bronchogenic carcinoma, and Alzheimer plus visual agnosia were considered as the abnormal class to classify image into two classes, i.e., normal and abnormal. Their results showed that the KNN classifier has better efficiency than the neural network.Maitra et al. [8] used Slantlet transform which is improved version of 2D DWT to extract the relevant features from brain MRI. Fuzzy c-means clustering approach was then utilized to segment brain MRI based on the features obtained from the image histogram to determine the person is normal or suffers from Alzheimer disease. In [9], modified fuzzy c-means algorithm was used for segmentation of T1-T2-weighted brain MRI. Since the standard fuzzy c-means is sensitive to the intensity inhomogeneity caused by noise during acquisition, the authors proposed to initialize the centroid using dist-max initialization algorithm before the execution of algorithm iteratively. A level set framework for MRI segmentation was presented in [11]. In [12], the features extracted from 2D DWT and morphological operations were fed to BPNN to classify astrocytoma type of brain cancer. The shape of the ventricular system and the shape relative to the skull are represented by graph-based approach in [13]. The extracted features from graph were used to classify individuals based on gender, age, level of education, and degree of cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer disease. Local linear region representative was used to model brain tissue class, and then region models were embedded in the level set framework to control the spatial coherence of the segmentation [11]. Hussain et al. [14] at first classified image as normal or abnormal using feed-forward BPNN by features obtained from dynamic statistical and 2D DWT. Then, white matter, gray matter, and cerebrospinal fluid are extracted from the normal MRI and pathological tissues such as edema and tumor are obtained from the segmented abnormal images.There are few studies on disease type determination. The first order statistical properties of horizontal and vertical sub-bands of 2D DWT of brain MRI were used by Lahmiri et al. [15] as features. The extracted features were pre-processed by PCA. Five different diseases with normal brain MRIs constitute six different classes. The authors proposed a new classifier that combines KNN, learning vector quantization (LVQ), and probabilistic neural networks (PNN) by polynomial SVMs. They showed that this combination achieves higher accuracy than the case that the above classifiers were applied separately.The aim of this paper is to determine the type of brain disease with high accuracy. In the proposed method, at first 2D DWT of MRI up to two resolutions is calculated. Previous studies have used approximation sub-band to extract features. In this work we use detail sub-bands and show that these sub-bands have enough information for classification. If the extracted wavelet coefficients are properly modeled, the parameters of model can be used as the primary features and the dimensionality of feature space can be reduced. Our experimental results demonstrate that the extracted wavelet coefficients of detail sub-bands of brain MRI have heteroscedasticity effect. Therefore, we choose generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) model, which satisfies this property. GARCH models are introduced as the feasible models for heavy tailed probability density functions (PDFs) and time varying variances of stochastic processes. We use GARCH(1,1) in this work. The primary features are constructed from the parameters of GARCH(1,1). Then, to select the proper features from the primary features, after feature vector normalizations, two approaches are used: PCA and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). The selected features are applied to the KNN and SVM classifiers separately to determine the normal brain or type of disease. The results indicate the efficiency of the proposed method in comparison with previous methods.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 a brief explanation about GARCH model is given. In Section 3, we introduce the proposed algorithm. Section 4 discusses the existence of GARCH effect in the wavelet coefficients of brain MRI images. In Section 5, the experimental results are presented. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.GARCH model was first developed by Bollerslev [16]. Heteroscedasticity can be considered as time-varying variance, i.e., volatility. Conditional implies a dependence on the observations of the immediate past, and autoregressive incorporates past observations into the present. GARCH models are statistical models that are more popular in economics. Previously, it was assumed that time series and economy processes had a constant variance over the time. Engle [17] introduced autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) process in order to allow the conditional variance to change over time as a function of past errors leaving on conditional variance constant. GARCH process is a general form of ARCH process and is a time series modeling technique which uses past variances to forecast future variances.A series dkis considered as GARCH(p,q) process if it can be written as(1)dk=σkεkk∈ℤwhere ɛkis a sequence of independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables that have Gaussian distribution with zero mean and unit variance. In the above equation, σkis a non-negative process such that(2)σk2=α0+∑i=1qαidk−i2+∑j=1pβjσk−j2q>0,p≥0where(3)α0>0;αi≥01≤i≤q;βj≥01≤j≤p;∑i=1qαi+∑j=1pβj<1For p=0, dkreduces to the ARCH(q) process [16]. In ARCH(q) processes the conditional variance is specified as a linear function of past sample variances only, whereas GARCH(p,q) process allows lagged conditional variances to enter as well [16].If we considerψk−1={d0,…,dk−1,σ02,…,σk−12}where ψk–1 denotes all information until the instant k−1, then it is shown that dkis conditionally Gaussian [18], i.e.,(4)(dkψk−1)∼N(0,σk2)whereN(0,σk2)denotes Gaussian PDF with zero mean and varianceσk2.In this work, we use GARCH(1,1) to model the extracted wavelet coefficients of MRI (will be described later). That is,(5)σk2=α0+α1dk−12+β1σk−12where α0, α1, and β1 should be estimated. Maximum likelihood estimation [16] can be used for estimation of these parameters.In this work, in addition to find the normality of brain, we also determine the type of disease. The overall block diagram of the proposed method for brain MRI classification is presented in Fig. 1. As observed, at first brain image is acquired. The next step is feature extraction. In the proposed algorithm, this step includes four parts: two-level 2D DWT, modeling the 2D DWT coefficients, feature vector normalization, and feature selection. The coefficients of two-level 2D DWT of brain MRI are computed. The calculated coefficients of detail sub-bands are modeled by GARCH(1,1). Then, the parameters of GARCH(1,1) model are considered as the primary features. However, some of these features are not effective in classification and cause redundancy. After normalization, in order to remove correlations among the features and also remove the unnecessary features, two approaches are used: PCA and LDA. Finally, the proper extracted features are classified by the classifier. In the following, each part is explained in detail.The first step in the proposed algorithm is to compute the coefficients of 2D DWT of brain image. Wavelet transform is a powerful tool for feature extraction of brain images [1–5,15]. The main characteristic of wavelet transform is that it can provide localized frequency information of an image that can be very helpful in classification.In this work, we compute the two-level 2D DWT of brain image where we use Daubechies 4 basis filters for decomposition. Fig. 2shows the process of a two-level 2D DWT. In this figure, h[n] and g[n] denote the low-pass and high-pass basis decomposition filters, respectively. As shown, after calculating each level of 2D DWT of an image, four sub-bands are obtained: LL (low-low), LH (low-high), HL (high-low), and HH (high-high). LL sub-band is considered as the approximation (low pass) component of image, while LH, HL, and HH sub-bands denote the vertical, horizontal, and diagonal detail components of image. In Fig. 3, a normal brain MRI image with two-level wavelet decomposition is demonstrated.The obtained wavelet coefficients can be considered as the features for classification. However, in this case the dimensionality of feature vector would be large. For example for an image with the size of 256×256 pixels considering the two-level wavelet decomposition and six detail sub-bands LH1, HL1, HH1, LH2, HL2, HH2, the number of wavelet coefficients equals to 61440=128×128×3+64×64×3. Classification of such large number of features results in more complexity.If we can model these coefficients with a proper statistical model, the parameters of the model can be considered as features. Hence, the feature vector dimensionality will be reduced.It has been shown [19] that GARCH statistical model has good fitness to the wavelet coefficients of an image for speckle noise suppression. GARCH model has also been used in some areas of voice processing [20,21] and was utilized in [22] to classify electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. In the next Section, we analyze the coefficients of 2D DWT sub-bands of brain MRI and show that the six detail sub-bands (i.e., LH1, HL1, HH1, LH2, HL2, HH2) follow GARCH(1,1) model. The parameters of GARCH model are used as the primary features.In order to extract GARCH(1,1) parameters, garchfit function in MATLAB environment is used. For input data samples, this function returns four output values related to the GARCH parameters: the conditional mean constant, conditional variance constant (α0), first lagged conditional variance (β1), and first past sample variance (α1), respectively.Since we consider six detail sub-bands and four GARCH parameters are obtained for each sub-band, the feature vector for each image contains 24 elements. It is concluded that using GARCH parameters, the information of six detail sub-bands, i.e., a total of 61440 wavelet coefficients are shown by 24 features, which is a significant reduction in the number of features and consequently computational complexity.The extracted features are normalized before applying to SVM. Normalization avoids attributes in greater numeric ranges dominating those in smaller numeric ranges and also avoids numerical difficulties during the calculation [23]. The feature x in the range [xmin, xmax] is normalized to xnin the range [xn,min, xn,max] by the following procedure.(6)xn=(xn,max−xn,min)x−xminxmax−xmin+xn,minIn this work, the features are normalized within the range [−1 1].We observed that if GARCH model is used to model the 2D DWT coefficients, the size of primary feature vector is reduced to 24. However, all of these features are not suitable for brain image classification and there are some redundancies in the feature vector.We use two well-known PCA and LDA approaches for feature selection and reduction. PCA is a widely used technique for dimensionality reduction, feature extraction, and data visualization. PCA can be defined as the orthogonal projection of the data into a lower dimensional linear space, known as the principal subspace, such that the variance of the projected data is maximized. PCA minimizes the average projection cost, defined as the mean squared distance between the data points and their projections [24].The main idea of LDA is that it searches for the project axes on which the data points of different classes are far from each other and the data points of the same class are close to each other. Our experiments show that if only LDA is used for feature selection, sometimes scatter matrix becomes singular, which results in considerable performance degradation. Hence, PCA can be used before LDA to overcome this problem [24].In order to find the effective number of features, at first the eigenvalues of features are sorted in descending order. Then, the normalized cumulative summation of sorted eigenvalues corresponding to the ith feature (NCSE(i)) is calculated as(7)NCSE(i)=∑n=1iEv(n)∑n=1NfEv(n)1≤i≤Nfwhere Ev(n) is the eigenvalue of the nth feature and Nfis the dimensionality of feature vector obtained by PCA+LDA approach. In Section 5, the number of proper features will be found.The extracted features are applied to the KNN and SVM separately to determine the category of MRI. KNN and SVM are two commonly used classifiers. More details are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
