@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Acute mental stress assessment via short term HRV analysis in healthy adults: A systematic review with meta-analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mental stress significantly reduced variability and chaotic behaviour of HRV.Stress causes sympathetic activation and parasympathetic withdrawal.Pooled HRV power ratio changed significantly while did not in individual studies.Studies investigating HRV non-linear measures and mental stress are required.The method proposed to meta-analyze HRV features can be adopted for other studies investigating HRV.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Acute mental stress,Heart Rate Variability,Systematic review with meta-analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mental stress reduces performances, on the work place and in daily life, and is one of the first causes of cognitive dysfunctions, cardiovascular disorders and depression. This study systematically reviewed existing literature investigating, in healthy subjects, the associations between acute mental stress and short term Heart Rate Variability (HRV) measures in time, frequency and non-linear domain. The goal of this study was to provide reliable information about the trends and the pivot values of HRV measures during mental stress. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the evidence was conducted, performing an exhaustive research of electronic repositories and linear researching references of papers responding to the inclusion criteria. After removing duplicates and not pertinent papers, journal papers describing well-designed studies that analyzed rigorously HRV were included if analyzed the same population of healthy subjects at rest and during mental stress. 12 papers were shortlisted, enrolling overall 758 volunteers and investigating 22 different HRV measures, 9 of which reported by at least 2 studies and therefore meta-analyzed in this review. Four measures in time and non-linear domains, associated with a normal degree of HRV variations resulted significantly depressed during stress. The power of HRV fluctuations at high frequencies was significantly depressed during stress, while the ratio between low and high frequency resulted significantly increased, suggesting a sympathetic activation and a parasympathetic withdrawal during acute mental stress. Finally, among the 15 non-linear measures extracted, only 2 were reported by at least 2 studies, therefore pooled, and only one resulted significantly depressed, suggesting a reduced chaotic behaviour during mental stress. HRV resulted significantly depressed during mental stress, showing a reduced variability and less chaotic behaviour. The pooled frequency domain measures demonstrated a significant autonomic balance shift during acute mental stress towards the sympathetic activation and the parasympathetic withdrawal. Pivot values for the pooled mean differences of HRV measures are provided. Further studies investigating HRV non-linear measures during mental stress are still required. However, the method proposed to transform and then meta-analyze the HRV measures can be applied to other fields where HRV proved to be clinically significant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mental stress has been investigated in various fields due to its destructive effects on the daily routine. Stress may cause cognitive dysfunctions, cardiovascular diseases, depression [1,2] and may lead to death and illness [3]. There is, in fact, an average of 50% of employees, which suffer of ‘work stress’ [4]. Moreover, stress reduces performances in daily life [5] and particularly in the work places [1,6]. This may be particularly relevant for those jobs that expose the workers or other persons to risky situations. This is the case of surgeons performing long surgeries, in which the loss of attention or concentration may cause severe effects on the patient, or pilots flying on long distances, whose stress may be dangerous for them and the passengers [7].Mental stress influences the Autonomous Nervous System (ANS), which controls our capability to react to external stimuli [3,5]. Therefore, the acute stress may be evaluated with non-invasive biomarker measurements, which are considered reliable estimators of ANS statuses. This is the case of Heart Rate Variability (HRV), which is considered a reliable means to indirectly observe ANS [8], also in real life settings. HRV refers to the variations of both instantaneous heart rate and the series of inter-times between consecutive peaks of the R-wave of the ECG (RR series) [9]. This variation is under the control of the ANS, which through the parasympathetic and the sympathetic branches, is responsible for adjusting the HRV in response to external or internal physical or emotional stimuli. A normal subject shows a good degree of variation of the heart rate, reflecting a good capability to react to those stimuli [9].Several studies investigated in the last years how HRV could be used to assess acute or chronic mental stress, in healthy subjects or in specific groups of patients, of different ages. These studies collected and analyzed HRV with different methods and tools: long or short term registrations were utilized; HRV was extracted from ECG or SpO2 or via other means; a wide range of devices was employed (i.e. from commercial smart phones to CE marked medical devices for ECG monitoring, including some advanced biomedical amplifiers); HRV was analyzed with commercial software tools, sometimes well validated ones; HRV features in time and/or frequency were extracted and both linear and/or non-linear domains were explored; different statistical tests, pattern recognition or data mining methods were used to explore results [4,9,10].The goal of this study was to review homogenously designed studies, in order to provide reliable information about the trends and the pivot values of HRV measures during mental stress. Therefore, this reviews investigated systematically studies published in peer-reviewed journals and focusing on the associations between acute mental stress and HRV, using short term HRV excerpts, extracted from ECGs, in healthy subjects above 18 years old.Relevant studies on the detection of acute mental stress through the analysis of the HRV were identified and selected by searching on PubMed and OvidSP databases.Pertinent articles were searched using Boolean combinations of the following keywords or their equivalent Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms: Heart Rate Variability, HRV, mental stress, psychological stress, and emotional assessment.The following criteria were utilized to limit the research: papers published in the last 10 years (since 2004), study on adult humans (i.e. not animals), not children, not cancer, not pregnancy.After a first screening of the titles and abstracts, studies published before November 2014 were considered suitable for this review if they met all of the following criteria:•Paper published on scientific journals with peer review;Paper focused mainly on mental stress investigation using HRV;The experiments were conducted with a robust design, well described, including repeated measures in the same group of healthy subjects at rest and during stress section. Studies were considered robust if the acquisition of the HRV was adequately standardized (i.e. stress and rest sessions in the moment of the day to minimize the circadian effect and with the subjects in the same position).The study was not focusing on chronic stress, and only acute stressors where used, as defined in [11].The subjects were humans beings over 18 years old;Studies were excluded if they:•focused on chronic stress;utilized HRV analysis on excerpts were longer than 10min;enrolled professional athletes and observed them during sport training sessions;investigated pain perception;reported HRV measures with not sufficient quality (i.e. no unit measures stated, not appropriate statistical descriptors);did not report inclusion/exclusion criteria for sample selection.Two authors (RC and PM) independently assessed the methodological quality of the papers, given the inclusion/exclusion criteria. A third author (LP) arbitrated when necessary.Following the research strategy described above, all the titles responding to the chosen keywords were identified. After excluding repetitions (titles indexed both in PubMed and OvidSp), studies were shortlisted according to inclusions/exclusions criteria, investigating titles, abstracts and full-papers.HRV measures in time and frequency domains, both linear and non-linear, were extracted by the papers included in this review [1,5,6,12–20]. Further details about HRV methodological conventions adopted in this review can be found in two open access papers [21,22].The changes of HRV measures during stress and rest sessions were investigated observing their trends. A trend was represented with arrows pointed up, if the mean value of a HRV measure was increasing during the stress section, with respect to the value of the same measure registered during the resting session. An arrow pointed down was used if the mean value of the HRV measure was decreasing. Two arrows were utilized for significant changes (p-values <0.05). Since papers reported only parameters of measure distributions (i.e. means and standard deviations) the p-values were calculated with a t-test and not with parametric tests, which in some cases would have been more appropriated.Regarding linear HRV measures in time and frequency domains, the recommendations of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology guidelines [9] were followed. Therefore, the power spectrum density measures were considered if reported in normalized units or ms2, for the low frequency bands (LF, 0.04–0.15Hz) and the high frequency bands (HF, 0.15–0.4Hz). When papers shortlisted for meta-analysis reported features in a non-conventional way, these measures were excluded from the pooling or converted in ms2, if possible. For instance, three studies [16,17,19] reported frequency domain features log-transformed (LFLog and HFLog). These were untransformed according to [23], using the following formula:meanLF(ms2)=exp(mean LFLog)stdLF(ms2)=std LFLog×[exp(mean LFLog)]2One study reported frequency measures in ms2/Hz [14] and therefore its results were not reported in this review.HRV measures were pooled if reported in more than one paper. Standard methods for systematic reviews with meta-analyses were employed in this paper to pool the HRV measures [24]: mean difference (MD) with 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) and p-values (p). Random or fixed effect models were used according to study heterogeneity measured with a Q statistic test. A significant Q statistic is indicative of dissimilar effect sizes across studies and to complement the Q test, we also calculated the I2 statistic, which provides an index of the degree of heterogeneity across studies. In particular, I2 indicates the percentage of the total variability in effect sizes due to between-studies variability, and not due to sampling error within studies [25]. Percentages of around 25% (I2=25), 50% (I2=50), and 75% (I2=75) may be interpreted as low, medium, and high heterogeneity, respectively [25]. Differences and 95%CI were considered significant if the p-value was less than 0.05. The Open Meta-analyst Software tool was utilized to compute these statistics.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
