@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Steadiness of syllable repetition in early motor stages of Parkinson's disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Steadiness of syllable repetition was found to be impaired in speakers with early motor Parkinson's disease (PD).Maximum velocity of syllable repetition was similar in patients with PD and healthy control speakers.Abnormal patterns of basic motor speech performance could discriminate PD speakers from healthy controls.Measurement of syllable repetition capacity could help to detect subtle abnormalities of basic motor speech performance in early stage PD.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parkinson's disease,Early motor stages,Dysarthria,Motor speech performance,Repetitive movements,Steadiness of pace,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) show characteristic abnormalities in the performance of simple repetitive movements which can also be observed concerning speech rate and rhythm. The aim of the current study was to survey if patients with early PD already feature impairments of steady vocal pace performance based upon a simple syllable repetition paradigm. N=50 patients with PD with mild to moderate motor impairment and n=32 age-matched healthy controls were tested. Participants had to repeat a single syllable or a pair of alternating syllables in a self chosen steady pace or in a given pace of 80/min. The coefficient of variance was taken as measure of stability of repetition. As main and novel result, vocal pace performance was observed to be irregular in all patients, even in the subgroup of PD patients with only very mild motor impairment (Hoehn&Yahr stage 1), although the capacity of rapid syllable repetition was preserved. Weak correlations were found between the maximum repetition rate (but not with steadiness of repetition) and some distinctive Parkinsonian motor features as speech impairment and gait.Assumed that subsequent studies are able to confirm these preliminary results, analysis of steadiness of syllable repetition might be a promising non-invasive tool for detection of subtle abnormalities of motor speech performance even in the early motor stages of PD.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative neurological disease with a variety of motor and non-motor symptoms. According to the prevailing concept of the Braak stages, Lewy bodies as the neuropathological hallmarks of neurodegeneration in PD can initially be found in the olfactory bulb and lower brain stem nuclei years before the involvement of the dopamine producing cells in the substantia nigra pars compacta [1]. In these “premotor” stages a subtle acquisition of the patient's medical history might reveal early symptoms as hyposmia, constipation or REM sleep behavior disturbance and mood disorders [2], however, these symptoms are unspecific and not always present. Furthermore, they occur in an otherwise “neurologically healthy” population and systematic collection of these symptoms is difficult, although attempts to meet this goal are actually underway [e.g. 3]. But, at present, the clinical diagnosis of PD still depends on the identification of a combination of the cardinal motor features of bradykinesia, rest tremor and rigidity. The diagnosis can be assured by a favorable response to dopaminergic medication and additional clinical signs as asymmetry of motor symptoms [4]. However, despite these criteria, the diagnosis of PD in its “early motor” stages is still challenging and often inaccurate [5]. Nonetheless, the first motor signs of PD which could allow a clinical diagnosis based upon accepted criteria do not occur until a substantial number of dopaminergic midbrain neurons are already degenerated [6]. And even in these early motor stages of PD, the clinical signs are often subtle and inconclusive leading to a delay of the diagnosis and of the initiation of treatment [7].On the other hand, early diagnosis of PD is desirable to provide appropriate information and management of patients, the more so, as some studies suggest that early treatment may lead to a better outcome [8,9], although real neuroprotective or disease modifying therapeutic strategies are still not available. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the establishment of meaningful and easily applicable clinical tests to facilitate an early diagnosis of PD. However, first motor symptoms of PD as slightly reduced armswing while walking or mild deterioration of dexterity are often unspecific, especially in elder persons with co-existing morbidity, and therefore often enough do not suffice to establish the diagnosis of PD based upon conventional clinical/neurological examination. Accordingly, easy applicable tests with high sensitivity would be helpful to gain more diagnostic certainty already in the stages with subtle motor symptoms.Abnormalities of the steady performance of simple repetitive “automated” movements are well-known features of PD and can be identified in different motor modalities as hand and finger movements, gait and also in Parkinsonian hypokinetic dysarthria. This characteristic pattern of “motor instability” throughout the performance is thought to be induced by the complex dysfunction of planning, preparing, scaling and maintaining a once chosen simple motor program as a consequence of the underlying basal ganglia dysfunction [10]. Since speech can be subdivided down to the level of single utterances, one might expect abnormalities of vocal pace performance already on the level of very basic non-speech articulatory gestures. Indeed, in previous studies, our group had been able to show that patients in different stages of PD featured marked difficulties to steadily repeat a single syllable without changing the speed of the repetition [11,12]. However, the majority of these tested patients was in their rather moderate to advanced stages of PD and was affected by considerable co-existing voice and speech impairment as well. Up till now, it has not been investigated, if these abnormalities of steady vocal pace performance are already detectable in the very early motor stages of PD and if they occur somewhat independent from overall dysarthria.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
