@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Methods for derivation of orthogonal leads from 12-lead electrocardiogram: A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We reviewed all transformation techniques for derivation of VCG from standard ECG.Using correct transformation plays key role in classification of heart diseases.The both interpatient variability and heart diseases influence accuracy of derived VCG.Most of the new methods are not sufficiently tested.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Vectorcardiography (VCG), as an alternative to standard 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG), represents the electrical activity of the heart. Previous studies on VCG document that VCG criteria for the diagnosis of, for example, myocardial infarction (MI), ventricular hypertrophy and ischemic diseases, are superior to the corresponding 12-lead ECG criteria. Its use in clinical practice is not common because it requires the placement of additional electrodes. However, VCG leads can be derived from standard ECG by using mathematical transformations.This paper reviews the published works on transformation techniques for derivation VCG from 12-lead ECG, their historical evolution and their importance in today's clinical practice. Different kinds of criteria for evaluation accuracy of transformations are briefly described and the accuracy of individual techniques discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The history of vectorcardiography dates back to 1920, when Mann introduced the concept of representing the cardiac vector using a loop constructed manually from three Einthoven's leads. He also mentioned the possibility of three-dimensional depiction of cardiac cycle [1]. For direct measurement of orthogonal leads, Schellong et al. presented the first non-corrected orthogonal system in 1937 [2]; their work was followed by other authors who defined new lead systems [3–6]. These lead systems differ by placing the electrodes on the torso and are represented by signals that are mutually orthogonal. However, they do not take account of the different geometry of the torso or inner inhomogeneity of tissues. The first corrected lead system was derived by Frank based on a mathematical model [7]. Today, this lead system is called Frank's lead system and is the most common VCG system. Other lead systems, including that of McFee and Parungao [8], SVEC III [9] and hybrid lead system [26], were also published and in use for a short period.Although VCG is considered as a diagnostic method in many fields with higher sensitivity compared to conventional ECG, it was gradually replaced by 12-lead ECG in common clinical practice [10,11]. However, today VCG still predominates in specific cases [12]. Current research in this field is focused on the development of new computational algorithms using directly measured or derived VCG in the field of MI detection [13,14,31,32,33] or ventricular hypertrophy [15,16,86], where VCG achieves significantly higher sensitivity than 12-lead ECG.VCG based features are usually used for automatic classification by using machine learning algorithms. Many VCG based features were designed. For example authors in [14] use 27 different spatial features computed from directly measured and derived VCG, which are used for automatic classification presence/absence of MI scar. Designed Support Vector Machine (SVM) model achieves sensitivity 82.36% and specificity 77.36%. Another robust classification algorithm presented authors in [17]. For detection MI scar, they used complex model based on SVM and using ECG and derived VCG features. This model achieves sensitivity 76% and specificity 87.5%. Even higher accuracy of detection MI published authors in [18]. By using regression tree based model (CART) and VCG based features is published sensitivity 97.28% and specificity 95%. Authors in [19] introduced Self Organizing Map based model using VCG features for localisation of the MI scar. For separating MIs and Healthy controls this model achieves sensitivity 94.9% and specificity 95.7%. For classification of individual localisations this model achieves sensitivity and specificity around 90% depending on the localisation of the MI.An additional prognostic information in acute phase of MI provides continuous VCG, which can be used in ambulance or already during transportation of patients. Some published works describe importance of VCG during acute phase of the MI [20–23].The greatest potential offered by computational VCG is also in the diagnostics of ischemic heart disease [29,30]. Authors in [24,25] published set of VCG based features for monitoring ischemic patients. For detection of acute ischemia achieve sensitivity 99.5% and specificity 99.4%. For standard Holter monitoring of patients with unstable angina pectoris compared authors in [26] ECG and derived VCG approach. The authors claim that dynamic VCG monitoring seems to be more efficient and more sensitive than conventional Holter monitoring. For localisation and estimation of ischemia size used authors in [27] derived VCG. The exercise test is used in work published in [28]. Authors measured VCG and computed 21 different features for classification by using artificial neural network (ANN).Some of the studies document that a combination of both 12-lead ECG and VCG significantly improves sensitivity and specificity in ischemia detection [11,25]. For this purpose it is necessary to directly measure VCG and 12-lead ECG. This is impractical especially during exercise tests. Some studies therefore use only derived VCG.Derived VCG is suitable for estimating some meaningful features which represent high diagnostic information such as QRS-T angle or TCRT. These features can be estimated from derived VCG with sufficient accuracy [35–39].Numerous transformation techniques have been published. In this review, we would like to highlight the methodology and evolution of individual methods.The first considerations of possible transformations between individual lead systems were described in a paper by Burger et al. [40]. Kornreich et al. described that 12-lead ECG and Frank's leads were very similar in terms of their information contents, and their mutual transformation was thus possible [41].The first attempts at transforming lead systems were based on VCG transformation to 12-lead ECG by Dower et al. [42,43]. Later, Wolf et al. derived transformation matrices for the bidirectional transformation of conventional 12-lead ECG to VCG and vice versa [44]. Other transformation methods focused predominantly on transforming 12-lead ECG to VCG. So-called quasi-orthogonal leads were initially used in clinical practice but their accuracy was not sufficient. Therefore, Levkov derived 4 transformation matrices and in addition, one simplified transformation matrix, which he implemented as a hardware solution as an electrical circuit [45]. Uijen et al. published their own transformation matrix [46], and Edenbrandt et al. designed a transformation matrix based on a mathematical model of the torso, which is still used today and is known as the inverse Dower transformation (IDT) [47]. The second most commonly used transformation matrix today was derived by Kors using the regression analysis method [48].New transformation matrices were developed with the rising importance of derived VCG, which take account of interpatient variability, particularly for paediatric patients, as published in the paper by Edenbrandt et al. [49]. Furthermore, transformation matrices focusing on specific patient groups were designed, divided e.g., according to pathologies [50].Most transformation matrices were derived only for the QRS complex. The authors of transformation methods consider the difference between transformations derived for various segments as insignificant. Despite that, Guillem et al. focused on the possibilities of optimizing the transformations also for other VCG segments; these authors designed a modified transformation matrix optimized for the P wave, whereby achieving an improvement in the transformation of this ECG segment [51].The derivation of orthogonal leads may serve to obtain indications that provide a significant diagnostic value. For example, QRS-T or the planar angle can be mentioned as two of the frequently used and explored indications. Cortez et al., and Man et al. demonstrated that the QRS-T angle derived from the Kors transformation was not significantly different from the angle obtained from directly measured VCG [37,38]. Transformations play an important role in this respect because unlike direct measurement of VCG leads, they can be used in common clinical practice. Currently, other methods can be used to derive VCG indications; these methods do not provide direct transformation to Frank's leads, but produce three non-correlated orthogonal leads. For example, Acar et al. used an optimized SVD transformation to derive orthogonal leads [52], and the thus derived leads were used by Karsikas et al. and Hasan et al. to obtain the QRS-T angle and other indications of diagnostic importance [35,39].Individualized transformations have recently been developed in the field of lead system transformations, based on minimizing the error between the measured and reconstructed ECG [53,54].Although it is very important, there is no standardization of how to evaluate the accuracy of derived VCG. Published papers and comparative studies evaluate accuracy by different criteria. For the objective comparison of new methods it is important to use the right criteria. In this section we provide the most common criteria and evaluation techniques used in individual studies.The comparison of morphological characteristics of the measured VCG and derived DVCG signal, or semantic evaluation based on diagnosis interpretation and from the measured and derived signal, can be used to evaluate the quality of the transformation.Various parameters are evaluated by individual authors when comparing the morphological characteristics.The mean absolute percentage deviation (MAPD) was used in [48]:(1)MAPD=1n∑VCG−DVCGVCGThe root mean squared error (RMSE) for QRS complex, P wave or for the entire cardiac revolution was used in [51,55–58]:(2)RMSE=1n∑QRS,PVCG−DVCG2.Mean squared error (MSE) was used in [54]:(3)MSE=1n∑VCG−DVCG2.Normalized Euclidean distance used in [45] is a relative measure for the mean squared error between signals:(4)D=∑VCG−DVCG2∑VCG2.Pearson's correlation coefficient r, used in [45,51,55,58], gives the rate of similarity between two signals and is independent of differences in their amplitudesr∈−1;1; for identical signals r=1. Although a frequently used parameter, a high value of the correlation coefficient by itself does not provide any information about the quality of the transformation, as discussed in [55], and therefore it is often used only as a supplementary parameter:(5)r=∑VCG×DVCG∑VCG2∑DVCG2The authors of individualized VCG synthesis [53] used the regression coefficient r2, calculated as the square value of the correlation coefficient r, to assess the quality of the enhanced accuracy of the transformation.Regression coefficient r2 can be calculated following [50]:(6)r2=1−∑VCG−DVCG2∑VCG2×100.The regression coefficient noted in paper [45] asb∈0;1is defined as:(7)b=∑VCG×DVCG∑VCG2.Semantic comparison of the transformations is very important and requires either experienced cardiologists who are able to classify VCG records or, alternatively, by analysing the used diagnostic indications obtained from the directly measured and transformed data. Besides morphological comparison of the methods, in [48] the transformations were assessed also based on the evaluations of three independent cardiologists, and based on subsequent kappa statistics of their evaluations of diagnoses in six categories (left and right ventricular hypertrophy; anterior MI; inferior MI; and others). In addition, they evaluated the records assigning them to the categories: normal, probably normal, possibly pathological, probably pathological, and pathological.New comparative papers evaluate the morphological parameters and/or features obtained from measured and derived VCG. There is a group of interesting morphological indications obtained from VCG loops which provide a demonstrable diagnostic value. These features are provided in [59,60]. Only some are used today to compare the quality of transformations. QRS-T angle has been the most commonly evaluated feature [36–38,61]. The authors in [47,49] evaluated the accuracy of their own transformation matrix using the maximum spatial amplitude of the QRS vector, the mean amplitude of the R wave for individual axes X, Y and Z, for the QRS and T vector angle in the horizontal plane.A VCG loop can be created from any leads; however, a VCG thus derived will not be orthogonal. Some leads of the 12-lead ECG show a relatively high correlation with orthogonal leads. These leads are called quasi-orthogonal. Quasi-orthogonal leads approximately correspond to non-corrected VCG lead systems, containing also their disadvantages. Correction can be applied based on the known geometry of the torso using the model derived by Frank [62].Fig. 1shows a schematic indication of the relationship between individual leads. The orientation of the Z axis is not uniform in literature. Most authors understand the positive direction of the Z axis as indicated in Fig. 1. The authors in [63,64] use an opposite orientation of the Z axis. The authors in [65] use different labelling of the axes. The results must thus be correctly interpreted when the transformations are used.Several quasi-orthogonal systems have been published, whose relationship to orthogonal coordinates can also be observed from Fig. 1.Bjerle et al. in [66] proposed their quasi-orthogonal leads:(8)X=1.06×V6,Y=1.88×VF=1.25×aVF,Z=−0.532×V2+0.043×V6Also Kors in [67] analyzed ECG leads in his work and chose a combination of those leads that showed the highest correlation with orthogonal leads:(9)X=V6,Y=II,Z=−0.5×V2.Quasi-orthogonal leads implemented in the ECG system of Marquette Electronics, Inc. (Milwaukee), used in [11,47], are represented by:(10)X=I,Y=aVF,Z=−0.8V1+V22.Schreck et al. explored in their work [58] the possibility of deriving a 3-lead VCG and a 12-lead ECG only based on 3 independent leads, I, II and V2. These 3 leads are related to orthogonal leads:(11)X=I,Y=aVF=II−I2,Z=V2.Amplitudes of individual leads were weighted based on the geometric dimensions of the patients.Kors et al. in [48] compared two different quasi-orthogonal leads (8), (9) and transformed VCG systems derived using both regression and IDT. Based on an evaluation by cardiologists and based on measurement of the mean absolute percentage deviation, the author concluded that both IDT and the matrix obtained using the regression approach achieved better results compared to both quasi-orthogonal leads.Rubel in [55] compared both quasi-leads, similarly as Kors, to other transformation matrices. The quality of the transformations was evaluated based on correlation and RMSE. Quasi-orthogonal leads again achieved the worst results. However, the authors in [58,68] noted that their own approach based on quasi-orthogonal leads (11) achieved good results for the derivation of 12-lead ECG and VCG. ECG was derived based on the non-linear optimization method (NLO). The evaluation was performed based on the correlation coefficient and RMSE; in addition, the resulting measured ECG and derived VCG were evaluated by cardiologists.In principle, 12-lead ECG does not contain much information about the sagittal plane, so it is necessary to use maximum information included in ECG for derivation VCG which describes the electrical activity of the heart in all three planes. Linear transformation methods between ECG and VCG are an extension of quasi-orthogonal leads. Not only one lead corresponds to one VCG lead but each of the independent ECG leads (I, II, V1 … V6) contributes with a specific weight to a certain extent to the given orthogonal lead. Individual weighing coefficients then form the transformation matrixM. This approach was first introduced in the paper [40]. The transformation coefficients were obtained using the regression approach. Accuracy of the transformation was evaluated in a group of 169 patients. The authors note that the orthogonal system can be transformed into any other with sufficient accuracy. However, the transformation coefficients were not published by the authors. The IDT matrix, which has become one of the most widely used, can be provided as an illustration of the transformation matrix.The following relationship can be written for lead X:X=−0.172×V1−0.074×V2+0.122×V3+0.231×V4+0.239×V5+0.194×V6+0.156×I−0.01×II.The relationship for the calculation of the Y and Z leads can be derived similarly. An analogy with quasi-orthogonal leads can be observed here. In this case, one orthogonal lead is not formed just by one ECG lead, but instead by all leads with various weights.The mathematical transformation is then performed based on the matrix multiplication, which can be written further as follows:(12)V=M×EwhereEis a matrix whose rows are formed by independent ECG leads,Vis a matrix whose rows are formed by VCG leads X, Y and Z, andMis a transformation matrix.Coefficients of the transformation matrixMcan be derived based on the torso model described, for example, by Frank [62], or regression methods based on data measured in a representative patient group. These coefficients then differ for individual approaches and reflect particularly the morphology of an average patient or torso model.In total, Levkov presented 5 transformation matrices (Table 2) obtained based on two methods [45].The first method (method 1) is based on a one-dipole model. The voltageubetween two arbitrary electrodes located at the positions (LA, RA, C1, …, C6) can be expressed as follows:(13)u=lXX+lYY+lZZ,where lX, lYand lZare the components of the torso model vectors obtained experimentally by Frank [62]. X, Y and Z are orthogonal components of the voltage, where for X:(14)X=a1LA+a2RA+a3C1+⋯+a6C6Relationships for the Y lead can be expressed similarly with the coefficients b1,…,b6, and for Z with the coefficients c1,…,c6. Having 8 electrodes, the number of linearly independent couples is 56. We will thus obtain a system of 56 equations with 18 unknown variables (a1,…,a6, b1,…,b6, c1,…,c6), which has infinitely many solutions. The best solution was published by Levkov as the transformation matrix T1.The second method (method 2) is based on regression for a group of patients. For the measured data, the author sought the coefficients a1,…,a6, b1,…,b6, c1,…,c6 using the least squares method. This method was applied in two ways. For method 2a, the author determined the coefficients separately for each patient; the resulting transformation matrix was then created by averaging the coefficient values for the whole patient group. This transformation matrix was denoted as T4.Method 2b consisted in determining the coefficients for a single long record containing multiple patients. The matrix denoted as T2 was obtained using method 2b for one half of all patients (46 patients). The matrix denoted as T3 was created using method 2b for the whole patient group. Matrix T5 for the simplified transformation was derived from matrix T3. Coefficients of low values were replaced with zero, other coefficients were reduced to one decimal point with a value close to T3.Based on transformation matrix T5, the author designed an analogue electronic circuit for deriving VCG leads based on conventional 12-lead ECG. Thus ECG and derived VCG could be recorded at the same time.Clinical tests were performed by Levkov in a group of 96 patients with transformation matrix T5. Obtained values of the correlation coefficient are r=0.99 based on the author of the method, and the normalized Euclidean distance is d<0.1. Transformation matrices T1, T3 and T4 were compared to other transformation methods in the paper [55]. The correlation coefficients published here are lower for individual transformation matrices than as stated by Levkov. However, the results are comparable, and differences between the obtained signals are not significant.In the 1980s, the concept of using VCG leads for computer-based ECG analysis was very attractive. Dower et al. [42,43,69] introduced the method of deriving 12-lead ECG from VCG based on transformation matrixCwhose coefficients they derived based on the torso model described by Frank [62]. Edenbrandt et al. derived the pseudoinverse matrix to matrixC, which can be used for reverse transformation from 8 independent ECG leads (I, II, V1 … V6) to VCG [47].E=C×VLetM=CTC,andM−1M=I,whereIis the unit matrix; then:(15)V=I×V=M−1M×V=M−1CTC×V=M−1CTE.D†=M−1CTis the pseudoinverse transformation matrix whose coefficients are given in Table 1for adults and in Table 3for children. The procedure of deriving the transformation matrix uses the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse.In paediatric patients, the precordial lead V3 is replaced with the right-sided precordial lead V4R. For this reason, Edenbrandt et al. derived a new transformation matrix (Table 3) based on the IDT [49].In their paper, Edenbrandt et al. compared the IDT to two types of quasi-orthogonal leads of Bjerle et al. [66] and quasi-orthogonal leads implemented in the ECG system of Marquette Electronics, Inc. (Milwaukee) for a group of 80 patients. Three cardiologists focusing on VCG analysis performed a visual assessment of the QRS complexes of the derived VCG for each patient. Numerical comparison of the derived to the measured VCG was evaluated based on statistical analysis of R wave amplitudes along the X, Y and Z axes, the maximum spatial amplitude of the QRS vector, and the maximum QRS and T vector angles in the horizontal plane. Differences between derived and directly measured VCG are small, but they may be of diagnostic importance, therefore, the authors suggested modifying the criteria for evaluation so that the diagnostic meaning would be the same also for the derived VCG. The difference between the IDT and quasi-orthogonal leads is not significant according to the authors. Quasi-orthogonal leads of Bjerle et al. actually achieve smaller differences between measured and derived VCG amplitudes and comparable changes in QRS and T loop angles compared to the IDT.In the paper by Rubel [55], reported poor results for the IDT, comparable to quasi-orthogonal leads. The authors in [38,79] explored the effect of the transformation method on the estimate of the spatial angle QRS-T and noted that unless there is a specific reason, the IDT should not be used for deriving VCG for the purpose of QRS-T analysis.According to [37], the IDT provided inferior results, for example, compared to the Kors transform; however, the differences are not statistically significant. The authors in [51] noted that the IDT should not be used for the analysis of atrial fibrillation. Parameters of the fibrillation wave are significantly different from directly measured orthogonal leads.Patients’ intra and inter-individuality is a meaningful factor which limits the available accuracy of general transformation [87,88]. Performance of patient-specific transformation is better than general transformation [70] but it demands direct measurement of VCG and ECG at the same time. This enables the construction of one matrix for each patient.In their paper [53], Man et al. focused on possible improvements in the quality of ECG transformation to VCG based on individualized IDT for a specific patient, by performing minor changes to the coefficients of transformation matrixD†. The basic idea of the method lies in minimizing error ɛ between the measured and reverse reconstructed ECG for each specific patient.LetV=D†×E,(16)E′=L×V=L×D†×E.whereE’ is the reverse reconstructed matrix of ECG leads; forL:L=invD†TD†D†TChanges to transformation matrixD† are done using an optimizing method based on minimizing error ɛ where:(17)ε=E′−E2.The authors noted an improved VCG synthesis by reducing error ɛ based on modification of coefficients in the transformation matrix in a small range (1–10%). According to the authors, this approach can be viewed as an individualization of the arrangement of the torso model's conductivity, as represented by the transformation matrix. Each patient differs in the geometry of their chest, and therefore individualization approaches are perspective; however, the authors compared the success of their own method in a group of 180 patients only based on evaluation of the regression coefficient, whose improvement need not clearly mean a better transformation. The authors noted that a reduced error between the measured and reconstructed ECG was a strong indicator of improved transformation.The transformation matrix introduced by Kors [48] was derived using the regression technique for a group of patients in the CSE database [71]. The reconstruction coefficients (Table 4) were found by minimization of the mean squared error between the measured and derived VCG. In this way, Kors derived several transformation matrices for various segments of P-QRS-T complexes. In his paper he noted that differences among the matrices were small. Therefore, the resulting transformation matrix was derived only based on regression of the QRS complex, and subsequently it was applied to the whole P-QRS-T complex. The training dataset was composed of 147 records for both healthy patients and for patients with pathologies (30% normal, 15% hypertrophy, 30% MI, 25% others). The testing dataset included 90 records (30% normal, 25% hypertrophy, 30% MI, 15% others).Results of the derived VCG were evaluated based on the mean absolute percentage deviation and evaluation by 3 cardiologists as per diagnostic meaning. Compared to quasi-orthogonal leads, the Kors regression transformation provided better results. The authors in [36,37] concluded that the Kors transformation was suitable for representing the spatial QRS-T angle from the 12-lead ECG. The authors in [38] also noted that the Kors transformation should be preferred to the IDT for deriving the QRS-T angle. In the paper [55], the Kors regression transformation provided the best results. On the contrary, in the paper [51] the Kors transformation gave the weakest results for the evaluation of atrial fibrillation, and therefore is not suitable for this purpose.A very accurate and well-documented physical model of the chest was designed by Rush [72]. This model was used to create a computer model of the chest. It consisted of a non-homogeneous reservoir containing the lungs, liver, spine, sternum, heart, subcutaneous fat, anisotropic skeletal muscles and blood inside the heart and large blood vessels. 15 triads of electrodes were placed near the heart where each represented the orthogonal components of the electrical cardiac vector. Based on this model, Hyttinen et al. derived a transformation matrix (Table 5) for the new lead system, calculated from the 12-lead ECG and denoted as VECG [73]. As stated by the authors, this derived lead system provides better orthogonality by 10% to 20% compared to Frank's lead system. The authors also derived a transformation matrix for deriving VCG leads according to Frank. It should be noted that the authors chose their own orientation of the axes, which is different from the standard orientation. The X axis is defined by the direction from the back to the front, Y from the left to the right, and Z is defined from the bottom upward.The results were compared to the IDT, the transformation according to Uijen et al. [46] and Willems et al. [74]. Individual methods were evaluated based on the table of correlation coefficients of ST segment values. The authors noted that their transformation matrix reproduced Frank's leads more accurately than the other methods. The authors in [36] performed a comparison of the individual transformation methods and found that the ECG transformation according to Frank's lead system as per Hyttinen did not have a statistically significant effect on the QRS-T angle compared to directly measured Frank's leads.Standard 12-lead ECG is not suitable for exercise tests given that many artifacts are created due to the motion of the limbs. Mason and Likar published their recommendation for restricting the movement of electrodes during ECG measurement with an exercise [75]. The movement during exercise is eliminated by placing the limb electrodes on the chest. Differences in the signals are described in [76] and should always be taken into account. Common transformation matrices cannot be used in such a case for transformations between ECG and VCG. Guldenring et al. proposed a transformation matrix as provided in Table 6for the derivation of VCG leads from Mason–Likar (ML) leads [57]. The authors compared their own matrix to the Kors regression matrix and two-step transformation, first transforming the ECG signal measured using ML leads to classical 12-lead ECG, and then using the Kors transformation to VCG.The transformation matrix was designed using the regression method in a training group of 545 patients and tested in a group of 181 patients. The data were derived from signals measured during potential mapping of the chest.The authors of the method evaluated the squared mean error between the QRS-T complexes of the measured and derived VCG for the testing patient group and noted that their transformation matrix provided increased accuracy compared to the two-step transformation. According to the results provided in their paper, the Kors transformation provided comparable results to their own transformation matrix.Transformations developed based on the regression approach usually focus on transforming only the QRS complex. The accuracy of P and T wave transformations is usually considered as sufficient, and differences in the transformation matrices are minimal [48]. Considering that VCG is starting to see application in research into arrhythmias, the accuracy of P and T wave transformation is important in this respect. Guillem et al. presented their own transformation matrix (Table 7) derived using the regression method, which is optimized for the P wave [51]. The matrix is called PLSV (P Least Square Value) by the authors. The authors also presented their own matrix optimized for the QRS complex (QLSV). Both matrices were derived for preprocessed signals for each patient of the training set (124 patients). A regression model was found for each patient using the least squares method. The resulting transformation matrix is given by the mean value of the transformation matrices for all patients. The results were compared to the IDT in a group of patients from the testing set (124 patients). Evaluation parameters included the correlation coefficient r and the RMSE.The authors demonstrated that the accuracy of the P wave transformation could be improved using specific transformation matrices. However, the significance of improvement in the transformation using the PLSV transformation is debatable. In the paper [51], the authors compared the IDT, Kors transformation and PLSV transformation for the description of atrial fibrillation. The PLSV transformation provided significantly better results in this respect than the other transformations.In their paper [46], Uijen et al. noted that the transformation matrix derived using the regression method provided better results for the transformation between 12-lead ECG and VCG than Dower's transformation based on the torso model. However, they used training data to test their proposed matrix. The authors added that they assumed higher variability of coefficients, particularly for V3 and V4. They designed a matrix for the transformation of 12-lead ECG from VCG leads, and based on this matrix they derived the inverse matrix shown in Table 8.The relationship between VR (VL) and commonly measured aVR (aVL) should be taken into account.Other authors, for example, Willems et al. [74], adopted a similar approach and presented their own coefficients derived for data from the CSE database. Their results are shown in Table 9.Artificial neural networks provide a perspective approach to signal transformations. The signal transformation is then non-linear and is given by coefficients of the neural network obtained by training using a data group. This approach to transformations was applied by Atoui et al. [56]. Their transformation consisted in calculating ECG leads from quasi-orthogonal leads I, II and V2. An opposite approach for deriving VCG leads using a neural network has not been published yet; however, in principle the same method could be used as that of Atoui et al. Their method is based on a multi-layer feed-forward neural network (Fig. 2) trained using an algorithm with backward propagation of errors. The published ANN includes one input layer with three input neurons, one hidden layer with 15 neurons and a sigmoid transfer function, and an output layer with five neurons with linear activation function. The relationship between the input and output layers is expressed using weights that connect individual neurons. These weights are chosen at random and are gradually modified during the ANN training phase. In this case, the transformation is performed using a group of 50 different ANNs. Each of the ANNs is trained using the cross-validation strategy.The authors of the method assessed the transformation based on the mean squared deviation and the correlation coefficient to compare a representative P-QRS-T segment for each patient between the measured and derived VCG. Furthermore, they performed a comparison to the regression model and concluded that the ANN achieved better results than the common regression approach. The results were also assessed by a cardiologist who noted that the differences between the signals were insignificant in terms of diagnosis in most cases. Based on their work, 12-lead ECG can be derived with sufficient accuracy from three independent leads that are related to quasi-orthogonal leads. It is thus highly probable that the same principle could be used with success also for reverse transformation.PCA is a statistical method designed to compress information from many correlated variables into a smaller number of linearly non-correlated principal components. Each component provides some new information about the entire data set. Individual components are ordered so that the first few components contain most of the variability of the whole signal and are mutually orthogonal. The three most significant components have been demonstrated to provide 96–99.9% of the overall information contained in ECG [77]. The first two or three principal components are also used to depict multidimensional data in planar or spatial projection, respectively.PCA is an important tool used in many fields of ECG signal analysis. The most common PCA applications include: ECG compression, heart rate detection, artifact noise suppression, classification, obtaining indications, signal separation and others [89,90,93–95]. PCA has also been used to derive orthogonal leads [35,39].The calculation of the three main principal components can be provided:(18)V=A×E,whereArepresents three most important eigenvector of the covariance matrix.Principal components can more often be calculated directly from the data matrix using SVD decomposition (singular value decomposition). The matrix of input data can thus be decomposed as follows:(19)E=UΣVT,whereUis the orthogonal matrix of left-side singular vectors;Vis the matrix of right-side singular vectors; and Σ is the diagonal matrix of singular numbers.The orthogonal signals thus obtained do not correspond to Frank's VCG leads exactly, and actually, not even the indications obtained from leads thus derived match those derived from VCG leads, as described in paper [78]. In spite of that, this mode of orthogonalization has been used and the derived orthogonal signals serve to derive the indications similarly as in classical VCG [35,39,52,54].Most published transformations are based on one generalized transformation, shared for all patients. Individualization may be focused on individual patients [53,54], or on a patient group, see [49,50]. Individual cardiac diseases cause a significant modification of the shape and amplitude of the ECG signal. Similarly, the ECG signal may differ for various patient groups divided according to age, sex, ethnicity, health status, but also size and orientation of the cardiac muscle. Dawson et al. described the effect of myocardial infarction on the optimal transformation matrix for transformations from ECG to VCG and vice versa [50]. The authors found out that the differences in coefficients derived using the regression approach for healthy patients and for patients with MI were statistically significant. The authors also discussed the differences in coefficients of the transformation matrix for patient groups divided according to age.The authors presented their own affine transformation matrices for the group of patients with MI and for the group of healthy patients. The transformation matrices presented in Table 10, were obtained based on the linear regression model for two-second records from 25 randomly chosen patients of each group.Individual ECG leads are strongly correlated and some are even linearly dependent, therefore, only 8 independent leads are commonly used. Despite that, these 8 leads contain redundant information. This redundancy supports a large number of different transformation matrices that will provide the same results according to [50]. The PCA method was used to obtain a single consistent matrix, denoted here asEPCA.EPCAis the matrix of principal components denoted as e1,…,e8, which are not correlated and are mutually orthogonal.Coefficients of the transformation matrix were obtained using regression of the 8 principal components ofEPCAto VCG leads (Fig. 3). 25 transformation matrices were created in each group (one transformation matrix for each patient), and the resulting presented transformation matrix was created as the mean of individual matrices.The transformation itself can then be written as follows:(21)V=A×EPCA+ε=α0+a1e1+a2e2+⋯+a8e8+ε,where a0,…,a8 are the coefficients that form the columns of transformation matrixAand ɛ is the error. Each of the rows (VCG leads) of matrixVis then formed by the linear combination of individual ECG components.The authors compared the results between the IDT and their own transformation for the following patient groups: healthy patients, patients with MI, and both groups combined. The regression coefficient r2 was used as the evaluation criterion. Based on statistical evaluation of the results, the authors noted that there was a significant difference between the coefficients for the group of healthy patients and for patients with MI. The authors also noted that the IDT poorly derived the signal along the Z axisrhealthy2<50%,rMI2<20%, which they explained by the placement of most electrodes of conventional ECG particularly in the XY plane. The use of affine transformation provides a significant improvement in accuracy of the transformation of the signal along the Z axis (r2>80%).Individualization of the transformation on the level of individual patients is based on compensation of different geometry and the arrangement of non-homogeneities of the torso. The authors Vullings et al. designed a method using the Bayesian probability theory for an individual transformation between ECG and VCG [54].The Bayesian probability theory serves to determine a common probability distribution for VCG signals and scaling matrix α, which models the attenuation of individual measured ECG signals. This probability distribution is based on a simplified model describing the relationship between VCG and ECG (Fig. 4).(22)E=α×D×V+H,where D is the matrix that describes the placement of the electrodes, for example, Dower's matrix. α is the diagonal matrix whose elements αirepresent linear weights that determine ECG signal attenuation at individual leads. Matrix H represents additive noise at individual ECG leads.The valuesV, α andHare unknown; however, based on statistical analysis,Vcan be estimated only based on knowledge ofE, the pseudoinverse transformation matrixD† and noise variance under the condition of statistical independence of α andEand Gaussian noise distribution in matrixHwith zero mean value. The statistical analysis is described in detail in the paper [54].The estimate ofVis given by the relationship:(23)V=D†U,whereUis a matrix whose rows are formed by vectorsvi; these vectors are calculated based on the iterative algorithm:(24)μi=vieiTΣi+viviTandβi=σiΣi+viviT,The authors tested the method by measuring the normalized mean squared deviation between the measured ECG and reversely derived ECG, based on a projection using the Dower transformation. The effect of patient intervariability was artificially inserted into the signal by random weight assignment at various ECG leads. Vullings et al. assumed that such random changes in ECG weights matched changes in the torso geometry, thereby artificially simulating patient interindividuality. The testing was performed for 10 healthy patients in the PTB database.Quasi-orthogonal leads are not truly orthogonal and interpretation of VCG is only approximate. Although there is a certain correlation with VCG leads, the information about spatial information which can be potentially obtained from ECG is reduced. Some studies have proved that for the derivation of VCG these systems achieve poor results [45,48,55].Independent ECG leads contain complete information on ECG. Linear transformations use all these leads for the derivation of individual VCG leads. Each ECG lead contributes to derived VCG with a different weight. Individual weights form the transformation matrix. These transformation matrices can be obtained based on a mathematical model of the torso (e.g., inverse Dower), or by regression approach for directly measured ECG and VCG (e.g., the Kors transformation). Regression matrices can be individual for each patient but general matrices have been published which are designed based on multi-lead databases of ECG for different patients with different diseases. Comparative studies and individual works prove that regression-based transformations achieve higher accuracy than model-based transformations [45,48,55]. Many different regression-based transformation matrices can be obtained. All of them will provide similar results. The most current used Kors regression-based transformation is obtained for a representative group of 147 records. There are multi-lead databases which can include higher variability. The most commonly used ones include the MIT/BIH PTB and CSE databases. Precisely the CSE diagnostic database seems to be suitable, which contains 1220 digital 15-lead records (including records measured by a hybrid system, which should be excluded for testing). This database can be expanded by the CSE multilead measurement library, which contains an additional 250 15-lead records [71]. The PTB database include 549 records for 289 different patients [84,85].The Kors regression-based transformation is the most common and its higher accuracy has been proved in many studies. The evaluation of accuracy was clear and many different morphological criteria and statistical analysis of evaluation by several cardiologists were used. However, the Kors transformation is considered the best one [36–38,61,96,97]. Some studies indicate the effect of cardiac disease on the accuracy of derived VCG. Furthermore, various effects have been described such as the effects of segment selections for derivation of the transformation matrix, the effect of the geometry and the arrangement of torso non-homogeneities for individual patients, the effect of inaccurate placement of electrodes, and others. Such effects are partially eliminated by patient-specific reconstruction or individualized transformations.Some studies are focused on individualization of the transformation matrix without prior direct measurement of VCG. However, unclear evaluation criteria and methodology were used. Evaluation by a cardiologist is also lacking. Results are compared only with the IDT and only for small testing dataset of records. Despite that, this way is promising for future work.The most important is evaluation of the diagnostic meaning for individual transformation. While the Kors regression-based transformation is suitable for representing the QRS-T angle, inverse Dower is not. For new methods, this evaluation should also be done.The most significant component of PCA are not correlated and it was proved that the first 3 components include maximum variability. These components are mathematically orthogonal. However, such obtained leads are not the same as VCG and the features obtained from PCA and VCG are also different. It is not possible to use VCG criteria for PCA-based orthogonal leads. The QRS-T angle is still a significant parameter for derived orthogonal leads and can be used for automatic classification and representation in spite of such derived QRS-T being different to the VCG one.There is no uniform methodology for evaluating the accuracy of the transformation. The accuracy of the transformation is of key importance for the proper interpretation of the derived VCG. The accuracy can be assessed based on various criteria. The non-uniform nature of evaluation criteria (used by individual authors) is a problem when comparing individual transformations. An essential condition for any transformation is that the diagnostic information remains unchanged during the transformation. The effect of transformation on diagnostic information can be evaluated only by an experienced cardiologist specialized in interpreting VCG. However, many authors only use the difference in morphological characteristics between the derived and measured VCG to assess a new method. The most commonly evaluated parameters include the correlation coefficient and the mean squared error or squared mean value. Evaluation by cardiologists should also be provided.Transformations should be robust to inter-patient variability and the kind of disease without prior knowledge about the afflicting disease of the patient. The influence of the only MI to the accuracy of the transformation was tested. Different diseases such as ischemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation, dilated cardiomyopathy, etc., can cause an incorrect interpretation of derived VCG and the obtained significant features. These diseases are important because they produce morbidity and mortality in patients.Many interesting modern methods exist in the field of regression methods, which have not been tested for the use of transformations between ECG and VCG. Such methods include the support vector machine (SVM), genetic, bio-inspired and optimization algorithms [80–82,91,92]. These methods are thus available for further future work in this area.Promising approaches seem to include transformations performed using independent components obtained using PCA [34,83,89,90]. The error between the measured ECG and reversely transformed ECG can be optimized; and the use of non-linear regression methods. New methods should be compared to multiple methods and particularly to the Kors transformation. Multiple evaluation criteria should be compared, including a cardiologist's evaluation, based on a broad database of 15-lead records.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
VCG leads are not measured directly in clinical practice; instead, transformations are usually used to obtain three orthogonal leads denoted as X, Y and Z. Analysis of orthogonal leads provides new information and can be used for more precise diagnosis of cardiac diseases, such as ventricular hypertrophies, ischemic heart disease, MI localization and others.Today, the most widely used methods include the inverse Dower and Kors transformations. In several publications, the IDT was demonstrated to achieve worse results compared to other methods. The IDT should be replaced by the Kors transformation particularly for the evaluation of the QRS-T angle. An overview of the most important comparative studies is provided in Table A1 in the Appendix. Several other modern methods have been developed, which provide a significant improvement in the accuracy of the transformation. We believe that further development and thorough testing of new methods can provide considerably enhanced accuracy of electrocardiological indications as well as of the diagnostics of cardiac diseases.