@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Frequency-domain active contours solution to evaluate intima–media thickness of the common carotid artery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fully-automatic segmentation of the intima-media complex (IMC) and the near wall.Automatic validation stage discards unreliable measurements from a medical point of view.Frequency-implementation of the active contours speeds up the algorithm.Softer contours than other fully-automatic methods.Tested in a wide range of spatial resolutions (from 0.029 mm/pixel to 0.081 mm/pixel).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image segmentation,Active contours,Ultrasound images,Intima–media thickness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The intima–media thickness (IMT) of the common carotid artery (CCA) is being used as a reliable and early detector of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis may be unnoticed fo years before triggering severe illnesses such as stroke, embolisms or ischemia. Hence, the use of IMT leads to an early atherosclerosis diagnosis that can prevent more serious cardiovascular diseases. Usually, IMT is manually extracted from ultrasound images, which is a non-invasive technique, but unfortunately its measurement is prone to error.This paper addresses a fully automatic method to segment the artery layers of the CCA over ultrasound images. Unlike other methods, the segmentation is not restricted to IMT, the artery diameter can be extracted too, which can help to determine cardiovascular risk together with IMT. The proposed technique is based on a frequency-domain implementation of active contours, which are computationally faster than the original space-formulation, while providing soft final contours.Working with three different probes over a range of spatial resolutions from 0.029mm/pixel to 0.081mm/pixel, the method presents an IMT error of only 13.8±31.9μm (in mean±standard deviation) when tested on an database containing 46 images. The automatic results were compared to the average of 2 manual observations performed by 2 observers (4 observations) over each image in our database.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are one of the main causes of death in developed countries [1]. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to prevent and to monitor patients affected by a CVD. Atherosclerosis is a CVD that acts as a trigger for more serious conditions, such as stroke, embolism or ischemia. Thus, an early diagnosis is critical to prevent related pathologies. Atherosclerosis consists of a progressive thickening of the arterial walls by fat accumulation, which hinders blood flow and reduces the elasticity of the affected vessels.The intima–media thickness (IMT) of the common carotid artery (CCA) is one of the mostly used indicators of cardiovascular risk [2–4]. IMT is extracted from ultrasound images [5] (i.e., a non-invasive technique) and can diagnose atherosclerosis in its early stages, when the patient is still asymptomatic.By measuring and monitoring the IMT variations doctors are able to early detect small thickening of the artery walls and, thus, to prescribe preventive care. Several manual measurement procedures appear in medical bibliography [2,3,6], but in order to consider IMT as a reliable indicator of atherosclerosis, the measurement protocol must prove its repeatability and reproducibility [2,7]. Particularly, the method here proposed is based on the repeatable and reproducible protocol used by the Radiology Department from Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca [7], which provided the images to develop our method.As can be seen in Fig. 1, left, blood vessels present three different layers, from innermost to outermost, intima, media and adventitia. These layers can be seen in a longitudinal cut of the CCA over the near and the far wall (Fig. 1, right). In the middle, the channel where blood flows known as lumen is appreciated as a dark area corresponding to a liquid medium. The IMT is defined as the distance from the lumen–intima to the media–adventitia interface at far wall. The interfaces to be detected present a bright-dark-bright pattern corresponding to the intima–media–adventitia layers (see Fig. 1).In the manual procedure [7] an expert observer marks from one to three pair of points delimiting IMT around 1cm after the carotid bulb. The carotid bulb is located on the left of the image in all cases.This paper addresses a fully automatic method to segment lumen–intima (LI) and media–adventitia (MA) interfaces along with the near wall–lumen interface. IMT measurement is the main objective and more precise, but the lumen diameter (LD) is provided too. Therefore, with little extra computational cost the method provides complementary information apart from the IMT.Unlike manual procedure, with the proposed method it is possible to measure IMT along a certain artery length and to calculate statistics of IMT and CCA diameter, such as mean, median or maximum. Since the proposed method applies automatic image processing, the results are reproducible, subjectivity is avoided and the analysis of IMT over a large population can be optimized in terms of time.This work is structured as follows: the present section introduces the need of automated techniques to measure IMT of the CCA from ultrasound images. In Section 2, the image database and features of manual observations are provided, together with the presentation of the developed method. Results are presented in Section 3 and discussed in Section 4. Finally, the conclusion section closes the paper.Our image database consists of 46 ultrasound images of a longitudinal cut of the CCA taken with a Philips iU22 Ultrasound System at different scale resolutions (ranging from 0.029mm/pixel to 0.081/,mm/pixel). Three different probes have been used at the discretion of the specialist, with frequency ranges of 9–3MHz, 12–5MHz and 17–5 MHz. The radiologist could manually select the space resolution of the image and the parameters of the US machine. The images correspond to 27 patients aged from 25 to 71, 12 of them females. The average age was 56.For the sake of homogeneity, the images were taken following certain recommendations: CCA preferably horizontal, the carotid bulb should not appear, CCA should be located approximately in the middle of the image and without blood turbulences. However, some images in our database do not obey these guidelines. There are 12 with blood turbulences, 16 sloped CCA, 1 elongated CCA, 6 noisy images and 19 images in which the bulb appears. Since the carotid bulb is curved, the typical bright-dark-bright pattern is not always present and active contours may diverge near the bulb.The inclusion of these images, apparently inconvenient for our purposes, is used to assess the robustness of the developed method, which demands less strict requirements in future US image acquisitions.The automatic delineation is compared to 4 manual segmentations from 2 different observers. Each observer made two measurements of every image spaced at least one month, which implies 184 observations. Thus, each of the 46 manual results were calculated as the average contours of 4 different observations.Hereafter, for every single image, these observations will be referred to as:•MA1: first measurement from observer A.MA2: second measurement from observer A.MB1: first measurement from observer B.MB2: second measurement from observer B.The delineation was performed over the images manually by marking at least 10 points for each contour. The manual contours were acquired thanks to a Matlab software implemented by the authors. After manual drawing, the selected points were lineally connected and saved. Therefore, for a single image, there are 4 manual contours for each of the 3 interfaces to be detected. As ground truth contours for a single image, the mean of these 4 manual delineations is considered.IMT distance is calculated using mean absolute distance (MAD), polyline distance (PD) [8], center line distance (CLD) [9] and Haussdorf distance (HD) [10]. These metrics are used for another purpose too, the comparison of the manual and automatic contours.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes a fully automated method to segment the artery walls in common carotid artery ultrasound images. Specifically, our method segments LII and MAI from far wall, as well as the NWI. With this segmentation, both, IMT and LD can be calculated along the artery length without any user interaction.The method here presented has shown good performance with noisy and sloped images as well as images in which the carotid bulb appears. Unlike most methods, it has been tested with images taken with 3 different probes and within a spatial resolution set by the radiologist criterion (ranging from from 0.029mm/pixel to 0.081 mm/pixel).The solution here presented is based on a frequency implementation of active contours. Since initialization is crucial in the active contour evolution, the first step consists in locating the lumen automatically. Initialization includes speckle reduction, correlation with a model and morphological processing. After that, the Fourier domain implementation of the snakes algorithm is applied, which produces relevant computational cost savings [14]. Final contours are smooth due to the use of B-splines as shape function. Finally, results are automatically refined by combining statistical and intensity-based strategies. This last checking step avoids the inclusion of regions which lack information in the IMT measurement. If the doctor wanted to measure at a specific point, the automatically validated results can be helpful to decide the most appropriate areas to measure IMT.The automatic segmentation has been compared to a manual segmentation considered as ground truth, obtained as the average of four manual segmentations from two different observers. Four different metrics were assessed to measure IMT: mean absolute (MAD), polyline (PD), center line (CLD) and Haussdorf distance (HD). The method has been tested on a database of 46 images obtaining great correspondence with ground truth. In fact, Pearson correlation coefficient presents a range of 99 % (PD, MAD) > 98.98% (CLD) > 94.71% (HD) for the IMT measurement. The mean IMT error is of 13.8±31.9μm, which is half of the IMT error for other automatic methods. For the LD, the error is comparable but lower than for other methods found. The execution time is comparable (or even lower) to other methods that do not segment the near-wall interface.There are no conflicts of interest that could inappropriately influence this work.