@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Classification of gait rhythm signals between patients with neuro-degenerative diseases and normal subjects: Experiments with statistical features and different classification models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Different statistical features are extracted from gait rhythm signals.A heuristic feature selection method is applied to generate the optimal subset.An accurate multi-class diagnosis system for neuro-degenerative diseases is proposed.Mean value, Teager energy and fuzzy entropy are the most discriminating features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gait classification,Neuro-degenerative diseases,Statistical features,Feature selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For the purpose of realizing an intelligent and highly accurate diagnosis system for neuro-degenerative diseases (NDD), such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD), the present study investigated the classification capability of different gait statistical features extracted from gait rhythm signals. Nine statistical measures, including several seldom-used variability measures for these signals, were calculated for each time series. Next, after an evaluation of four popular machine learning methods, the optimal feature subset was generated with a hill-climbing feature selection method. Experiments were performed on a data set with 16 healthy control (CO) subjects, 13 ALS, 15 PD and 20 HD patients. When evaluated with the leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) method, the highest accuracy rate for discriminating between groups of NDD patients and healthy control subjects was 96.83%. The best classification accuracy (100%) was obtained with two subtype binary classifiers (PD vs. CO and HD vs. CO).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
From a neurophysiological control viewpoint, neuro-degenerative diseases are characterized as the progressive loss of structure or function of neurons, including the death of neurons. Typical neurodegenerative diseases include: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD). Different neurodegenerative diseases may have different clinical symptoms. PD manifests itself as bradykinesia, rigidity, a resting tremor and posture instability. Primary clinical features for HD are chorea and cognitive and personality changes, while the most evident symptom for ALS is the degeneration and atrophy of the muscles. Meanwhile, as a result of an impairment of the neural control network, the common external characteristic for NDD is the disorder of movement, which has been investigated and confirmed by several studies.Hausdorff et al. [1] studied the magnitude of the stride-to-stride fluctuations and perturbations of the gait rhythm in subjects with ALS disease compared to healthy control subjects. Their study revealed longer stride intervals for ALS patients vs. normal gait. In another similar study, by using the detrended fluctuation analysis technique, Hausdorff et al. [2] found that stride-interval fluctuations for patients with Huntington's disease are more random than healthy control subjects. Liao et al. [3] investigated gait symmetry in ALS patients using the multi-resolution entropy analysis of stance time fluctuations. Their study verified that gait rhythm in ALS patients exhibits a prominent asymmetry. As for PD patients’ gait dynamics, Morris et al. [4] demonstrated that PD had greatly influenced the subjects’ gait by reducing the speed, stride length, and total range of movement during walking. These studies demonstrated that for NDD patients, stride interval or stride-to-stride variability gait dynamics manifested important differences when compared with control subjects.Currently, the most commonly used method to diagnose and evaluate an improvement in NDD patients is still dependent on all types of questionnaires. It is well known that the use of questionnaires may lead to subjective results. Therefore, an objective assessment of patients’ physical functional performance is of great importance to current clinical practice, and with the help of it, clinical doctors tend to develop a more reasonable treatment plan and a more scientific assessment of the outcome of therapy. Quantitative gait analysis as a non-invasive method for the detection of movement disorders has captured considerable attention in previous studies. In recent years with the rapid development of the machine learning technique, various feature extraction methods and classification models have been employed to realize an automated and accurate diagnosis system for clinical assistant purposes.Duta et al. [5] employed Elman's recurrent neural network for the automatic identification of healthy and pathological gait based on stance, swing and double support intervals of gait. The relevant features in their work were from cross-correlograms of those gait signals with corresponding signals of a reference subject. Daliri [6] extracted features such as the minimum, maximum, average and standard deviation (SD) of each gait stride sequence and then fed this information to a support vector classifier for the purpose of distinguishing the healthy group from the group of subjects with NDD. Wu and Krishnan [7] quantified the gait variability in patients with PD using the signal turns count method. They found that the swing interval turns count parameter presents a significant difference between the healthy control subjects and PD patients. In another study [8], the nonparametric Parzen-Window method was utilized to estimate the probability density functions (PDFs) of gait in terms of the stride interval and then by computing the mean of the left-foot stride interval and the modified Kullback–Leibler divergence from the estimated PDFs, they realized the classification of gait in subjects with ALS and normal subjects.In addition to considerable work toward an automatic gait analysis, recent decades also saw the rapid development of gait recognition, which has similar procedures as gait classification. Moustakidis et al. [9] applied wavelet packet (WP) decomposition to ground reaction force measurements during walking, and then a compact set of powerful and complementary features from WP coefficients was obtained with a fuzzy complementary criterion. By using a single camera, Zeng and Wang [10] extracted features from a series of subject silhouettes and then realized gait recognition under the framework of the deterministic learning theory. To realize multi-view gait recognition, Hu [11] first applied a set of dual-tree complex wavelet transforms (DTCWT) with different scales and orientations to gait energy images and then proposed a two-stage Gaussian mixture model to represent these DTCWT coefficients. The view angle of a probe gait sequence was then estimated by using a simple nearest-neighbor classifier.The present study focuses on an automatic gait classification for NDD patients by applying gait rhythm signals because it is easy to collect with different sensors [12,13]. Previous studies have demonstrated the use of statistical and nonlinear computational methods for feature extraction from gait rhythm signals and some nonlinear classifiers for automatic diagnosis of pathological gait. However, for a practical expert system to be widely used in clinical practice, accuracy is a dominant factor. When the public gait dataset used in this study is evaluated with the LOOCV method, the best accuracy reported is only 90.32% for PD vs. CO and 92.3% for ALS vs. CO, which is obtained by using an SVM classifier [7,8]. To obtain more performance, a better feature set and a more suitable classifier are needed. Difficulty comes from the following two basic facts: (1) gait cadence exhibits complex and nonlinear behavior in both NDD and CO subjects because of the nonlinear dynamics of the human system [14,15]; (2) due to the impaired movement ability of NDD patients, it is hard to design an experimental protocol to sample long time series gait rhythm signals, for example, only 5min of walking for each time series is available in the present study. The purpose here is to investigate the classification performance of different statistical features of gait rhythm signals under different nonlinear classifiers. In addition to the previously calculated statistical features for gait rhythm signals, several other features, which were seldom applied before such as complexity, fuzzy entropy and Teager energy, were also extracted for classification purposes. Then, for different gait features, their classification performance was compared with the most suitable classifier, and an optimal feature set was generated by a hill-climbing feature selection algorithm. With this optimized feature set, several different diagnosis expert systems for NDD patients were implemented with high accuracy. In addition to the classification tasks between abnormal and normal gaits as investigated in most previous studies, the present study also introduced a multi-class solver to differentiate different subtypes of abnormal gaits, which could be helpful in monitoring altered gait dynamics for different NDD patients. This paper has been organized as follows: an overview of different feature extraction algorithms and classification models is given in Section 2. The proposed method is evaluated by actual gait data in Section 3. Finally, the summary and conclusions are presented in Section 4.The gait dataset used in this study was contributed by Hausdorff et al. [16]. The database contains 64 recordings of gait from four different groups: 20 subjects with HD, 13 subjects with ALS, 15 subjects with PD and 16 healthy control subjects. After some checking, it was found that the data with the 20th HD subject has some problems. Therefore, it was removed in this study. According to the experimental protocol, the subjects were asked to walk at their normal pace along a straight hallway that was 77m in length for 300s. The gait signals were measured with ultrathin force-sensitive switches placed inside each subject's shoes. The signals were recorded by an on-board analog-to-digital converter at a 300-Hz sampling rate and with a 12-bit resolution per sample. Different gait cadence parameters were derived with the stride detection algorithm proposed by Hausdorff et al. [12]. Currently, the database provides the following seven gait parameters: left and right stride interval (time from initial contact of one foot to the immediate subsequent contact), left and right stance interval (amount of time when one foot is on the ground), left and right swing interval (amount of time when one foot is in the air), and double support interval (time of bilateral foot contact). The first 20s of each record were removed to eliminate the start-up effects, and a median filter was applied to remove data points that were three SDs greater than or less than the median value. These outliers were most likely caused by the turns at the end of the hallway. All of the pre-processing steps were suggested in the previous study by Hausdorff et al. [16].Heights and weights of the control and NDD subjects were not significantly different. The subjects with NDD were not using a wheelchair for mobility and were free of other ailments that might affect the gait. The presence or absence of symptoms that might affect lower extremity weakness was determined by a qualified physician. The severity of ALS, PD and HD is represented by the corresponding questionnaire score, which is often used in clinical practice. Some basic information for the different categories of subjects has been summarized in Table 1. Additionally, some stride-to-stride plots of gait cadence parameters for a healthy subject and three NDD patients are shown in Fig. 1.Because the stride interval is the sum of the swing and stance interval among the seven gait parameters provided in the gait dataset, five independent gait time series are chosen for feature extraction. These selected gait time series are the left and right stride interval, left and right stance interval and double support interval. For each gait time series, features describing the major statistical characteristics of its sample distribution were extracted as: (1) MEAN (mean value), (2) STD (standard deviation), (3) MAX (maximum), (4) MIN (minimum), (5) SKEW (skewness), and (6) KURT (kurtosis). The calculation formulas for these six statistical parameters were listed in Table 2.Then, an additional three statistical features were also calculated to represent the complex and nonlinear gait rhythm signals. Seemingly, although these three features were successful in modeling many different nonlinear signals [17–20], they have not been applied to extracting classification features for gait rhythm signals on this dataset in previous studies. A simple description of them will be given as follows:(A)Lempel-Ziv complexityThe complexity measure of a sequence is based on the Lempel-Ziv definition [21], which is performed by transforming the signal to be analyzed into a data sequence whose elements are given by a few symbols. As a “coarse-graining” operation, this transformation focuses on the intrinsic characteristics of the overall dynamics of the signal, thereby neglecting details contained in lower hierarchical components [17].Consider the sequence of a gait dynamics signal x={xi, i=1, …, n}. The new symbol sequence s is generated by using the following steps [17]:Step 1: Calculate the mean value m of the signal. The time series is transformed into a 0–1 symbol sequence s={si, i=1, …, n} with the following rules:(1)si=0ifxi−m≥0,1otherwise,where⋅represents the absolute value.Step 2: Prepare an empty buffer Q_Buf to contain the subsequence and another buffer SQPi_Buf to contain the previous subsequence. We use c(n) to represent the complexity value associated with the N length signal. A cursor i is first initialized to be one.Step 3: Read a symbol s(i) and store it into Q_Buf, and then store the preceding symbol s(i−1) into SQPi_Buf. Judge whether SQPi_Buf contains Q_Buf. If the answer is yes, then update i to be i+1 and repeat this step; otherwise, a new subsequence has been found. Update c(n) to be c(n)+1, i to be i+1, empty Q_Buf and repeat this step.The above procedure stopped when all of the symbols had been scanned. The Lempel-Ziv complexity is given by(2)0≤C(n)=c(n)b(n)≤1whereb(n)=n/log2nis an upper limit of c(n), which is used as a normalization factor. From the calculating process of the complexity measure, it could be found that the Lempel-Ziv complexity reflects upon the number of different subsequences contained in the original signal sequence.Fuzzy entropyEntropy is the rate of information production as it relates to dynamical systems. Entropy analysis is an important tool for understanding nonlinear dynamical systems. However, its calculation often needs very long data sets. To estimate the entropy of a finite length time series, several important methods [19,22,23] have been proposed. In this study, fuzzy entropy (FuzzyEn) [19] as opposed to approximate entropy (ApEn) [22] and sample entropy (SampEn) [23] was employed because it is well suited for short time series [24].Given an N sample time seriesx1,x2,…,xNand a window length m, we form N−m vectors with length m, which is given by(3)Yim={xi,xi+1,…,xi+m−1}−avgimfor 1≤i≤N−m, whereavgimis the average value ofavgim=∑j=0m−1xi+j/m. Then, the calculation of FuzzyEn is performed as follows [19]:Step 1: Calculate the similarity degree u(i, j, m) of vectorYjmtoYim, where 1≤i, j≤N−m, j≠i. Given n and r, the similarity degree is defined by a fuzzy functionu(i,j,m)=exp(−(dijm)n/r), wheredijmis a distance measure given bydijm=max{yi+k−yj+k,0≤k≤m−1}.Then, for vectorYim,pim=(N−m−1)−1∑j≠iu(i,j,m)represents the degree of any other vectorYjmthat is similar to it.Step 2: The average ofpim,1≤i≤N−mis denoted by pm, which is given bypm=(N−m)−1∑i=1N−mpim.Thus, FuzzyEn is defined byFuzzyEn(m,n,r,N)=limN→∞−ln(pm+1/pm), which is estimated by the statistic:(4)FuzzyEn(m,n,r)=−ln(Pm+1/Pm)Teager-Kaiser Energy FeatureThe Teager-Kaiser energy operator (TKEO) is a nonlinear energy-tracking operator widely used in speech applications [20,25]. Basically, the nonlinear TKEO measures the instantaneous energy changes of signals that are composed of a single time-varying frequency. The calculation of the Teager-Kaiser energy operator for a 1D discrete-time signal can be given as(5)NE(x[n])=x2[n]−x[n−1]x[n+1]Its application to gait dynamics is motivated first by the fact that the movement control system is a highly complex system and second by the difficulties in satisfying the assumptions of either linear or chaos analysis. TEKO produces a time series that represents the instantaneous energy of the original gait dynamics. To measure the variant energy sequence, the statistics method can be used. In this study, the average value of nonlinear energy in the time domain is defined as(6)TE=1N∑n=0N−1NEXnwhere N is the number of samples in the gait dynamics time series. TE is used as a characteristic feature of the original gait time series.To conduct a comparative study, four machine learning methods, i.e., the support vector machine (SVM), random forest (RF), multilayer perceptron neural-networks (MLP) and K-nearest neighbor (KNN), were evaluated because all of these methods were often employed to solve the classification problem in nonlinear feature space and were also demonstrated to be suitable for a small size dataset, which is the case in the present study. For detailed introductions of these models, one can refer to references [26–28].The SVM classifier first introduced by Vapnik [26] is the first implementation of structural risk minimization (SRM), which is a theory that enforces the selection of the optimal learning model from a subset of models. To setup a linear separating hyperplane for nonlinear problems, SVM employed kernel methods to map data to a higher dimensional feature space. In the present study, the popular radial basis function (RBF) kernel was adopted. Basically, SVM finds an optimal hyperplane that separates one class from the other class based on the quadratic programming technique. This optimization problem is often solved by transforming it into a dual Lagrangian problem [29]. Further algorithm details can be found in [30].The random forest (RF) is a classifier consisting of an ensemble of classification and regression tree-structured classifiers [27]. RF inherits the merits of two powerful machine learning techniques: bagging and random feature selection. In bagging, each tree is trained on bootstrap samples of the training data, and predictions are based on the majority votes across all of the trees in the forest. Random feature selection is performed to randomly select a subset of features to split at each node when growing a tree. This method is a development of bagging where all features are used instead. The tree growing algorithm used in this study is the CART methodology [31].As a widely used feed-forward artificial neural network, the multi-layer perception network is a powerful nonlinear black-box model for learning complex nonlinear mapping from input to output variables [28]. When used as a classifier, the MLP network consists of a set of neurons that are arranged in three layers: (1) input layer, (2) hidden layer, and (3) output layer. The perceptron concludes a pair of output values from a series of numerous inputs, and the information moves in the forward direction from the input layers to the output nodes through the hidden layers [32]. In this study, the number of input neurons equals to the dimension of the feature vector, and the sigmoid transfer function was used.K-nearest neighbor is a method for classifying a test sample on the basis of the k closest training examples in the feature space. In most cases, KNN determines the label of the test sample by majority voting, that is, choosing the class that is most common among its k closest training samples. KNN is a type of instance-based learning or lazy learning, where the function is only approximated locally and all computation is deferred until classification. As for the distance measure, in addition to the commonly used Euclidean distance, other distances, such as the Mahalanobis distance, City-block distance, Hausdorff distance [33] and Kullback–Leibler distance [34], can also be considered for different types of samples.Feature selection is an important step in designing a pattern classification system. To find the optimal or suboptimal subset, which can achieve the global or local best classification performance for NDD gaits, the following heuristic steps are followed:Step 1: Select meaningful features from the original feature set. Different features of the gait time series were calculated first, and then by statistical analysis, the classification capability in terms of each feature across different groups was compared. By this step, those features that show no significant group difference were removed from the feature set for classification.Step 2: Compare the performance of different classifiers. For one particular classification problem and for each classifier, each of those meaningful features generated in Step 1 was used as a single feature that was input to the classifier to measure its classification performance. The classifier was chosen as the classification model if it had the best classification result for the same feature set.Step 3: Choose the best feature subset. To avoid a complete search of different feature combinations and to find the feature subset that represents maximal separation between the classes, a hill-climbing feature selection algorithm [35] was applied. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the algorithm used a step-by-step search with each step picking up one feature. When added to previous feature set, it will generate the best classification performance among other features.Basically, our feature selection method belongs to the category of supervised wrapper methods [36], which are only suitable for small data and feature sets. When their sizes are large, some feature ranking techniques [36,37] could be adopted to reduce the computational burden.In summary, Fig. 3depicts the flowchart of our proposed approach toward an accurate diagnosis system for NDD patients. In the next section, a design of different experiments and evaluation methods will be presented.Two different types of diagnosis systems were investigated in the current study. Binary classifiers were trained to address the first type of diagnosis problems, for example, NDD patients vs. CO subjects, ALS patients vs. CO subjects, and PD vs. HD patients. The other type of diagnosis system was a typical multi-class classification problem, which was seldom addressed on this dataset in previous studies. To perform this task, an automatic diagnosis system with a streamline structure was proposed in this study, which is shown in Fig. 4. In this diagnosis framework, the first step was to differentiate normal controls from NDD patients, and then three different subtypes of NDD (ALS, PD, and HD) patients were further identified. To determine the subtype of NDD, the widely used strategy is a so-called ‘one-against-all’ or ‘one-against-one’ strategy. Hsu and Lin presented a detailed comparison and demonstrated that ‘one-against-one’ strategy is a competitive approach [38]. Therefore, the ‘one-against-one’ strategy was adopted, that is, for a k-class problem, it constructs k(k−1)/2 binary classifiers. The output of a multi-classifier is based on the max-win strategy [38], which determines the label of the test sample with the maximum number of votes.To measure the performance of different diagnosis systems, two different validation schemes were employed. One scheme is the popular leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) method that is used over the entire data set. During LOOCV, one sample is left out at a time and is used for testing, and the other remaining samples are used as training data. The other scheme is the so-called random sub-sampling strategy: certain times of trials were taken; for each trial, certain percentage of samples are drawn randomly from the entire data set, and the remaining samples are then used as testing data; thus an average performance result is calculated after all of the trials.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
