@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The correlation of vectorcardiographic changes to blood lactate concentration during an exercise test

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New method for extracting vectorcardiography (VECG) parameters from noisy measurements.Dynamics of VECG parameters during exercise and recovery are presented.VECG parameters were significantly associated with exercise intensity markers.VECG provides a potential approach for monitoring physical performance and recovery.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vectorcardiography,VECG,Lactate,Exercise,Principal component regression,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, the correlations between blood lactate concentration (BLC), different vector electrocardiogram (VECG) parameters, ventilatory parameters and heart rate during exercise and recovery periods were investigated. The aim was to clarify the relationships between VECG parameters and different exercise intensity markers. Six (25–37 years old) nonathlete, healthy, male participants took part in the study. All participants performed two different bicycle ergospirometric protocols (P1 and P2) in order to attain different lactate levels with different heart rate profiles. A principal component regression (PCR) approach is introduced for preprocessing the VECG components. PCR was compared to Sawitzcy Golay and wavelet filtering methods using simulated data. The performance of the PCR approach was clearly better in low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) situations, and thus, it enables reliable VECG estimates even during intensive exercise. As a result, strong positive mean individual correlations between BLC and T-wave kurtosis (P1: r=0.86 and P2: r=0.8, p<0.05 in 12/12 measurements) and negative correlation between BLC and cosRT (P1: r=−0.7, P2: r=−0.62, p<0.05 in 8/12 measurements) were observed. The results of this study indicate that VECG parameters (in addition to heart rate) can make a significant contribution to monitoring of exercise intensity and recovery.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Measuring of blood lactate concentration (BLC) is an important tool for defining the anaerobic threshold (AT). AT corresponds to the onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA), where the lactate concentration threshold is normally about 2mmol/l [1]. Another commonly used method for defining AT is the ventilatory threshold determined by online gas analysis [2]. Ventilatory threshold is thought to be associated with the maximal steady state of lactate concentration (MLSS), normally about 4mmol/l, however also controversy literature has been published [3]. AT and lactate measurements can be used to prescribe training intensity and are therefore important tools for athletes. BLC could also be used for recovery monitoring. Ventilatory threshold measurements require expensive equipments and can be performed only under laboratory conditions. Lactate measurements, on the other hand, are invasive and are not easy to acquire during dynamic exercise. Thus, there is an obvious need for noninvasive simple methods for determining AT or exercise intensity estimates.There are number of previous studies where the relationship between lactate and heart rate or heart rate variability (HRV) has been evaluated [4–7]. There has also been an attempt to determine AT using a heart rate (HR) deflection point [8] but several investigators have concluded that this method is not reliable [9,10], although some studies have shown support for this concept [11]. More recent techniques have used HRV as a way to determine anaerobic threshold [12–14]. However it is known that during exercise HRV is greatly reduced which complicates’ the accurate estimation of HRV parameters. In practical applications such as in athletic training, HR actually used to adjust the training intensity based on individually determined relationship between HR and lactate accumulation. However BLC depends on many individual factors such as muscle mass, lactate clearance rate and lung capacity, and thus, the relationship between HR and BLC is not always clear. Instead of focusing only on HR and HRV analysis, we hypothesized that one could attain more information on physiological performance by monitoring the depolarization and repolarization phase of heart muscle via vector electrocardiogram (VECG) measurements.It is known that a low blood glucose concentration (i.e. hypoglycemia) affects the repolarization characteristics of the heart. In hypoglycemic clamp studies, where electrocardiogram (ECG) or VECG recordings have been analyzed, it has been observed that the repolarization time (i.e. the interval from Q-wave onset to T-wave end) lengthens, T-wave amplitude decreases and the angle between the QRS and T-wave vector loops is reduced [15–17]. Based on by these findings, it was speculated that changes in the oxygen availability at heart muscle itself or analytes/hormones produced during exercise could have measurable impacts on cardiac electrophysiology.The estimation of VECG parameters during an exercise test is problematic because of the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Exercise ECG recordings contain noise from many different sources for example electromyogram (EMG), power line noise and artifacts from body movements. Nonetheless there are a few older studies where VECG loop magnitude parameters were measured during exercise tests [18,19]. However, in these studies, only averaged beats of a few minute intervals were used and loop orientation parameters were not reported. In addition there are two more recent studies where the dynamics of VECG loop orientations have been shown to depend on HR [20,21].In this paper, repolarization and depolarization waveforms were parameterized using ϕT, θT, ϕRand θRwhich present orientations of VECG loops and cosRT which describes spatial deviation between repolarization and depolarization wave-fronts. These VECG parameters were compared to different exercise intensity markers including HR, ventilatory parameters (minute ventilation and carbon dioxide oxide ratio) and in particular to lactate levels. The aim of the study was to evaluate if different VECG parameters can provide information, compared to HR and HRV parameters, on physiological performance during exercise. Therefore, correlations were calculated between VECG parameters, BLC and ventilatory parameters during exercise and recovery periods. Two bicycle ergometer protocols were designed to produce changes into BLC levels but with different HR profiles in order to be able to identify the parameters actually correlating with BLC irrespective of the HR. The two protocols are shown in Fig. 1. For preprocessing of the VECG data, an advanced principal component regression (PCR) method is proposed. The method was originally described by [16] for single ECG lead data, but here the method is expanded for VECG data.Six (25–37 years old) healthy male participants after giving informed consent, participated in the study. The participants were not competitive athletes. All participants performed two different incremental dynamic tests on cycloergometer. The tests were separated by a minimum of 7 days. The measurement protocols are presented in Fig. 1. Both protocols consisted of 2min baseline measurement, 3min warm-up period (cycling 75W), 21min exercise period and 15min recovery period. The total work required with the two protocols was equal (bicycle loads are shown with the gray areas in Fig. 1) and used crank velocity was 60rpm.The reason for using two different protocols was to attain different BLC levels with different HR profiles. In the first protocol (P1), HR and BLC were assumed to change similarly whereas second protocol (P2) was designed to induce BLC changes that would be more independent of HR, and thus to help to differentiate between those variables that depend mainly on BLC and are not so reliant only on HR.VECG was measured using Frank's vectorcardiographic lead system [22] using Schiller CS-200 ECG unit (Schiller, Switzerland) with a sample rate of 1000Hz. Ventilatory variables were measured continuously using the power cube gas analysis device (Ganshorn Medizin Electronic, Germany) which was integrated to the Schiller CS-200 ergospirometry system. Blood samples (25μl) were collected from the left hand index finger, for measuring blood lactate concentration. During both protocols lactate was measured 11 times, firstly before exercise (normal concentration), 6 times during exercise period and 4 times during the recovery period (see Fig. 1). BLCs were measured using enzymatic electro-chemical lactate analyzer (Ebioplus, Eppendorf). Collection and processing of the blood samples were approved by local ethic committee.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
