@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hierarchical dictionary compressive sensing (HDCS) method in microwave induced thermal acoustic tomography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hierarchical dictionary compressive sensing method in microwave induced thermal acoustical tomography (MITAT) is proposed.The proposed method reconstructs images under multiple dictionaries with different spatial resolutions.The quality of MITAT image is improved with both reconstruction time and measurement time decreased.Redundant information reduced significantly which saves computational time and improves image quality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast tumor,Hierarchical dictionary,Medical imaging,Microwave induced thermal acoustic tomography (MITAT),Compressive sensing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Aiming to reduce the reconstruction time and enhance the image quality of microwave induced thermal acoustic tomography (MITAT), a new image reconstruction method named HDCS-MITAT (HDCS: hierarchical dictionary compressive sensing) is proposed. Different from the recently demonstrated CS-MITAT (CS: compressive sensing) imaging method in which only one level dictionary is applied, hierarchical dictionaries are used in the HDCS-MITAT. In this method, the dictionaries with different spatial resolutions are constructed which constitute a hierarchical structure. During the image reconstructions, first the coarsest level dictionary is utilized to roughly estimate the position of the targets in the original image domain. A reduced interested image domain can be set based on this estimation. Then the next level dictionary which has higher resolution than the above level is applied to further estimating the position of the targets and so on. Finally, the finest level dictionary is used to reconstruct the image of the targets. Compared with the CS-MITAT, this HDCS-MITAT has much less computational time and better image quality. The effectiveness of the method has been validated through some simulations and real breast tumor experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer has become the most diagnosed cancer among women according to the American Cancer Society (ACS), and early detection in breast cancer is important to more effective treatment [1]. In recent decade, microwave induced thermal acoustic tomography (MITAT) has attracted lots of attentions for its potential in early breast tumor detection [2–10]. MITAT employs contrasts in tissues’ dielectric properties while reconstructing images with ultrasound resolution. In MITAT, the tissue is stimulated with short microwave pulses. Tissues with higher conductivity strongly absorb microwave energy and induce acoustic waves due to thermal-elastic expansion. These thermal acoustic signals are collected by ultrasound transducers around the tissues and processed for image reconstruction [11].Many image reconstruction methods in MITAT have been studied, such as filtered back-projection (BP) [12] and time reversed mirror (TRM) [13]. All these methods require large number of acoustic sensor data to ensure high spatial resolution. However, large number of sampling data usually means long data acquisition time. Moreover, longer scanning time indicates that more microwave radiation will be imposed on patients. To mitigate this problem, Zhu et al. proposed an imaging method in MITAT from compressive sensing prospective (CS-MITAT) which significantly decreases the amount of the sampling data leading to a reduction in measurement time [14]. In some related works [15–17], the concept of multi-level or multi-scale dictionary is utilized. In this paper, we proposed a more effective imaging framework under compressive sensing (CS) scheme named hierarchical dictionary compressive sensing in MITAT (HDCS-MITAT). Compared with the CS-MITAT, the HDCS-MITAT decomposes single reconstruction step into multiple steps using hierarchical dictionaries with different spatial resolutions.The HDCS-MITAT is an evolution of the CS-MITAT. In CS-MITAT, imaging reconstruction is performed by means of one measurement associated with a fixed dictionary of selected spatial resolution. The key procedure of the CS-MITAT is to create a dictionary that segregates imaging area into a large number of cells which determine image resolution [14]. MITAT image is reconstructed with resolutions corresponding to these cells. In the HDCS-MITAT, multiple levels of dictionaries with different spatial resolutions are built. These dictionaries are applied with different sizes of imaging domain. Because a finer dictionary is applied in a smaller image domain, this strategy saves more computation time. As a bonus, the image reconstructed by the HDCS-MITAT has clearer background because of the reduced imaging domain at different levels.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a creation of dictionary is described and a hierarchical dictionary framework is proposed. In Section 3, simulation results are presented to compare the performance of the HDCS-MITAT with the CS-MITAT. Experiments using breast tumor and adipose are conducted to validate the effectiveness of the HDCS-MITAT both on reconstruction time and image quality. Conclusions are drawn in the final section.In MITAT prototype [18], tumor specimen is immersed in the coupling oil, transducers are uniformly distributed around a detection container at different spatial positions. Fig. 1shows a sketch map of the detection environment with four transducers and a tumor specimen.The dictionary proposed in the CS-MITAT segregates image area into a large number of resolution cells. Each resolution cell represents a MITA signal propagation model which contains spatial information and dielectric properties of the tissues. In MITAT, a tissue is considered as a source that generates MITA signal due to thermal-elastic expansion. This expansion and the propagation process can be described in a wave equation given in the following equation [9].(1)∇2p(r,t)−1vs2∂2p(r,t)∂t2=−βC∂H(r,t)∂twhere p(r, t) denotes the acoustical pressure with the target at the spatial position r. vsis the sound velocity and H(r, t) is the heating function. β and C are the heat expansion coefficient and the capacity, respectively. Eq. (1) can be solved with a volume integration at time t represented in the following equation,(2)p(r0,t)=β4πC∫V∂H(r,t−r0−r/vs)∂td3rr0−r.In Eq. (2), r0 and r denote the spatial position of transducers heat sources, respectively.If each propagation process determined by the spatial position i is defined as a MITA propagation model, a MITA dictionary can be represented as Ψ={p1(r0, t), p2(r0, t), …, pi(r0, t), …, pN(r0, t)}, where the subscript i(i∈1, 2, 3, …, N) denotes the ith resolution cell in the image domain. Fig. 2is a schematic diagram of the MITAT dictionary. The dashed-line circle in Fig. 2 represents the image domain and the red spots are resolution cells. The external square guarantees the over-complete property of the MITAT dictionary.HDCS-MITAT framework is based on the basic CS scheme which is briefly reviewed as follows [19–21]. Suppose a signal x∈RN×1 has a sparse representation in a dictionary Ψ, where Ψ∈RN×Nis an over-complete dictionary. x can be represented as x=Ψθ, where θ∈RN×1 is the coefficient of the dictionary Ψ. In CS theory, it is a common assumption that θ has very few nonzero elements. Given y∈RK×1 (K≪N) as a measurements of x acquired by a measurement matrix Φ∈RK×N, y can be written as(3)y=ΦΨθ.Because Φ and Ψ are given, y is the CS measurement, one can use CS reconstruction algorithm such as OMP [22], GPSR [23] and Bayesian Compressive Sensing (BCS) [24,25]etc. to recover the coefficient θ.The main contribution of this paper is the hierarchical dictionary framework. The core idea of the HDCS-MITAT is one measurement, multiple reconstructions, versus the one measurement, one reconstruction in the conventional CS-MITAT.Sparse coefficient θ is a position indicator in the CS-MITAT which shows target position. θ, reflects spatial position of targets as well as amplitude of MITA signals generated by the targets. Because of sparse spatial distribution of early-stage breast tumor, only few elements in θ are nonzero. This satisfies the pre-condition of CS. Resolution of MITAT image is determined by the resolution cells in the dictionary Ψ. In the HDCS-MITAT, data compression is mainly on the number of sensor positions K (i.e. CS measurement). Reduction in the number of sensor positions directly leads to less measurement time.Compared with the only one dictionary in the CS-MITAT, the HDCS-MITAT has multiple dictionaries with different spatial resolutions. Here, we take N-level dictionaries as an example. Suppose {Ψ1, Ψ2, …, ΨN} are dictionaries at N levels. Each dictionary Ψi, (i=1, 2, …, N) is over-complete which has been discussed in the Section 2.1. The spatial resolution of the dictionaries increases as level ascends. (i.e. The scale of resolution cell gets smaller with level increases). In the HDCS-MITAT, reconstructions at different levels can be written asy=ΦΨ˜iθ˜i, whereΨ˜i⊆Ψi(Ψ˜1=Ψ1,θ˜1=θ1).Ψ˜icontains the information of interested imaging domain where targets exist and with the same resolution ofΨ˜i. In each reconstruction, position indicatorθ˜iis reconstructed in the interested imaging domainΨ˜i. This indicator which contains the spatial information of the targets provides an evidence to reduce the image domain for the next level reconstruction. At the final reconstruction, position indicatorθ˜nis used for imaging. Compared with the HDCS-MITAT, CS-MITAT only utilizes one dictionary Ψnin the reconstruction which can be represented as y=ΦΨnθn.θnis used for image reconstruction. Theoretically,θnandθ˜nshare the same resolution and contain the same information of the targets which leads to the same MITAT images.Fig. 3shows the reconstructions of the HDCS-MITAT compared with the CS-MITAT. Here we use two-level structure as an example. In Fig. 3, the upper branch stands for the reconstruction proposed in the CS-MITAT, where only one fine-level dictionary is applied. Fine resolution image will be obtained at once. But at a cost of large time consuming resulting from the large size of the fine-level dictionary and the large image domain. The lower branch in Fig. 3 shows the idea of the two-level reconstructions in the HDCS-MITAT. First a coarse-level dictionary is utilized to estimate the spatial position of the targets. In this reconstruction, one can find the reduced interested image domain by using target matching and positioning method. Then a fine-level dictionary will be applied in this reduced interested image domain to do the fine-level reconstruction. Usually the interested image domain is much smaller than that of the whole domain. Therefore the imaging time for this hierarchical dictionary compressive sensing framework would be much less than that for the conventional compression sensing. Between each reconstruction, target matching and positioning is critical to find the reduced interested image domain. Details about the matching and positioning will be discussed in the following subsection.Target matching and positioning depend on the sparse distribution of the targets and dielectric properties of the tumors. Due to the contrast between malignant and adipose may be as large as 10:1 [26], the strength of the thermal acoustical signal of tumor tissue is much stronger than that of adipose.In the MITAT prototype [18], the main interference in tumor detection is the noise from detection environment and the system noise in analog circuits. Moreover, since four ultrasound transducers independently acquire data at different spatial positions, noise during the detection can be modeled as Gaussian random process. In order to acquire better signal to noise ratio (SNR) of MITA signal, usually pulse accumulation technique is adopted. As for a specific system and a stationary, homogeneous detection environment, the power of noise can be measured. Then the threshold can be adaptively set according to the power of the noise.The threshold setting is applied on the sparse coefficient θ and related to the noise model. There are two procedures to set the threshold:a)The received acoustical signals were projected on to the dictionary and then form the sparse coefficient θ where large elements in θ represent target zone and small elements (zeroes) represent non-target zone (i.e. background or noise).In MITAT prototype, the noise is modeled as additive Gaussian noise (i.e. some mean μ with varianceσn2). Moreover, the MITAT prototype measures the noise level and estimate the parameters (i.e.μˆ,σˆn2) of the Gaussian random process before each diagnose. From prospective of probability, one can set a false-detection probability fato determine the detection threshold. Thus, the detection threshold τ can be calculated throughfa=∫τ+∞p(x)dxorfa=∫τ−∞p(x)dx(i.e. some target may have negative contrast over the background.), where p(x) is the probability density function of the Gaussian noise. In this paper, the false-detection probability fa=0.01. However, in clinical diagnose, the penalty of the false-detection may lead to serious result. The breast cancer specialist may change the fafor different situations.According to the detection threshold, one can estimate the approximate spatial position of the targets. Before reducing the image domain for the next level reconstruction, target-domain-expansion is applied to include more information of the targets. The idea of target-domain-expansion is illustrated in Fig. 4.The computational cost of the HDCS-MITAT framework is mainly decided by the reconstruction. For the better performance of the gradient projection for sparse reconstruction (GPSR) compared with the OMP [23], we utilize GPSR as the reconstruction algorithm to analyze the computational cost of the HDCS-MITAT.Although each reconstruction step shares the same form of equationy=ΦΨ˜iθ˜iin the HDCS-MITAT, the image domain at each level dictionary is different. In this paper, we take two-level reconstruction procedures for cost analysis. For two-level reconstructions, Ψ1∈RN1×N1and Ψ2∈RN2×N2represent two dictionaries used at the two levels reconstructions, respectively. N1 and N2 represent the number of resolution cells in Ψ1 and Ψ2.Ψ˜2∈RN˜2×N˜2(Ψ˜2⊂Ψ2,N˜2≪N2) is the reduced image domain in Ψ2, whereN˜2is the number of resolution cells in the reduced image domain.For the CS-MITAT which uses GPSR, its computational cost is O(N2)+O(KN) [23]. The cost mainly depends on the dimension of the dictionary and the number of CS measurement K. As described in Section 2.1, the proposed HDCS-MITAT has two or more reconstructions. The total cost of the two-level HDCS-MITAT isO(N12)+O(KN1)+O(N˜22)+O(KN˜2). In two-level HDCS-MITAT, the number of resolution cells in the coarse-level dictionary is much less than that of the fine-level dictionary. Image domain reduces significantly in the second reconstruction due to the sparse distribution and the size of early-stage breast tumor. Therefore in two-level HDCS-MITAT, N1≪N2 andN2≪N˜2, the computational cost of the HDCS-MITAT is much lower than that of the CS-MITAT which leads to a great reduction in computational time. For a more general case, i.e. for N-level HDCS-MITAT, the total cost is∑i=1NO(N˜i2)+O(KN˜i)(N˜1=N1).The optimal choice of the levels of dictionaries is a concerned problem in the proposed method. The advantage of MITAT is its great potential in early-stage breast tumor detection. According to the report on [27], the early-stage breast tumor, called T1-stage in TNM breast cancer staging, is no more than 2 cm. T1 is further divided into 4 groups. Each group has determined size in clinical diagnose. Therefore the choice of the levels corresponds to the groups of T1 stage tumor. Table 1shows the size Δd of 4 groups of T1-stage breast tumor [27] and suggested resolution ΔR in the dictionary of each level.Table 1 means that the optimal choice of the levels of dictionaries depends on the desired resolution of MITAT image. For example, if the desired resolution of the finest dictionary is less 0.1cm, the optimal level should be 4. Moreover, in order to achieve quick matching between each level of the dictionaries, the size of the dictionaries should have the following relationship: log2(Ni/Ni−1)=2m, (m=1, 2, …), where Niand Ni−1 are the number of the cells at the ith level and the (i−1)th level dictionaries, respectively. That is to say, each cell (father cell) at the (i−1)th level has 22mbaby cells at the ith level.The strategy of the optimal choice of the levels is summarized as follows:1)Determine the finest level resolution ΔRfinest(desired resolution of MITAT image). Note that the desired resolution cannot surpass the physical limit of a specific system.Set the optimal choice of the levels of dictionaries according to the rules given in Table 1.Determine the resolution of each levels of dictionaries under quick matching condition.In order to evaluate the performance of the HDCS-MITAT framework, numerical simulations with single and multiple targets are conducted. All simulations are under the same setup of real experimental environment of MITAT prototype system.Fig. 5shows one target located at the center of the detection container. In this simulation, three-level dictionaries are used in the HDCS-MITAT. Fig. 6shows the images reconstructed by using the HDCS-MITAT and the CS-MITAT. All the images are reconstructed by using only 25% of the acquired data. Fig. 6(a) shows the first level reconstruction, where a coarse-level dictionary was used. Target position was estimated at the center of the imaging area. Fig. 6(b) is the result of the second reconstruction, in which the outline of the target becomes clearer. Fig. 6(c) shows the image of the final reconstruction step, where a fine-level dictionary with reduced image domain was applied. Fig. 6(d) is the result reconstructed by using conventional CS-MITAT. Fig. 6(c) and (d) agrees well with the original image in Fig. 5. But from the point view of the profile of the target, Fig. 6(c) is better than Fig. 6(d) which depicted in Fig. 7. In the HDCS-MITAT, image domain for the final level reconstruction is much smaller than that in the CS-MITAT. This property of the HDCS-MITAT reduces the uncertainty in the reconstruction and leads to a better image. It should be emphasized that the image reconstruction is always the last step in the HDCS-MITAT.Fig. 7 shows the profiles of the HDCS-MITAT and the CS-MITAT compared with the original target profile. The red dashed line and the green dash-dot line represent the profile of the CS-MITAT and the HDCS-MITAT, respectively. Compared with the black dotted line which depict the profile of the original image, both the HDCS-MITAT and the CS-MITAT agree well in the targeted region. However, due to the reduced image domain, the HDCS-MITAT has a more accurate result without small peaks outside of the targeted region.To further evaluate the performance of the HDCS-MITAT, multiple target simulations are conducted at different SNRs and CS measurements. Three different types of tissues with different contrast over the background are considered. Fig. 8shows the original images under SNR=5dB and SNR=20dB, respectively. In real experimental environment, the tumor specimen is immersed in the coupling oil which can be regarded as the background. However, coupling oil will not generate acoustical signals. Thus, the background in simulations is set as zero.Fig. 9are the images under the CS measurement with K=20, where only 10% of the acquired data are used for image reconstruction. Fig. 9(a) and (b) are the images reconstructed by using the HDCS-MITAT at SNR=5dB and 20dB, respectively. Fig. 9(c) and (d) are the images reconstructed by using the CS-MITAT at SNR=5dB and 20dB, respectively. Both images agree well with Fig. 8.In order to quantitatively evaluate the results, spatial position error epof the position indicator θ is analyzed. The spatial-position error epis defined as(7)ep=θˆp−θp1θp1,whereθˆp, θprepresent the reconstructed spatial position vector of the target and the original position vector of the target, respectively. The elements of θpare binary, in which value “1” stands for target region and “0” for non-target region.From Table 2, the HDCS-MITAT has smaller spatial-position error compared with the CS-MITAT under the same condition, especially for cases with lower SNRs. Due to the reduced image domain, the HDCS-MITAT saves more than 50% of the computational time than that of the CS-MITAT.In multiple target simulations, the HDCS-MITAT has validated its advantages over the CS-MITAT on computational efficiency as well as spatial accuracy. However, there could have some tissues of pathological interest that have negative contrast of the microwave-absorption property over the background. Continuing the situation that used in the multiple target simulation where one target with negative contrast is taken into consideration. Fig. 10shows the original image with SNR=20dB where a target (the black one) has negative contrast against the background. CS measurements with K=40 are applied to reconstruct MITAT images. Fig. 11(a) and (b) illustrates the MITAT images reconstructed by the HDCS-MITAT and the CS-MITAT, respectively.From Fig. 11, the HDCS-MITAT performs better than the CS-MITAT in computational time and spatial accuracy, the target with negative contrast agrees well with the original image. This simulation further verifies the robust of the proposed method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An approach based on hierarchical dictionary compressive sensing is proposed for MITAT imaging. In the proposed HDCS-MITAT, a single reconstructed step is decomposed into multiple procedures. Under the HDCS-MITAT framework, interested targets area at each level dictionary reduces significantly due to the sparse distribution of early-stage breast tumor. This reduction not only leads to lower spatial-position error but saves more than 50% of computational time than that of the CS-MITAT both in simulations as well as experiments. In the experiment, image reconstructed by the HDCS-MITAT has better contrast and clearer background than the CS-MITAT. Both the simulations and experimental results validate the analyses.