@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive speckle reduction in ultrasound images using fuzzy logic on Coefficient of Variation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A speckle reduction filter for ultrasound images using Fuzzy logic on Coefficient of Variation (CV) is proposed.In the first level of adaptation, fuzzy logic is applied to classify noisy pixels into three classes based on CV.In the second level, the most suitable filter is applied on Homogenous, Detail and Edge defined classes based on Structural Similarity Index Measure of the image.Experimental results and comparison with existing works shows appreciable improvement in noise suppression and preservation of image structural details.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy logic,Speckle noise,Coefficient of variation,Structural similarity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Speckle reduction is an important pre-processing stage for ultrasound medical image processing. In this paper, an adaptive fuzzy logic approach for speckle noise reduction in ultrasound images is presented. In the proposed method, adaptiveness is incorporated at two levels. In the first level, applying fuzzy logic on the coefficients of variation computed from the noisy image, image regions are classified. The best suitable filter for the particular image region is adaptively selected by the system yielding appreciable improvement in noise suppression and preservation of image structural details. At the second level, to distinguish between edges and noise, the proposed method uses a weighted averaging filter. The structural similarity measure, which depends on the nature of image and quantity of noise present in the image, is used as the tuning parameter. Thus with two levels of adaptiveness, the proposed method has better edge preservation compared to existing methods. Experimental results of the proposed method for natural images, Field II simulated images and real ultrasound images, show that proposed denoising algorithm has better noise suppression and is able to preserve edges and image structural details compared with existing methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ultrasound imaging is predominantly used for diagnosis of thyroid diseases compared to X-ray, computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging as it is non-invasive, utilises non-ionising radiation and is cost effective. However, the main disadvantage of medical ultrasonography is the poor image quality due to backscattered echo signals called speckle [1]. Therefore, it is not only difficult for the physician to analyse and diagnose the image in the presence of speckle noise but it is also difficult for feature extraction, analysis, and recognition [2]. Hence, speckle filtering is a critical pre-processing step. Researchers have proposed a number of methods for speckle reduction. Lee [3], Frost et al. [4], and Kuan et al. [5] have proposed spatial domain filters based on the local statistics of the image. These methods achieve good speckle reduction in homogeneous areas but ignore the speckle noise in areas close to the edges and lines. Perona and Malik [6] developed a method called anisotropic diffusion based on heat equation. This technique works well in homogenous areas with edge preservation for images corrupted by additive noise but the performance is poor for the multiplicative speckle noise. Yu and Acton [7] proposed a method called speckle reduction anisotropic diffusion (SRAD). In this method, a diffusion coefficient is defined based on the ratio of local standard deviation to mean using four nearest neighbour window. However, smoothening of the edges and structural content occurs in this method.Achim et al. [8] proposed a speckle reduction based on homomorphic filtering and modelled the wavelet coefficients as a non-Gaussian model. However, this approach is computationally expensive, as it requires the extraction of distribution parameters. Yue et al. [9] developed a non-linear multiscale wavelet diffusion algorithm for speckle suppression. This technique not only preserves edges but also enhances edges by inhibiting diffusion across edges. Pizurica et al. [10] proposed a generalised likelihood (GenLik) method in which wavelet coefficients are denoised by likelihood ratio using local neighbours following non-homomorphic filtering technique. An adaptive wavelet thresholding technique was proposed in [11] based on Bayesian maximum aposteriori probability (MAP) by modelling the noise free signal coefficients as symmetric normal inverse Gaussian and noisy coefficients as Gaussian distribution. From this, an adaptive threshold is obtained to reduce the speckle noise in ultrasound images. An adaptive bilateral filtering algorithm was developed in [12] by estimating the range parameter using intensity homogeneity measurements and denoising was performed iteratively. Nonsubsampled Contourlet Transform (NSCT) developed by Cunha et al. [13] tested the transform on image corrupted with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and applied hard thresholding. This method gives better performance than the undecimated wavelet transform in image enhancement as well as in filtering AWGN noise. Cheng et al. [14] proposed speckle reduction of synthetic aperture radar images based on fuzzy logic. This technique computes fuzzy edges for each pixel in the filter window and uses these to weight the contributions of neighbouring pixels to perform fuzzy filtering. Nevertheless, this iterative filter has the drawback that it is suitable only for images with large homogenous area. Zhang et al. [15] proposed a fuzzy sub pixel fractional partial difference method for ultrasound speckle reduction. In this, the Euler Lagrange equation is employed and filtering is done in an iterative manner by which image contrast is improved. Nevertheless, calculation of parameters for image fuzzification at every iteration is the limitation of this scheme. Kwan et al. [16,17] proposed symmetrical and asymmetrical triangle fuzzy filters based on median and average filters. However, the fuzzy based median or average filters tend to smoothen the fine details causing poor edge preservation. Binaee et al. [18] developed a fuzzy filter based on local gradient of the image and used fuzzy inference to categorise the image regions and structural information. Weights were found based on a similarity window by non-local means filtering process. Nevertheless, the method is computationally intensive as it takes much iterations to locate the similarity window. Guo et al. [19] proposed a despeckling filter based on modified non local means algorithm. This method consists of two steps, first noise free pixel has been estimated using maximum likelihood estimator and a non-local means algorithm has been applied to restore details. The noise variance parameters in maximum likelihood estimator is directly related with exponential function in non-local means algorithm; hence optimisation of this parameter is difficult and this algorithm is time consuming. Damodaran et al. [20] developed an algorithm based on discrete topological derivative. This algorithm is able to reduce speckle noise and contrast of the image has been improved at the cost of more computational time. Tsakalakis et al. [21] developed a denoising filter based on novel multi-transducer architecture. Despeckling technique has been employed by combining frequency and spatial compounding along with despeckling super resolution algorithm. The main drawback is that image registration step is required as images are captured from different sensors with different frequencies.This paper presents a novel fuzzy based filter for speckle noise reduction based on Coefficient of Variation parameter derived from the noisy image. Using this parameter, the structural information of the images is characterised. This proposed method incorporates adaptiveness at two levels. In the first level, using fuzzy logic, image regions are classified based on Coefficient of Variation parameter and the system adaptively selects the best suitable filtering technique for the particular region of the image. By applying appropriate filters on the corrupted pixels, appreciable improvement in noise suppression and preservation of image structural details is achieved. At the second level, to distinguish between edges and noise the proposed method uses a weighted averaging filter. Using the structural similarity index for computing the tuning parameter the proposed technique adapts with the nature of image and amount of noise present in the image. Thus with two levels of adaptiveness using Coefficient of Variation and structural similarity, the proposed method has better edge preservation compared to existing methods. The performance of the proposed method is studied with natural images, Field II simulated images, real ultrasound images and compared with existing methods.The paper is organised as follows: Section 1 describes the related works, their limitations, and the objective of the paper. Section 2 discusses the fuzzy logic model for speckle noise reduction with Coefficient of Variation, design of the adaptive weighted averaging filter and the despeckling algorithm. Section 3 describes the experimental results and Section 4 summarises the conclusions of the study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
