@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Contributory inequality alters assessment of academic output gap between comparable countries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Reduced contributory inequality was positively associated with increased publication output.The elite segment of the publication gap between Denmark and Norway narrowed from 2012 to 2013.Metrics confounded by EqB (equalizing bias) purported that the elite segment of the publication gap was widening.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coauthor credit,Harmonic formula,Bibliometric bias,Publication metrics,Inequality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An elite segment of the academic output gap between Denmark and Norway was examined using harmonic estimates of publication credit for contributions to Science and Nature in 2012 and 2013. Denmark still leads but the gap narrowed in 2013 as Norway's credit increased 58%, while Denmark's credit increased only 5.4%, even though Norway had 36% fewer, and Denmark 40% more, coauthor contributions than in 2012. Concurrently, the credit produced by the least productive half of the contributions rose tenfold from 0.9% to 10.1% for Norway, but dropped from 7.2% to 5.7% for Denmark. Overall, contributory inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient, fell from 0.78 to 0.51 for Norway, but rose from 0.63 to 0.68 for Denmark. Neither gap narrowing nor the positive association between reduced contributory inequality and increased credit were detected by conventional metrics. Conventional metrics are confounded by equalizing bias (EqB) which favours small contributors at the expense of large contributors, and which carries an element of reverse meritocracy and systemic injustice into bibliometric performance assessment. EqB was corrected by using all relevant byline information from every coauthored publication in the source data. This approach demonstrates the feasibility of using EqB-corrected publication credit in gap assessment at the national level.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The main objective of this work is to use recent advances in bibliometric credit allocation to gain new insights into the academic output gap between two comparable countries, in this case Denmark and Norway. Previous studies invariably rated the academic output of Denmark above Norway (e.g. Glänzel, 2000; Research Council of Norway, 2014; Schneider, 2010; van Leeuwen, 2012), but all gap size estimates based on conventional bibliometric methods are inaccurate because they do not adequately account for the size of each country's contribution to internationally coauthored publications.Almost 200 countries contribute to the global production of academic publications and the output of many is changing rapidly (National Science Board, 2014). Everyone, therefore, wants to know how well they are doing in relation to others and their shared concern is to avoid being misguided by inaccurate information. Such concern over perceived academic output gaps between countries has fuelled research policy debate for nearly two centuries, and the concept of academic productivity as an input/output ratio has evolved in a context of international comparison (Godin, 2006, 2009; Nowotny, 2007). An early example is Charles Babbage's concern about the decline of science in England relative to Germany (Babbage, 1830; Foreigner, 1931); a concern quantified by Edward Frankland in 1871 (Devonshire, 1872, p. 371:5866) (cf. Braun, 1993; Cardwell, 1972; Nye, 1984), and echoed in the modern debate about the same topic 150 years later (Martin, 1994). On a broader scale, the dynamic nature of international science today is reflected in current trends suggesting that the academic pre-eminence of the US may be surpassed by China in the foreseeable future (Leydesdorff, 2012).The global growth in academic output has been accompanied by an unabating increase in international collaboration (Aksnes, Frølich, & Slipersæter, 2008; Leydesdorff & Wagner, 2008). More than a quarter of all publications in the world are produced by multi-national teams, and several smaller countries produce more than half of their research papers in collaboration with international partners (Royal Society UK, 2011). Collaboration has many benefits, is often encouraged by policy makers and funding agencies, and is considered essential for groundbreaking research where the required effort is beyond the capacity of a single nation (Bidault & Hildebrand, 2014; Sonnenwald, 2007). Participation in international top-level research is therefore regarded as an indication of national competitive ability and academic achievement.But in conventional measures of academic output, collaboration is a major source of inaccuracy. The routine approach is to inflate publication counts by issuing full publication credit to every country included in the list of author affiliations. The other conventional approach is to divide one unit of credit equally among a paper's coauthors, and then tally the fractions for each country. Such fractional publication counting corrects for inflationary bias, but not for the equalizing bias (EqB) which is the inevitable consequence whenever the coauthors of a paper have not contributed equally.EqB skews bibliometric assessments and accounts for a massive shift of credit from primary to secondary authors. As a result, biased equal credit scores produce distorted publication performance rankings that are fundamentally different from rankings obtained from estimates of actual coauthor credit (Hagen, 2014a). Furthermore, the powerful distortional effect of EqB is inevitably compounded in derived bibliometric indices and indicators. EqB may also provide an incentive for unethical behaviour, including unwarranted claims for honorary authorship or gift authorship.The key to more reliable publication counting is to ensure accurate accreditation of coauthors by including all relevant byline information. This bottom-up approach is facilitated by the harmonic formula, which provides equitable distribution of coauthor credit for scientific papers with a hierarchical byline structure (Hagen, 2008, 2013). It also accommodates additional byline information which, for instance, may indicate the equality of some or all coauthors, or the presence of a senior author. Recent studies of field specific publication patterns have used the harmonic formula to partially eliminate EqB (Fernandes, 2014; Walters & Wilder, 2015), but future studies must also include additional byline information about equality or seniority in an effort to completely eliminate EqB.Here, I use an evidence-based informetric approach to estimate the effect of international academic collaboration on measurements of publication output for two comparable nations, Denmark and Norway. First, I address the need for improved accuracy by portraying how the combination of increased output and increased international collaboration over the past four decades has generated a widening zone of overlap between the upper and lower boundaries of the two countries’ total publication output. Second, I provide a close-up of the academic output gap between Denmark and Norway, by analyzing in detail their scientific contributions to the two top-tier journals Science and Nature for the years 2012 and 2013. Third, I quantify the inequality profile of each country's contributions, and provide new information about the relationship between contributory inequality and cumulative top-level output. And finally, I conclude by demonstrating how EqB altered the perceived direction of annual change in the top-level academic output gap.The use of publication counts as a quantitative base for research policy was pioneered by Frankland's testimony to the British Royal Commission in 1871, when he used publication counts for the year 1866 to provide a quantitative assessment of the alledged academic performance gap which showed Britain lagging behind Germany (Cardwell, 1972; Devonshire, 1872, p. 371:5866). At the time coauthorship was not a confounding issue but inaccuracy due to international collaboration had already entered the picture. It was Frankland who pointed out that the count for Britain underestimated the gap because it included publications from German scientists residing in Britain who had received their training in Germany.Inflated publication counting was initiated in 1917, when S.I. Franz (Franz, 1917, p. 202, footnote 1) decided to assign full value publication credit to both individuals of a joint publication (cf. Godin, 2006). This approach provided a strong incentive for joint authorship which expanded seamlessly to multiple authorship. Inflated counting has dominated quantitative research output analysis ever since.But inflated publication counting is confounded by two separate sources of bias. Inflationary bias, generated by issuing one full unit of credit repeatedly to each coauthor or participating country; and equalizing bias (EqB), generated by ignoring differential contribution (Hagen, 2008).Nearly 50 years ago, as multiple authorship became increasingly common, Price and Beaver (1966) introduced the practice of fractional counting in an influential paper which set a longstanding, unintended precedent for using fractional counting in conjunction and comparison with inflated counting (e.g. Gauffriau, Larsen, Maye, Roulin-Perriard, & von Ins, 2008; Martin, 1994; Nature Index, 2014a).We define fractional productivity as the score of an author when he is assigned 1/n of a point for the occurrence of his name among n authors on the by-line of a single paper. Thus a man with one paper of which he is the sole author, a second of which he is one of two authors, and a third in which he is one of five, will have a fractional productivity of 1.7 and a full productivity of three papers. (Price & Beaver, 1966, p. 1014–1015)Despite some support (Lindsey, 1980; Narin, 1976), fractional counting was not an immediate success, and 15 years later Price lamented that:… publications or citations must be divided among all the authors listed on the byline, and in the absence of evidence to the contrary it must be divided equally among them. Thus each author of a three-author paper gets credit for one-third of a publication and one-third of the ensuing citations. … Any time you take a collaborator you must give up a share of the outcome, and you diminish your own share. That is as it should be; to do otherwise is a very cheap way of increasing apparent productivity. (Price, 1981)Lately fractional counting has found practical application as a proxy measure for coauthor credit in metrics-based national research funding systems in Norway, Denmark, and elsewhere (Hicks, 2012). This is cause for concern as less than 4% of all coauthored research papers intentionally choose to indicate equal contribution by listing the coauthors’ names in alphabetical order (Waltman, 2012). The implication is that over 96% of all contemporary papers are susceptible to confounding by equalizing bias (EqB) when publication credit is counted fractionally.The immediate effect of EqB is to overestimate the credit of small contributions and underestimate the credit of large contributions (Hagen, 2008). EqB also precludes assessment of the effect of contributory inequality on cumulative publication output. Fractional counting may therefore misrepresent the publication performance of comparable nations by exaggerating or concealing the gap between them. Either way, there is a risk that inaccurate estimates of publication performance may inspire misguided and counterproductive initiatives with unanticipated undesirable outcomes for the scientific community.The harmonic formula, although not named as such at the time, was first proposed by Hodge and Greenberg (1981) as a response to Price's (1981) plea for division of publication credit among all the authors listed on the byline. Unfortunately forgotten until 2008 (Hagen, 2008, 2009), it has since been validated against empirical data and has outperformed other credit allocation schemes from the bibliometric literature (Hagen, 2010, 2013).The harmonic formula owes its transparency to three simple ethical criteria (Hagen, 2008, 2010):1.One publication credit is shared among all coauthorsThe first author gets the most credit, and in general the ith author receives more credit than the (ith+1)th authorThe greater the number of authors, the less credit per author.One recent study found that the harmonic formula explained nearly 97% of the variation in a composite empirical dataset composed of 3 independent sets of data from the scientific subfields of chemistry, medicine and psychology (Hagen, 2013); that is, a coefficient of determination R2=0.9676 was obtained for the linear regression between values predicted by the harmonic formula and the empirical data points. In contrast, fractional credit explained less than 40% of the variation, with EqB accounting for the roughly 60% discrepancy between the two figures. A follow-up theoretical analysis showed that the amount of EqB increases as the number of coauthors increases, and suggested that fractional credit scores are likely to be dominated by EqB when the number of coauthors exceeds 12 (Hagen, 2014b).In short, the harmonic formula makes it possible to assess the relative contribution of collaborators by providing accurate, parsimonious and verifiable quantification of hierarchical bylines. The prospect of improved accuracy has implications for applications currently afflicted by EqB, including assessment of the effect of international coauthorship on the publication gaps between nation states. It also makes it feasible to study previously unexplored aspects of publication data in unprecedented detail, for example, by documenting the relationship between contributory inequality and cumulative publication output.Proxy indicators, such as inflated and fractional counting, quantify publication credit according to a top down approach which allocates the same amount of credit to all coauthors irrespective of their actual contribution. The advantage is that automated credit allocation is unproblematic. But the disadvantage is that the credit of all coauthors who have not contributed equally is severely biased by EqB (Hagen, 2014a).In contrast, a bottom-up approach uses all relevant evidence in the source data to provide an accurate informetric estimate of actual publication credit for all coauthors. Credit, therefore, is not allocated equally unless there is evidence indicating equal contribution. When there is no evidence of equal contribution, credit must be allocated according to the available information. Such information usually consists of a hierarchical byline structure but may also include additional information indicating specific departures from the hierarchy, such as two or more equal coauthors, or the presence of a senior author. Allocation of hierarchical information is easily automated using the harmonic formula (e.g. Walters & Wilder, 2015).Advantages of the bottom-up approach include increased accuracy, transparency, reproducibility and credibility. However, a full implementation of automated bottom-up allocation is still hampered by non-standardised coding of relevant additional information, by the persistence of incomplete, inaccurate or ambiguous byline information, and by the ongoing evolution of larger and more complex author collaborations. To resolve these challenges completely will require a concerted multidisciplinary effort by all involved stakeholders. Meanwhile, the preferred remedy is to encourage authors to state their contributions more explicitly, by making every effort to respect the information they do provide.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper I have used data for articles and reviews in Science and Nature to document a recent narrowing of the top-level output gap between Denmark and Norway. Denmark still leads, but the gap narrowed between 2012 and 2013 because the publication credit of Norway rose by 58%, while the credit of Denmark rose by only 5.4%. The narrowing of the gap was detected by using harmonic estimates of actual contribution to remove inflationary bias and equalizing bias (EqB) from conventional publication counts. The narrowing was not detected when conventional inflated or fractional publication counts were used as proxies for publication credit. On the contrary, the conventional approach purported that the gap was widening. This result highlights the utility of increased accuracy in estimates of publication credit in national comparisons.For Norway, the narrowing of the output gap was accompanied by a large drop in contributory inequality, and a 36% reduction in the number of coauthor contributions. In other words, fewer contributors who produced more publication credit. In comparison, for Denmark the narrowing coincided with a slight increase in contributory inequality, and a 40% increase in the number of contributions, that is more contributors who produced less publication credit. These diverging patterns, in the number and inequality of the two countries’ contributions, provide a proximate explanation for the observed narrowing of the output gap by demonstrating that reduced contributory inequality was associated with increased publication output.The remarkable dynamics of these changes were obscured and distorted by equalizing bias (EqB) in the fractional estimates of publication output, and by a combination of EqB and inflationary bias when using conventional whole counts as a proxy for publication output. Specifically, the diverging patterns in the number and inequality of the two countries’ contributions, suggest that the conventional measures did not detect the narrowing of the gap because their inherent EqB overestimated the importance of the increasingly numerous small Danish contributions and underestimated the importance of the increased proportion of large Norwegian contributions.The recently launched Nature Index (2014b) includes a table of country outputs for Science and Nature, which uses inflated and fractional publication counts. These conventional metrics are not corrected for EqB, and may therefore misrepresent the gap between comparable countries with high levels of international collaboration. The results of this paper, however, indicate that improved accuracy is readily attainable by including all relevant information about the relative contribution of coauthors, and by using the harmonic formula to quantify hierarchical bylines.Equalizing bias is of special concern because it carries a large counterproductive element of reverse meritocracy and systemic injustice into bibliometric performance assessment by favouring small contributors at the expense of large contributors. EqB acts in an asymmetrical fashion which precludes top-down compensation for its distortional effects. To correct for EqB in national comparisons requires a bottom-up approach which incorporates relevant byline information from every internationally coauthored publication in the source data. Right now, this still manual task is sufficiently labour-intensive to preclude a full-scale analysis of the total productivity gap between Denmark and Norway. However, immediate implementation of automated harmonic credit allocation could correct for EqB, and facilitate unconstrained bibliometric gap analysis with unprecedented accuracy. In the meantime, the top-tier, close-up approach adopted here demonstrates the feasibility of using EqB-corrected publication credit in gap assessment at the national level.