@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reversing the byline hierarchy: The effect of equalizing bias on the accreditation of primary, secondary and senior authors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Equalizing bias (EqB) is the difference between equal and actual coauthor credit.EqB accounts for a massive shift of credit from primary to secondary authors.Equal credit scores grow increasingly biased as the number of coauthors increases.Credit lost by unrecognized senior authors becomes part of other coauthors’ EqB.EqB is universally unaccounted for in metrics relying on biased equal credit.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coauthor credit,Harmonic formula,Equalizing bias,Bibliometric counting,Senior authorship,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Equalizing bias (EqB) is a systematic inaccuracy which arises when authorship credit is divided equally among coauthors who have not contributed equally. As the number of coauthors increases, the diminishing amount of credit allocated to each additional coauthor is increasingly composed of equalizing bias such that when the total number of coauthors exceeds 12, the credit score of most coauthors is composed mostly of EqB. In general, EqB reverses the byline hierarchy and skews bibliometric assessments by underestimating the contribution of primary authors, i.e. those adversely affected by negative EqB, and overestimating the contribution of secondary authors, those benefitting from positive EqB. The positive and negative effects of EqB are balanced and sum to zero, but are not symmetrical. The lack of symmetry exacerbates the relative effects of EqB, and explains why primary authors are increasingly outnumbered by secondary authors as the number of coauthors increases. Specifically, for a paper with 50 coauthors, the benefit of positive EqB goes to 39 secondary authors while the burden of negative EqB befalls 11 primary authors. Relative to harmonic estimates of their actual contribution, the EqB of the 50 coauthors ranged from <−90% to >350%. Senior authorship, when it occurs, is conventionally indicated by a corresponding last author and recognized as being on a par with a first author. If senior authorship is not recognized, then the credit lost by an unrecognized senior author is distributed among the other coauthors as part of their EqB. The powerful distortional effect of EqB is compounded in bibliometric indices and performance rankings derived from biased equal credit. Equalizing bias must therefore be corrected at the source by ensuring accurate accreditation of all coauthors prior to the calculation of aggregate publication metrics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Coauthors of a scientific paper customarily arrange the byline in hierarchical order to indicate the relative importance of each author's contribution (Lake, 2010; Maciejovsky, Budescu, & Ariely, 2009; Riesenberg & Lundberg, 1990; Vinkler, 2000; Waltman, 2012; Wren et al., 2007). Nevertheless, the standard bibliometric praxis is to ignore the byline hierarchy and instead allocate equal credit to all coauthors irrespective of their actual contribution; either by allocating one full credit to each coauthor, or by dividing one credit equally among all coauthors (e.g. Pendlebury, 2007). Either way, the ensuing information deficit introduces equalizing bias (EqB) which distorts authorship accreditation by underestimating the contribution of primary authors and overestimating the contribution of secondary authors (Hagen, 2008).The magnitude of such EqB distortion is potentially large. EqB accounted for 57% of the total variation in an analysis of empirical coauthor credit attribution (Hagen, 2013), confounded the ranking of h-index scores (Hagen, 2008), and was detrimental to accuracy when ranking the publication output of individual researchers (Hagen, 2014).Here, I quantify the effect of EqB by subtracting harmonic estimates of actual coauthor credit from fractional credit scores. First, I show how fractional counting generates a reverse byline hierarchy of misallocated authorship credit, where the total amount of negative EqB affecting the primary authors is balanced by the total amount of positive EqB benefitting the secondary authors. I also delineate the transition from secondary to primary author status, and show how the ratio of secondary authors per primary author increases as the number of coauthors increases. Furthermore, I use relative EqB scores to show that each coauthor's fractional credit score becomes increasingly biased as the number of coauthors increases. Finally, I juxtapose authorship credit scores and EqB scores for papers with and without a senior author, and summarize the quantitative consequences for alternative bibliometric interpretations of senior authorship.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
