@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Information impact on transportation systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the effect of real time traffic information on transportation systems.We analysed the network performance when varying the amount of informed drivers.We analysed the network performance when varying the length of the alternative route.In some cases the massive use of traffic information is detrimental for the system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information dissemination,Information control,Modelling and simulation,Agent based simulation,Transportation systems,Human complex systems,Network performance,Traffic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With a broader distribution of personal smart devices and with an increasing availability of advanced navigation tools, more drivers can have access to real time information regarding the traffic situation. Our research focuses on determining how using the real time information about a transportation system could influence the system itself. We developed an agent based model to simulate the effect of drivers using real time information to avoid traffic congestion. Experiments reveal that the system's performance is influenced by the number of participants that have access to real time information. We also discover that, in certain circumstances, the system performance when all participants have information is no different from, and perhaps even worse than, when no participant has access to information.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With a larger distribution of personal smart devices and navigation tools, there are several novel sources for real time data collection and better means for information transmission. At the same time, Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), applying information processing, communication, sensing, and control technologies [21], have become more advanced and play a key role in improving transportation [20]. In this context, large amounts of data are processed and presented to the participant vehicles through their navigation systems. Surveys show that, in most of the cases, drivers trust real time information and follow the navigation recommendations [6]. However, the consequences of providing real time information to drivers, who are themselves participants in the data collection process, has not been investigated in much detail.Information dissemination with feedback loops is a fundamental topic in all human complex systems where people make decisions by accessing real time information. Knowing details of future problems modifies people's behaviours and this possibly affects the entire system. This effect has been studied in several areas of human activity. For example, in financial markets, has been analysed the effect of private and public information. In [8], the market dynamics is explained by phases: boom, euphoria (with informational cascades), trigger and panic (with information avalanches). Another example is analysing the effect of transaction costs on the overall market efficiency when aggregating private information [3].In this paper, we investigate the effect of information dissemination on transportation systems. The annual Traffic Report released in 2014 by the navigation device maker, TomTom, after analysing real world traffic data, reveals that the travel time is increased by 50% because of the common traffic shortcuts drivers take to avoid congestion [16]. The effect can be empirically observed, for instance, during daily commutes, when multiple drivers make the simultaneous decision to take the same alternative route, thus simply moving the congestion to the new road.Unlike in existing research, [14,15,1,11] discussed in more detail in Section 2, we are particularly interested in investigating how the traffic is affected by the amount of drivers that receive information about the traffic situation. Intuitively, the more drivers are informed, the better the traffic situation should be. We investigate and analyse the conditions under which, drivers having knowledge of the current situation of the traffic system is detrimental to the system as a whole. For this, we built an experimental set-up based on a microscopic traffic simulation. The transportation system and the information dissemination in it is modelled and analysed in this paper through an agent based simulation.This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces related work done on the effect of information dissemination over transportation networks. Section 3 and Section 4 describe the computational model, experimental set-up and the numerical results. Section 5 presents the conclusion and the significance of our study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We present our experimental results involving information dissemination in transportation systems. These results show that informing drivers about congestion in the transportation system will affect the overall performance. In some cases, if most of the traffic participants receive information (for example trough navigation tools and applications on personal smart devices) traffic can become worse, contrary to common expectation. There are cases when giving more information does not make a difference on the network performance and cases when it gets improved.It is important to note that our model of disseminating information consists in selecting specific numbers of traffic participants to receive details about congestion. We calculated the network performance when varying the amount of informed agents and the length of the alternative road selected to avoid the congested area. For this study, it was assumed that all agents are rational and decide to use the information about congestion to improve their travelling time.Future work will aim to extend the existing models of information dissemination by introducing among others time delays and information errors. Also, we plan to use more realistic city networks and human behaviour models in order to determine how agents decide to use the real time congestion awareness information.The findings of our study are relevant in the context of information based solutions for ITS [21], involving information processing, advanced communication and sensing. There are significant amounts of money that governments and private industry invest in developing such systems. ITS are expected to play even a more important role in the future [20]. It is useful to anticipate the impact that the massive use of real time information can have on traffic.Particularly, understating the effect of real time information disseminated in traffic can help solving problems related to congestion. A practical solution to improve congestion should take into consideration not only the travel time but also reliability, predictability, recurrence,peak-spreading or the geographic extent [13]. This will be analysed in future work.For planning efficient future ITS, it is necessary to consider the negative and the positive effects that real time congestion awareness information can have. Our study illustrates that the real time information has a great impact on a transportation system. Understating what the effect is and why it occurs can help decreasing the likelihood of congestion, therefore it is worth exploring further details.