@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bounce regime of droplet collisions: A molecular dynamics study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Reproduced the binary collision bounce regime in nanoscale by MD simulation.Extended the gas film theory for bounce regime.Considered impact velocity and ambient pressure as two key parameters affecting the appearance of the bounce regime.Discussed the differences between nanoscale and microscale droplet dynamics.Completed the regime map of nanoscale binary droplet collisions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiphase flow,Binary droplet collision,Nanoscale,Molecular dynamics,Droplet bounce,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Droplet collisions have complex dynamics, which can lead to many different regimes of outcomes. The head-on collision and bounce back regime has been observed in previous experiments but numerical simulations using macro- or mesoscale approaches have difficulties reproducing the phenomena, because the interfacial regions are not well resolved. Previous molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have not reproduced the bounce regime either but have reported the coalescence and/or shattering regimes. To scrutinize the dynamics and mechanisms of binary collisions especially the interfacial regions, head-on collision processes of two identical nano-droplets with various impact velocities both in vacuum and in an ambient of nitrogen gas are investigated by MD simulations. With the right combination of the impact velocity and ambient pressure, the head-on collision and bounce back phenomenon is successfully reproduced. The bounce phenomena are mainly attributed to the “cushion effect” of the in-between nitrogen molecules and evaporated water molecules from the two nano-droplets. The analysis has verified and also extended the current gas film theory for the bounce regime through including the effects of evaporated water molecules (vapour). Some similarities and some dissimilarities between nanoscale and macro-/meso-/microscale droplet collisions have been observed. The study provides unprecedented insight into the interfacial regions between two colliding droplets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Droplet collisions are encountered in both natural and industrial processes, such as, in the formation of clouds and rain drops [6], in the operation of nuclear reactors and in the process of spraying [5]. In recent decades, efforts have been made to unveil the fundamental mechanisms associated with coalescence and bounce of two identical droplets. Experimental studies have identified that under different atmospheric conditions most of head-on liquid-gas droplet collisions can be described using three distinct regimes: coalescence, bounce and reflexive separation [1,2,9,30]. Other studies using experimental and numerical methods such as the level set, volume of fluid, immersed boundary method, lattice Boltzmann method have already presented various phenomena of droplet collisions [4,7,14,17–19]. Even so, details of the collision process are difficult to obtain through experiments and continuum simulation methods, especially when the approaching droplets are within a distance comparable to the molecular mean free path. It should be noted too that the lattice Boltzmann method has been successful in reproducing all the collisions regimes except the head-on collision and bouncing regime [18]. Thus, computer simulations considering atomic effects become the only method to understand droplet dynamics when the separation distance comes within nanoscale. Yet up to the present time, the published simulations have only reproduced coalescence and shattering regimes [8,11,12,16,22,26,31] but not the bounce regime. Such an absence is intriguing as it suggests the possibility that the bounce regime may not exist in nano-droplet collisions while it was observed in micro- and macro-droplet collisions. Our study has, however, successfully observed the bounce behaviours with two nanoscale water droplets, thereby completing the regime map of the nano-droplet collision phenomena.In this research, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of droplet collisions in vacuum and in ambient gas have been conducted to reproduce the bounce behaviours of nano-droplets. Our research will demonstrate that bounce frequently occurs in nanoscale droplet collisions. Such occurrences are influenced by parameters including pressure and impact velocity. Moreover, a “cushion effect” will be proposed to reveal the impact of the ambient gas and vaporized water molecules on droplet behaviours during the bounce process.Fig. 1illustrates the initial setup of the simulation system with two nano-droplets submerged in the nitrogen gas.The dimension of the simulation box is 800Å×400Å×400Å, and the origin of the coordinates was set at the left bottom back corner. Two identical droplets with diameters of 10nm were placed along the x direction at the central part of the box with x coordinates being 500Å and 1500Å, respectively. The TIP3P water model [10,15] was chosen for water molecules because it offers a sufficient description of intermolecular forces in water in MD simulations. Nitrogen molecules were treated as Lennard-Jones particles. Intermolecular interactions between water and nitrogen molecules included both Coulombic and Lennard-Jones (L-J) 12–6 potentials [3,24,27], as shown in Eq. (1).(1)Uij=qiqjrij+4εij[(σijrij)12−(σijrij)6]where q represents the charge of particle, and r is the distance between any two atoms, and σ and ε represent the zero energy separation distance and the minimum energy, respectively. The subscripts i and j are the atom indexes. The Lorentz-Bertthelot mixing rule was employed for calculating the potential parameters between water and nitrogen molecules. L-J parameters used in this research are summarized in Table 1. A cut-off distance of 16Å was adopted. Periodic boundary conditions were applied to all three directions. All the simulations were carried out using the LAMMPS platform [21].Equilibrium simulations of droplets and ambient gases were conducted before the collision simulations. For droplets, the equilibrium was undertaken in vacuum at the temperature of 300K, and the canonical ensemble (NVT) was employed. After equilibrium of 2ns, a single droplet can be generated by removing all the vaporized molecules around. The second droplet was obtained by duplicating the first one. Meanwhile, ambient nitrogen molecules were also equilibrated at 300K in a parallel equilibrium simulation.After equilibrium, the two droplets were first placed in the required positions, and then equilibrated ambient gas molecules were added to fill the remaining space of the box. A further simulation was conducted for 2ns to equilibrate the final system consisting of both droplets in ambient gas molecules. In the formal collision simulations, each droplet was assigned the same impact velocity along the x direction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
MD simulations of droplet collisions in vacuum and in ambient gas have been conducted to scrutinize the dynamics and mechanisms of binary collisions at molecular scale. The head-on collision and bounce phenomenon is successfully reproduced for the first time. The bounce phenomena are mainly attributed to the “cushion effect” of the in-between nitrogen molecules and evaporating water molecules from the two nano-droplets. The study has verified and extended the current gas film theory for the bounce regime by including the additional effects of evaporating water droplets. Moreover, the MD results show that low impact velocity and high ambient pressure promote bouncing. The behaviours of nanoscale droplet collisions have both similarities and dissimilarities to macro-/micro-droplet collisions. Finally, a set of regimes for nano-scale droplet collisions has been identified, but further details such as regime boundaries require extensive further investigations, which will be pursued in our future studies.