@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Internet-based CBT for social phobia and panic disorder in a specialised anxiety clinic in routine care: Results of a pilot randomised controlled trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Effectiveness of iCBT for anxiety was investigated in specialised care67 adult anxiety patients were randomised to either waiting-list or iCBTNo significant difference was found post treatment on symptomatic levels of anxietyA large and significant difference was found on self-reported quality of life

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet,Computer,Internet-based,Cognitive behavioural therapy,CBT,iCBT,cCBT,RCT,Randomised controlled trial,Anxiety,Social phobia,Panic disorder,Specialised care,Secondary care,Self-help,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ample studies have demonstrated that internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) for anxiety disorders is effective and acceptable in controlled settings. Studies assessing the clinical effectiveness of iCBT for anxiety disorders among routine care populations are, however, not as numerous. The purpose of this study was to assess the effectiveness of iCBT among anxiety patients, who were on a waiting list for intensive outpatient treatment, in a specialised routine care clinic.11Clinic for OCD and Anxiety disorders, Aarhus University Hospital, DK.A randomised controlled pilot trial was conducted. Recruited patients were on a waiting list and had a primary diagnosis of either social phobia or panic disorder. Participants were randomised into either receiving iCBT with minimal therapist contact (received access to the programme FearFighter® (FF) and received support from a clinician via telephone) or no treatment (stayed on the waiting list). The primary outcome was self-reported symptomatic change of anxiety on Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI). The secondary outcomes were comorbid depression measured on Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) and quality of life measured with the EuroQol one-item visual-analogue scale (EQ-vas). All results were analysed by intention-to-treat analyses using a mixed-effects approach. N=158 patients were assessed for eligibility of which N=67 met all eligibility inclusion criteria, signed informed consent forms, and were randomised. Post-treatment assessment was completed by N=47 (70%). In the intervention group, N=11 (31%) completed all modules of FF. No significant differences of change of symptomatic levels were found between the intervention and control group for anxiety (BAI: mean diff.=2.42; 95% CI −1.03 to 5.86; p=0.17; d=0.06) or for depression (BDI-II: mean diff. 1.87; 95% CI −2.25 to 6.00; p=0.37; d=0.02). A large and significant effect was found in self-reported quality of life in favour of the experimental group (EQ-vas: mean diff. −20.88; 95% CI −30.64 to −11.11; p<0.001; d=0.81).This study was not able to document statistically significant clinical effect of iCBT with minimal therapist contact compared to a waiting list control group in a specialised anxiety clinic in routine care. However, a large and significant effect was seen on self-reported quality of life. Although these results offer an interesting perspective on iCBT in specialised care, they should be interpreted with caution, due to the limitations of the study. A large scale fully powered RCT is recommended.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Panic disorder and social phobia are common, debilitating disorders characterised respectively by an excessive anxiety response when experiencing either normal bodily symptoms such as small palpitations or when confronted with social situations (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). A large epidemiological survey estimated a 12-month prevalence rate of 2.7% for adult panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia) and 6.8% for adult social phobia (Kessler et al., 2005). Onset is typically between the ages of 13–15 for social phobia and 24–40 for panic disorder. If untreated these disorders often become chronic (Bruce et al., 2005). They are associated with negative consequences such as impaired career trajectories, absenteeism from work, reduced work performance, impaired romantic relationships, impaired quality of life, elevated medical utilisation and high societal costs (Katon, 1996; Wittchen et al., 2000; Batelaan et al., 2007; Olatunji et al., 2007; Konnopka et al., 2009).There is now substantial evidence to support internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy with minimal support (iCBT) as being effective for panic disorder and social phobia compared to non-intervening (Spek et al., 2007; Barak et al., 2008; Andrews et al., 2010; Andersson et al., 2014) with large effect sizes (e.g. Carlbring et al., 2006; Berger et al., 2009).iCBT even seems to offer treatment results comparable to those of traditional face-to-face therapy. For example, in a randomised study by Hedman et al. (Hedman et al., 2011) no difference was found between iCBT and group face-to-face CBT for social phobia on the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (non-inferiority randomised design, where the lower-bound of the 95% CI of the mean difference fell within 10 LSASS points). Similarly, Kiropoulos et al. (Kiropoulos et al., 2008), found support for iCBT to be equally effective as face-to-face CBT for panic disorder in a randomised study (post-treatment assessment for Panic Disorder Severity Scale: iCBT (N=45): M=9.92 SD=5.88; CBT (N=35): M=9.24 SD=5.65; ANOVA analysis on group effect p=.88). And in a meta-analysis of studies comparing iCBT with face-to-face CBT for depression and anxiety disorders, Cuijpers et al. (Cuijpers et al., 2010) did not find support for iCBT to yield smaller effect sizes than traditional face-to-face CBT.However, most studies have been conducted under controlled conditions and have primarily included self-referred patients. To our knowledge, only a few studies had been conducted on patients in routine care settings. Cavanagh et al. (Cavanagh et al., 2006) conducted a naturalistic, open, non-controlled study of adult anxiety and/or depression using the programme Beating the Blues. N=219 was included of which, N=84 (38%) dropped out, and N=104 (47%) completed post-treatment outcome measures. A significant change was found using intention-to-treat analyses on the Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation-Outcome Measure (p<0.001; d=0.5) and on the Work and Social Adjustment scale (p<0.001; d=0.26). Similarly, in a specialised CBT clinic Learmonth et al. (Learmonth et al., 2008) conducted a naturalistic, open, non-controlled study on adult anxiety and/or depression using the programme Beating the Blues as well. N=555 participants were included, and almost three quarters (N=394≈71%) concluded all modules in the programme. A significant improvement was seen (p<0.001) on Beck Depression Inventory (d=0.72) and on Beck Anxiety Inventory (d=0.5) using intention-to-treat analyses. Even though these studies were uncontrolled, a positive effect was indicated for the use of iCBT in routine care.Since more research on this topic was needed and due to long waiting lists for anxiety treatment, it was decided to conduct a pilot RCT on iCBT for these disorders using a waiting list population in an outpatient clinic for anxiety disorders22Clinic for OCD and Anxiety disorders, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, DK.in a Danish specialised care setting. No studies had been conducted on iCBT in routine care in Denmark up to this point.The intervention chosen was the programme FearFighter® (FF). This online self-help programme is specifically designed for panic disorders and phobias and is completed over 9 steps. Two previous randomised controlled trials (RCT) had investigated the effectiveness of FF on adult populations with positive results being indicated. The first RCT was conducted by its original developer Isaac Marks et al. (Marks et al., 2004) on a population (N=93) of mainly self-referred patients who answered notices in general practitioner (GP) offices or self-help groups. FF with minimal guidance was compared to face-to-face therapy and relaxation in a three-arm trial in a 2:2:1 ratio. On the Fear Questionnaire Global Phobia scale a significant difference was found between FF and relaxation (mean diff. −1.2; 95% CI −2.4 to −0.1; p<0.001) but no significant difference was found between FF and face-to-face therapy (mean diff. −0.2; 95% CI −1.2 to 0.8), which indicated FF to be effective. The second RCT was conducted by Schneider et al. (Schneider et al., 2005) on a population (N=68) referred to a self-help clinic. This RCT compared FF to a minimal form of iCBT referred to as ‘anxiety management’ in a 2:1 ratio. Both groups received minimal guidance in equal doses. In both groups a significant improvement was seen (FF: d=0.5–5.1; MA: d=0.5–5.1; p<0.01), but no significant between-group effect was seen (p>0.3). There was, however, a tendency in favour of FF compared to anxiety management after 14weeks. Given the relatively small sample size (N=68), the active control condition, and the significant within group results in both groups, the authors conclude that this might also indicate FF to be an effective treatment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
