@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Current research and trends in the use of smartphone applications for mood disorders

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There is a small but informative literature on smartphone applications for major depressive and bipolar disorders.Studies of smartphone application for major depressive disorder focus on active data while bipolar disorder on passive data.Numerous opportunities for further research exist, especially with physiological data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Smartphones,Psychiatry,Depression,Bipolar disorder,Applications,Apps,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundSmartphone applications for mental illnesses offer great potential, although the actual research base is still limited. Major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder are both common psychiatric illness for which smartphone application research has greatly expanded in the last two years. We review the literature on smartphone applications for major depressive and bipolar disoders in order to better understand the evidence base for their use, current research opportunities, and future clinical trends.MethodsWe conducted an English language review of the literature, on November 1st 2014, for smartphone applications for major depressive and bipolar disorders. Inclusion criteria included studies featuring modern smartphones running native applications with outcome data related to major depressive or bipolar disorders. Studies were organized by use of active or passive data collection and focus on diagnostic or therapeutic interventions.ResultsOur search identified 1065 studies. Ten studies on major depressive disorder and 4 on bipolar disorder were included. Nine out of 10 studies on depression related smartphone applications featured active data collection and all 4 studies on bipolar disorder featured passive data collection. Depression studies included both diagnostic and therapeutic smartphone applications, while bipolar disorder studies featured only diagnostics. No studies addressed physiological data.ConclusionsWhile the research base for smartphone applications is limited, it is still informative. Numerous opportunities for further research exist, especially in the use of passive data for, major depressive disorder, validating passive data to detect mania in bipolar disorder, and exploring the use of physiological data. As interest in smartphones for psychiatry and mental health continues to expand, it is important that the research base expands to fill these gaps and provide clinically useful results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mood disorders remain a common but disabling condition, with a 9.5% 12-month prevalence among the U.S. adult population (Kessler et al., 2005). Two major mood disorders include major depressive disorder with a 6.9% prevalence (National Institute of Mental Health) and bipolar disorder with a 2.9% prevalence (National Institute of Mental Health). Despite the prevalence of mood disorders, only 51% of those suffering from major depressive disorder, and 49 % of those with bipolar disorder, are receiving any treatment, and of those, only 21% and 19% are receiving minimally adequate care respectively (National Institute of Mental Health; González et al., 2010). In light of both this high prevalence and unmet need, there has been recent interest in the utility of new tools, such as smartphone apps, for patients with mood disorders. A similar situation exists for nearly every psychiatric condition, with mobile mental health offered as a means to increase access to care, reduce stigma, improve diagnosis, and expand treatment modalities. Although much has been written about this potential, there is currently a sparse evidence base supporting mobile mental health's use (Powell et al., 2014). While the literature base on mobile mental health for mood disorders is small, there is value in understanding the current efforts and future trends. In this paper, we provide a review of smartphone-based app research applied towards major depressive and bipolar disorders, offer a framework for clinicians and researchers alike to classify and understand such research, and explore future trends.While mobile mental health is a broad and evolving field, smartphones stand out as a novel tool. Integrating the abilities of a phone, computer, journal, Internet connection, survey platform, and a host of sophisticated sensors, smartphones have an array features that can be applied towards mental health (Glenn and Monteith, 2014). Patients within the mental health system increasingly own smartphones and are interested in using their smartphones to monitor their health (Torous et al., 2014a,b). In only a few years, thousands of commercially available health related applications have emerged (Powell et al., 2014) and many of these are targeted towards mental health (Chan et al., 2014). While several recent content analyses of commercially available mental health applications suggest that few have been formally evaluated (Savic et al., 2013), this has not deterred patients, and a recent study in a primary care population noted that 57.2% of patients have downloaded a health-related app to their smartphone (Carras et al., 2014). Thus, between its proposed potential and current commercial applications, the reality of mobile mental health cannot be ignored.Given the evolving and dynamic nature of mobile mental health, it can often be difficult to draw firm boundaries and definitions of technologies such as apps. Responsive webpages can load on smartphones and mimic apps only when an Internet connection is available, some apps only work in the context of larger sensor network-based interventions (e.g. a fitness tracker sending activity level to a smartphone app), and many apps discussed in the research literature are not actually commercially available. Acknowledging the inherent complexity in reviewing the literature in this rapidly progressing field of mobile mental health, we define a smartphone app as a program downloadable and saved to a smartphone that runs with or without Internet availability and utilizes the graphic and computing capabilities of the smartphone.Understanding the mobile mental health literature can appear daunting, given the complexity of mental illness, diverse applications of new smartphone technology, lack of standardized measurements and outcomes, and finally pilot nature of much of the work. However, through understanding some basic concepts about this research, a useful framework to contextualize mobile mental health emerges. These smartphone apps can be broadly broken down into those that are active and passive. Active apps require direct participation from the patient, such as completing mood logs or recording subjective experiences. Passive apps do not require active participation of the patient, and can autonomously gather data through a smartphone's GPS, accelerometer, or other sensors. In addition, mobile mental health apps can be separated into two further distinct categories, those that mainly serve a diagnostic role by monitoring or recording symptoms versus those offering interventions such as mobile therapy or health reminders. As is shown in Table 1, a two by two matrix with mobile mental health apps that are active versus passive and diagnostic versus interventional on each axis provides a useful framework to organize and understand the current research.Using this framework, we review the published outcomes literature on app research for major depressive and bipolar disorders with the objective of providing insight into the current state and future directions of smartphone based research for mood disorders. We hypothesize that while much of the evidence will be preliminary in nature, utilizing this framework can help elucidate current research efforts and suggest emerging trends. Understanding the current research base can also help clinicians understand what is more evidence-based versus more speculative in the use of smartphone apps for mood disorders.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
