@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D reconstruction of marble shipwreck cargoes based on underwater multi-image photogrammetry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present the survey and representation of two Roman shipwrecks.Integrated surveying techniques for documentation of underwater sites are described.Accurate 3D models open to new analyses, reconstructions and virtual exploration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cultural heritage,Maritime archaeology,Underwater survey,Multi-image photogrammetry,3D modelling,GPS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Acquisition and processing of point clouds, allowing the high dimensional accuracy that is an essential prerequisite for good documentation, are widely used today for cultural heritage surveys. In recent years, manual and direct surveys in archaeological survey campaigns have been replaced by digital image processing and laser-scanning. Multi-image photogrammetry has proven to be valuable for underwater archaeology. A topographical survey is always necessary to guarantee dimensional accuracy, and is necessary for geo-referencing all the finds in the same reference system. The need for low costs and rapid solutions, combined with the necessity of producing three-dimensional surveys with the same accuracy as classical terrestrial surveying, led the researchers to test and apply image-based techniques. Ca' Foscari and IUAV University of Venice are conducting research into integrated techniques for the accurate documentation of underwater surveys. Survey design, image acquisition, topographical measurements and data processing of two Roman shipwrecks in southern Sicily are presented in this paper. Photogrammetric and topographical surveys were organized using two distinct methods, due to the different characteristics of the cargoes of huge marble blocks, their depth and their distribution on the seabed. The results of the survey are two 3D polygonal-textured models of the sites, which can be easily used for various analyses and trial reconstructions, opening new possibilities for producing documentation for both specialists and the wider public. Furthermore, 3D models are the geometrical basis for making 2D orthophotos and cross-sections. The paper illustrates all the phases of the survey's design, acquisition and preparation, and the data processing to obtain final 2D and 3D representations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the 1960–70's archaeologists have adapted the aerial surveying method to underwater conditions, using photogrammetry with the first stereo-pair cameras to document underwater sites (Bass, 1966; Hohle, 1971; Leatherdale and Turner, 1991; Capra, 1992). These cameras offered high accuracy in recording, measuring and interpreting photographic images, but imposed some operating constraints, such as parallel optical axes required for stereo-vision conditions. Another disadvantage was the high degree of technical knowledge required to produce relatively few measurements.The necessity of producing accurate detailed three-dimensional mapping, a product of stereo-photogrammetry, combined with the necessity of reducing underwater work time for hyperbaric reasons, has driven researchers to look for a fast documentation technique. At the same time, this technique had to be low-cost and accessible, considering the limited budgets of the discipline. Image-based technique using digital photogrammetry is now recognized as a powerful and accessible tool for non-destructive archaeology all around the world, and also for underwater archaeological sites (Green et al., 2002; Canciani et al., 2003; Bass, 2006; Green, 2004; Drap et al., 2007, 2013).McCarthy and Benjamin (2014) present research using standard cameras and automated processing data with special software employed to capture 3D models of underwater archaeological features. Furthermore, the possibility of checking the results in the field is certainly one of the main advantages.In recent years, Ca' Foscari University and University IUAV of Venice have been conducting research into the application of integrated techniques to support underwater measurement documentation. Recently published papers, such as Menna et al. (2011), Skarlatos et al. (2012), Eric et al. (2013), Henderson et al. (2013) and Demesticha et al. (2014), show how multi-image photogrammetry is now an effective technique for mapping and retrieving the shape and geometry of completely submerged objects. Underwater photogrammetry has thus been transformed from a highly technical and costly process to a much more powerful and accessible tool (McCarthy and Benjamin, 2014).The production of a precise 3D model offers many opportunities from both measurement and recording points of view, because it represents a realistic model. It is possible to verify directly many kinds of data: measurements, shapes, colours, locations, etc., without the necessity of returning to the site.This paper describes the method employed in two underwater sites in 2014, with image acquisition, topographical measurement and data processing to produce 2D drawings and 3D models of the shipwreck cargoes.The research on the photogrammetric technique began some years ago in Crotone, southern Italy, with an experiment. Using some images not intended for a final 3D representation, but only for a simple photomosaic, we evaluated the perspectives of research of a 3D representation model from point clouds (Fig. 1).The department of Studi Umanistici of Ca’ Foscari University (headed by Carlo Beltrame) and the Circe Laboratory of Photogrammetry of IUAV University of Architecture of Venice (headed by Francesco Guerra), in collaboration with the Soprintendenza del Mare of the Regione Sicilia, decided to document two shipwrecks of cargoes of marble blocks dated to the Roman period by employing software that used several cameras and sensors to obtain dense point clouds or 3D models.Archaeometric analysis by Lorenzo Lazzarini (LAMA, University IUAV of Venice) of a few samples preliminarily identified proconnesion marble from the Sea of Marmara.The archaeological sites differ in the distribution of the cargo on the seabed and the depth, but the integrated survey method of these shipwrecks is the same and comprises the following stages:1.cleaning the subject from seaweed and partially from concretions;manual measurements of the dimensions of the blocks and detailed photographs of the archaeological sites;laying ground control points (CGP) on the upper surfaces of the marble blocks and a topographical survey of the CGP, with trilateration (Direct Survey Method) and GPS RTK measurements;image acquisition for multi-image digital photogrammetry;3D modelling and hypothetical reconstruction.In 1958 fishermen discovered marble blocks on the seabed near Marzamemi (Siracusa), southeastern Sicily. The following year, Kapitaen (1961), P.N. of the Gargallo Marzamemi I shipwreck, documented the shipwreck with a preliminary survey and some photographs, dating the site to the 3rd century AD, based on the study of two types of amphora found on site.The site included 15 marble blocks scattered on the seabed; but actually the presence of Posidonia oceanica hid two of the more distant blocks. The cargo was semi-finished, irregular and degraded columns and squared blocks.The principal cluster of 9 items comprised (Figs. 2 and 3):1.3 large columns, with a maximum length of 595cm and a diameter of 138cm;3 large squared blocks, the largest measuring about 4m3;1 large irregular block with a maximum length of 343cm;3 small parallelepiped blocks.The other four blocks are away from the main cluster:1.15m to the south is the largest column of the site (and also the largest column found underwater in the Mediterranean), measuring 640×185cm2, and weighing 49tons;15m to the south-west are two overlapping medium-sized blocks;32m to the west is another column.The total tonnage, calculated on a specific gravity of 2.68g/cm3, is 164tons, with a total volume of 61m³.The second shipwreck, found near Granitola (Mazara del Vallo-Trapani) in south-western Sicily and dated to the 3rd century AD, was documented by a preliminary survey in 1976 by Purpura (1977), and then by Poseidon S.p.A. with a 2D plan.The shipwreck lies at 3m depth, and is only 200m off shore; it is represented by a homogeneous cargo found as it was originally stowed in parallel lines: 63 squared marble blocks (Fig. 4) and two (or perhaps three) podia (Fig. 5).The squared marble blocks are semi-finished, corroded and concreted.Some blocks are broken, but their coherent positions make it possible to make a virtual reassembly of the pieces.The lengths of the blocks range from 60 to 330cm. The total weight, calculated approximately from the maximum dimensions of the visible parts of the blocks, is about 150 tons. This will be checked after the excavation of the whole site, during which the parts of the blocks now hidden by sand and seaweed will be totally exposed and surveyed.In recent years, image-based surveying and 3D modelling can offer results comparable to those of laser-scanning (range-based survey) for many terrestrial and aerial applications, thanks to significant progress in hardware and innovative image-matching algorithms, as described by Remondino et al. (2104).Nowadays, in the field of cultural heritage documentation and recording, photogrammetry is considered a competitive technology. Image-based measurement tools allow obtaining realistic 3D models, which can be used in several applications, with a particular interest from the archaeological point of view.Many software and hardware solutions have been proposed in order to reduce the costs of instruments (i.e. low-cost standard digital cameras), acquisition times and processing without requiring trained personnel. The image-based techniques, using algorithms derived from Computer Vision, such as the well-known Structure from Motion and Dense Multi-View 3D Reconstruction (Green, 2004; Remondino et al., 2012), can perform the whole process automatically, reducing time both of image orientation and 3D reconstruction (Balletti et al., 2015b).Researchers used these instruments widely for 3D reconstructions of monuments, the rigorous modelling of land, cities, archaeological sites and underwater finds. The complexity of the models created stems from the large amount of data acquired as images, and from the intricate shape of the subject.Agisoft’s Photoscan software aligns all the images into a single wide photogrammetric block. The system can provide precise measurements, but its accuracy is always related to the camera calibration.Capra et al. (2015), Agrafiotis et al. (2105) and Troisi et al. (2015) showed that camera calibration has to be carried out in situ, due to the variable chemical and physical properties of water, such as salinity, temperature and density. Various approaches can be used to calibrate a system, either as a series of components or as a whole; and may include the refractive effects of the air–glass–water interfaces, either explicitly or implicitly. In our case studies, the shallowness of the sites allowed a preliminary calculation of the camera's intrinsic parameters, with a simulation of the dive in a swimming pool, using sets of photos of two checkerboards placed on the bottom. The estimated camera parameters (horizontal and vertical focal lengths, the coordinates of the principal point, the radial and tangential lens distortions in Brown's model and the skew coefficient), were calculated entirely by the AgiSoft Lens, and used later as initial parameters in the Photoscan alignment process to improve the system convergence.The effect of refraction (depending on a number of parameters, such as depth, temperature and salinity) and the presence of several media (water, air and glass), can cause unstable modelling effects, so the intrinsic parameters of a submerged camera change significantly in comparison to the primary values.External factors, such as the variability of the light conditions, the turbidity of the water and the loss of colour with the increase of depth, can alter the legible texture information at any particular point on an artefact, creating problems in producing the 3D survey.For these reasons, the photographer has to acquire all the images in the same dive, and during the acquisition phase of the images has to establish white balance and colour correction. Moreover, the water affects the image: the focal length is longer and the field of view is narrower, thus a smaller area will be covered by a photograph in water than in air. The turbidity of the water drastically reduces the overall image contrast, and hence the accuracy in image point marking. In our case studies, clear and shallow water, good light conditions and a high-quality white balance allowed a good chromatic result. For the photographs, we used a digital Nikon D 700 camera with a 20mm lens, enclosed in an underwater housing with a hemispherical dome. Resolution of the photographs was high-quality: 4256×2832 pixels, at 1600 ISO. Depending on the sets of images, the lens aperture varied from f6.3 to f13, and the shutter speed from 1/250 to 1/640s.The two Sicilian underwater sites were documented with a series of photogrammetric strips. For Drap (2012), in order to make spatial models, regular strips of images photographed perpendicular to the face of the blocks had to guarantee a complete coverage of the archaeological site with a suitable overlap, i.e. 60% between photos and 20% between the strips.The photographic sets of the two shipwrecks are different, due to their differing morphology:1.The dispersion of the 14 elements of Marzamemi on the seabed gave the possibility to view them from all sides. To record the vertical details of the block we made oblique photographs at 45° and almost 90°, in addition to perpendicular photographs in the E–W direction.The 65 blocks of Cape Granitola are close together and cover a wide area, therefore a good system of recording all the vertical sides of the blocks was based on two directional series of perpendicular photos, to N–S and to E–W. We also made oblique photos at 45°, but after computer processing these photos were removed, since the blue colour of the water column above the blocks created a blue point cloud on the surfaces of the blocks. However, in this situation, perpendicular photographs with a good overlap were enough to create the 3D model.Multi-image photogrammetry must be supported by a topographical survey to acquire ground control points (GCP); to roto-translate and geo-reference the model in a reference system, and to attain accuracy suitable for the application.The wreck cargoes present differences in quantities, layout and depths of the marble blocks, requiring two different solutions for the survey of the GCP.The scattered distribution of the blocks of Marzamemi I implied a subdivision of the photogrammetric survey into four different clusters, which were added in the same reference system by trilateration at a later stage.A 3D topographical network using rigorous least squares techniques, following the DSM (Direct Survey Method) technique designed by Rule (1989), was applied for the trilateration of the numbered markers, placed on the upper side of some of the blocks (Fig. 6). The data were processed with Site Surveyor software to create the x, y, z coordinates of the markers (Fig. 7).The depth of the Cape Granitola shipwreck is about 3m, giving the possibility of testing a different kind of topographical survey. The markers applied on the blocks were measured by GPS RTK, the master station was positioned on an IGM trigonometric point, and the antenna was mounted on a 4m pole (Figs. 8 and 9).Each marker was surveyed by repeated measurements. The inability to stay absolutely still in the water caused movements of the pole, which are to be considered random; consequently, the position of the surveyed point can also be random, and the barycentre of the acquired points cloud can be thought as the point lying on the vertical of the target. This statement is confirmed by test runs carried out on land with the antenna on a 4m pole like those used in Granitola (Fig. 10).The GCP coordinates were inserted into Photoscan, corresponding to the markers, and were employed both to roto-translate the model into the correct position, and to check the position of the marker, in order to evaluate the final accuracy of the photogrammetric model. On Marzamemi I, the mean error in the coordinates of the GCP was 0.053m, which is tolerably low considering that the linear measurements were taken with a measuring tape on distances varying from 4.30m to 35.45m (Table 1).On the Cape Granitola shipwreck the accuracy of the model was calculated comparing the real dimensions of the marble blocks and the measurements from Photoscan software (Table 2,Fig. 11).In recent years, 3D modelling and documentation have been employed for a new kind of representation of underwater sites. At the basis of the reconstruction is the photogrammetric model created with Agisoft Photoscan. For the photogrammetry of the Marzamemi 1 shipwreck, 495 images were used for the complete survey; for the Cape Granitola shipwreck, 918 images were loaded to the software. The images were aligned with a high accuracy, with the 'Align photos' command, which computed the camera positions and their orientation. As result, a sparse point cloud model was produced.At a later stage, the software created a dense point cloud, to which triangulated meshes were applied. As a result of the survey, we have two 3D polygonal textured models of the sites, from which we have extrapolated orthophotos from above (Fig. 12) and perspective views of the two shipwrecks (Figs. 13 and 14).The textured model created by the software was re-worked and cleaned, highlighting every block, and allowing direct detailing of each element, isolated from the others.The mesh was imported into a CAD programme, and was measured and compared with the dimensions of the blocks measured underwater during the archaeological campaign. The final 3D model was made by removing the irregularities of the mesh due to the concretions and the presence of seaweed. A portion of the blocks close to and in contact with the seabed was not visible during the image acquisition underwater, and was integrated in 3D CAD software to recreate the original shapes of the blocks. The textures of the marble applied to the model were based on the type of the marble identified by isotopic analysis (Figs. 15 and 16).The model can be employed in other ways; for example in various analyses and in trying out reconstructions, and opening new possibilities of documentation for both specialists and the wider public. The software also calculated the precise volume of every single item and of the entire cargo. Using the specific gravity of the marble and the volume, we calculated the minimum tonnage of the cargoes, giving a basis for the reconstruction of the hull lines of the two vessels. The software also allowed individual marble blocks to be moved virtually and rearranged in their correct positions as originally stowed, based on hydrostatic calculations (Figs. 17 and 18).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The experience described in the recent studies of Balletti et al. (2015a) highlights the importance of this approach to the documentation. Costa et al. (2015) also confirmed the potential of the 3D dimensional method for affording the public an underwater experience of the archaeological sites 'in dry suits'.Regarding the survey, the study demonstrates the technological advances achieved in recent years with multi-image photogrammetry, already a largely automatic approach to processing, developing into an inexpensive, rapid and accurate method for recording underwater archaeological features. Furthermore, multi-image photogrammetry can be used to perform analyses in ways that were previously unavailable to marine archaeologists. The 3D model allowed an immediate reading of the information on the shapes and dimensions of the cargoes of marble blocks.Regarding our experience, we are developing the calibration to guarantee better accuracy. The extremely variable chemical and physical properties (salinity, temperature, density, etc.) of water require in situ camera calibration. A 3D frame is to be designed to provide the known points for the orientation of the photographs, and to calibrate the camera.As demonstrated by Bruno et al. (2015), from the perspective of representation 3D reconstruction offers many opportunities for the documentation of underwater cultural heritage, thanks to the possibility of converting the tangible heritage into a form that can be enjoyed and studied without the constraints of the marine environment. Virtual navigation around the model allows one to take in the whole archaeological context, which is impossible to do clearly in the underwater environment, and it allows some virtual attempts at reconstructing the original stowage of the blocks.In addition, the management and exploration of digital models with stereoscopic display systems (such as the Oculus virtual reality headset) allow the possibility of exploring deep underwater archaeological sites that are inaccessible to those who are not trained scuba divers. Interactive multimedia products aim at promoting knowledge of underwater cultural heritage to a wide public (scholars, students, tourists, etc.), made from the collection of images (renderings, texts, reproductions of iconography) starting from the reality-based survey and structured in an interactive visualization.