@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A qualitative exploration of Internet-based treatment for comorbid depression and alcohol misuse

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
More comprehensive web treatments for depression and alcohol misuse resulted in more positive perceived outcomesFew other differences in experiences emerged between conditionsMore individualisation and support was commonly wantedResearch activities were often mistaken for treatmentWhile therapist coaching was seen as having little impact, coping after it ended was often seen as challengingSome participants said they used program tools mentally or converted them to offline formats

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web-based intervention,Internet-based treatment,Comorbid depression and alcohol misuse,User's perspective,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundMany Internet-based treatments for depression and for alcohol misuse have a positive impact, yet little is known about how these treatments work. Most research on web-based interventions involves efficacy trials which, while important, offer little explanation about how people perceive and use online programs.ObjectiveThis study aimed to undertake a qualitative exploration of participants' experience, perceived impact and use of an integrated web-based program for comorbid depression and alcohol misuse. Specifically, it explored users' perspectives on the intensity of their treatment and the level of support they received.MethodsInterviewees were drawn from participants in a randomised controlled trial of the OnTrack web-based treatment for depression and alcohol misuse, which compared Brief Self-Guided, Comprehensive Self-Guided and Comprehensive Therapist-Assisted versions of the program. Twenty-nine people (9–11 from each condition) completed semi-structured telephone interviews asking about their impressions and experiences with the program. Interview transcriptions were subject to a 6-step thematic analysis, employing a conceptual matrix to identify thematic differences across groups.ResultsPositive experiences and outcomes were more pronounced among participants receiving the comprehensive treatments than the brief one, but other responses were relatively consistent across conditions. A major theme was a wish for more individualisation and human contact, even in participants receiving emailed assistance. Some confused follow-up research assessments with therapist support. There was little correspondence between the perceived impact of the program and the amount reportedly completed, and some participants said they used strategies offline or completed exercises mentally.ConclusionsThis study highlighted discrepancies between how web-based treatments are intended to be used and how people actually engage with them. A challenge for the next wave of these interventions is the provision of individualised responses and coaching that retains an emphasis on self-management and constrains cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The past decade has witnessed an enormous growth in the implementation of Internet-based treatment for mental health issues (Griffiths et al., 2010). In Australia, web-based interventions have helped to overcome multiple barriers associated with traditional face-to-face therapy, including geographic isolation (Jorm, 2012), affordability (Foroushani et al., 2011; Postel et al., 2005), paucity of mental health providers (Lehtinen et al., 2000; Montero-Marín et al., 2013) and the stigma associated with accessing services from mental health facilities (Holmwood, 2001). Web-based interventions therefore have potential to reach many individuals who would otherwise be unable or unwilling to access appropriate treatment (Foroushani et al., 2011; Postel et al., 2005).Numerous trials have supported the utility of the Internet as a treatment modality for depression and problem drinking, albeit as independent problems. Web-based interventions for depression have varied markedly in their focus and intensity of support, ranging from self-guided programs (Clarke et al., 2009; Hoek et al., 2011), through minimally supportive interventions (Christensen et al., 2006; Clarke et al., 2009; Vernmark et al., 2010), to programs that incorporate email and other forms of therapist contact (Perini et al., 2009; Ruwaard et al., 2009; van Straten et al., 2008). Web-based cognitive-behavioural therapy programs have been found efficacious in treating sub-threshold (Perini et al., 2009; Spek et al., 2007, 2008) and moderate (Andersson et al., 2005; Warmerdam et al., 2008) levels of depression, across adolescent (Hoek et al., 2011; O'Kearney et al., 2006) and adult (Spek et al., 2007) samples.Alcohol misuse also responds well to Internet-based treatments, which typically apply a harm-reduction paradigm, incorporating strategies to reduce problem drinking (Finfgeld-Connett and Madsen, 2008). These interventions are associated with reductions in alcohol consumption (Cunningham et al., 2009; Matano et al., 2007; Riper et al., 2007; Westrup et al., 2003), in weekend drinking (Doumas and H. E., 2008), academic problems (Kypri et al., 2008) and intrapersonal and other alcohol-related problems (Cunningham et al., 2005; Hester et al., 2005; Linke et al., 2007). Comprehensive Internet-based interventions for drinking problems appear equivalent, but not superior, to face-to-face treatment (Rooke et al., 2010).Although no study has previously investigated the effects of web-based treatment for co-existing depression and alcohol problems, two have examined these comorbidities in a computerised format. Kay-Lambkin et al. (2008) compared computerised CBT for depression and alcohol or cannabis misuse with a ‘live’ therapist-delivered intervention with identical content, and with a brief intervention (BI). Alcohol misuse responded well to the BI alone, but improvements in depression were more pronounced with intensive treatment. A more immediate improvement in depression was also noted in those receiving ‘live’ treatment, but after 3months this superiority was lost, and in fact that condition had the highest relapse rates. It was argued that the self-help nature of computerised treatment may have rendered participants more able to sustain improvements over time (Kay-Lambkin et al., 2008). In a similar study, Kay-Lambkin et al. (2011) compared supportive counselling to an integrated treatment delivered either by a computer or therapist. Improvements among those receiving computerised treatment were at least equivalent to those receiving face-to-face treatment and surprisingly, computerised treatment was associated with superior alcohol-reduction outcomes. These findings are promising for the implementation of computerised treatments for depression and alcohol misuse, although cannot necessarily be generalised to Internet-based interventions.Qualitative methods can enhance the interpretation of randomised controlled trial (RCT) results (Council, M.R., 2000) and facilitate our understanding of the mechanisms of change in web-based treatments (Bendelin et al., 2011), particularly in more complex interventions comprising many active ingredients (Murtagh et al., 2007). At present, however, knowledge of user acceptability, engagement and satisfaction towards web-based interventions is sparse (Kaltenthaler et al., 2008), with only a handful of studies qualitatively investigating user's experience of more complex computerised or Internet-based interventions. In their study of ‘live’ online CBT delivered via instant messaging, Beattie et al. (2009) found that being able to express themselves in text and developing a virtual therapeutic relationship were key themes among patients with depression. The importance of human connectedness has also been emphasised in more recent investigations concerning guided Internet-based CBT for depression (Bendelin et al., 2011; Doherty et al., 2012). While both studies found support to be facilitating and comforting, Bendelin et al. (2011) found that some participants were disappointed they did not receive more assistance, regardless of how much they were offered. This study demonstrated that users' motivation, attitudes, and perceived impact of treatment varied considerably, depending on whether they adopted a hands-on or sporadic approach to treatment (Bendelin et al., 2011).Research into self-guided computerised and web programs has articulated both deficits and advantages of this mode of delivery. Since these treatments are particularly susceptible to high rates of attrition, most work has been interested in identifying reasons for non-completion and poor motivation (Donkin and Glozier, 2012; Postel et al., 2011). Donkin and Glozier (2012) found that a significant barrier to persisting with an online depression program was that participants felt they were unsupported and unaccountable. Similarly, Gerhards et al. (2011) reported that many users desired some kind of support to provide personal assistance and set sufficient standards for adherence. Although both studies found that these issues decreased motivation, they also revealed multiple positive aspects associated with the absence of support, including enhanced control, freedom and a duty to oneself (Donkin and Glozier, 2012; Gerhards et al., 2011). Interestingly, Gerhards et al. (2011) found that many participants without support blurred the distinction between research aspects and the intervention, so that screening and questionnaire activities were perceived to be part of treatment. This confusion appeared to hinder adherence to the online program and in some cases precluded participants from starting it (Gerhards et al., 2011). These findings may explain why quantitative research has been inconsistent in terms of indicating that support can both facilitate (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Vernmark et al., 2010) and inhibit (Kay-Lambkin et al., 2008) treatment gains.Qualitative research has also shed light on the ingredients perceived to be most and least effective in web programs. Gerhards et al. (2011) found some participants regarded mood diaries as the most valuable treatment component, while others experienced them as a burden. Some users find web-based interventions too simplistic (Donkin and Glozier, 2012) or lacking in skill-building (Kay-Lambkin et al., 2012), particularly if they have long-standing problems (Poole et al., 2012). Research focused on the user's perspective has also helped to elicit various suggestions for improving participants' engagement and progress when using online programs. These include the need to regularly update the intervention (Brouwer et al., 2009; Crutzen et al., 2008), provide email reminders (Postel et al., 2011), allow for more flexibility in treatment protocols (Postel et al., 2011) and offer follow-up questionnaires to further progress (Brouwer et al., 2009). The need for more personal support is consistent across these studies (Donkin and Glozier, 2012; Gerhards et al., 2011; Kay-Lambkin et al., 2012; Postel et al., 2011), irrespective of the intensity of support provided.OnTrack Alcohol and Depression is a web program that blends motivational, cognitive-behavioural and mindfulness-based strategies, to address co-occurring alcohol misuse and depression. Based on feedback from potential users about preferred structure (Klein et al., 2010), it allows users to access modules, tools and resources in any order and pace, while offering a recommended order and asking them to trial a strategy for several days before accessing another. An initial module encourages a consideration of incentives for change, builds self-efficacy, assists users to identify sources of social support, and cues development of a detailed plan for behaviour change. Additional content includes a consideration of strengths and resources, pleasant activity scheduling, planning for risky situations, managing cravings, problem solving, drink refusal, cognitive restructuring, assertiveness and negotiation training, anger management, dealing with guilt and shame, identifying links between depression and alcohol use and early warning signs, reviewing improvements across the program, and relapse prevention. All program components are highly interactive and encourage personalization through selection of icons and text entries, and each tool creates a printable summary page, a history of which is available from every screen. Brief videos illustrate key concepts throughout. A diary displays planned actions and allows monitoring of drinking and mood, which populates progress graphs. Resources include fact sheets about alcohol and depression, and downloadable audios about mindfulness and dealing with cravings. A help button on every screen provides advice on suicidality, and phone numbers for emergencies and for services on alcohol and drugs, mental health problems, grief, and relationships, among others.The current study is informed by an RCT on this program (Kavanagh et al., in preparation), which randomised 327 participants to one of three conditions: (a) Brief Self-Guided intervention (B-SG), which only offered the initial module on motivation, self-efficacy, social support and planning; (b) Comprehensive Self-Guided treatment (C-SG), giving users full access to the program, or (c) Comprehensive Therapist-Assisted treatment (C-TA), which added emailed therapist support over the first 12weeks. Emails in the C-TA rewarded individual participants' progress, assisted with lapses, encouraged continued use of the program and suggested modules that were not yet accessed. Sentences in these emails contributed to or were adapted from a library of templates, to maximise consistency and treatment fidelity. All participants also received regular standard emails to remind them to use the program. The trial assessed depression and alcohol-related outcomes at 3, 6, 9, and 12months, using online surveys and single-blind phone interviews. Results are reported separately (Kavanagh et al., in preparation).This study investigated participants' experience, use and overall perceptions of the web-based programs. In particular, we aimed to identify whether differences existed across the three treatment conditions, given their variability in comprehensiveness and whether therapist support was included.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study represents the first qualitative exploration of participants' experience of a web-based treatment for comorbid depression and alcohol problems. Findings offer understanding of how this sample of participants use, engage with and respond to Internet-based treatment with and without therapist guidance. Overall, treatment experiences appeared more positive in the comprehensive treatment conditions, where participants received enhanced support for their efforts and were more able to engage with treatment concepts in adaptive, personally meaningful ways. The findings highlighted the challenge of differentiating the impact of treatment components from research activities, given participants' tendency to blur this distinction, and indicated a discrepancy between ways in which web-based treatments are designed to be used and how participants actually engage with them. The current findings offer important insights into ways to improve the study, design and implementation of web-based programs. A challenge for the next wave of these interventions is the provision of individualised responses and therapist support, while retaining an emphasis on supported self-management and constraining cost.ACTRN12610000061033.There are no competing interests to declare.CBTCognitive Behaviour TherapyRandomised controlled trialBrief self-guided interventionComprehensive self-guided treatmentComprehensive therapist-assisted treatment