@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mobile Cognitive Therapy: Adherence and acceptability of an online intervention in remitted recurrently depressed patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Total therapist support time in remitted recurrently depressed patients was low.Intervention adherence of participants was relatively high.During remission, Mobile CT might be a feasible form of continued care.Overall Mobile CT was rated as usable, acceptable and user-friendly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet-based therapy,Recurrent depression,Uptake,Adherence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThere are first indications that an Internet-based cognitive therapy (CT) combined with monitoring by text messages (Mobile CT), and minimal therapist support (e-mail and telephone), is an effective approach of prevention of relapse in depression. However, examining the acceptability and adherence to Mobile CT is necessary to understand and increase the efficiency and effectiveness of this approach.MethodIn this study we used a subset of a randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of Mobile CT. A total of 129 remitted patients with at least two previous episodes of depression were available for analyses. All available information on demographic characteristics, the number of finished modules, therapist support uptake (telephone and e-mail), and acceptability perceived by the participants was gathered from automatically derived log data, therapists and participants.ResultsOf all 129 participants, 109 (84.5%) participants finished at least one of all eight modules of Mobile CT. Adherence, i.e. the proportion who completed the final module out of those who entered the first module, was 58.7% (64/109). None of the demographic variables studied were related to higher adherence. The total therapist support time per participant that finished at least one module of Mobile CT was 21min (SD=17.5). Overall participants rated Mobile CT as an acceptable treatment in terms of difficulty, time spent per module and usefulness. However, one therapist mentioned that some participants experienced difficulties with using multiple CT based challenging techniques.ConclusionOverall uptake of the intervention and adherence was high with a low time investment of therapists. This might be partially explained by the fact that the intervention was offered with therapist support by telephone (blended) reducing non-adherence and that this high-risk group for depressive relapse started the intervention during remission. Nevertheless, our results indicate Mobile CT as an acceptable and feasible approach to both participants and therapists.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a chronically relapsing disease (Richards, 2011), with a high risk of depressive relapse (Burcusa and Iacono, 2007). Each episode of depression leads to considerable economic costs to the society (Johnson et al., 1992; Keller and Boland, 1998; Richards, 2011; Smit, 2009). Prevention of relapse is therefore of great importance. However, waiting lists due to scarcity of therapists are common (Cameron and Thompson, 2005). Therefore, an Internet-based Cognitive Therapy might be a feasible approach, given that it is easily accessible and therapist involvement may be reduced, as demonstrated in acute phase Internet-based treatment (Wright et al., 2005). Meta-analyses demonstrated small to moderate effect sizes of Internet-based therapies in the acute phase of depression, anxiety, panic disorders and alcohol use disorders (Andersson et al.; Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Lewis et al., 2012; Richards and Richardson, 2012; Riper et al., 2011; Spek et al., 2007). In addition, first results of psychological treatment by using a smartphone app are positive as well (Ly, 2012; Ly, 2014).In addition, there are first indications that the effects of guided self-help interventions (blended care), such as Internet-based psychotherapy, might be comparable to face-to-face psychotherapy, although this is less clear to patients seeking help in speciality care (Andersson et al., 2013; Cuijpers et al., 2010).Although it was demonstrated that Internet-based therapies are effective in treating various (mental) health problems, most studies were performed in patients with acute problems. So far, only one study has examined an internet-based cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) compared to a control group as a relapse prevention strategy in depressed patients that responded to treatment but were partially remitted (Holländare et al., 2011; Holländare et al., 2013). Now for the first time, an Internet-based preventive Cognitive Therapy aimed at relapse prevention of a new episode in patients remitted for at least two months, including mood monitoring by making use of text messages and minimal therapist support by telephone and e-mail (Mobile-CT) was developed and evaluated (Bockting and van Valen, 2009; Bockting, 2009). Recently, in a randomized controlled trial (N=239), we demonstrated that Mobile CT significantly reduced depressive symptoms levels measured with the Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (IDS-SR30), over three months of follow-up compared to Treatment as Usual in fully remitted participants with recurrent depression (Cohen's d=0.44; Kok et al., 2014 under review).Apart from these effects on return of depressive symptomatology, understanding how and to what extent an intervention is used is critical to increase the efficiency and efficacy (Eysenbach, 2005). According to the model of Internet-based interventions by Ritterband et al. (2009), based on multiple theories and models, factors such as user characteristics, adherence, support and website characteristic all influence the usage of the Internet-based intervention. In the current study, after we described the details of the Mobile CT program that was developed, the following facets were examined to evaluate the use of Mobile CT: 1) the user characteristics of participants in relation to adherence, 2) therapist support uptake, and 3) experienced difficulties based on some experiences of participants and therapists and evaluations filled in by participants after each module of Mobile CT.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
