@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D survey and virtual reconstruction of archeological sites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
3D reconstruction of ancient sites integrating metrical surveys with historical sources.Iteratively infer geometrical refinements on reconstruction hypotheses.Novel use of 3D data for archeological interpretation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last decade the use of 3D acquisition techniques in the archeological field has allowed to widen the scope of the geometric survey process, providing high resolution reality-based digital models capable to be linked with different historical documentations, greatly improving the conventional bi-dimensional hand-made survey with a consequent gain of knowledge for the archeologists.Another possible output, supported both by reality-based models and historical data, can lead to the generation of suggestive 3D digital reconstructions of architectures not anymore existing, made lively through Computer Graphics. These can be useful for a careful interpretation of the existing ruins but sometimes they might also be capable to suggest new archeological discoveries.A weak part of the latter process is represented by the possible lack of scientific reliability on the reconstructed model, due to the actual disjunction between the modelers producing the final computer graphics output, and the archeologist owning the knowledge for creating the appropriate reconstructive hypotheses. The methodology here proposed is based on a first extensive 3D documentation of the site in its current state, followed by an iterative interaction between archeologists and digital modelers, leading to a progressive refinement of the reconstructive hypotheses. The starting point of the method is the reality based model, that, together with ancient drawings and documents, is used for generating the first reconstructive step.Such rough approximation of a possible architectural structure can be annotated through archeological considerations that have to be confronted with geometrical constraints, producing a reduction of the reconstructive hypotheses to a limited set, each one to be archeologically evaluated. This refinement loop on the reconstructive choices is iterated until the result becomes convincing by both points of view, integrating all the available starting data in the best way.The aforementioned approach to the digital reconstruction problem has been verified on the ruins of five temples in the Mỹ Sơn site, a wide archeological area located in central Vietnam. Created by the ancient Cham civilization active in Vietnam from 7th to 18th century, it has been listed as UNESCO World Heritage in 1999. Mỹ Sơn area contains a reasonably well preserved system of 78 Cham Temples, some of them destroyed by the nature in the last centuries (Ky Phuong et al., 1990). The integration of 3D surveyed data and historical documentation has allowed supporting a digital reconstruction of not existing architectures, developing their three-dimensional digital models step by step, from rough shapes to highly sophisticated virtual prototypes. The 3D acquisition and modeling of a specific set of five temples, indicated by the archeologists as “G group”, is presented here and methodologically discussed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper describes a process of acquisition and modeling applied to create a virtual reconstruction of lost architectures located in a striking context, the Mỹ Sơn archeological area in Vietnam. A commonly used 3D acquisition and modeling approach along with some different topics are discussed, suggesting both optimized procedures for data processing and communication. In particular, as synthesized in Fig. 16, an iterative methodology is suggested to support the interpretative modeling step, simplifying the feedback on virtual models by the archeologists. This solution gives a significant improvement on the complex procedure for reconstructing in 3D an ancient building whose remains are often very few with respect to its original shape. In this way both an instrument of communication and valorization of the cultural heritage site is provided, helping the interpretation of archeological and architectural ruins. As future development it would be interesting to explore an enhanced communication level between the different historical and technological experts, based on social networking instruments, and annotations on renderings or directly on 3D models.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 10.1016/j.daach.2014.01.001.Supplementary Material