@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reconstructing the Baths of Caracalla

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This is a reconstruction of the Baths of Caracalla in Rome.The model uses a parametric program and data from a book and onsite observations.The process revealed an interesting pattern involving the glass panes.The textures are mostly generic; largely due to a lack of information.The 3D model gives a partial sense of atmosphere inside the Baths at its peak.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Baths of Caracalla are the second largest but most complete bathing complex in the city of Rome. They are a representation of the might, wealth, and ingenuity of the Roman Empire. As such, a brief introduction to the site of the Baths of Caracalla and its layout is advantageous. This article chronicles the digital reconstruction process that began as a means to obtain the geometry of one room for the purposes of a thermal analysis. Unlike many reconstructions, this one uses a parametric design program, SolidWorks, as the base because it allows for easy and precise manipulation of the geometry. While this recreation still has rough textures, it provides insights into the geometry: particularly surrounding the glass in the windows. The 3D model allows the viewer to partially experience the atmosphere of the site and illustrates its enormity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Baths of Caracalla in Rome, Italy were the second largest bathing complex but remain remarkably well preserved. As a mechanical engineer, I used the Baths of Caracalla as a case study to investigate the thermal environment inside the room that housed the hot baths, known as the caldarium. In order to complete the simulation, however, I required a geometrical model of the air volume inside the room. The way that I chose of obtaining this was to construct the room and take its interior negative. The reconstruction process was fascinating and soon enveloped the entire structure. In earlier publications (Oetelaar, 2011, 2012), I have outlined aspects of the procedure. This article builds on my previous work to provide a consolidated and complete overview. Furthermore, this journal allows for a partial exploration of the atmosphere of the Baths because of its unique inclusion of 3D models. The methodological synopsis chronicles the software programs used, the overarching issues that arose, the room specific adjustments made, the intricate insertion of window glazing, and the application of textures.Since it is the most intact thermae in Rome, the Baths of Caracalla are important to reproduce accurately. As such, this reconstruction uses published publically available dimensions as much as possible. I have also undertaken a logical and precise mapping of window pane sizes not seen in other models. The biggest difference between this recreation and others is the program that I used. Parametric programs like SolidWorks allow for a higher degree of control of dimensions and easier modification of those dimensions. Though my recreation does not fully capture the opulence of the Baths, it is a 3D scale model that can provide scholars measurements not available with comparative models.Before introducing the reconstruction process, it is important to briefly give the historical background and general layout on the Baths of Caracalla to establish some context for the site. The Romans constructed the Baths of Caracalla (formally the Thermae Antoninianae) between 212 CE and 216 CE and dedicated them in 216 CE. The Emperor Septimius Serverus (193–211 CE) commissioned their construction but his son, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus (popularly known as Caracalla; 211–217 CE), completed them. The baths remained in use until the Goths severed the aqueducts to Rome in 537 CE. They are located approximately 1.2km SSE of the Flavian Amphitheatre (or Colosseum). The main building itself covers just over 2.4ha and, with the garden and perimeter walls, the complex occupies just under 9ha.The layout of the Baths of Caracalla (Fig. 1) is virtually symmetrical. The alignment of the four rooms in the middle of the bath—the natatio, the frigidarium, the tepidarium, and the caldarium—comprise the axis. These four rooms represent the major bathing components of the complex. The natatio was a vast swimming pool (1300m2)11The areas given here are based off of this reconstruction.originally thought to have a roof (Iwanoff and Hülsen, 1898; shown in Yegül, 1995, p. 158) but now believed to be open to the atmosphere (DeLaine, 1997). The frigidarium was a giant, typically high vaulted, room (1960m2) that housed the unheated baths.22The term frigidarium technically implies an association with cold water; however, since artificial cooling was impossible in Roman times, cold baths were simply baths with unheated water.The tepidarium was a smaller room (360m2) containing the warm baths. The caldarium was another large room (1300m2) that, as mentioned earlier, contained hot pools. The two very important off-axis rooms are 3E/W,33I followed DeLaine′s numbering scheme for the off-axis rooms as shown in Fig. 1.the apodyteria, and 12E/W, the palaestrae. The two apodyteria were rooms (540m2 each) where patrons changed into their bathing attire (which, many times, consisted of sandals and nothing else) and store their clothes. The two palaestrae, large, probably open-aired,44Brödner (1951) suggests that the palaestrae were roofed but most others (DeLaine, 1997; Yegül, 1995; Nielsen, 1993) maintain they were open-aired.rooms (2000m2 each) where the patrons would exercise, represented the major sportive component of the baths.55Yegül (1995) points out when defining the palaestrae that this type of room used to be part of the Greek gymnasium. It is important to remember that these activities included running, boxing, wrestling, fencing, and ball games. The rooms just off the palaestrae at the Baths of Caracalla (i.e., 8–10E/W and particularly 13E/W given its mosaic motif, see note 20) also probably had some athletic component. The other major exercising area was the natatio though, as Yegül (2010) points out, because of its size and other bathers, swimming may have been limited.The specific purposes of the remaining rooms are largely unknown though there are some speculations.66Ripostelli (1916) lists 2E/W as rooms for conversation; 8–10E/W as schools for the gymnasia; 17E/W as small sudatoria; 19E/W as baths for the palaestra; and 20E/W as open rooms for exercise. Krencker et al. (1929) specifically state that they were not trying to identify room function but they do speculate that 19E/W might have been ancillary frigidaria. Lugli (1970) lists 8–10E/W as schools; 14E/W as sudatoria; and 20E/W as halls. Nielsen (1993) lists Room 19E/W as unctoria or frigidaria, 20E/W as tepidaria, and 21E/W and 22E/W as sudatoria. DeLaine (1997) suggests that 17E/W may have been massage rooms, 20E/W were very hot, and, on page 46, she gives a schematic breakdown of the rooms (1–3E/W): dressing; 4–6E/W: entrance; 7–12E/W: palaestra; 13–14E/W, 17E/W: social; 15–16E/W, 18E/W, 23E/W: services, 19–22E/W: hot rooms. Piranomonte (2008) lists 1E/W as a vestibula and 20E/W as lanconia.Rooms 19E/W–22E/W were hot rooms since excavators found evidence of heating structures—known as the hypocaust (Yegül, 1995 provides a nice description of the hypocaust)—in them. Rooms 14E/W, 17E/W, and possibly 19E/W had smaller pools; basins sitting on the floor in the case of 14E/W and tubs approximately 0.88m below the surface of the floor in the case of 17E/W and 19E/W.Outside the complex there was a garden-like area surrounded by a large external wall. In this wall there were libraries, small shops, eateries, a theater, and massive cisterns that held the water for the baths. In the garden just south of the hot rooms there was an intricate network of underground passageways that slaves primarily used for the day-to-day workings of the bath, such as storing wood and boiling water for the hot baths (Piranomonte, 2008).Because of its parametric capabilities and my familiarity with it, I chose to use the engineering computer-aided design (CAD) program, Dassault Systèmes′ SolidWorks (Dassault Systèmes, 2012), for the geometrical portion of the reconstruction. In parametric design, as the name suggests, the researcher creates features by drawing shapes and defining modifiable parameters to hold the shapes in place. This allows for easy manipulation of pieces of the design if new information becomes available. However, the program is based on mathematical formulae, which limits the creativity of the researcher. This is evident in the formation of intricate curves, such as a Corinthian capital, which can be time-consuming and frustrating if not impossible. This is why parametric programs are almost always engineering-based. Therefore, for the artistic finishing details, such as texture application, Autodesk′s 3ds MAX (Autodesk, 2012) was more appropriate.77It is important to note that it is possible to create the entire model in 3ds MAX; in fact, a large proportion of scholars use it to generate their archeological models. I found, however, that SolidWorks allows a higher degree of flexibility and accuracy.However, the use of McNeel′s Rhino 4 (McNeel, 2012) was necessary to ensure a smooth transition between these two programs because Rhino 4 can open a native SolidWorks file and export it to a Autodesk file format.Even though there have been a number of books,88Blouet (1828), Ripostelli (1916), Brödner (1951), Lugli (1970), and Piranomonte (2008).sections of books,99Krencker et al. (1929), Iacopi (1977), Heinz (1983), Nielsen (1993), and Yegül (1995, 2010),and articles1010Iwanoff and Hülsen (1898), Ghislanzoni (1912), Iacopi (1985), Cecchini (1985), DeLaine (1985, 1987), Conforto (1991), and Manderscheid (1991).on the Baths of Caracalla, none had the necessary numeric data that I required. I was fortunate enough to visit the site in May 2008 but was unable to take any substantive measurements of my own because of limited time and access. DeLaine′s (1997) book on the Baths of Caracalla has the only published and publically available composite of dimensions for the site. So this table supplied the base dimensions for my reconstruction. However, it is important to note that the numerical data were skeletal and left room for interpretation. I used the above listed works and the information gathered from my visit to supplement and clarify any of the data from DeLaine.The Appendix A in DeLaine′s manuscript tabulates the measurements of wall lengths, door widths and heights, window widths and heights, window-sill heights and niche widths and heights of most rooms. Even though her data are extensive, they are not complete, which presents the first stumbling block. The absent data fell into two categories: those dimensions that had a place but no value and those that did not fit in a standardized table. For the first category, DeLaine could not provide a particular dimension, either due to access issues or, more often, because it simply did not exist anymore. To solve this I took advantage of the symmetry of the Baths of Caracalla and used the mirror image dimension. For example, DeLaine listed the north window dimensions of Room 1W (Fig. 1) but those for the north window of Room 1E are missing because the window itself is not there anymore. In this case, both windows used the same dimensions. While it may be possible to gather data from other contemporary Severan buildings or even the Baths of Diocletian, these would more reflect trends in architecture than numerical values necessary here as each building is unique. These buildings will be helpful when someone undertakes a study of the decorative motif of the Baths of Caracalla. The second category probably stems from a need for clarity. While she gave many key dimensions, she omitted some, most noticeably the placement of the doors, windows, and niches. The issue with the placement of the various openings is that they are impossible to fit clearly into a table because there is no datum that works in all cases. For example, take the north door of 5E, one can specify its placement from the west wall but this datum will not work for the west door as it is in the west wall. Fortunately, DeLaine also included a set of scale drawings of the building, which I measured to obtain approximations for the missing dimensions.The following ten steps outline my procedure for the basic geometric construction.1111It is important to note that in the remainder of this section and the next section there is a number of terms—extrusion, revolve, sweep, and loft—that apply only to the digital reconstruction and not to how the Romans constructed the Baths.(1)Walls. I drew the outline of the walls for a block of rooms (e.g., 4W–6W), leaving the doorways, windows, and niches open. I then extruded this sketch to the lowest height that the vault sprung from of the block of rooms. However, when drawing the sketch I made my first simplification. Averaging opposing wall lengths modified the rooms from quadrilateral to rectangular, which meant that all corners met at 90°. In actuality, since opposing walls were not the same length, no room corners were perfectly square. In most cases, though, the difference was 2 or 3cm, which, over a wall measuring up to 20m, was relatively insignificant. The key reason for modification was that it substantially decreased the complexity of the reconstruction of the vaults. The parallel walls allowed for a simple extrusion to create the vaults instead of using a complicated, somewhat unpredictable loft. More importantly, it simplified the whole process because then all walls were either vertical or horizontal and angles were not involved.Niches. At this point in the reconstruction the niches lacked sills and lintels and were essentially grooves that ran the entire height of the extruded wall. In the Baths of Caracalla, there are two types of niches: rectangular and semi-circular. The rectangular niches were simple because they had flat sills and lintels that I made with extrusions. The semi-circular niches, on the other hand, had a semi-dome instead of a lintel. I made a lower faux lintel and then cut away a semi-sphere to reconstruct the semi-dome.Doors and windows. The doors and windows were gaps in the wall. I drew the door lintels and window sills and lintels onto the surface of the wall and then extruded the sketch through the thickness of the wall. This allowed me easily to add the curvature in the lintels. I found that for most doors a radius of curvature of 5m best approximated the required camber.Vaults. I used the springing heights given by DeLaine to sketch and extrude the shape of the vault. In the case of groin vaults, I extruded one vault and then cut out the crosswise vault from the existing structure. I finished by extending the wall to the vault. Like the wall lengths, the distance from the floor to the springing of the vault varied depending on where DeLaine took the initial measurements. Because these vaults were the finishing piece, structurally speaking, the differences in their dimensions were not as critical and could be incorporated without jeopardizing subsequent components. The vaults themselves were easy to create but their thickness is a point of debate due to the uncertainty surrounding the existence of rooftop terraces, as we notice in step six.Pools. By this point in the reconstruction the superstructure was recognizable as the Baths of Caracalla but the floor had no definition. The major geometrical pieces that were missing were the pools. Since the structural pools were below the floor, to form these I created a hole in the outline of the pool to the depth of 1.5m.Roofs and terraces. The shape of the roofs and existence of roof-top terraces are somewhat contentious. Some reconstructions have gabled roofs on many of the major rooms (such as the one in Italo Gismondi′s model of Rome in the Museo della Civiltà Romana) while others (like DeLaine′s) have all flat roofs. Based on site observations that I made in 2008, my current reconstruction is somewhere in the middle. The presence of stairs above Room 11E/W and from 18E/W to the roof of the portico above 12E/W intimated that there were terraces on Rooms 4E/W–11E/W. There were also the well-lit staircases that ascend from the floor of Room 3c to the top of Room 4; presumably if the Roman designers had meant these for only the maintenance staff, the light wells would not be present.1212This is similar to the windowed stairwell inside the Column of Trajan. As Jones points out, “that the stair was meant to be used by visitors, and not just for maintenance purposes, is confirmed by the presence of forty windows, ten on each cardinal axis, sufficient to ensure an adequate illumination throughout the climb” (Jones, 2003, p. 165). Given the size differential (0.15m×0.3m in the Column of Trajan and 0.5m×1.25m in the Baths of Caracalla), it is safe to assume that the same principle applies.The presence of a gabled roof on the Basilica di Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri,1313Etchings by Palladio in 1550 (Cameron, 1772), Dosio in 1564 (Siebenhüner, 1955, p. 181), and Dupérac in 1575 (Siebenhüner, 1955, p. 181) suggest that the vaults were largely intact when construction on the basilica began. Though it is difficult to tell from these drawings whether the gabling existed in the 1500s, it is hard to believe that the architects would have risked collapse to convert the roof.formerly the frigidarium of the Baths of Diocletian, the sister complex to the Baths of Caracalla in ancient Rome, suggests that there was gabling on the roof of the Caracalla frigidarium. This is an example of how architectural trends in similar buildings mentioned above influenced this reconstruction.Stairs. The Baths of Caracalla have two categories of stairs: those that go into the pools and the ones that go to the terraces. The former were easy to create by extruding (or revolving, in the case of the caldarium) the shape of the stairs but the latter posed some difficulty due to their intricacy. The stairs leading to the terraces are U- or fold-back stairs, meaning that they have multiple flights connected by landings. While the stairs themselves were easy to construct, the vaults supporting the stairs were not, due to the quasi-helical nature. I had to use lofts to construct these in the computer model. This is one case where the mathematical nature of SolidWorks proved to be disadvantageous as these lofts were extremely time-consuming to create.Placeholders for the columns. As mentioned earlier, creation of artistic shapes like columns is extremely difficult in SolidWorks, so my plan was to insert prefabricated columns into my model in 3ds MAX. I created cylinders that were the right size and spacing as indicated in Table 2 on page 59 of DeLaine′s book (1997) thereby making this procedure a simple process of copying, scaling, and replacing.Window glass and frames. This is a complex and interesting issue and Section 6 below describes it.Finishing touches. These are mainly the entablatures above many of the colonnaded doorways. In SolidWorks I created the basic shape using either extrusions or, if the entablature was on more than one wall as in Room 12E/W, lofts. One of the major regions of entablatures was on the north wall of the natatio where the impressive wall had eighteen niches for statuary. Since the wall now has—and had even in Blouet′s time in the early nineteenth century—only recessed definition intact, the entablatures for the natatio simply give a general impression of its grand nature.Overall, then, it was not necessary to make many assumptions or simplifications to complete such a massive reconstruction, which decreased the introduced uncertainty. The squaring of the rooms, for example, reduced the complexity of the reconstructive process considerably without affecting the overall accuracy by an appreciable margin. All of this means that the base of the model stayed true to the site and the surviving evidence.There were ten rooms that required more attentive reconstructions: Rooms 15E/W, 16E/W, 18E/W, 20E/W, the tepidarium, and the caldarium. The reason that these rooms could not follow the outline established above was either because of complex geometry or, more often, a lack of information. This section chronicles the obstacles of these rooms and their subsequent resolution.The biggest problem with Rooms 20E/W was that they had the most complicated ground plan of any room. As the floor plan shows, Rooms 20E/W have three exedrae—one in each of the E, W, and N walls—and the two E and W exedrae have two smaller apses in them. Three of these four apses contained the doorways to the adjoining rooms. This meant that the standardized data that DeLaine provided only was not enough to complete the sketch. Again, though, this limitation was most likely necessary for the overall clarity of the table. To finish the floor plan of 20E/W, I supplemented the standard dimensions given by DeLaine with measurements from the scale drawing: some of which were extremely difficult to obtain. To minimize the difficulty of the digital recreation of the roofs of 20E/W, I needed to make the minor assumption that the apses with doorways were circular and not ovoid. With the walls complete, however, the remaining stages of the process were not straightforward either. The next issue was that, unlike almost all of doorways in the complex that were straight, the doorways of Rooms 20E/W had an angular bend part way through.1414This makes thermal sense if, as DeLaine (1997) and Piranomonte (2008) speculate, that the Roman architects designed 20E/W to be extremely hot. Any bend, particularly in a narrow doorway, will slow heat transfer in and out.I created the lintels of these doorways using lofts. Since the ends of the lofts in SolidWorks are flat, I removed excess material to maintain the curvature of the apse. I then used revolves to create the apse semi-dome as well as the exedrae. The roof is unique because, like 19E/W, there is no evidence of vaulting indicating that these rooms most likely had a flat roof.The major issue with the tepidarium was that DeLaine gives no dimensions. After onsite observations, the reason became clear as the tepidarium has suffered the most damage of the rooms within the building proper. Only the west wall remains standing and even that only reaches approximately 1m in height. As such, I derived the dimensions of the tepidarium from measuring the floor plan and scale elevation drawings. Fortunately, the tepidarium was a small rectangular room and followed the stages outlined above. The south doorways to the caldarium, however, had similar bends like in 20E/W and therefore required the use of lofts to create the digital model.Like the tepidarium, the caldarium also requires interpretation since the entire southern half exists only to half a metre in height and DeLaine′s data on the caldarium were therefore minimal. With the doorway to the tepidarium finished, the basic structure of the digitally recreated caldarium was seven piers measured from the scale drawings and extruded up to the springing height of the dome. The dome1515It is important to note, however, that some reconstructions such as Le Duc′s from 1867 (given in Piranomonte, 2008, p. 31) and Blouet (1828) show the caldarium as having an oculus on top. This could have a dramatic impact of the thermal environment inside and on its controllability. This, though, introduces another aspect of uncertainty which is beyond the scope of the CFD work later so I did not include it in this reconstruction.—created using a revolved sketch—finished the skeleton of the caldarium. The detailing, particularly the insertion of arches over the windows, however, proved to be complex, cumbersome, and time-consuming. The major difficulty with the arches was that they were in two pieces; each involving 3D curves on top of cylindrical faces that stretched the capabilities of SolidWorks almost to the limit. The way I solved this was again to use lofts and trim the excess to maintain the inner and outer curvatures of the room. However, the top outer arches added a new problem as Blouet (1828) and DeLaine (1997) indicated that these had a degree of flaring to them meaning the loft was straight along the sides but concave in the middle. The use of multiple guide curves solved this.The final six rooms—Rooms 15E/W, 16E/W, and 18E/W—required attention because they were geometrically difficult and the publically available documentation is sparse.1616DeLaine states, in a personal communication, that she was not allowed in these rooms during her research so this discrepancy is not surprising.Rooms 15E/W and 16E/W most likely were places for servants and maintenance people as the doorways were extremely small when compared to the others. There appeared to be remains of a hanging staircase in 15E/W leading to the window sill in the central wall that separated 15E/W and 23E/W and the second floor of 16E/W. It may have been that the ground floor of 16E/W led to the subterranean maze under the baths. From unpublished pictures provided by DeLaine, it appeared that the roof of 16E/W connects to the terrace system that eventually led to the central wall of 15E/W mentioned above. Room 18E/W was a mystery because even DeLaine had to guess its contents. Her drawings indicated a staircase leading up to the terrace level. Blouet (1828), however, suggested that it was just a connecting room between 12E/W, 17E/W, and 20E/W with a mosaic floor. If there was a staircase in 18E/W, it would have to lead to the second floor of 16E/W because there was no break in the roof structure of 16E/W. While this staircase is not improbable, it would seem rather futile unless the Romans used it to transport bathing accoutrements to the hot rooms. The most curious aspect of 18E/W, however, was the terrace floor, because it appears that the designers raised the terrace walkway above the structural vaulting, leaving an air gap. What was the purpose of this gap? Heating? The reconstruction of these six rooms was, therefore, tenuous and highly speculative.Most of the room-by-room modifications dealt with problems that arose from a lack of data, the notable exception being the caldarium window arches, which were also difficult to create. The recreation of Rooms 20E/W, the tepidarium, and the caldarium, however, was as accurate as the evidence allowed. The reconstruction of Rooms 15E/W, 16E/W, and 18E/W, on the other hand, was interpretive given the extreme absence of data and their apparent complexity. Overall, the recreation of these complicated rooms took more resourceful thinking but was not unrealistic.One of the more challenging and time-consuming aspects of the model construction was the creation of the glazing for the windows. This was for two reasons: one, the number and size of the windows in the complex, and two, nothing remains of them, archeologically. There are 130 windows in DeLaine′s reconstruction and the smallest measures 2.5m wide×3.25m high in Rooms 13E/W. DeLaine does not reconstruct the glazing in her scale drawings but she does state that there would have been a minimum of 3400m2 of glass on site (1997, p. 218). Even though there are no glass fragments from the Baths of Caracalla, there is evidence from other sites in the Empire. Therefore, the first step is to survey what evidence is available to plan a course of action.Direct articles on bath glazing fall into two major categories. First are the overviews of window glass production in bathing contexts, which include Foy and Fontaine (2008), Allen (2002), Whitehouse (2001), Ortiz Palomar and Paz Peralta (1997), Broise (1991), Charlesworth (1977), and Boon (1966). Second are descriptions of archeological glass and frame fragments recovered from bath sites that authors embed in their site reports. There are many articles in this category and, for the sake of brevity, this article does not include details except for special cases. Many scholars found glass panes and fragments at a number of sites dated primarily between the 1st and 2nd centuries CE.1717These are the Taurine Baths at Civitavecchia (Bastianelli, 1933, pp. 407, 420), the Hadrianic Baths at Leptis Magna (ca. 2nd century CE; Bartoccini, 1929, pp. 60–61), the small baths of the Middle City in Pergamon (ca. 2nd century CE; Radt, 1980, p. 412), the Great Bath on the Lechaion Road in Corinth (ca. late 2nd century CE; Biers, 1985, p. 17), the baths at Chassenon (ca. 2nd century CE; Hourcade, 1999), the public baths at Caesaraugusta in Zaragozza (ca. 1st century CE; Ortiz Palomar and Paz Peralta, 1997, p. 442), the baths at Labitolosa (ca. 1st century CE; Ortiz Palomar and Paz Peralta, 1997, p. 442), the baths at Uncastillo (ca. 1st century CE; Beltrán Lloris, 1996, p. 76), the baths at Bilbilis (ca. 1st century CE; Ortiz Palomar and Paz Peralta, 1997, p. 440), the baths at Saint-Jean-Le-Vieux (ca. 1st century CE; Bouet and Tobie, 2003, p. 160), the bath-house at Garden Hill, Hartfield, Sussex (ca. 2nd century CE; Harden, 1974), and the baths at Barzan (ca. 1st century BCE; Bouet, 2003, pp. 187–188).Other finds, though, better indicate the nature of Roman bath window construction.1818In the caldarium of the Constantinian Baths (ca. mid-3rd century CE) at Arles, excavators discovered not only glass, but evidence for wooden shutters (Formige, 1922, pp. 253–254). Broise (1991) notes similar finds at the Terme del Invidioso, the Terme di Nettuno, and Bazra. For this reconstruction, however, I did not want to speculate on the placement of shutters.Zienkiewicz (1986, p. 1:337) came across glass fragments and the remnants of putty that supposedly held the glass into the frames at the legionary fortress baths at Caerleon (ca. 75 CE). In the Forum Baths at Pompeii (62 CE), Nissen (1877, p. 135) uncovered remainders of bronze frames along with pieces of sheet glass. Martini (1984, p199-200) unearthed complete marble-framed windows in the Roman baths at Samos (ca. 2nd century CE). This evidence implies that ancient windows were not of one pane, like modern windows, but were multi-paned. In fact, it was not until after the Industrial Revolution that large plate glass became available (Douglas and Frank, 1972).It is important to note, however, that, according to Seneca the Younger (Q. Nat. 86.8–11)—the only ancient writer to mention window material in baths—the baths in his time had “latis specularibus” in the windows of the caldaria.1919Pliny (Ep. 2.17.11) mentions how he could see out from a bath all the way to the sea which suggests a translucent or transparent material or no glazing at all. However, it is important to note that Pliny does not explicitly reference a caldarium and his bath is part of a residence rather than a public bath. The temporal and spatial differences between Pliny and Seneca are also significant.What is peculiar about this reference is the use of specularia instead of vitrum: the Latin word for glass. Many scholars (e.g., Rackham, 1938, p. 2:25, p. 5:463; Sedgwick, 1959, p. 124; Oltramare, 1961, p. 206; André, 1964, p. 19:49, p. 19:122; De Labriolle and Villeneuve, 1974, p. 41; Smith, 1975, p. 189; Shackleton Bailey, 1993, p. 2:171) and the OLD (Glare, 1982) have translated this word as being mica or transparent stone rather than glass. While this differentiation does not affect the geometry here, it does impact the texture of the material. The counterpoint to this debate as it pertains to this reconstruction is that Seneca wrote in the 1st Century CE—almost two centuries before the Baths of Caracalla—so the designers may have abandoned this technology in favor of glass. However, since the material may have varied with both time and region as demonstrated by Pliny in note 11, what material I chose was not crucial to the overall reconstruction.There are also key secondary works (Thatcher, 1956; Ring, 1996; Oetelaar, 2013, pp. 89–116; Miliaresis, 2013; and to a lesser extent, Broise, 1991) that debate the possible ramifications to the interior thermal environment of having or not having window glass. Though these, with the exception of Broise (1991), are not primarily showing evidence for glass, they show how important glass was to the day-to-day operation of the baths.The evidence suggests that the Roman designers would have most likely made the inserts from compilations of smaller panes. Therefore all windows had to be split into two parts: the glass and the frame. Instead of making the individual panes of glass, it was easier to make one sheet of glass fill the window opening and then overlay the frames.One major question remains: how big were the panes, muntins, stiles, and rails (Fig. 2)? For clues one has to turn to sites outside Rome. The evidence, though, was limited as shown earlier, so one must appeal to practicality. Assuming that the panes of glass were in multiples of Roman feet (1 Roman foot or pes (p) is 0.297m) and that the muntins are 5cm wide gave a starting point. To determine the size of the panes, I created a spreadsheet giving the dimensions of each window and the multiple of each 1p, 1.5p, 2p, 2.5p, and 3p panes (seeTable 1) that would fit in each window, to see if a pattern appeared from these data. Somewhat counter-intuitively, though, there has to be some leeway in the fit to allow for the space for the frames (i.e., the muntins, rails, and stiles). Interestingly, a pattern emerged. The columns in bold (number of 2p panes that fit in height-wise and number of 2.5p panes that fit in width-wise) have values that are all just above multiples of 5 and 4 respectively. This means that the best fit comes from arranging panes 2.5p wide×2p high into panels 4 panes wide×5 high, and making the rails and stiles adjustable. There are two exceptions—the windows in Rooms 13E/W and the higher windows in the frigidarium—where the best fit is panes that are 1.5p wide. However, it is important to note that these were completely based on DeLaine′s drawings as nothing remains. The caldarium windows were different because the openings that they cover were curved. Since curved glass panes were difficult to manufacture and the radius of the curve is so large, I decided to break these windows down into three equal flat sections and then paned each section. Interestingly, since the size of the window differed depending on its orientation, each window had a different number of panes per panel and even a different sized pane. The site northeast and northwest windows (Fig. 1) were the smallest, each section with three 2.5p wide×2p high panes across the bottom; the site east, west, southeast, and southwest windows each had four 2p wide×2.5p high panes; and the largest were the site south windows, with six 1.5p wide×2p high panes.With the geometry complete, the next step in the reconstruction was texturing. This is where the major drawback of SolidWorks becomes apparent. As an engineering design program, models generated by SolidWorks look metallic and the program′s rendering capability is limited. As mentioned earlier, to enhance its appearance, I chose the more artistic Autodesk 3ds MAX. The transition process, however, was not easy as 3ds MAX cannot open SolidWorks files directly and IGES—a CAD interchange file format—did not provide adequate results. The best alternative was to open the SolidWorks files directly in another program, McNeel′s Rhino 4, and then save the model as a 3D Studio file. In essence, a tertiary program was necessary to ensure the best results. The problem then became the large mesh size and the limitations associated with high memory demands. For instance, instead of a cylindrical surface that has three faces, the model would import a cylindrical mesh containing many polygons or polyfaces. Smaller grids produce smoother images but rendering times go up dramatically and some displays can only handle a limited number polyfaces. The intricacy of the Baths of Caracalla turned into a drawback because creating the mesh of the entire building required more computer memory than was available. Instead of importing the entire model, it was better to import groups: superstructure, frames, glazing, mosaic floors, subfloor, columns, terrace and tiled roofs, and pool water. This also made applying the texture simpler because, for example, applying the bronze texture to all the frames at once is easier than applying it to each frame individually. To create the mesh of the superstructure, though, it was necessary to break the complex down further into three blocks: the two wings and the central rooms. Since their coordinate system origins were the same, the reassembly of the groups was a simple overlay.Texture application is critical to the appearance of a reconstruction because, as a visual medium, the “skin” is the first thing that the eye catches. In the prototype model presented here, most of the textures themselves were generic because the details of the decorative scheme are largely unknown and thus insufficient to propose a specific design motif. However, I did attempt a reconstruction of the opus sectile floors using drawings from Blouet published in 1828. I only had access to the microform version that was black and white so I extrapolated the color scheme based on the fragments of opus sectile still in situ; however, the assumption that the color scheme remains similar throughout the baths is questionable as evident by the remnants. Room 3E and its subsidiaries (a–d) were all black with white detailing but Room 12W had white, tan, green, and maroon with some sea green accents. This version used the colors of Room 12W and tried to ensure some degree of continuity; however, this was just one of many interpretations. The completed design is shown inFig. 3. There is one omission, the semi-circular Rooms 13E/W that held the Mosaics of the Athletes now in Rome′s Vatican Museums.2020For a picture of this, refer to Fig. 71 in Dunbabin (1999) or Figs. 144–148 in Heinz (1983).I did not attempt to reproduce these rooms as they are much more intricate and require much more expertise than I possess.The decorative motifs of the walls and vaults were considerably more difficult to reconstruct. DeLaine provided line drawings of her interpretation of the marble revetment on one wall of two rooms. These mosaics of large rectangular tiles appeared inconsistent with what little remains in a corner of Room 8E, which indicated intricate multi-layer decoration. However, if one remembers that Romans often painted marble, these two images can merge and create an extremely complicated picture. This becomes even more complex with the suggestion that the walls could have glass tesserae, as contended by Sear (1977). As such, I decided not to attempt to reconstruct the wall and vault treatments. For this model, the best option to cover the superstructure was a simple stone material that mimicked travertine.I felt that I could take some freedom with some of the remaining textures because as mentioned earlier this is a model made largely to demonstrate the geometry. Initially I used two tones of greenish marble to cover the simple columns: dark green for the large columns and light for the others. Later iterations may have more specific colors of marble and detailed columns will replace the present simple ones. I purchased more detailed columns for key rooms (the natatio, the frigidarium, and the tepidarium) but even these, while better, do not have the capitals that still exist and thus are nonetheless inaccurate. The columns in the publishable model here, however, have less detail to minimize the polygon count and the overall file size. The window frames imitated bronze and I decided to go with glass that had a slight blue tinge to match many examples from that period instead of mica for the panes. I estimated what the vestiaria (lockers) and benches in the apodyteria may have looked like as seen in the 3D model. Since nothing remains, I extrapolated measurements of the lockers from Eschebach′s scale drawings (1979) of the women′s apodyterium of the Stabian Baths in Pompeii.2121In this model, there are 1090 separate lockers which indicate that the Baths of Caracalla held less people than Fagan′s (2000) lowest estimate for the five hour seating capacity of the caldarium. Obviously this is inaccurate but these lockers were simply meant to give an impression of what the apodyteria were like.I assumed that the ones that were in the Baths of Caracalla were wooden with a cloth door.With the geometry completed, attention turned to the more intricate details, namely texture application. For this, it was necessary to switch to Autodesk 3ds MAX. Picking the most appropriate texture was exceedingly difficult considering the state of preservation of the veneers and mosaics. The arrangement presented in this model was a simplified one and not a completely accurate appearance of the Baths of Caracalla when they opened in 216 CE.Video S1 is a fly-through of the 3D model that highlights many of the major rooms of the complex.What was it like to stand in the Baths of Caracalla at their height? There are multiple components to fully analyze this seemingly simple question including the thermal environment, the sounds, and the sights. Engineering techniques like computational fluid dynamics (CFD) can help decipher the thermal environment by determining the temperature and air currents in the building on a room-by-room basis. The sounds are possibly the most difficult to interpret because they are very dependent on the activity taking place, which could vary day-to-day or even hour-to-hour. However, a recording of a crowd might be a worthy analog. The last aspect—the sights—is where a 3D model can be very useful. Pictures of the 3D model, while good, only give the viewer snapshots and cannot truly convey the immensity of this complex. Similarly with video walkthroughs because inevitably the part that a scholar wants to view is not included or is only briefly. This downloadable model allows for exploration and immersion into the complex. Moving from room to room the full size of this building becomes apparent. Whether it is looking up to the 45.75m apex of the caldarium dome or the view of the palaestra from the terrace that encircles it, the Baths of Caracalla are a symbol of the wealth and power of Rome.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
