@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Web-based individual Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for cancer-related fatigue — A pilot study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This pilot study is the first to investigate the efficacy of a web-based individual MBCT for CRF.Fatigue severity (effect size: 1.46) and distress (effect size: 0.71) significantly decreased after the intervention, n=257.35% (n=89) was clinically relevant improved after the intervention62% (n=159) adhered to treatment, thus completed at least 70% of the intervention

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy,Cancer-related fatigue,e-Mental health,Cancer survivor,Adherence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundSevere fatigue may persist for many years in cancer survivors and has a considerable impact on a patient's life. This condition is called cancer-related fatigue (CRF). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy has shown to significantly reduce CRF in cancer survivors. Internet-delivered interventions can be valuable for fatigued patients who are not able to travel to a healthcare institute because of the lack of energy and/or physical limitations. Therefore, we have developed a web-based, therapist guided individual 9-week Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (eMBCT) aimed at diminishing CRF.ObjectiveThe aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of eMBCT in a clinical setting in reducing fatigue severity and distress in cancer survivors.MethodsThis pilot study was based on data from severely fatigued cancer survivors who applied for eMBCT between 2009 and 2013. Our primary outcome measure was the change in self-reported web-assessed fatigue severity, measured with the Fatigue severity subscale of the Checklist Individual Strength before (baseline) and one month after (post-assessment) eMBCT. The secondary outcome was distress (HADS) and the proportion of participants that showed clinically relevant improvement on fatigue severity. Patients' satisfaction with using eMBCT and reasons for non-adherence were studied. Intention-to-treat analyses were performed using multiple imputations to deal with data loss at post-assessment. All patients had to be severely fatigued at baseline (≥35 on the fatigue severity subscale of the Checklist Individual Strength), were >18years old, had no history of psychosis or current Major Depressive Disorder, finished their last cancer treatment at least six months ago (mixed cancer types), and were not in the terminal phase of illness. Patients were recruited offline as well as online.ResultsTwo-hundred fifty-seven patients (age range 22–79 (M=50.2, SD=10.7), 76% women, 44% breast cancer, most had had surgery, chemo- and/or radiotherapy) met our inclusion criteria. Paired samples t-tests showed that fatigue severity was significantly reduced post-assessment (t(18)=13.27, p<.001, Cohen's d: 1.45 as well as distress (t(46)=7.66, p<.001, Cohen's d: 0.71). Thirty-five percent (n=89) was clinically relevant improved at post-assessment and 62% (n=159) adhered to treatment. This study had a completion rate of 1.5 and a registration rate of 2.3.ConclusionThese findings suggest that individual eMBCT may be effective in reducing fatigue in cancer survivors. A randomized controlled study with a large sample and longer follow up is needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of eMBCT for CRF.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fatigue is a common side-effect of cancer and its treatment (Servaes et al., 2003; Bower, 2005; Van der Geest et al., 2013). Cancer-related fatigue (CRF) is defined as a distressing persistent, subjective sense of physical, emotional and/or cognitive tiredness or exhaustion related to cancer or cancer treatment that is not proportional to recent activity and interferes with usual functioning (Berger et al., 2014). In about one third of cancer survivors fatigue may persist for months or even years after cancer treatment (Nieboer et al., 2005; Goedendorp et al., 2013; Heutte et al., 2009; Hjermstad et al., 2005; Storey et al., 2012). Fatigue is known as one of the most prevalent and distressing long-term consequences of cancer (Bower, 2008; Díaz et al., 2008; Jansen et al., 2011; Oerlemans et al., 2013). It is associated with high levels of depression and anxiety (Prue et al., 2006; Smets et al., 1993; Goldstein et al., 2006), and has an impact on patient's ability to reintegrate into everyday life (Bartsch et al., 2003). It is estimated that in the Netherlands alone, at least 156.000 cancer survivors are suffering from fatigue (Goedendorp et al., 2013; Meulepas et al., 2011a). This number is expected to rise in the next decades, as the number of people surviving cancer is increasing (Meulepas et al., 2011b).The etiology of CRF is complex and multidimensional (Koornstra et al., 2014), as it most likely involves physiological, biochemical and psychological systems (Ryan et al., 2007). Most commonly identified factors that contribute to CRF include 1) tumor-related factors and complications (e.g. anemia, pain, appetite loss, stress), 2) treatment side effects (e.g. tissue damage due to cytostatica, or radiation, medication side effects), 3) comorbid medical condition (e.g. thyroid dysfunction, diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) 3) exacerbating comorbid symptoms (sleep disturbance, deconditioning, chronic pain) and 4) psychosocial factors (coping with illness, anxiety, depression) (Koornstra et al., 2014; Wagner and Cella, 2004).In the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines for CRF (Berger et al., 2014) psychosocial interventions are recommended for CRF both during active cancer treatment, as well as after treatment. These interventions are aimed at changing inefficient coping strategies (Berger et al., 2014; Mock, 2003), thus changing the behavioral and cognitive reactions of the patient to cancer-related stressors including fatigue itself (Duijts et al., 2011; Gielissen et al., 2006; Van der Lee and Garssen, 2012). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT) has shown to be effective in reducing severe fatigue in cancer survivors in a randomized controlled trial (Van der Lee and Garssen, 2012). Mindfulness-based interventions have been found to have a positive effect on psychological and physiological symptoms in cancer survivors (Ledesma and Kumano, 2009; Foley et al., 2010; Ott et al., 2006; Hofmann et al., 2010). Baer (2003) proposed that mindfulness skills can lead to symptom reduction and behavior change through exposure, cognitive change, self-management, relaxation and acceptance. In Fig. 1the proposed mechanisms by Baer are presented, and applied to CRF by the authors.Internet-delivered psychosocial interventions can serve as an addition to existing face-to-face interventions (Cuijpers et al., 2008; Andersson et al., 2014; Boettcher et al., 2014). It makes treatment available for patients who are unable to travel to a healthcare institute, because of lack of energy or physical limitations. Also, internet interventions may be suitable for patients who seek treatment that is easy to integrate into daily life activities, as one can follow the program when and wherever preferred. We have developed a web-based individual MBCT aimed at alleviating CRF called eMBCT. The eMBCT is characterized by personal contact with one assigned therapist via e-mail and follows the same protocol as face-to-face MBCT for CRF (see Appendix A) (Van der Lee and Garssen, 2012). MBCT is originally delivered in a group format. Individual MBCT can be beneficial for patients who are reluctant to treatment in a group, for instance because they fear being confronted with stories of fellow patients. Individual MBCT has been shown to be effective in reducing depression in patient with diabetes (Tovote et al., 2014). As far as we know, this pilot study is the first to investigate a web-based individual MBCT for CRF.In the development of eMBCT, we originally adopted the 9-week face-to-face MBCT protocol for CRF (Van der Lee and Garssen, 2012), and made the following adaptations: We re-designed the reader with a professional lay-out, and added a written introduction which was originally given in the group face-to-face. The weekly reader was divided in paragraphs, describing each psycho-educational theme separately, and thereby improving readability. We transformed the audio files from the face-to-face MBCT to digital MP3 files. We added written instructions for the exercises ‘eating with awareness’ and ‘walking meditation’, as these exercises were originally done in the group in the face-to-face MBCT. We illustrated the yoga exercises in the reader so patients could easily copy the yoga postures.We designed a website (www.mindermoebijkanker.nlHelen Dowling Institute, 2009) (SSL encrypted) with the help of an ICT company called Studio2 (Studio2 Communications BV, 2015) (see Appendix D for screenshots). The 9-week protocol, the readers, MP3 files, and log boxes were implemented. On this website, patients as well as therapists could log in on their personal webpage with a username and password. In the log boxes patients could write down their experiences with doing the exercises. An e-mailbox was implemented on the webpage, so patients could securely correspond with their personal therapist, and receive feedback on their log files. An extensive intake procedure containing state and trait questionnaires was designed and put on the webpage. See Section 2.3 for more information about setting and intervention.Five fatigued cancer patients, who had previously followed face-to-face MBCT for CRF (Van der Lee and Garssen, 2012), volunteered to follow the first version of eMBCT and gave feedback about user friendliness and usability. Following their feedback, we added MP3 files of the same exercises (male voice, female voice, and shorter versions) so patients could choose which exercise they preferred. We added an option to print out the log files and e-mail correspondence with the therapist. We improved navigation on the webpage and enlarged the log boxes. An online forum was suggested to share experiences with mindfulness, and to help continue practicing after the intervention had finished. Though, as the costs of a moderator would not be compensated by the health insurance companies, we instead referred to a website for the patient to find mindfulness meetings nearby.The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of eMBCT in a clinical setting in reducing fatigue severity and distress in cancer survivors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
