@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy for adolescents with functional gastrointestinal disorders — An open trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Medical or dietary treatments have little effect on FGID, common in adolescents.This is the first trial that evaluates exposure based ICBT for FGID in adolescents.High adherence and symptomatic improvement suggests potential efficacy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Functional abdominal pain,Irritable bowel syndrome,Functional gastrointestinal disorders,Functional dyspepsia,CBT,Adolescents,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGID), including irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia and functional abdominal pain, are common in adolescents and are associated with substantially decreased quality of life. Cognitive behavior therapy for children and adolescents with FGID is one of few treatments that have shown effect, but treatment access is limited. In adults with irritable bowel syndrome, exposure-based internet-delivered CBT (ICBT) leads to reduced symptoms and increased quality of life, but studies in children are lacking. This open pilot aimed to evaluate feasibility and the potential efficacy of an exposure-based ICBT-program for adolescents with pain-predominant FGID. Twenty-nine adolescents (age 13–17), with FGID were included. The ICBT-program lasted for 8weeks with weekly online therapist support. The protocol for adolescents included exposure to abdominal symptoms, while the protocol for parents aimed at increasing parents' attention to adolescent healthy behaviors. Assessment points were baseline, post-treatment and 6-month follow-up. The primary outcome was the Gastrointestinal Symptoms Rating Scale-IBS (GSRS-IBS). Effect sizes were calculated using Cohen's d in an intent to treat analysis. GSRS-IBS improved significantly from baseline to post-treatment (mean difference 6.48; 95% CI [2.37–10.58]) and to follow-up (mean difference 7.82; 95% CI [3.43–12.21]), corresponding to moderate effect sizes (within-group Cohen's d=0.50; 95% CI [0.16–0.84] and d=0.63; 95% CI [0.24–1.02], respectively). Treatment adherence was high with 22 of 29 (76%) adolescents completing the entire treatment period. High adherence indicates acceptability of format and content, while symptomatic improvement suggests potential efficacy for this ICBT intervention in adolescents with FGID.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGID) are common in adolescents, with a prevalence of 14% reported in Japan (Sagawa et al., 2013) and as much as 24% reported in an often cited school-based study (Saps et al., 2009). FGID are associated with school absenteeism, high health care consumption, increased anxiety and depression (Saps et al., 2009) and have a large negative impact on the quality of life (Youssef et al., 2006). Three of the most common types of FGID are irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), functional abdominal pain (FAP), and functional dyspepsia (FD) (Sagawa et al., 2013). They are characterized by recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort and in IBS, also a change in defecation patterns and consistency (Rasquin et al., 2006). Other gastrointestinal symptoms like nausea, bloating, and flatulence are also common in FGID (Rasquin et al., 2006). FGID symptoms have been shown to be stable over time (Walker et al., 1998) and sustain into adulthood for many patients (Campo et al., 2001). There is currently no support that medical or dietary treatments have any meaningful beneficial effects (Huertas-Ceballos et al., 2008, 2009) but cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) has been evaluated for children and adolescents with FGID with promising results (Foisy et al., 2011; Sprenger et al., 2011).Although CBT can be an effective treatment for FGID in children, there is a shortage of CBT therapists (Shafran et al., 2009). During the last two decades, internet-delivered CBT (ICBT) has been applied to more than 20 different clinical disorders in adults in more than 100 studies with results equivalent to traditional CBT (Hedman et al., 2012). While ICBT treatments are often based on the same therapeutic content as face-to-face CBT, the content is presented online and patients and therapists interact using written messages. Thus, ICBT can potentially increase the availability of effective psychological treatments through reduced therapist time per patient and greater geographical reach. Although the majority of ICBT studies have included adult participants, ICBT has been shown to lead to improvement for children and adolescents suffering from anxiety disorders (Richardson et al., 2010; Vigerland et al., 2013), OCD (Lenhard et al., 2014), chronic pain (Hicks et al., 2006; Palermo et al., 2009), and other health problems (Cushing & Steele, 2010). However, although studies of ICBT for children and adolescents with chronic pain have included participants with abdominal pain, among other pain conditions, these treatments have not been designed to specifically target the full range of symptoms in FGID, for example disturbed defecation in IBS, and dyspeptic symptoms in FD (Rasquin et al., 2006). Thus, it has not been investigated if ICBT tailored specifically for FGID could lead to global symptom relief.Many CBT protocols for abdominal pain rely on interventions that target stress or teach symptom management techniques, such as applied relaxation, deep breathing and distraction (Sprenger et al., 2011). These interventions are often based on the common observation that abdominal pain is associated with stress (Song et al., 2012). However, studies of adults with IBS have indicated that fear and avoidance of symptoms rather than stress may be the most important factor associated with diminished quality of life and symptom severity (Hazlett-Stevens et al., 2003; Labus et al., 2004, 2007; Jerndal et al., 2010; Reme et al., 2010). Thus, instead of aiming at symptom improvement through symptom control and stress reduction, another target of treatment could be to use exposure treatment i.e., to practice having symptoms in difficult situations, to reduce the fear of symptoms and avoidance behaviors, and to ultimately reduce symptoms. Several studies have shown that exposure treatment is effective for reducing gastrointestinal symptoms in adults with IBS, both in face-to-face format (Ljótsson et al., 2010a; Craske et al., 2011) and delivered over the internet (Hunt et al., 2009; Ljótsson et al., 2010b, 2011a,b, 2014). In these studies, the exposure-based ICBT has targeted avoidance behaviors and fears that are related to both the abdominal pain and the disturbed defecation in IBS.In summary, no previous study has investigated ICBT specifically tailored for adolescents with FGID and neither has any study investigated the effect of exposure-based CBT, regardless of delivery format, for FGID in adolescents. As preparation for a planned randomized controlled trial, we therefore conducted this open pilot trial to evaluate the feasibility and potential efficacy of a newly developed internet-delivered exposure-based CBT for adolescents diagnosed with pain-related FGID, specifically IBS, FAP or FD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Exposure-based ICBT may be a feasible and efficacious treatment for adolescents diagnosed with IBS, FAP or FD. The results obtained in this pilot study will be used in the planning of future randomized controlled trials, required to confirm these preliminary results. The internet-modality is particularly interesting as it allows any geographical distance between patient and therapist and could potentially be used to increase accessibility to effective psychological treatment for this patient group.