@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Digital image enhancement with DStretch

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We argue that using DStretch® greatly facilitates the recording rock-art in remote areas and harsh environments.We propose a two-step procedure for on-site documentation.Our tests show that digital enhancing does not preclude subjectivity, as final tracings are always subjective and biased by personal perceptions.A code of good practice should be installed in this field.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rock art,Petroglyph,Prehistoric art,Image enhancement,Sahara,Tracing,Methodology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
DStretch®, plug-in for ImageJ© is designed specifically for the enhancement of digital images of pictographs. It is now widely used in the world since a decade but have thus far rarely been used in French and African rock art studies. Among all the software tools currently available to rock art specialists, it is one of the most efficient to decipher faint paintings and sometimes engravings, while being cheap, fast and easy to use, particularly in harsh or remote environments. Moreover, the enhancement of digital images with DStretch® is almost operator-independent and reproducible thanks to pre-recorded settings, thus improving objectivity. We provide several examples of the benefit of using this tool on various sites, from African prehistoric pictographs to Alpine paintings and petroglyphs, and propose a method for recording rock art panels with DStretch®. But, in spite of these advantages, we have to keep in mind that the final tracings are always subjective and biased by personal perceptions, as demonstrated here by a simple but significant experience.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past 10 years, invention then development of digital photography and image enhancement software tools has significantly changed the recording and study of rock art (e.g.: Montero Ruiz et al., 1998; Kamal et al., 1999; Clogg and Díaz-Andreu, 2000; Brady, 2007; David et al., 2007; López-Montalvo and Domingo-Sanz, 2009; Gutiérrez Calvache and González Tendero, 2010; Rogerio-Candelara, 2010; Ortiz-Sanz et al., 2010; López-Montalvo, 2010; Rogerio-Candelara et al., 2011; Hollmann and Crause, 2011; Förster, 2013; Ruiz and Pereira, 2014). Compared to previous methodologies (hand sketch, direct tracing or tracing from film photography), the new tools constituting what Brady and Gunn call “the digital revolution”(Brady et al., 2012: 628) provide numerous advantages, like more comprehensive inventories of paintings (McNiven et al., 2004; Brady, 2006), more precise and objective tracings, and help for superimpositions studies (Gunn et al., 2010), while avoiding direct contact with pigments.Image enhancement can be achieved at the photography step by using special technics as infrared (Fredlund and Sundstrom, 2007) or cross-polarization (Henderson, 2002), but the most commonly used method consists in post-processing the digital pictures through image enhancement software tools. Among those currently available, the “standard” one since more than ten years is Adobe Photoshop©, a very powerful tool (Mark and Billo, 2002; Domingo Sanz and López-Montalvo, 2002; McNiven et al., 2004; Brady, 2006, 2007). Good alternatives are ImageJ® (written in java, open source, with a worldwide users community), and Hypercube® (a Spectral Imagery Analysis Software freely distributed by the US Army Topographic Engineering Center). However, DStretch®, a free plug-in for ImageJ©, designed specifically for the enhancement of digital images of pictographs by Jon Harman in 2005 (Harman, 2005; Mark and Billo, 2006) offers, at equal or often better performances, more advantages as regards ease of use, faster processing time, operator-independent enhancement.We will not discuss here the technical aspects of DStretch® and its functioning, succintly presented in a previous article (Le Quellec et al., 2013), as this topic was already discussed in detail by several specialists (Gillespie et al., 1986; Rothery, 1987; Gillespie, 1992; Alley, 1996; Guo and McM Moore, 1996; Harman, 2005). Now we would like to clarify the position we have currently reached in our reflections on the use of this software and on the fact that the final recording always involve a certain amount of subjectivity. We argue that the combined use of DStretch® and Adobe Photoshop© at different steps of the procedure provides a very powerful toolbox for rock art studies, which may serve as a standard in this field.The main use of image enhancement software consists in helping visualization of faint paintings or of superimposed ones – or both – difficult to identify with the naked eye. As a wrong or partial inventory could lead to misinterpretation or overinterpretation of a figure or of a rock art site, deciphering painted motives is critical.DStretch® is based on several algorithms first used in remote sensing and adapted for rock art studies by Jon Harman in 2005 (Harman, 2005). It was presented in France during the AAARS (Association des Amis de l’Art Rupestre Saharien) meeting in 2006, and the first French papers illustrated with photographs processed with this software appeared the following years (Dupuy and Fouilleux, 2007; Lachaud, 2008; Maestrucci and Giannelli, 2008). AAARS is an association of Saharan rock art enthusiasts, and all AAARS authors are now routinely using DStretch®, which has enabled the discovery of hundreds of new pictures in the Sahara.Curiously enough, outside this group, DStretch® is still rarely used in France and Africa, despite its undeniable qualities. For these parts of the world, this may be partly attributable to a long tradition of tracing techniques, going back to the Abbé Breuil era (Breuil, 1955: 16–18). In Southern Africa for example, many rock art specialists still favour direct tracings, although this technique raises conservation issues (but signs of change begin to appear: see Hollmann and Crause, 2011). French specialists working in caves have now improved their technique and work on photographs, checking their work by comparing it with the original at the site. They also use Computer Aided Drawing (CAD) but most of them are still reluctant to apply image-enhancement algorithms to their documents (Fritz and Tosello, 2007). In France, it seems that the first published paper using this method on a palaeolithic art image appeared in 2012 (Robert, 2011: Fig. 11) – and a second one was published in 2014 (Petrognani et al., 2014: 426) – while DStretch® is now routinely used in many other places of the World: Spain (Quesada Martínez, 2010; Fernández Ruiz and Spanedda, 2013; Martínez Collado et al., 2013; Collado and Julio García Arranz, 2013), Italia (Colella, 2010), Norway (Dodd, 2013), North America (Mark and Billo, 2006; Knight et al., 2010), Patagonia (Acevedo and Franco, 2012), Australia (Gunn et al., 2014), Cambodia (Tan et al., 2014), etc. DStretch® has also proved to be a very suitable non-destructive tool to study the morphology of the ceramic cracks of the glazed ceramics of the Song Dynasty (Lahlil and Ji Ming, 2013).One of the main advantages of this plug-in is that the enhancements are almost fully operator-independant while for most of the other software, they depend on the operator׳s skills and expertise level and thus vary enormously. This ensures reproducible and more objective results, which is essential for an accurate study of the art (Clogg and Díaz-Andreu, 2000: 842; Brady et al., 2012: 630, 632). Presettings design leads to a quick and easy learning of the plug-in as well as to rapid results, when handling different settings or combination of settings with Photoshop© or other software takes, in average, more time. And DStretch® yields faster or often better results, as illustrated in the coming examples.Ease and rapidity in obtaining powerful and reliable results are crucial in documenting rock art sites, above all in remote areas and harsh environments, desert or mountainous regions where access difficulties and fieldwork logistics are critical aspects. When it is impossible to go back and forth between the site and the laboratory, DStretch® allows a fast on-site deciphering of the walls, helping to rapidly acquire a comprehensive and accurate documentation, even with limited material and financial resources.It should be stressed that DStretch® has to be considered as a possible and even essential tool for recording petroglyphs, at least in some contexts and when the research question does not require 3D models. This software yielded convincing results in the southern French Alps, in the Oullas rock-shelter (St-Paul-sur-Ubaye, Alpes-de-Haute-Provence), a rock surface painted and engraved from the Neolithic period (Defrasne, 2014). On-going studies show that DStretch® is even indispensable in this area. One of the main goals of the new recording techniques is to avoid any contact with the rock surfaces, but in the Alps some panels are covered with tangled fine and superficial linear incisions. Such engravings could be revealed thanks to an almost horizontal light, a technique particularly suitable for working in closed environments (Robin, 2010), but high in the mountain (as in desert areas) we have a very bright context and no power source, and recording these lines from photographs would be quite difficult and rather risky. Fortunately, DStretch® proved to be very efficient there. Linear incisions were highlighted and could be easily recorded in a complete and detailed way (Figs. 1 and 2) – an impossible task with Photoshop©. At the Oullas rockshelter, only this way made it possible to detect medieval or modern linear engravings which can be very difficult to see with the naked eye (Figs. 3 and 4).To ensure high quality and affordable on-site documentation even when circumstances are unfavourable, we propose a two-step procedure.(1)The completion of a systematic photographic coverage of the entire wall, without prejudging the existence of paintings. Each photograph covers about 1×1m2, with at least 50% of overlap in order to avoid missing any figure. An alternative solution could be the use of the GigaPan© robotic system to automatically generate a panorama (Mark and Billo, 2011). In 2012, one of us (JLLQ) had the opportunity to test this system in two sites of the Libyan Desert (cf. Le Quellec and De Flers, 2013; Kuper, 2013): the “Cave of the Hands” (http://gigapan.com/gigapans/118768) and the “Cave of the Beasts” (http://gigapan.com/gigapans/118911), confirming that it is fast and easy to implement even in the most difficult environments. Pictures are then immediately enhanced in situ with DStretch®. Each identified motif (even partial ones) is given by an ID number transferred on an overall view of the wall, as is now routinely done (e.g. McNiven et al., 2004: 230). This view and a sketch of the figures positioned on the wall help in remembering the location of faint or partial paintings. The ID number of each figure, preceded by the site and wall names, will be used later to reference the corresponding picture files.The second step consists in taking closer views of each identified motif and group of motifs. Thanks to the preliminary deciphering, framing fainted motives is no longer a problem. Different camera settings can be used according to the purposes of the pictures – such as tracings, publishing or photogrammetry for 3D reconstitution of the site (Hachid et al., 2010: 52). Close views are also taken for superimposition analysis. A second DStretch® enhancement should be done to check focus for fainted motives. Back to the lab, DStretch® is also used for tracing each motif or for helping in the study of superimpositions (Gunn et al., 2010). At this stage, the methodology is similar to that proposed by other scholars for the use of Photoshop© (e.g.: Mark and Billo, 2002; López-Montalvo and Domingo-Sanz, 2009; Domingo Sanz and López-Montalvo, 2002; López-Montalvo, 2010) or for developping databases that compile tracings made from photographs (e.g. López-Montalvo and Domingo-Sanz, 2005; Bea, 2012). The weak point of these processes seems to lie mainly in the use of the eraser tool to remove pixels considered as parasites. The famous saying “tracing is choosing” (Lorblanchet, 1993: 329) becomes “Tracing is selecting and erasing” and at this point, the passage through DStretch® greatly reduces the risk of errors.As an example, we give the tracing of a painting of Mokandioa in Mozambique.Fig. 5 is an unenhanced photo from the main panel, where one can recognize two human figures, but details are very difficult to make out.Fig. 6 is the same photo processed by DStretch®–YRD enhancement, chosen for its capacity to bring out red pigments. Many details are now visible, in particular the remains of an antelope between the two anthropomorphs: only the horns, the back and the tail of the animal are now visible, and it does not seem to be contemporary to the other motifs. Some scholars do not like the flashy colours resulting from most of the DStretch® enhancements, and some journals hesitate to publish them, but this can be easily remedied. The simplest way is to convert the picture to black and white (Fig. 7). But there is still another way: by suppressing all the colours except the reds, we obtain the result shown inFig. 8. Next we can extract the reds and put them back into the original image. Some slight adjustments will produce the result shown inFig. 9.The benefits of this method are twofold: it easily produces quick enhancements with minimal subjective human input. It makes visible information that already existed in the image but was barely or not visible to the naked eye. It also can suppress redundant, disturbing or useless information. An inherent risk in using DStretch® and Photoshop© in such a way is to unintentionally suppress data, but this is a lesser evil than adding wrong information.Depending on the quality of the original image and according to the purpose assigned to the tracing (Aujoulat, 1987; Lorblanchet, 1993, 2014), the processing steps may be more or less complex. Thus, the study of a surface on which one sees only “ghost” of paintings (Fig. 10) and for which the direct use of DStretch® produces a dramatic loss of sharpness (Fig. 11) – requires close-up flash shootings (Fig. 12) to be processed separately (Fig. 13). All the Pixels corresponding to the paint are selected on the decorrelated image, then the details are reassembled on another file (Fig. 14) before being superimposed on the original photograph (Fig. 15).We now come to three examples illustrating what a few clicks could avoid in term of misinterpretation of rock paintings.Our first example is from a well-known South African site: Main Caves North in the Giant׳s Castle Nature Reserve (Drakensberg/Ukhlahamba Mountains). Among the many paintings recorded in this site (Russell, 2000), Thackeray and Russell (Thackeray and Russell, 2004: 18) commented on two “stripes” painted on the neck of a roan antelope (Fig. 16), without specifying whether they had identified these stripes with or without image enhancement. They claimed that “these certainly do not relate to natural stripes on the animal and it is probable that the stripes have symbolic intent”. After the DStretch® processing (with the LDS matrix) of a good photograph of this part of the painting (Fig. 17), several details can be noticed which are inconsistent with the published tracing (Fig. 18): the ears, the mane and the muzzle are different, and the so-called “stripes”are far from convincing. They appear to result more from a combined effect of the drawing of the rump and thigh of the underlying quadruped with the irregularities of the wall. This observation is confirmed with the Photoshop© treatment of the same image (CMYK mode, levels and hue/saturation settings): the so-called “stripes” are just an optical illusion (Fig. 19).Another example (Fig. 20) comes from Sefar, a site of the Tasīli-n-Ajjer plateau, in Algeria.Fig. 21 is the tracing published by Soleilhavoup (Soleilhavoup, 2007: 107). The main character seems to have a very large, strange circular head, and this curious detail was interpreted as a “drum” (Soleilhavoup, 2007: 107) or an “entoptic” sign (Fagnola, 1995: 4) indicating that this anthropomorph could represent a shaman. During the fieldwork of the franco-algerian project aimed at dating Tassilian rock art (Hachid et al., 2010, 2012; Le Quellec, 2010; Mercier et al., 2012), we took a close photograph of the head (Fig. 22). The DStretch®–LDS enhancement (Fig. 23) immediately made the head of the anthropomorph clearly visible: it is represented in front view, with large round “Mickey mouse” ears, and the previous readings cannot be maintained anymore. According to Sansoni (Sansoni, 1994: 97, Fig. 44) and Muzzolini (Muzzolini, 1995: 106, Fig. 80) the circular figure is superimposed on the anthropomorph, but the image enhancement reveals a reverse superimposition (the pigments of the head probably did not adhered to the underlying painting) and this suggests to reverse the chronology proposed by Sansoni (Sansoni, 1994: 92, Fig. 41 and 97, Fig. 44). In this case, the head is less visible with Photoshop© enhancement (Fig. 24, CMYK mode, hue/saturation settings and color replacement), and DStretch® gives better results.Most scholars invent their own method to enhance their photographs, and the main problem is how much confidence should we place in the results. In particular, several papers have made much of the efficiency brought by the “pulizia elettronica” (PE, in Italian: “Electronic Cleaning”) elaborated by L. de Cola, according to a procedure which produced surprising results in Saharan and Erythraean rock art sites (de Cola, 1995, 1997, 1998, 1999). For instance, many details were said to be revealed by this method on another famous painted wall of Sefar in the Tasīli-n-Ajjer (Fig. 25): the published tracing includes about 10 newly discovered subjects (Fig. 26), and on that basis, L. de Cola conceives an interpretation of the whole scene (de Cola, 1997). These statements were checked by applying the DStretch® LDS_AC-setting on recent photographs of the same panel. It appeared that none of these new figures is accurate, and – worse – most of them simply do not exist. For example, no painted delineation is visible above the head of the Great Bubalus, the parallel lines below the breast are non-existent, no bovid protome was painted in the muffle, and the animal between the legs is nothing else than a few cracks in the rock (Fig. 27). By contrast, and this is confirmed by Photoshop© enhancement (Fig. 28, CMYK mode), two ostriches and a small anthropomorph in the “orant position” typical of the Round Heads style are clearly visible inside the Bubalus (Fig. 29), but they were completely missed by the PE method. This should serve as a lesson to us: undisciplined use of image processing software can easily produce erroneous results.Today, nobody would declare that “the copies record the proportions and contours of rock paintings more exactly than photographs”, as did Breuil who also added: “Generally speaking, the margins of error in my copies are likely to be very small, as they are traced directly on the rock faces” (Breuil, 1955: 18). The importance of subjectivity in the recording of pictograms or petroglyphs is now aknowledged (Lorblanchet, 1984: 43–44; Ucko, 1992; Bednarik, 1992; Le Quellec, 1994; Brady, 2006; Le Quellec, 2007; Seoane Veiga, 2009: 40; Le Quellec et al., 2009; Dobrez, 2011). Digital enhancement is generally viewed as a way to reduce subjectivity, but even if “tool׳s eye forces human׳s one to be more rigorous” (Paillet, 1998: 17), one cannot believe that computer processing would totally eliminate the subjective nature of our readings.Surprisingly, this question has not been addressed in depth in any of the recently published books on Palaeolithic art. For example, the authors of the lavishly illustrated corpus on the Tuc d’Audoubert cave just note in passing: “as far as practicable, we try to interpret faithfully the Madgalenian expression” (Bégouën et al., 2009: 54). This process is certainly comparable to a translation (Delluc and Delluc, 2009: 96), but as the saying goes, “traduttore traditore” (“the translator is a traitor”). The same is true for rock art recording, for two reasons. First, all recording techniques are faillible. Second, their results have to be interpreted, and the need to create sense from chaos is often playing tricks here. One must keep in mind the cautionary tale of “The Spiral that Vanished”: when looking for a spiral rubbed in 1995 on stone 11 of the Castlerigg stone circle in Cumbria, Margarita Díaz-Andreu, Christopher Brooke, Michael Rainsbury and Nick Rosser tested two different non-contact techniques: laser scanning and ground-based remote sensing. Neither technique was able to document the spiral, but they found that intense scrutiny of the stone resulted in their beginning to see a variety of circular patterns (Díaz-Andreu et al., 2006). This is not surprising as recent studies have shown that image enhancement results in higher risk of being victim of pareidolia (Di Lazzaro et al., 2013).Much has been written by rock art specialists on the difficulty – or impossibility – of interpreting signs and images (is this bison wounded to death or not?) (Layton, 2000), on the errors attributable to the image projection or on the level of accuracy of the tracings (Lorblanchet, 1984: 43), but the very process of recognizing the figures in the first place (is this really a bison?) was generally overlooked. For example, schematic engravings consisting of only two, three or four lines have been published as “feminine figures” without the slightest argumentation: the reader has to believe the authors… or not (ex. Bosinski, 2011: 201–206, 212–213). How can we be sure that these elementary Palaeolithic tracings were really made to evoke some “feminine figures”? This “reading” might as well be the result of the brain capacity to give false representations of the reality, because “our mind tends to see what it expects and/or wants to see” (Murra and Di Lazzaro, 2010). A good example of this trend is Breuil׳s reading of the Levantine art with a palaeolithic bias (López-Montalvo, 2010: 160 and Fig. 3).To gain a better understanding of the degree of subjectivity commonly involved in rock art studies, one of us (FD) asked colleagues having a good practice in rock art recording to participate in a small experience. These colleagues were given original and enhanced photographs of two very faded Saharan rock paintings displaying anthropomorphic figures (Figs. 30 and 31) and they were asked to make a tracing of them. For both figures, each tracing was then coloured differently, and they were all superimposed one over another to highlight their differences (Fig. 32, and Video 1 for animation). Thus these latter could only be due to the perception of each operator as he/she worked from the same enhanced image.Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at doi:10.1016/j.daach.2015.01.003.The following is the Supplementary material related to this articleVideo 1.Video 1Animation of the previous stack, showing each of the ten tracings (image processing: Frédérique Duquesnoy).The result showed that with such a low contrast between the painting and the rock wall, it is difficult to decide where the limits of the forms are. However, the most important incertainty observed was on figure׳s head of the left hand anthropomorph, as well as on the possible presence of an object beside the bow. What was more surprising is that the tracings of the anthropomorph on the right also displayed important differences despite the fact that this figure is more visible than the previous one (Fig. 33). Another interesting result is that some participants saw a third figure below the right one; they always traced it as an anthropomorphic figure (Fig. 34), systematically omitting the above two parallel lines that are as visible as the ones below (Fig. 35). We suspect that the presence of several anthropomorphic figures on the wall influenced the perception of this third very hypothetical painting. As already stated by Peter Ucko, who conducted a similar test, an unavoidable level of uncertaincy will ever remain in final tracings (Ucko, 1992: 159).The signification of this evaluation shoud be tempered by the small number of our “guinea pigs”. However, the above results illustrate once more that the perception does not strictly correlate with the vision but depends as well on personnal factors, both physical (Changeux, 2002) and cultural (Panofsky, 1999: 43; Le Quellec, 2007; Bennett et al., 2014). The paintings used here could be seen as an unsuitable case because their very bad state of preservation induces, even with image enhancement, a very low contrast with the rock surface; however, this situation is not unusual, especially in Saharan rock art. The parietalists have to deal with it, but in the real world, it is rarely possible to have several operators working together on the same tracing.This implies that we should always keep in mind that image enhancement improves our vision but only a part of our perception. Therefore, from a methodological point of view, the procedure used for a tracing should always be documented. And the uncertaincy level of a tracing should be assessed before any further analysis: in our example, the left figure could be used to generate statistics on the number of anthropomorphs in the corpus, but not on the head shapes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
