@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Recruiting for health, medical or psychosocial research using Facebook: Systematic review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Health, medical and psychosocial research recruiting participants of all ages via Facebook is reviewed.Results suggest Facebook is an effective and cost efficient recruitment method.Results suggest Facebook can be used to obtain samples similarly representative to samples recruited via traditional methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Facebook,Recruitment,Online recruitment,Systematic review,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recruiting participants is a challenge for many health, medical and psychosocial research projects. One tool more frequently being used to improve recruitment is the social networking website Facebook. A systematic review was conducted to identify studies that have used Facebook to recruit participants of all ages, to any psychosocial, health or medical research. 110 unique studies that used Facebook as a recruitment source were included in the review. The majority of studies used a cross-sectional design (80%) and addressed a physical health or disease issue (57%). Half (49%) of the included studies reported specific details of the Facebook recruitment process. Researchers paid between $1.36 and $110 per completing participants (Mean=$17.48, SD=$23.06). Among studies that examined the representativeness of their sample, the majority concluded (86%) their Facebook-recruited samples were similarly representative of samples recruited via traditional methods. These results indicate that Facebook is an effective and cost-efficient recruitment method. Researchers should consider their target group, advertisement wording, offering incentives and no-cost methods of recruitment when considering Facebook as a recruitment source. It is hoped this review will assist researchers to make decisions regarding the use of Facebook as a recruitment tool in future research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recruiting participants is a challenge for many health, medical and psychosocial research projects. Participant recruitment can often be an expensive and time consuming process, complicated by the fact that some traditional methods of recruitment, such as mail and phone recruitment have become more difficult and expensive in recent decades (Fenner et al., 2012; Balfe et al., 2012). In research environments where resources are scarce and project timelines are tight it is important for researchers to identify ethical, effective, efficient and representative methods of recruitment.Online recruitment is more frequently being used to improve recruitment outcomes, by overcoming some of the limitations of traditional methods. In particular, Facebook has attracted researchers as a recruitment source, due to its widespread use and ability to target advertising to user characteristics. Facebook is a free social networking website that allows users to create a profile, connect with other users and view and share content (Facebook.com, 2013). Globally, Facebook is the most popular social media site with 1.49 billion active users (users who have logged into Facebook during the last 30days: Statista, 2015) and the 2nd most popular website, following Google.com (Alexa.com, 2015). The Pew Research Institute recently reported that 71% of US adults who use the Internet also use Facebook, which represents 58% of all US adults. Seventy percent of Facebook users also report that they use the site on a daily basis (Duggan et al., 2015).Recruiting via Facebook is a potentially cost-effective way to contact a large number of individuals, in a short period of time. It has also been suggested as a particularly useful resource for recruiting younger people, (Christofides et al., 2009; Raacke and Bonds-Raacke, 2008), and low incidence and stigmatized groups, due to the anonymity and confidentiality that sites such as Facebook can afford (Balfe et al., 2012; Fenner et al., 2012; Ramo and Prochaska, 2012; Temple and Brown, 2011).Adding to Facebook's appeal for research is the increasing diversity of users. While Facebook continues to be used at high levels by young adults, the Pew Institute found that more than half of all online older adults surveyed (56%) used Facebook, representing 31% of all adults aged 65years and over (Duggan et al., 2015). Their study also found high rates of Facebook use (77%) were reported by people with a household income of less than US$30,000 per year, indicating its reach into economically disadvantaged populations. Similarly, growth in Facebook usage is largest in developing countries (Duggan et al., 2015; Internet World Stats, 2012).In order to legitimise the use of Facebook as a recruitment source, we need to better understand who is likely to participate in research recruiting via Facebook, how researchers are using it, how to economize the process and what the limitations surrounding this recruitment source are. However, only one group has previously examined the utility of Facebook recruitment for research-related purposes across a number of research trials. Focussed exclusively on recruiting adolescents, Amon et al. (2014) identified six studies that used Facebook as a recruitment tool of children aged 10 to 18years. Amon et al. (2014) identified three ways in which Facebook was used for recruitment: (1) via paid advertising on Facebook (4/6 studies, at an average cost per participant of USD $0.60 to $20.14); (2) via a project-specific Facebook page (1/6 studies); and (3) to locate participants for follow-up (1/6 studies). The authors concluded that paid advertising on Facebook was an effective and cost efficient recruitment method, however many studies did not provide sufficient data to establish the efficacy of Facebook as a recruitment tool. It remains unclear as to how researchers might best optimize Facebook to recruit participants, particularly in research targeting populations other than adolescents (Amon et al., 2014).The aim of the current review was to examine the methodology and effectiveness of recruiting participants of all ages, to any psychosocial, health or medical research, via Facebook. Specifically, the review aimed to determine: who is likely to participate in research recruiting via Facebook; how has this recruitment source been used by researchers; the most cost-effective recruitment strategies; and limitations associated with this approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
