@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Attitudes towards the use of computerized cognitive behavior therapy (cCBT) with children and adolescents: A survey among Swedish mental health professionals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A majority of clinicians were positive to cCBT treatment.Treatment orientation, but not ruralitym had a significant effect on several ratings.Perceived concerns about CCBT included lack of human support.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet-delivered CBT,Computerized CBT,Children,Adolescents,Attitudes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundResearch has shown that computerized cognitive behavior therapy (cCBT), including internet-delivered CBT), can be effective. However, less is known about clinicians' attitudes towards this mode of treatment delivery. The aim of this study was to explore the attitudes of clinicians within child- and adolescent psychiatry towards cCBT and to explore if attitudes differed depending on rurality or theoretical orientation.MethodsA random sample of Swedish child- and adolescent mental health services was selected for a survey study (N=15). A total number of 156 surveys were collected.ResultsResults showed a generally low knowledge of cCBT. A majority of clinicians were positive to cCBT as a prevention program (73%), and as treatment for mild to moderate problems (75%). More caution was reported with regard to more severe mental health problems. Treatment orientation, but not rurality, had a significant effect on several ratings. Thematic analyses showed concerns regarding for example lack of human support and the restricted usefulness of cCBT regarding age and complexity of symptoms. Perceived advantages were for example increased availability and possibility of an alternative way of communication.ConclusionsThis study adds to the limited literature on attitudes towards cCBT. The emerging picture is of a mainly positive attitude and prerequisites for dissemination are promising.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As technology evolves and the demands on health care increases, different modes of treatment delivery have been developed, for example internet-based treatment (Andersson, 2010). Computerized cognitive behavior therapy (cCBT), including internet-based treatments, has been shown to be effective for a range of disorders, for example anxiety disorders and depression (Hedman et al., 2012). For children and adolescents, research on cCBT is still limited (Richardson et al., 2010), but results so far are promising (Khanna and Kendall, 2010; March et al., 2009; Spence et al., 2011; Wuthrich et al., 2012; Merry et al., 2012; Vigerland et al., 2013).Studies on cCBT for adults and youth have mainly focused on treatment outcomes, and knowledge about the attitudes of patients, research participants, clinicians and the public towards cCBT is scarce. Some studies have investigated the acceptability of treatment from patients' views (Mohr et al., 2010; Wootton et al., 2011) and found cCBT to be an acceptable treatment method that could overcome barriers like time constraints. Two studies from the United Kingdom have investigated clinicians' attitudes towards cCBT and found mainly positive attitudes, although few clinicians actually used cCBT in their clinical practice (Stallard et al., 2010; Whitfield and Williams, 2004). Furthermore, clinicians expressed a wish to learn more about cCBT and receive training before they were to use them themselves. Cook et al. (2009), identified negative attitudes as one of the most common barriers to adopting new treatments. This could for example be in the forms of doubts about the new methods efficiency, lack of interest or that the new method is not compatible with the clinician's values, education or style.Wangberg et al. (2007) did a survey of Norwegian psychologists use of email and text-messages within therapy and found that theoretical approach correlated with their attitude towards these communication methods. Specifically, a dynamic theoretical stance related negatively to positive attitudes, and a positive attitude correlated with a higher degree of usage in their own work. In Australia, Gun et al. (2011) explored the acceptability of internet-based treatments for anxiety or depression among health professionals and lay people. Internet-based treatment was rated acceptable for mild and moderate, but not severe, disorders and there was no significant difference in the acceptability ratings between health professionals and lay people. In New Zealand, Fleming and Merry (2013) investigated the attitudes of youth work service providers in focus groups and semi-structured interviews and found that they were positive to using cCBT in their services.In Sweden, there are several politicians and care-givers who are interested in implementing cCBT for children and adolescents within regular health care. A successful dissemination of this method is more likely if the clinicians who will work with or refer to cCBT are willing to do so. It is also likely that clinicians, depending on their attitudes towards and beliefs about cCBT, might introduce available programs differently and thus affect the willingness of patients to try the method. Therefore, it is important to investigate attitudes among clinicians before disseminating cCBT to children and adolescents. The results could affect how dissemination is planned, for example regarding information and education on cCBT.To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study of clinicians' attitudes towards cCBT in Sweden, and one of the few focusing specifically on cCBT for children and adolescents. As cCBT has been suggested as a way to increase availability of evidence-based treatments, it is possible that attitudes might be more positive in rural areas where problems with geographical availability might be larger than in urban areas.The aim of this study was to examine the attitudes of clinicians within Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) towards cCBT for children and adolescents. We also wanted to explore if attitudes differed depending on rurality or theoretical orientation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study adds to the limited literature on attitudes towards and acceptability of cCBT. The emerging picture is of a mainly positive attitude, particularly towards prevention and treatment of mild to moderate problems. There seems to be differences in attitude and acceptability depending on treatment orientation, but no clear effect of rurality could be seen. Perceived advantages regarding computers as an appealing medium for children and adolescents, and concerns regarding the lack of human contact seem to be recurrent in the literature. Overall, prerequisites for dissemination are promising. Future research should include professionals in other settings, for example schools and primary health care, potential patients and should also include more detailed questions about factors that could influence attitudes, for example type of disorder and age of the youth. These questions could be important to investigate before considering a wider dissemination of cCBT.The following are the supplementary data related to this article.Online supplement 1The adapted version of the questionnaire "Clinicians views about the use of computerized CBT with children and adolescents"Supplementary TableMeans or frequencies for all items for all participants, and means and frequencies for groups of treatment orientation.Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2014.06.002.