@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
From sketchbook to structure from motion: Recording prehistoric carvings in Ireland

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Techniques of recording Irish megalithic and rock-art developed in punctuated phases.Recording techniques progress when scholars work in collaboration and/or competition.Photogrammetry is a cost effective method for 3D modelling, easy to use and adaptable across scales.Immersive and realistic virtual worlds can be integrated with traditional recording methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ireland,Megalithic art,Rock-art,Recording,Photogrammetry,3D modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper traces the development of techniques of recording carvings on megalithic tombs and on open-air rock-art in Ireland from 1699 to the present day. Analysis shows that after the initial pioneering phase, recording methodologies tended to develop in accelerated bursts, interspersed with lulls in activity. In all, four phases of activity can be identified; in each there were a critical number of researchers who interacted with each other, driving forward advances in various forms of recording methods. Part 2 of the paper describes the application of new methods of digital recording, notably Structure from Motion photogrammetry. It shows how the resulting data have been used to create new ways of experiencing Irish prehistoric art in virtual environments, either as entire monuments in the landscape or within a “virtual museum”, using the open-source Blender 3D animation and game engine software.Part 1—Elizabeth Shee Twohig

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In Ireland prehistoric carvings are found on megalithic tombs (almost exclusively of the passage tomb type), on rock outcrops and on monuments such as standing stones. Traditionally the carvings have been divided between passage tomb art on the one hand and rock-art/cup and ring art on the other hand, particularly following Eoin MacWhite’s seminal paper (MacWhite, 1946). However, as so often happens, over time this division has been found to be somewhat simplistic, and a large number of carvings cannot be fitted comfortably into this traditional two-fold categorisation. Models are now emerging which indicate a more complex situation, resulting in suggestions of a third category called ‘anomalous or debatable sites’ (O’Sullivan, 2009, Table 1) or ‘other’ art (Shee Twohig et al, 2010, 25), however, a firm chronology for the open-air art is, as yet, elusive. Thus there are still many challenges to our understanding of these types of carvings in Ireland, in addition to the bigger questions of how the art was produced and its significance for those who created it and those who experienced it.The development of recording methods in Ireland shows pioneering work in 1699–1700, followed by three main phases of innovation, which seem to occur when a critical mass of recorders were working at the same time; major progress was made by the recorders comparing notes and adopting and adapting each other’s methodologies.In summary these phases are:1.Pioneer phase: 1699–1700Consolidation: 1840s–1910sSystematic classification: 1950s–1990sDigital revolution: 1990s to presentIn this paper the earlier phases are discussed by EST and phase 4 by KW.In Ireland the earliest records of carvings were made by Edward Lhwyd (1659–1709) (or Lhuyd or Lloyd), Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, a polymath who became interested in antiquarian matters after an earlier career classifying natural history and working in linguistics (Ashmolean Museum, 2014). He was on an antiquarian tour of Ireland at the time of the discovery of the passage tomb at Newgrange, Co. Meath in 1699. Some letters he wrote describing the discovery have survived, and also a drawing made by his draftsman, Will Jones (Herity, 1967; C. O’Kelly, 1982, 24–27; McGuinness, 1996; Smyth, 2009, Fig. 1.11). The drawing (Fig. 1) is of particular interest as it presents an elevation of the interior of the passage tomb, demonstrating the relative positions of the carved stones. Another sketch made for Lhwyd shows a carved stone from Site L passage tomb, adjacent to Newgrange (O’Kelly et al., 1978, 328–329, Fig. 25).In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, illustrations of the carvings at Newgrange principally comprised poorly executed sketches. Some bear little resemblance to the actual carvings and were made with a particular agenda in mind, for example those published by General Vallancey who interpreted the carvings as ‘Druidic Inscriptions’, which he believed represented the ‘Supreme Being’ (Vallancey, 1786).Examples of other late eighteenth century published illustrations of carved stones are rare; they include Thomas Wright’s 1758 illustration of a carved stone from a probable passage tomb at Killen, Co Louth (see Shee Twohig, 1981, 224). In 1789 a drawing of a carved stone from north Donegal was published in Gough׳s edition of Camden׳s Britannia (Camden, 1789, 645, Plate XLVII). The carving had been noted in 1773 ‘… on a druidical altar from Lynsfort on Inis Oen’ and was first reported in Walker׳s 1774 Proposals for a Description of Ireland.Notable advances were made in recording methods in Ireland from just before the mid nineteenth century, and records of stone carvings benefitted from the exchange of ideas between researchers, some of whom now began to present photographs and scaled drawings made from full-size rubbings or tracings. Various casting methods were also developed.The 1830s saw the beginning of the emergence of archaeology as opposed to antiquarianism; in Ireland this was pioneered by the work of members of the Ordnance Survey of Ireland where, as Waddell (2005, 103), has noted ‘The systematic recording… and the scholarly work of its topographical department mark the beginnings of Irish archaeology as a discipline’. Some of those working in the topographical department were involved in recording carved stones. The senior antiquarian/archaeologist, George Petrie (1790–1866) was a polymath, like many others of the time and taught art to a number of younger people who went on to develop methods of recording carvings, notably George V. Du Noyer (1817–1869) and Margaret Stokes (1832–1900). Du Noyer and another of Petrie׳s pupils, W.F. Wakeman (1822–1900) worked in the Ordnance Survey with Petrie in the later 1830s. Both Du Noyer and Wakeman taught art for a period at St Columba’s College near Navan, Co. Meath, beside the River Boyne, and did a great deal of fieldwork in the area. In 1845 a careful plan and sectional elevation of the passage tomb at Newgrange by Du Noyer was published (Wilkinson, 1845, Plate 6) while Wakeman published numerous illustrations of Newgrange and Dowth (Wakeman, 1848), and later some of rock-art (for example in Wakeman, 1874–75); his illustrations of the better known sites were frequently used by others such as Wilde (1847), though some were soon noted to be inadequate (see below).The first instance of the making of full-scale copies of prehistoric carvings appears to date to 1851 when Bishop Charles Graves and the Earl of Dunraven report making “heel-ball rubbings” of rock-art in County Kerry (Graves, 1867, 422). Their text was later reproduced by J. Graves in a paper which presented an early example of a photograph of rock-art, on a standing stone at Muff, Co Donegal (J. Graves 1877, facing p. 293); this was captioned ‘Dallastint, engraved and printed by Duncan C. Dallas, King’s Cross, London’’.Photography began to be introduced to record Irish antiquities in the 1850s, for example by W.D. Hemphill in south Tipperary (Mullaney-Dignam, 2014), but apart from the example cited above, it does not seem to have been used to any extent for recording carvings until the end of the century. The history of photography in Irish archaeology is, however, in need of extensive research.Samuel Ferguson (1810–1886) also contributed to the development of recording techniques in this phase, and unusually, he worked on megalithic art outside Ireland. He described making tracings and rubbings at Mané Lud in Brittany during 1863, from which he prepared scale drawings which were shown at a meeting of the Royal Irish Academy and he also reported on the results of René Galles׳s excavations there (Ferguson, 1863a,b). Ferguson went on to develop methods of recording by means of a ‘paper squeeze’—a cast made by building up layers of wet paper such as blotting paper; some of these casts have been retained in the collections of the Royal Irish Academy. Wakeman (1874–75, 471) described what he called Ferguson’s pioneering process… which insures absolute truthfulness in pictorial illustration. The legends [on a megalithic tomb at Castlederg, Co. Tyrone] were carefully cast, and from the impressions thus procured, sun drawings were made; from these, by the art of a skilful engraver, perfect representations were multiplied. Thus we have, as it were, the original before us.In 1880 Ferguson described to the Royal Irish Academy his ingenious method of using photography to record stones carved with Ogham inscriptions on two sides of an angle (Fig. 2). Paper casts were taken of the stone, the casts were then flattened out and photographed so that both faces of the angle were ‘… substantially in one plane, and in whatever light may be found most effective to bring out all the impressions in one image’ (Ferguson, 1877–86, 47). His methodology was also described by his wife in her preface to Ferguson׳s book on Ogham inscriptions, published just after his death (Ferguson, 1887).Others working on early christian period stone carvings and inscriptions also experimented with recording methods. In 1854 the manuscript scholar Westwood (1853–57) discussed various techniques of making rubbings, while Henry O’Neill (1798–1880) employed an ‘intelligent native’ to make rubbings with a wad of grass (Harbison, 2015, 49).Margaret Stokes spent much of her life editing and illustrating publications for her father and others, and held strong opinions about the need for accurate recording and how to achieve it (Ní Grádaigh, 2008; Stokes, 1993; McEvansoneya, 2011). Stokes later published in her own right and in her illustrations of High Crosses published a year after her death the photo of each cross is accompanied by another with her interpretation of the carvings inked-in (Stokes 1901).George V. Du Noyer’s extensive output includes albums and sketchbooks held in the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland which contain some copies of rubbings and sketches of carvings at Newgrange as well as plans of the structure, several being dated September 1866 while he was living in Co. Meath. Du Noyer’s work clearly benefitted from his training in the Geological Survey in that he aimed for accuracy as much as for artistic effect (see Croke, 1995; Coffey, 1993). He drew rock-art as well as megalithic art, and also some of the previously neglected and more enigmatic incised carvings (e.g. Du Noyer, 1864–65; on this topic see Shee Twohig, 2004). Although his illustration of the unusual carved outcrop at Clonfinlough, Co. Offaly (Graves, 1864–66) was not particularly accurate (see Shee Twohig, 2002, 102), his comprehensive recording in 1865 of the carved stones which had just been revealed by Eugene Conwell at a number of passage tombs at Loughcrew, Co. Meath was very important. These are not rubbings, though he may have made some for his records, but semi-perspective drawings, which give a good impression of the stones in the context of the monument as well as of the carvings. A view of one of the large side cells at Loughcrew was published (Du Noyer, 1864–66). Some of the stones are now damaged, for example the top left corner of the backstone of Cairn T is now broken off but was shown in Du Noyer’s illustration (Fig. 3). Du Noyer’s illustrations were exhibited when Conwell read a paper to the Royal Irish Academy on 2 February 1866. However, in 1867 Conwell employed another, much less talented illustrator, Wilhelm Tomsohn, to make drawings which were used in his principal publication of Cairn T (Conwell, 1873), probably because of his annoyance that Du Noyer had published a letter describing Conwell׳s discoveries in the local County Meath newspaper which was reproduced in full by Graves (1864–66, 356–359). Du Noyer’s Loughcrew watercolours were not published until nearly thirty years later by the collector William Frazer (Frazer, 1892–3). The original watercolours are now held in the Royal Irish Academy (RIA MS 3D3). However, details of the carvings have been pencilled in, probably by Frazer or someone else in order to provide more contrast in publication. The pencilling-in is absent from a few unpublished items (e.g. the basin stone from Cairn W, which is marked “not to be done”; see Eogan et al., 2012, 46, Fig. 7 bottom, footnote 2). The pencilling-in of the watercolours in the Academy collection is quite rudimentary in comparison with the aforementioned published illustration of the large side chamber and basin stone in Cairn L (Du Noyer, 1864–65). Frazer (1892–3, 297 ) noted that the Cairn L illustration was missing from the collection so he (Frazer) copied it in an ‘ink-sketch’, which suggests that Frazer himself may have pencilled in the carvings on the other illustrations. Coffey (1993, 104) has noted that Du Noyer had studied lithography, and thus it is likely that he was responsible for preparing the earlier drawing for publication.The publication of Du Noyer’s Loughcrew drawings in the early 1890s overlaps in time with the work of one of the outstanding recorders of megalithic art in Ireland, George Coffey (1857–1916) who in 1897 was appointed Superintendant in the Antiquities Division of the newly established Dublin Museum of Science and Art (re-named the ‘National Museum of Ireland’ in 1921). Coffey was another polymath, who had qualified in both experimental science and engineering at TCD, was called to the Bar, and was an artist in his own right. His varied training is evidenced in the methodologies he adopted for recording carvings; he used photography with artificial lights, rubbing and making paper squeezes and casts and he reproduced rubbings by photography and made drawings from photographs and casts. An early paper, read in 1890 to the Royal Irish Academy on ‘The tumuli and inscribed stones at New Grange, Dowth and Knowth’ included photographs of a number of the carved stones inside the tombs (Coffey, 1892–96, Plates IV–VI). He reported that a magnesium lamp was used in photographing inside the monument and that the exposure varied between 1.5 and 2.5 yards of magnesium ribbon (Coffey 1892–96, p.1, footnote).Between 1894 and 1897 Coffey published a series of wide-ranging papers entitled ‘The origins of prehistoric ornament in Ireland’. In the first of these he noted that the drawings were made from photographs (Coffey, 1894). He used a number of photographs again in a paper on the carvings at Loughcrew and individual photographers were specifically acknowledged (Coffey, 1897).Coffey also began to get casts made of stones; in 1896 he published a paper-squeeze made with R.L. Praeger of one of the elaborately carved kerbstones at Newgrange; this included some details not previously reported by him (Coffey, 1896, Fig. 62, p. 49, footnote 1). He gave details of making paper-squeezes at Knockmany Co. Tyrone which were later used as moulds to make casts for the museum (Coffey, 1898, 100). The drawings for the publication were made from the squeezes and the casts at 1:4, and were then reduced by photography. He also organised the making of plaster casts in the field, for example he visited the stone at Sess Kilgreen Co. Tyrone in 1899 to make a cast of it for the National Museum ‘… by the aid of Henry Pierce, a skilful plasterer from Enniskillen’ (Coffey, 1911a, 175–176).He drew many of the stones himself, and he also made some rubbings, notably of the extensively carved large glacial erratic at Reyfad, Co Fermanagh; the published illustration was ‘taken from a photograph of the rubbing’ showing that he was using photography to prepare the published drawing. Here (and elsewhere) he noted (Coffey, 1911b, facing p. 25) that his illustrations were much more accurate than those published by Wakeman (1874–75, Fig. 8). Coffey’s earlier papers were reproduced with some revisions in his book New Grange and other incised tumuli in Ireland, in which many of the drawings and photographs of carvings at Newgrange were replaced by photographs of casts which had been made for the National Museum in 1901 (Coffey, 1912, 29).In the early 1920s Professor R.A.S. Macalister accompanied the Abbé Henri Breuil on a tour of sites in Ireland and they wrote together and separately about megalithic and rock-art (e.g. Breuil and Macalister, 1921). However, their records left a lot to be desired (Shee Twohig, 1998, 165–6) although classification systems based on Breuil׳s (1934) main publication on prehistoric art in Ireland persisted in the archaeological literature even into the 1970s (see, for example, Herity, 1974, Fig. 81).Not until M.J. O’Kelly׳s (1956) report on rock-art at Coomasaharn, Co. Kerry (Fig. 4) was there any attempt to treat carvings as worthy of systematic and standardised recording. He published a series of carved stones including details of location, measurements and a standard illustration (in this case a chalked-in photograph) for each carved surface, treating the data as would be done in compiling a survey or a catalogue of finds from an excavation.In 1962 O’Kelly began excavations at Newgrange as part of a major conservation project for the Office of Public Works. Over the course of the excavations (1962–1975) he found a large number of new carvings, and realised the need for a proper catalogue, with standardised drawings, not just photographs or sketches. Some casts were made in both plaster and latex, but this was discontinued partly due to anxiety about causing damage to the carvings. As an undergraduate in 1963 the author was recruited by O’Kelly to begin to record all the passage tomb art in Ireland outside the Boyne Valley for comparison with Newgrange. We became aware of Emmanuel Anati’s use of cellophane for tracing rock carvings in Valcamonica which was seen as an improvement on rubbings because the carvings were visible through transparent cellophane. Successful experiments with cellophane tracing at Derrynablaha, Co Kerry in the mid 1960s (Fig. 5) led to this method being adopted for recording most of Irish megalithic art. It was used by M.J. O’Kelly and his wife Claire O’Kelly for recording the carvings at Newgrange (C. O’Kelly, 1973; M.J. O’Kelly, 1982), some of the smaller tombs beside Newgrange (M.J. O’Kelly et al., 1978) and Dowth (M.J. O’Kelly and C. O’Kelly, 1983), although some scaled drawings were also made at this time by their colleague, Frances Lynch (Fig. 6). The author׳s first publication of drawings reduced from cellophane tracings was of some rock-art in Co. Cork (Shee, 1968) and this was followed by recording the rest of the Irish passage tomb art outside the Boyne Valley in 1967–1968 and all the megalithic art reported up to then in Western Europe in 1969–1971 (Shee Twohig, 1981). Recordings were made with the help of artificial lighting, to bring up the details and carvings were occasionally checked at night in order to maximise the effect of artificial lights. The drawings were always worked on in the drawing office with the help of notes and photographs, and were checked in the field before being finalised.Just 1.3km north–west of Newgrange, George Eogan began excavations at the Knowth passage tomb complex also in 1962, where he found an even greater number of new carvings, both in the smaller tombs surrounding the main mound, on its kerbstones and most dramatically inside the two newly discovered large passage tombs within the main mound. Initially these were recorded by scaled drawings, or by measured sketches, mostly done by Muiris O’Sullivan, whose Master’s and Doctoral theses were based on his researches at Knowth; (see O’Sullivan, 1986, 2006). Later Eogan’s recording team switched to tracing onto cellophane, enabling reductions to be done off site under more comfortable conditions.In recent years the author became involved in checking the draft catalogue and drawings of the carved stones at Knowth and reviewed all the illustrations and descriptions, re-recording many stones, or parts of stones (Fig. 7). A number of new carvings were discovered, mostly incised examples in the small tombs where the original recordings had been done at an early stage of the excavation programme and were already published (Eogan, 1984). KW’s digital photographs were used via photoshop to improve and amend the drawings, and were particularly valuable in recording finer details of the carvings.One of the issues that is always in the minds of those recording carvings is to create a balance between depicting the carvings and the natural features of the stones. Rubbings pick up the natural features, as can be seen in the recordings done by a Japanese team at Loughcrew, Co. Meath in 1980 (Kondō, 2011). Their method consisted of applying wet drawing paper tightly to the stones, letting the paper dry and then applying oil based ink to it; this technique gave a good record of the stones’ surfaces but as always an issue with rubbings, it is difficult to distinguish between natural and artificial features.Looking back, one of the main issues with the author׳s illustrations and those of the O’Kellys was the tendency to concentrate on recording just the carvings, often omitting much of the outline of the stone, and paying minimal attention to showing the surface texture of the stone, its cracks and fissures, while depth of carvings was shown by varying the density of stippling. Others used stipple more extensively to show the surface of the stone and various iterations of this method can be seen in the illustrations of rock-art in the Iveragh peninsula, Co. Kerry (O’Sullivan and Sheehan, 1996, Figs. 42–74). It has to be recognised that all these drawing methods involve a certain amount of subjectivity, no matter how much one tries to be objective.Until relatively recently three-dimensional digital recording of megalithic and rock-art in Ireland had been very limited, due largely to the historically high costs in terms of hardware, software and time. Perhaps one of the first published references to the use of digital photogrammetry relating to Irish megalithic art is the production by Frank Prendergast of a 3D model of the entrance kerbstone and front façade of the large passage tomb at Newgrange to investigate a shadow casting phenomenon (Prendergast, 1991). More recent examples of published references include some experiments with laser scanning of open-air rock-art panels at Loughcrew, Co. Meath in 2004 (Shee Twohig et al., 2010, 2), the Discovery Programme’s modelling of carved stones from the passage tombs at Knockroe, Co. Kilkenny (Shaw, 2011) while an ambitious project to record and present virtual 3D models of the large passage tombs at Dowth and Knowth is still in progress (Davis et al., 2012). Other results have recently been made available online, notably the Discovery Programme’s 3DIcons project (http://www.3dicons.ie) which utilised 3D scanning with both laser and structured light.Innovative techniques in two-dimensional recording have also been employed resulting, for example, in the recording of newly identified megalithic art in the passage tomb complex at Carrowkeel, Co. Sligo where none had been recognised previously (Hensey and Robin, 2011). The technique involved vector drawing from digital photographs taken with oblique lighting (VeDPOL). Multiple photographs, taken from a single point with lighting directed from differing angles, are layered and analysed in Adobe Illustrator. A composite of observed shadows cast on the rock surface are traced and overlaid on screen. This generates a more complete recording when the underlying photographs are subtracted, leaving only the overlays (Cassen and Vaquero Lastres, 2003).An earlier, mostly film-based method based on similar principles but without the use of oblique lighting was employed by Blaze O’Connor following on from an epigraphic survey methodology used during the Rock Art Pilot Project in Britain (RAPP, 2000). This involved taking one or more photographs of a rock art panel with scale bars. The developed print is brought back into the field and the motifs and scale bars are drawn in ink directly onto the print surface using the actual rock art panel as a guide. When the print is bleached the photographic image is washed away leaving only the drawings. Reproducing the scale bars allows the drawing to be manipulated in AutoCAD software to correct for lens and perspective distortion (O’Connor, 2006).The increasing adoption of digital photography that came alongside rapid advances in the quality of imaging sensors during the last decade and a half certainly facilitated experimentation with various lighting techniques in the field and post-processing techniques in software. When approached sympathetically, the results can often offer a striking combination; revealing easily missed details in the carvings while also situating them within their immediate and/or wider environment (Fig. 11).One technology that has gained particular interest among archaeologists and amateur researchers in Ireland has been digital photogrammetry using Structure from Motion (SfM). Today, the creation of a digital 3D model using SfM is accomplished through the recovery of depth information from two or more overlapping digital photographs of a surface or object taken at different angles. The photographs are processed in software that uses common points in each photograph to reconstruct three dimensional co-ordinate based point clouds (Dellaert et al, 2000). Including a 3D scale object in the scene allows accurate measurements to be subsequently taken. The software can usually output the resulting data as a dense point cloud or a solid mesh consisting of many edges, vertices and faces that bridge the points in the point cloud to create a solid. Further processing can generate a photo-realistic texture overlay which can be mapped to the shape of the subject. These texture maps are exported as a separate set of files with mapping information and image data. Today, digital photogrammetry can be performed with non-metric ‘off the shelf’ consumer digital cameras and affordable or free software which automatically aligns each set of photographs as well as correcting factors such as lens distortion (Torres et al, 2012).When compared with Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) or structured-light scanning therefore, photogrammetry has enormous potential to facilitate low cost 3D modelling and analysis when applied to megalithic art and the structures on which it is found, as well as open air rock-art. Unlike photogrammetry, however, TLS is not dependent on sufficient ambient lighting and this can be advantageous in the dark passages and chambers of large megalithic tombs where TLS might be preferable if the costs could be met. Structured-light scanning systems are typically less expensive than laser systems but can also produce very high resolution models. Since the structured-light technique requires the accurate recording of a visible beam or pattern of light across the stone surface, recording outdoors during daylight requires the erection of a light-excluding tent which may be less practical in remote or densely packed groups of carved surfaces. Photogrammetry software on the other hand may struggle to generate accurate point clouds when the subject has a reflective surface or contains many specular highlights due to surface water for example.In terms of accuracy and resolution, SfM and TLS have been recently compared using one of the kerbstones of the main passage tomb at Knowth as a test subject. Although the lowest measurement of comparison was at 3mm, the model produced using photogrammetry compared favourably with the output generated with a Leica C10 mid-range laser scanner capable of a maximum resolution of 0.5mm at 1.5m working distance (Simon and Opitz, 2012). The maximum 3mm resolution of these comparisons would be sufficient for evaluating the recording of the stone’s shape and surface morphology but would be of limited value in analysing how the detail of pecked carvings are reproduced and would likely not register the rendering of incised carvings, of which there are many at Knowth. On the other hand, the high resolution laser scanning on a small sample of megalithic art by the Discovery Programme using a NextEngine 2020i demonstrates the possibility of obtaining an accuracy of 0.1mm (Shaw, 2011). However the results have not been directly compared to models created through photogrammetry alone.As we shall see, SfM Photogrammetry is capable of capturing exceptional levels of detail when high-resolution sensors are paired with high quality lenses, although the sheer volume of data points makes the resulting models challenging to work with on consumer-grade computing hardware currently available11One of the benefits of SfM photogrammetry is that the original source photograph sets can be re-used at any point in the future as the capabilities of software and computer hardware increase, providing that the format the images are captured and stored in does not become obsolete. The TIFF format is one of the most widely used lossless digital photographic image formats and is almost universally supported by imaging software. JPG, unless saved using high compression, can often be used as a smaller and easily processed alternative. Hence, it is prudent to store all of the captured photographs used as TIFF or highest quality JPG to maximise their future usefulness. Proprietary RAW formats, while offering greatest flexibility today, are often brand and model specific to each camera, thus are less likely to be supported by software developers in years to come..The rest of this paper will present an evaluation of the SfM technique and show how its potential for presenting and interpreting the data has been explored from the perspective of the novice with no prior experience in 3D data capture or processing.A fortuitous introduction to the processes involved in digital photogrammetry came through an association, as a photographer, with the Wicklow Rock Art Project, which was instigated by Dr. Clíodhna Ni Lionáin while a PhD candidate at University College, Dublin. The aims of the project were the recording of existing rock-art panels using both SfM photogrammetry, drawings and written observations, communication with the public through public talks, a website, social media channels and pamphlets to foster awareness and guardianship of the sites. The project drew from the methodology used in the Northumberland and Durham Rock Art Project (NADRAP) (Bryan and Chandler, 2008). None of the participants involved in fieldwork had any prior experience with 3D modelling or photogrammetry technology, and a blog (http://www.ahiddenview.com) was set up detailing the experiences and insights gained as the project progressed. Seed funding enabled the purchase of software and hardware, following expert technical assistance from Dr. Rachel Opitz. The results of this completed project are due to become available on line in the first half of 2015 at http://www.wicklowrockartproject.com.Recent advances in software, particularly the automation of the process of comparison-point selection from each photograph, subsequently allowed a relatively quick adoption of SfM photogrammetry techniques which formed the basis of all further work described here.The experience gained through collaboration in the Wicklow Rock Art Project proved invaluable and highlighted the potential for SfM photogrammetry in recording both open air rock-art and megalithic art in exceptional detail. The ability to capture 3D data with high levels of accuracy and quickly process a preview of it in the field on a laptop computer helped ensure that complete coverage had been achieved in a single visit. The resulting 3D models also delivered advantageous lighting positions that were difficult, if not impossible, to achieve in the field using flash photography on often irregular or curved surfaces.Funding for the digital recording of megalithic art and rock-art in Ireland has been quite limited and so cost effectiveness of any new technology is of the utmost importance, particularly for independent researchers. Hence, software selection criteria were weighted by accuracy, features and cost. Where appropriate, free and open source software was used. After initial testing of the various 3D reconstruction software options available, Agisoft Photoscan Standard Edition (http://www.agisoft.com) was selected to create the 3D point cloud, mesh and texture files.Although it would be possible to achieve comparable results using a workflow based on free software such as 123DCatch, VisualSFM and Meshlab, Photoscan Standard Edition offered several advantages which, as the project progressed, outweighed the expense of this commercial package. The most important benefits in the context of the projects described here included the availability of a free companion camera calibration program, Agisoft Lens, which produces lens specific data that integrates with the Photoscan software. A small but perceptible increase in accuracy and reproducibility22Differences in output could also be due to the settings used within different programs or different techniques used to capture the original photographs. For a demonstration of possible discrepancy of results see video by Timotheos Samartzidis: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=snLgyF9w7i0 (accessed 23/02/2015).in the resulting models when compared with those produced while experimenting with VisualSFM also became apparent while the limited number of images that could be used with 123DCatch and the lack of control over the process produced models with clearly inferior surface detail in some cases. The ability to batch process entire projects from aligning photographs to producing a mesh ready for export through Photoscan alone proved to be especially useful. This process is time consuming and allowing it to run unattended from start to finish overnight or over several days substantially increased the efficiency of the entire workflow. New software solutions are constantly becoming available such as Autodesk’s Memento 3D reconstruction software which was launched as a free public beta in February 2015. GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP) could also be used as a free alternative to Adobe Photoshop for editing texture files, although it lacks the 3D tools of the latter and can be less user-friendly.Processing for the examples described here was carried out on a portable computer with an Intel Core i7 processor, 8GB of RAM and an nVidia GeForce GTX 660M GPU. This would perhaps be considered below the currently recommended specification required for local processing of a SfM workflow. The identification of common points and reconstruction of a dense point cloud are extremely processor intensive, a powerful Graphical Processor Unit (GPU) can speed up this process considerably. The creation of the final mesh relies on large quantities of memory. 16GB or more RAM is typically recommended by software manufacturers.The majority of the known rock-art panels in Wicklow feature simple arrangements of cupmarks, occasionally with single or multiple rings. While photogrammetry provided the clearest record yet of the sites included in the Wicklow Rock Art Project, the simplicity and weathering of their motifs meant that the potential for photogrammetry to reveal previously unnoticed detail was limited. In order to explore this potential more fully it was necessary to expand on the number and type of sites across a much wider area.A number of sites were identified where the condition or position of the rock surface had proved problematic for traditional tracing and photographic recording. A very weathered carving on the top surface of an erratic boulder on the north-western face of Slíabh na Calliaghe, at Loughcrew, County Meath, (ME015-114) was published recently (Shee Twohig et al, 2010, 11, pl. 4). The carving consists of a series of five arcs on the lower left portion of the surface. While the setting on the open hillside and the method of carving used to create what once must have been quite wide and deep grooves was more suggestive of open-air rock-art, the nested arc motifs themselves were more typical of megalithic art in a passage tomb context. By varying the lighting position, alongside the use of the radiance scaling shader in Meshlab, the faint traces of the bottom portion of the ‘arcs’ and a possible central cup mark were recovered and allowed its recognition as cup and ring art as found on other open air rock-art panels in the area (Fig. 8). The model showed that part of the rock surface had flaked off in antiquity.One of the strengths of SfM Photogrammetry is the capability of employing it across many scales from micro to macro without significantly modifying the required equipment or software and the potential for examining extremely fine incised carvings was explored at Knowth in 2014. A series of test set-ups were used for both open air carvings as on the kerbstones at Knowth and those located within the roofed chambers and passages. The lens selected was a Tokina 100mm f/2.8 AT-X Pro D macro which produces extremely detailed images and allows for a relatively comfortable working distance. This extra working distance compared to a shorter focal length lens also accommodates more flexible lighting options. The example shown is K67 at Knowth (Fig. 9) where a small detail is examined at several scales of magnitude (Video S1)One of the constraints of photography at the macro scale is limited depth of field, i.e. achieving sharp focus is only possible within a very thin plane at a certain distance from the front of the lens. To maximise the depth of field available it is necessary to use very small aperture settings, typically f/22 or smaller. This in turn requires more intense lighting to allow a bright enough exposure.In the outdoor scenario it was found that available light could be sufficient on cloudless days supplemented by use of silver reflectors. However in the darkness of the passage tombs, it was necessary to use the intense light from a strobe flash. While this had the advantage of allowing the camera to be used hand-held in areas with limited accessibility it also significantly slowed the process as the strobe must be allowed to cool after repeated intense bursts. Tracking the location of the previous photographs was also challenging; it can be easy to become disorientated when viewing mostly featureless surfaces through the restricted angle of view that results from using a macro lens.Processing the results of a series of macro photos, typically 150–200 for a 30cm×30cm area, generated an exceptionally dense point cloud and a very large mesh file which took quite a long time to load into Meshlab. Manipulating these 3D models in real time on the available computers was quite difficult; however the level of detail revealed greatly exceeded the requirements for conventional documentation purposes (Video S1).To apply this technique at the maximum resolution would be extremely time consuming however, and would require considerable computing power. To illustrate this with an example, the area of the Nikon D700 image sensor used is 860.4mm. Working on a surface 2m by 1m therefore, full coverage at the maximum 1:1 ratio would require (2000mm×1000mm)/860.4mm which yields 3487 photographs. To ensure a minimum 60% overlap between photographs increases this figure to 5579 photographs in total.Clearly, this method may be best limited to small areas that are difficult to record and interpret using other methods or for sampling areas to compare techniques and tools used to create the carvings. On the other hand, it would be ideal for recording minute detail on small objects. By increasing the working distance between the camera and the surface to be recorded, however, a compromise between maximum achievable resolution and the requirements for a particular research goal can be reached.Right from its inception, one of the main goals of the Wicklow Rock Art Project mentioned earlier was to explore the various ways in which the catalogue of rock-art could be made more accessible to the public to increase awareness and, ideally in turn, a sense of guardianship over them.Once a number of high quality models had been produced using photogrammetry they began to be featured on the project blog at http://www.ahiddenview.com. This was first accomplished using video screen capture of the manual manipulation of the models and lighting within Meshlab. This was later improved upon by embedding the viewer provided by the online 3D model hosting platform at http://www.sketchfab.com which was launched in 2011. It was immediately obvious that the video screen capture method was inferior as a viewing experience due to the jolting motion and inelegant transitions between different lighting positions. The embedded viewer provided by Sketchfab was an improvement as it allows users to directly manipulate the model and switch between both textured and untextured views. However, there are some limitations on the size of the models that could be uploaded and directional lighting could not be manually controlled.This experience demonstrated a need for a more flexible means to interact with the models for both the viewer and the researcher. While there is adequate potential for the research community to access and manipulate the models via the provision and exchange of point clouds and mesh models in standard formats, for non-specialists and the wider public interested in the Irish corpus of megalithic art and rock-art, the data is more typically presented through the use of rotating or fly-through animations. These are useful as they allow the creator to draw attention to significant points of interest that may otherwise be missed when the viewer is unfamiliar with the actual site. However, there is also an opportunity to maximise the potential of the 3D models by providing a much more interactive and immersive environment.The passage tombs at Loughcrew were selected as an ideal testing ground for this element of the project. Across four hilltops close to Oldcastle, Co. Meath clusters of passage tombs remain in various states of preservation. Many are missing their covering mound and roofing and the carvings within are now open to the elements (Fig. 10). Three such passage tombs were chosen for recording, selecting unroofed monuments as they would not require exterior and interior models to be integrated later in software. Subsequent work has demonstrated that the technique can work equally as well within the interior of roofed chambers, using diffused photographic flash to illuminate visible surfaces.Video S2, segment 1 shows the results obtained from recent experimentation that takes a model created through SfM photogrammetry and places it within a user-controlled virtual environment. It should perhaps be noted that the video does not reflect the high definition visuals in the original game environment, as the process of capturing the video and compressing it down to a smaller file size has a significant impact on the visual quality of the resulting video file.At Loughcrew Cairn U, a total of 263 photographs were taken of the entire monument under cloudy conditions to take advantage of the resulting flat, even lighting. To ensure full coverage of the structure inside and out, one set was taken on a walk-though of the site with the camera held about 1m above the ground surface. A second set was then taken with the camera mounted on a pole held about 3m high, following the contours of the monument in both cases.The photographs, captured in RAW format, were imported into Adobe Lightroom 5 for inspection and conversion into a format usable within Photoscan. The subsequent processing at ‘medium’ quality settings produced a dense point cloud of 19,536,046 points. Further processing produced a mesh with 656,052 vertices and 1307,507 faces. A texture map consisting of three JPG images, each 4096×4096pixel in size was generated. The texture maps are overlaid onto the 3D model using a co-ordinate system and provide the photo-realistic effect when viewing the final model. The model was then imported into Meshlab and examined using various lighting positions, to determine if the level of detail and accuracy was sufficient for the intended outputs.The next step was to import the model into Adobe Photoshop CS4 Extended so that the textures could be edited. Using the 3D tools introduced in this version release, each carved face was marked by applying various points of colour using the paint tools directly on the texture. When the model and textures are subsequently exported from Photoshop, the texture maps can be opened separately later in Photoshop and each surface easily identified by reference to the ‘painted on’ markers.Having identified the corresponding surfaces, the photographs taken with oblique lighting or the drawings of the megalithic art were also loaded into Photoshop. The relevant areas are selected and then overlaid on top of the texture map in their correct locations. Often this required resizing and correction of the oblique imagery to match the underlying texture as closely as possible.When the texture is then exported in the original format and the model loaded into a 3D software package it is possible to examine the results of the overlaying process as it will appear to the viewer and note any corrections that need to be made.The final product of this process is a photorealistic three-dimensional model of the passage tomb in which the carved surfaces, which are normally difficult to view in indirect daylight, are highlighted without requiring complex lighting schemes or an extremely high polygon count in the model itself.While the overlaid photographs taken with oblique lighting provide the most realistic appearance, the published drawings of the carvings can also be applied instead of, or alternating with, the photographs on command. The method followed was the same as with the oblique lighting photographs and the results of this process as applied to Cairn V at Loughcrew can be seen in the second segment of Video S2.Blender is a free and open-source object-oriented software package which allows 3D models to be created, manipulated and animated. It is an excellent tool for cleaning up meshes produced by Photoscan and has the capability of rendering high quality rotating or fly-through animations. It also features a basic built-in game engine that utilises a very similar interface, thus reducing what can be a very steep initial learning curve.Initially, Blender was put to use purely to create fly-through animations of the models but this process can be time-consuming and the results difficult to judge until the entire animation is rendered out frame by frame, which may take several hours to complete. Frame by frame animation allows maximum detail in the 3D models to be preserved in the final rendered video as it is not being computed in real time during playback; however the viewing experience is passive and does not allow the viewer the opportunity to explore their own particular areas of interest.The integrated game engine within Blender on the other hand provides the capability to create 3D first or third person virtual environments in which a user can navigate in real time using game logic. Commands that allow the user to move in any direction or pan a virtual camera through 360° can be assigned to keyboard keys, a dedicated game controller or a standard mouse. It is also possible to use a combination of all input methods. In Blender Game Engine, a simple rectangular box shape acts as proxy for the user with a virtual camera attached at ‘eye level’ (Fig. 12). Since this user/box has simulated physical properties in the virtual world, the physics emulation within Blender causes the user to encounter the model as in real life. All of the irregularities of the ground surface recorded through SfM are faithfully simulated as the user navigates around the virtual world and negotiates its obstacles. This adds an extra dimension to the experience often lost in fly-through animations while the audio effects further enhance the immersive qualities.The 3D models created in Photoscan will be the main objects the user will navigate around; however, for a more immersive experience it is necessary to complete the virtual environment with some simple surrounding landscape, horizon and sky created using simple geometric shapes in Blender and textures available online.The results are illustrated in Video S2; the first segment shows a user׳s movement through the Cairn U passage tomb, demonstrating the quality of the virtual environment and the visibility of the carvings under ideal lighting conditions, although remembering that the original users would have only had the light from the entrance and some simple lamps/torches. In the second segment of the video we move to the more ruinous Cairn V located close to Cairn U. In this segment the published drawings (Shee Twohig, 1981, Fig. 242) have been substituted for the oblique lighting photographic textures, demonstrating the effectiveness of combining different recording techniques to highlight the art in its original context.Segment 3 demonstrates the potential for varying the virtual environment; here the user operates a virtual handheld torch to examine the carvings as they would have been encountered when the monument׳s roof was in place.One of the principle benefits of this approach is that the results can be compiled into an executable file package that can be downloaded and run on any Windows PC that meets a minimum hardware specification.Another use of this 3D virtual environment technology takes data recorded alongside the Wicklow Rock Art Project to create a 3D Virtual Museum (Video S3). Since the rock-art of Wicklow occurs in the main on individual boulders spread throughout the county, the challenge was to create a virtual space in which many of the 3D models could be experienced and compared together. The concept of a virtual museum featuring many 3D models under favourable lighting conditions was a challenging one to implement, due not only to the constraints of computing technology generally available but also because it required the creation of an artificial environment from the ground up into which the models produced by photogrammetry could be inserted. The implications and problems of presenting digitised objects within the context of virtual museums is a complex subject, usefully discussed, for example, in Sylaiou et al. (2009).In order to minimise the impact on graphics and memory performance the design of the virtual museum was kept as simple as possible. The floor and walls were single planes with four vertices, and only the floor area had a texture applied to add some sense of realism. The basic cube shape was then manipulated to create ‘plinths’ on which each model could be placed. When all of the models had been arranged, the next step was to design individual lighting schemes for each model and some ambient illumination for the space. As the lighting sources in Blender are invisible in the rendered animation or in the game engine, a designer has complete freedom to place the sources in positions that may be impractical or impossible in a real world scenario.Complex lighting schemes can often enhance the visual experience, bringing out the detail in the carvings and the contours of the rock surface. Because photogrammetry is often carried out in flat lighting conditions the texture overlays created by Photoscan rarely approach the visual impact possible with oblique lighting so it is an advantage to create unique lighting schemes for each piece in Blender (Fig. 13).Each piece can benefit from multiple lighting sources, all of which have individual control for brightness, falloff, shape and angle. Video S3 demonstrates this concept through an animation generated in Blender in which a camera tracks a pre-set path around the virtual museum.It is also feasible within dedicated 3D gaming platforms, such as Unity Game Engine, to design an interface so that text information or additional imagery for each piece could be called up on screen, using keyboard commands to toggle the information display on and off. Alternatively this information can be triggered automatically if the user approaches a certain area. Game logic control could be used to allow users switch individual lights on and off in real time using the keyboard, highlighting different parts of the carved surface in turn.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have shown that in the past the evolution of recording methods for megalithic art and rock-art in Ireland was not a smooth trajectory, and that it advanced in a punctuated manner, stimulated by innovations and exchanges of ideas between scholars, often people with skills acquired in other fields of expertise. The developments in digital recording in recent years also reflect this pattern, with researchers from outside the archaeological community collaborating with those within it to good effect. In Ireland digital recording has been relatively limited due to lack of personnel and funding, but in this paper we have shown that small scale, inexpensive projects can be completed, given the right expertise. The potential for non-contact recording done through photogrammetry and through extension its use in 3D modelling, as described here, is clearly significant for advancing our understanding of these sites. Equally important are the opportunities it creates for the dissemination of information for public and pedagogical use and the ability to replicate models via 3D Printing and other techniques, particularly in light of the likelihood of deterioration of the carvings in the future. However, it must be remembered that while the employment of non-contact recording methods can reduce wear and damage to the carvings, elements obscuring the rock surface such as moss, lichens etc. will preclude a truly definitive recording of the motifs, particularly in the case of open-air rock-art.