@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Feasibility of a worker-directed web-based intervention for employees with depressive symptoms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In this process evaluation we found an implementation score of 63.8%.93.1% of the participants used the interventions components that were offered.Participants were satisfied with different aspects of the intervention.The intervention seems feasible for further implementation.The effectiveness results of the intervention did not show positive outcomes.Therefore, we do not recommend implementation of the intervention.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Depression,Prevention,Feasibility,Process evaluation,Employees,Occupational therapy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Depressive disorders are highly prevalent in the working population and lead to excessive costs. Online interventions have shown to be effective treatments for depression but are not often applied in the work setting, despite the importance of work related aspects in the development and perpetuation of depression. We developed a worker-directed web-based intervention for employees with depressive symptoms named Happy@Work. A process evaluation was conducted alongside a randomized controlled trial to assess the feasibility of the intervention and to explore barriers and facilitators for further implementation of the intervention. Employees from different companies in the Netherlands who experienced elevated depressive symptoms and were not on sick leave were eligible to take part in this study. Happy@Work contains six lessons and every lesson has several assignments. When completed, a coach provides feedback to assignments via the website. Process measures investigated were: reach, dose delivered, dose received, and fidelity. Recruitment methods and participant satisfaction with the intervention were described and analyzed as well. Data was collected at baseline and 8weeks later via online questionnaires and data registrations on the website. The implementation score of the intervention was sufficient, but reach of the target population was low. The dose delivered was high, with 93.1% of participants who used the intervention components that were offered to them. However, adherence to the intervention was low; the dose received was 57.8%. The fidelity of the implementation of the intervention was satisfactory. Recruitment of companies and participants was difficult. Participants were satisfied with the different aspects of the intervention, especially with the feedback from the coach. The results of this process evaluation showed that the intervention was conducted according to protocol and seems feasible for further implementation. Potential barriers to further implementation of the intervention include the reach of the target population, intervention adherence and the quality of the feedback. Based on the results of the effectiveness of the intervention, we do not recommend further implementation of the intervention in its current form.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Depressive disorders are highly prevalent in the working population (OECD, 2012; Wang et al., 2006) and lead to excessive costs for both society and employers (Berto et al., 2000; Greenberg and Birnbaum, 2005; Smit et al., 2006; Thomas and Morris, 2003). About 70–85% of the total costs are due to work absenteeism, work impairment and loss of work productivity, which implies that companies pay the largest part of the costs of depression (Lerner and Henke, 2008; Henderson et al., 2005; de Graaf et al., 2011; Smit et al., 2006; Thomas and Morris, 2003).Many studies on the treatment of depression in mental health care have shown that depression can be treated effectively with different types of psychotherapy such as cognitive behavior therapy, interpersonal therapy, and problem solving therapy (Barth et al., 2013; Cuijpers et al., 2011, 2013). In the past decade, ample research has shown that these treatments can also be delivered successfully through the Internet (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; van't Hof et al., 2009; Richards and Richardson, 2012; Spek et al., 2007), which has several advantages such as reduction of therapist time, high accessibility, increased user control of the intervention, and cost savings (Cuijpers et al., 2008; Griffiths et al., 2006).Despite the importance of work related aspects in the development and perpetuation of depression (Nieuwenhuijsen et al., 2008; Szeto and Dobson, 2013) and the large impact on absenteeism and work productivity (Lerner and Henke, 2008; Henderson et al., 2005) not much is known about worker-directed interventions for employees with depression and the results of the few studies that have been conducted thus far are inconsistent (Blonk et al., 2006; van der Klink et al., 2003; Nieuwenhuijsen et al., 2008; Rebergen et al., 2009; Schene et al., 2007). Web-based interventions may be of particular interest to employees due to high user control as they can work through the intervention at their own pace and outside working hours. However, to the best of our knowledge, web-based interventions for the treatment of depression in the workplace have not been studied yet.Therefore we developed a guided web-based worker-directed intervention for employees with depressive symptoms who are not absent from work due to illness (sick-leave), named Happy@Work. The intervention is aimed at reducing the employee's depressive symptoms, and we postulate that in turn this may reduce work absenteeism and loss of work productivity, which will result in cost savings for the employer. The effectiveness of the intervention is described elsewhere and some of the information in this manuscript has also been reported in those papers (Geraedts et al., 2013, 2014b).In order to get detailed information on the feasibility of the intervention a process evaluation was conducted alongside the RCT. Performing a process evaluation alongside a randomized controlled trial has been recommended by several authors (Kristensen, 2005; Linnan and Steckler, 2002; Oakley et al., 2006; Saunders et al., 2005) 1) to facilitate the interpretation of study findings by providing detailed information on the implementation of the intervention (Oakley et al., 2006) 2) to gain insight into barriers and facilitators of the implementation of the intervention that was used in the RCT, which can be used to further improve the intervention, and 3) to guide further implementation of the intervention into routine practice (Grol and Grimshaw, 2003; Oakley et al., 2006; Rychetnik et al., 2002).This paper describes the process evaluation of the web-based intervention Happy@Work. The primary goal is to investigate the feasibility of the intervention by describing the process systematically. The second objective is to explore possible barriers and facilitators for future implementation of the intervention into routine practice.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
