@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Australian mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT: What is the role of knowledge? Are there differences? Can we change them?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Australian mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT were assessed.Greater knowledge was related to less perceived disadvantages and more advantageous circumstances.No differences between psychologists and non-psychologists on attitudesDifferences in attitudes were found between those who intended to use cCBT and those who did not.A short presentation was effective in improving attitudes towards cCBT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CCBT,Computer-based therapy,Mental health workers,Attitudes,Knowledge,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundDespite the proven efficacy of computerised cognitive behavioural treatment (cCBT) programmes and their potential to provide more people with high quality treatment, their uptake is relatively low. This study had three main objectives: 1. To investigate the impact of Australian mental health worker knowledge of cCBT on a range of attitudes towards these programmes. 2. To determine differences in attitudes towards cCBT between a) those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, b) psychologists and non-psychologists and c) those who reported intention to use cCBT programmes compared to those who did not. 3. To determine whether a short presentation on cCBT was effective in changing mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT.MethodsOne hundred and twenty-four Australian mental health workers completed an online survey that measured: knowledge of cCBT; perceived advantages of cCBT; perceived disadvantages of cCBT; circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous; belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy; comfort with using computers in therapy; and intention to use cCBT. Participants were randomly allocated into either the cCBT presentation condition or Control presentation condition. After viewing the presentation, participants again completed the measures.ResultsHigher knowledge of cCBT was found to be associated with fewer perceived disadvantages of cCBT (t=−4.51, p<.001) and a greater number of circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous (t=2.30, p=.021). No differences between psychologists and non-psychologists or between those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, were found. Compared to those low in intention to use cCBT, those who reported high intention to use cCBT programmes were found to perceive more advantages of cCBT, F(1119)=9.32, p=.003, fewer disadvantages of cCBT, F(1119)=17.10, p<.001, more circumstances under which cCBT was considered advantageous, F(1119)=17.89, p<.001, reported higher belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy, F(1119)=26.39, p<.001, η2=.181, endorsed greater comfort with using computers in therapy, F(1119)=7.80, p=.006, and had greater knowledge of cCBT, F(1119)=5.00, p=.027. Finally, compared to Control presentation participants, those who viewed the cCBT presentation demonstrated a significantly greater increase in knowledge of cCBT, F(1119)=13.77, p<.001, a greater increase in the perceived advantages of cCBT, F(1119)=4.82, p=.030, and a greater reduction in the perceived disadvantages of cCBT, F(1119)=4.77, p=.031.ConclusionsAustralian mental health workers attitudes can be changed through provision of information about, and demonstrations of, cCBT programmes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computerised CBT (cCBT) programmes are a relatively recent technological advancement in the provision of mental health services. Although the term ‘cCBT’ is used in a variety of ways, for the purposes of this paper, we are referring to computerised programmes where the content of the intervention is embedded within the programme itself and contact with a therapist is either minimal (usually in the form of email or telephone contact) or non-existent. cCBT programmes have been found to be efficacious in the treatment of many psychological disorders including anxiety and depression (Donovan and March, 2014; Richards and Richardson, 2012), substance abuse (Kay-Lambkin et al., 2012), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Ormrod et al., 2010), chronic insomnia (Vincent et al., 2010), obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) (Andersson et al., 2012), and disordered eating (Kass et al., 2014) to name just a few. Furthermore, there have been a number of studies demonstrating that cCBT is equivalent to face to face therapy in terms of efficacy (e.g., Spence et al., 2011). Yet, despite clear empirical evidence for its utility, its favourable comparison to face-to-face therapy, and its high client satisfaction ratings, the rate of cCBT uptake remains low (MacLeod et al., 2009). It is important to consider the attitudes of those providing mental health services when examining potential reasons for poor cCBT uptake, as without their commitment towards, and use of cCBT, dissemination of these programmes is unlikely.Clinician attitudes towards cCBT and other computer-based therapies have been investigated in a number of countries including Australia (Sinclair et al., 2013; Gun et al., 2011), New Zealand (Fleming and Merry, 2013), the USA (Carper et al., 2013; Mora et al., 2008; Wells et al., 2007; Perle et al., 2013; Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013; Cook et al., 2009), Sweden (Vigerland et al., 2014), Britain (MacLeod et al., 2009; Stallard et al., 2010), Norway (Wangberg et al., 2007), and Scotland (Du et al., 2013). Although results vary from study to study, there are some common themes that emerge. For instance, it would seem that the majority of mental health workers believe that face-to-face therapy is superior to cCBT, with only 17–33% of mental health professionals reporting that cCBT can produce equivalent outcomes to standard practise (Perle et al., 2013; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). In addition, computerised therapy is viewed by the majority of mental health workers as being potentially useful for prevention purposes and for mild to moderate psychological problems, but as being less appropriate for severe and complex disorders (Sinclair et al., 2013; Gun et al., 2011; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). Also, mental health workers are more likely to use or consider using, computerised programmes as adjuncts rather than as substitutes for therapy (Sinclair et al., 2013; Mora et al., 2008; Perle et al., 2013; Waller and Gilbody, 2009) and report that cCBT programmes should not be made freely available online without therapist support (Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). Furthermore, it would seem that CBT therapists are generally more accepting of computerised interventions than other theoretical orientations, perhaps because the majority of computerised interventions are CBT oriented (Mora et al., 2008; Perle et al., 2013; Vigerland et al., 2014). Indeed, CBT programmes are more amenable to computerisation given their structured nature, while other forms of therapy are more difficult to convert to an online medium. Finally, research has produced a long list of clinician perceived advantages and disadvantages of cCBT (Sinclair et al., 2013; Fleming and Merry, 2013; Mora et al., 2008; Wells et al., 2007; Perle et al., 2013; Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013; Cook et al., 2009; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010; Waller and Gilbody, 2009). When examining the list of perceived disadvantages, it is clear that some may be due to a lack of knowledge regarding cCBT programmes and the research behind them. Unfortunately, poor mental health worker knowledge about cCBT programmes is common (Wells et al., 2007; Du et al., 2013).Through emerging research, it is also becoming clear that mental health workers are able to identify targets of change to increase the use of cCBT in their practise. It has been suggested that knowledge regarding the effectiveness and availability of programmes requires improvement, information is required on the potential legal issues around cCBT use, adequate training needs to be given, and practical considerations such as the location of computers to allow cCBT use require solutions (Gun et al., 2011; Fleming and Merry, 2013; Perle et al., 2013). Encouragingly, a large proportion of mental health workers are relatively positive about the potential use of cCBT programmes, with significant numbers being accepting of cCBT and indicating a willingness to consider its use in future practise (Perle et al., 2013; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). However, it should be noted, than in some countries, even if mental health specialists would be willing to use cCBT, they would not be allowed to do so due to professional rules and legislation requiring face-to-face contact in therapy. Thus, for practitioners in some countries, uptake will not occur until changes in rules and legislation take place.It is evident from the above discussion, that there is increasing empirical interest in mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT due to the important contribution they make with respect to the uptake of this treatment modality. Continuation and extension of this research area is particularly important in Australia, where the government is investing significant funds into its national e-mental health strategy.As noted above, mental health worker knowledge about cCBT programmes is low. However, poor knowledge has not been examined previously in relation to its impact on a broad range of cCBT attitudes. In addition, there has been great variation in the type of mental health workers examined in previous studies. Some have involved only psychologists (e.g., Perle et al., 2013) or only youth workers (e.g., Fleming and Merry, 2013), and others have involved a broad range of mental health workers who have been grouped together in analyses (e.g., Vigerland et al., 2014). It is our contention that when examining the attitudes and beliefs of mental health providers regarding cCBT, it is essential to include both psychologists (who have historically delivered face-to-face CBT programmes) and ‘other’ mental health service providers (who generally do not deliver face-to-face CBT programmes), given the pathways people take in order to receive mental health assistance. For example, research has demonstrated that a large percentage of children and adolescents (70–80%) utilise the education sector (e.g. guidance counsellors and school nurses) as their sole source of mental health care (Sawyer et al., 2001; Burns et al., 1995). The majority of these providers are not trained in CBT even if they know of its efficacy, and they are frequently required to refer students on to psychologists for CBT treatment. If guidance counsellors and school nurses for example, held positive attitudes towards cCBT, they may be particularly inclined to promote and become trained in these approaches, and to subsequently disseminate these programmes to youth. Indeed, it may well be ‘other’ mental health workers who hold the most positive attitudes towards cCBT. In addition to investigating differences between psychologists and non-psychologists, this study will also examine factors that might differentiate those mental health workers who report intention to use cCBT programmes from those who do not, as well as those mental health workers whose primary therapeutic approach is CBT from those whose primary therapeutic approach is something other than CBT. In this way, the content of promotional material may be better informed.Finally, to our knowledge, only three studies to date have investigated an attempt to change attitudes towards cCBT with any population. Mitchell and Gordon (Mitchell and Gordon, 2007) provided a cCBT demonstration to 20 student participants and found that 30% changed their opinions in a positive direction post-demonstration. Prior to viewing the cCBT demonstration, participants were provided with a brief description of cCBT and then completed a questionnaire with respect to their expectations. Pre-demonstration findings suggested that participants were not convinced of the credibility of cCBT, indicated low expectancy for improvement, and reported little likelihood of using cCBT over traditional therapist guided CBT. After viewing the demonstration however, credibility scores, expectancy ratings, and reports on the likelihood of using a cCBT programme, all increased by a minimum of 50%. A study by Casey et al. (2013) investigated the relative utility of information provided via text versus film in changing adult attitudes towards e-mental health services in a general population sample of adults aged 19–60years. Text but not video was found to increase intention to use e-mental health services whilst neither modality was found to improve the perceived helpfulness of e-mental health services. Finally, Fleming and Merry (2013) found that youth workers who were given exposure to cCBT through a demonstration programme, reported more positive attitudes towards computer-based therapy compared to youth workers who had not had exposure to such programmes. Although not all of these studies were conducted with mental health workers, it provides preliminary evidence that attitudes towards cCBT can be modified through exposure to an actual programme.Drawing on this literature base, the current study had three aims. The first was to investigate the role of mental health worker knowledge in their attitudes towards cCBT. The second was to examine differences in attitudes towards cCBT between a) mental health workers whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT versus mental health workers whose primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, b) psychologists versus ‘other’ mental health workers (e.g., psychiatrists, social workers, case workers, guidance officers, occupational therapists, counsellors, nurses and youth workers) and c) those who reported a strong intention to use cCBT and those who did not. The third aim of this study was to examine whether a short 5–7min PowerPoint presentation providing information and a demonstration of cCBT, was effective in changing mental health worker attitudes towards, and intention to use, cCBT.Table 1provides the demographic details of participants. As is evident from Table 1, the majority of participants were psychologists, worked in the public sector, had completed tertiary level education, and were CBT-oriented.Participants were required to provide general demographic information concerning gender, age, employment, education, and preferred therapeutic approach, as well as responses to questions asking them a) whether they had ever seen a cCBT programme in use (yes/no), b) whether they had ever used a cCBT programme (yes/no), c) how much they knew about cCBT before the survey (not at all/very little/a little/quite a lot/a lot), d) how much exposure they had had to cCBT in practise (not at all/very little/a little/quite a lot/a lot), e) how effective they felt cCBT was in treating various disorders (not at all/very little/a little/quite a lot/a lot), and whether they would use cCBT with their clients if it was available to them (unsure/definitely not/possibly/most likely/definitely yes).Comfort with using computers in therapy and belief in the efficacy of using computers in therapy were measured with the Comfort with Using and Belief in Efficacy subscales respectively of the 8-item Computer-Assisted Therapy Attitudes Scale (CATAS) (Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013). The Comfort with Using subscale consists of three items assessing how comfortable a therapist is with using computer-assisted therapy programmes (e.g., “I feel apprehensive about using computers in my practise”). The Belief in Efficacy subscale consists of five items assessing therapist belief in computer-assisted therapy efficacy (e.g., “If given the opportunity and training, I would like to use computers in my practise”). Participants were required to rate the degree to which they agreed with each statement on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). After reverse scoring the negatively worded items, the items on each subscale were summed to produce total subscale scores ranging from 3 to 15 for the Comfort with Using subscale and 5 to 25 for the Belief in Efficacy subscale. Higher scores indicated greater comfort with using and belief in efficacy of computers in therapy respectively. The authors reported a somewhat low (a=.59) internal reliability estimate for the Comfort with Using Subscale and a high (a=.84) internal reliability estimate for the Belief in Efficacy subscale (Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013).Circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous were measured using a modified version of Stallard et al.'s (2010), Helpfulness of cCBT measure. The original 3-item measure was modified for this study by a) slight rewording to reflect a broader age range of patients (i.e., not only young people aged 7–18years), b) adding more circumstances in which cCBT could potentially be perceived as advantageous and c) changing the 6-point scale to a 5-point scale. The resulting scale used in the current study consisted of 12 statements regarding the potential advantages of cCBT under various circumstances (e.g., “as a prevention programme” and “with mild severity problems”). Participants were required to rate each of the 12 statements on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (not at all advantageous) to 5 (extremely advantageous). Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 12 to 60, with higher scores indicating a greater number of perceived circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous.Perceived advantages of cCBT were measured using a modified version of Stallard et al.'s (2010) 10-item Advantages of cCBT measure. The measure was modified for this study through a) minor wording changes, b) the addition of three items relating to the cost efficiency of cCBT and c) using a 5-point rather than 4-point Likert scale. The resulting Perceived Advantages scale used in the current study consisted of 13 statements regarding the potential advantages of cCBT (e.g., “Reduction of stigma”). Participants were required to rate each of the 13 statements on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (not at all advantageous) to 5 (extremely advantageous). Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 13 to 65, with higher scores indicating more perceived advantages of cCBT.Perceived disadvantages of cCBT were measured using a modified version of Stallard et al.'s., Disadvantages of cCBT measure (Stallard et al., 2010). The original measure was modified for this study through a) minor wording changes, b) the addition of three items and c) using a 5-point rather than 4-point Likert scale. The resulting Perceived Disadvantages scale used in the current study consisted of 15 statements regarding the potential disadvantages of cCBT (e.g., “therapy dropout”). Participants were required to rate each of the 15 statements on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (not a problem) to 5 (extreme problem). Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 15 to 75, with higher scores indicating more perceived disadvantages of cCBT.Knowledge of cCBT was measured using a ‘test” of cCBT facts (see Appendix A). The items were developed by the authors in consultation with colleagues who conduct research in the online area. Participants responded True, False or Unsure to six statements regarding computerised interventions (e.g., “computerised interventions are not interactive”). Correctly answered items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 0 to 6, with higher scores indicating greater knowledge of cCBT.Agreement/belief in CBT as a theoretical approach to treatment, Confidence in Computer use, and Primary Therapeutic Approach were used as control variables in the analyses. Agreement/Belief in CBT was measured using two author-developed questions: “Do you agree with the principles of CBT?” and “Do you believe CBT is an effective therapeutic approach?” Participants were required to answer ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Somewhat’ in response to these items. Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 0 to 4, with higher scores indicating greater agreement/belief in CBT.Confidence in Computer use was measured with one author-developed item: “How confident do you feel using computers and the internet generally?” Participants were required to rate their perceived computer confidence on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (really not confident) to 5 (very confident). Scores on the item ranged from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating greater confidence with using computers.Therapeutic approach was measured with one question, asking participants to endorse their primary therapeutic approach from a list of alternatives including CBT, Mindfulness/Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy, Interpersonal Therapy, Psychodynamic Therapy, Neuropsychological Therapy, Humanistic Therapy, Dialectical Behaviour Therapy Solution Focused/Brief Therapy, Gestalt Therapy, Family Therapy, Supportive Counselling, Mentoring, “Other” (to which participants could then specify) or ‘I do not do therapy with clients’. Responses were then coded as either ‘CBT’ or ‘not CBT’.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results of this study suggest that Australia still has a long way to go in terms of educating mental health professionals about cCBT programmes. Despite widespread dissemination of Australian programmes such as MoodGYM (O'Kearney et al., 2009) and BRAVE-ONLINE (Spence et al., 2011, 2006), it would appear that the uptake of such programmes by mental health professionals is not widespread, that mental health professionals lack knowledge about them, and that mental health workers hold a number of misconceptions about the effectiveness and scope of cCBT programmes. On the positive side, it would seem that it is possible to change the attitudes of Australian mental health workers towards cCBT at least to some extent, by providing them with information and demonstrations.None declared.TrueFalseUnsure1. Computerised interventions are only available online2. All computerised interventions involve therapist contact3. Computerised interventions are less effective than face-to-face therapy4. Computerised interventions automatically tailor to individual needs5. People who do computerised interventions are generally satisfied6. Computerised interventions are not interactive