@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantifying the precision and accuracy of the MicroScribe G2X three-dimensional digitizer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The MicroScribe is an accurate and precise instrument (errors <1mm).The accuracy is maintained across the workspace.Both linear distance and geometric morphometry are accurate.The accuracy is maintained with different positions of the digitizer arm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractMicroScribe digitizing arm reaching to points on the reference object

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“Digitize” is one of the six operational areas of Virtual Anthropology, and a necessary step for other areas such as “compare” and “share” (Weber, 2014, 2015). Portable three-dimensional digitizers facilitate these areas by non-invasively recording the location of specific points in three dimensions. They provide a relatively inexpensive and non-invasive way to identify and record three-dimensional points. They are an important tool for numerous fields including anthropology (Hughes et al., 2012; Ross and Williams, 2008), biomechanical modelling (Li et al., 2015), and musculoskeletal research (Gillespie et al., 2011; Meier and Meier, 2006; Ravichandiran et al., 2010; Schenk et al., 2013). The MicroScribe G2X three-dimensional digitizer (Revware Inc, Raleigh, North Carolina) is a counterbalanced, multi-joint apparatus with a 1m3 workspace. It can record individual coordinates or stream coordinates for a finite period of time. The manufacturer states that the point accuracy error of the G2X is 0.23mm (Immersion Corp, 2013). Although international standards have been developed to describe the measurement characterization of 3D measurement systems based on touch probes (summarized in Acko et al. (2012)), these standards have not been considered for the Microscribe. Furthermore, we are not aware of any studies that have evaluated whether the accuracy varies within the workspace. Importantly, researchers have not questioned the accuracy of the MicroScribe device; in contrast, one study used the MicroScribe as the gold standard for their assessment of two photogrammetric systems (Gornick, 2011). The G2X is constructed of serial linkages with redundant joints (Fig. 1) and therefore the stylus tip can reach a desired coordinate using different combinations of joint arm angles (configurations;Video S1), giving the user the ability to assess objects with complex shapes such as skulls (Ross and Williams, 2008). This may introduce systematic error and thereby impact the precision and accuracy of the device, although these factors have not yet been investigated. The scarcity of studies evaluating the instrument measurement properties starkly contrasts the large number of studies that have evaluated human repeatability (Ross and Williams, 2008; Sholts et al., 2011; Sládek et al., 2012), and error between multiple observers (Ghoddousi et al., 2007; Ross and Williams, 2008; Sládek et al., 2012) or measuring techniques (Ghoddousi et al., 2007; Sládek et al., 2012).Due to the MicroScribe׳s widespread use, it is important to be confident that it has adequate precision and accuracy, regardless of the arm׳s configuration or location in the workspace. The purpose of this paper was to evaluate the accuracy and precision of the MicroScribe G2X instrument at different locations in the workspace.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The MicroScribe G2X digitizer is commonly used because of the published accuracy and the relatively economical price. This paper provides evidence to complement the manufacturer׳s accuracy specifications as we evaluated the accuracy and precision across the workspace. Results from the study indicate that measurements are not affected by different digitizer arm configurations; researchers can measure points without undue consideration of how they are positioning the digitizer arm. This is a reassuring finding for researchers looking for apparatus flexibility. We note however that proper setup, calibration, and handling of this equipment is important to obtain optimal results. The MicroScribe G2X has suitable accuracy and precision to be an appropriate research tool for most anthropological and musculoskeletal studies.