@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Examining self-guided internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy for older adults with symptoms of anxiety and depression: Two feasibility open trials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Few older adults with symptoms of anxiety and depression seek psychological treatment.Self-guided and Internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy (iCBT) has potential for older adults.This study examined the feasibility of self-guided iCBT for older adults.Large clinical improvements were found in symptoms of depression.Evidence of the cost-utility of self-guided iCBT was also found.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anxiety,Depression,Geriatric,Online therapy,Self-guided,Cost and utility analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Self-guided internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy (iCBT) has considerable public health potential for treating anxiety and depression. However, no research has examined the use of self-guided iCBT, that is, treatment without contact with a clinician, specifically for older adults. The aim of the present study was to undertake a preliminary examination of the acceptability, efficacy and health economic impact of two entirely self-guided iCBT programs for adults over 60years of age with anxiety and depression. Two separate single-group feasibility open trials of self-guided iCBT were conducted, the Anxiety Trial (n=27) and the Depression Trial (n=20), using the control groups of two randomized controlled trials. The online treatment packages consisted of five online educational lessons, which were delivered over 8weeks without clinical contact. Participants rated the interventions as acceptable with more than 90% reporting the course was worth their time and more than 70% of participants completing at least 3 of the 5 lessons within the eight weeks. Significant reductions on measures of anxiety (Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item; GAD-7) and depression (Patient Health Questionnaire 9-item; PHQ-9) were observed from pre-treatment to post-treatment in both the Anxiety Trial (GAD-7 Cohen's d=1.17; 95% CI: 0.55 to 1.75) and the Depression Trial (PHQ-9 Cohen's d=1.06; 95% CI: 0.33 to 1.73). The economic analyses indicated that there was statistically significant improvement in health-related quality of life compared to baseline and marginally higher costs associated with treatment for both the Anxiety Trial ($69.84; 95% CI: $4.24 to $135.45) and the Depression Trial ($54.98; 95% CI: $3.84 to $106.12). The results provide preliminary support for the potential of entirely self-guided iCBT for older adults with anxiety and depression and indicate larger scale and controlled research trials are warranted.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epidemiological surveys indicate that the rates of anxiety and depression tend to be lower in older adults. However, these surveys also indicate that approximately 8% and 3% of adults over 65years of age still meet formal diagnostic criteria for depression and anxiety disorders, respectively (Byers et al., 2010; Gum et al., 2009; Pirkis et al., 2009). This is significant given that the number of adults over 65 is projected to increase in the coming decades and given these conditions compound the effects of physical comorbidities (Katon et al., 2007; Braam et al., 2005).There is considerable evidence for the efficacy of psychological treatments, such as cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), for older adults with anxiety and depression (Scogin et al., 2005; Nordhus and Pallesen, 2003; Ayers et al., 2007; Gould et al., 2012; Wetherell et al., 2005). However, research indicates that the proportion of older adults seeking and receiving evidence-based treatment for anxiety and depression is low (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2007; Troller et al., 2007). This has led several researchers to examine internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy (iCBT) for older adults (i.e., 60years and older) with anxiety and depression as a way of overcoming barriers to traditional face-to-face treatments and increasing access to evidence-based treatment (Dear et al., 2013; Spek et al., 2007; Zou et al., 2012; Dear et al., in press; Titov et al., in press). For example, two recent randomized controlled trials of iCBT provided with regular clinician guidance found significant improvements in symptoms of anxiety and depression (Cohen's ds>1.0) among adults over the age of 60 compared with a Waitlist-Control Group (Dear et al., in press; Titov et al., in press). Moreover, these trials found the improvements in symptoms to be maintained at a 12-month follow-up and found the interventions to be cost-effective at common willingness-to-pay thresholds.There is now strong meta-analytic evidence for iCBT treatments for anxiety and depression in adults generally (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Andrews et al., 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2009). Importantly, the findings of these meta-analyses have suggested that iCBT treatments provided with weekly clinician-guidance may achieve better clinical outcomes than iCBT provided in self-guided formats, that is, where no regular contact with a clinician is provided (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Cuijpers et al., 2009). However, since these meta-analyses, several clinical trials have produced clinical results that are more encouraging of self-guided iCBT treatments (Berger et al., 2011; Furmark et al., 2009; Leykina et al., in press). For example, one study found no differences in clinical outcomes between self-guided and clinician-guided iCBT for adults with depression (Berger et al., 2011) and another found no differences for adults with social anxiety disorder (Furmark et al., 2009). Another trial (n=257) examined self-guided iCBT for symptoms of anxiety and depression and found large clinical effects (Cohen's ds>.80) consistent with those obtained in clinician-guided treatments, particularly among participants with comorbid anxiety and depression and where automatic emails were provided (Titov et al., 2013, 2014). These more recent studies are encouraging and highlight the public health potential of well-developed self-guided treatments for anxiety and depression (Andersson and Titov, 2014; Titov, Dear & Andersson, 2014). Unfortunately, despite their potential, no studies have examined the use of self-guided iCBT for anxiety and depression among older adults to date.The present study sought to explore the efficacy, acceptability and health economic impact of self-guided iCBT for older adults with anxiety and depression using two separate single group open trials. To do this, the present study employed the Waitlist Control-Groups from two previous randomized controlled trials (RCTs; Dear et al., in press; Titov et al., in press), where the control groups were provided with self-guided iCBT. It was hypothesized that: (1) participants would report significantly reduced symptoms of anxiety and depression at post-treatment, (2) these reductions in symptoms would be maintained at 3-month follow-up, and (3) the self-guided iCBT treatment would reduce costs and improve health-related quality of life.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
