@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Logging into therapy: Parent attitudes and intentions to use computer-based therapies for youth mental health

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Parents act as gatekeepers to mental health services for children and adolescents.Parents reported their attitudes towards computer-based therapies for young people.94% of parents would access a computer-based therapy if their child needed support.Computer-based therapy knowledge predicted perceived helpfulness and use intentions.Parents hold positive attitudes to the use of computer-based therapies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-based therapy,Parent,Attitude,Child,Adolescent,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesThe first aim of this study was to describe parental attitudes towards and intentions to access, computer-based therapies for youth mental health problems. The second aim was to assess parental factors (demographic and clinical factors, personality, technology factors, mental health knowledge and attitudes, and knowledge of computer-based therapies) predicting attitudes and intentions to access computer-based therapies for youth.MethodThree hundred and seventy-three Australian parents completed an online survey measuring: demographics; mental health service experience; personality; technology factors; mental health knowledge and attitudes; perceived benefits, problems, and helpfulness of computer-based therapies; and intentions to access services.ResultsApproximately 50% of parents reported accessing support for their child's mental health, yet only 6% had used a computer-based therapy. The majority of parents strongly endorsed all benefits of computer-based therapies, and appeared relatively less concerned by potential service problems. Computer-based therapies were perceived as somewhat to extremely helpful by 87% of parents and 94% indicated that they would utilise a computer-based therapy if their child required support and one was offered to them. Parental knowledge of computer-based therapies significantly predicted perceived helpfulness (∆F=19.23 (1301), p=<.001) and intentions to access (∆F=10.91 (1288), p=.001) computer-based therapies, above that of parent demographic characteristics, clinical factors, and engagement with technology.ConclusionsAustralian parents hold positive attitudes to the use of computer-based therapies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite advancements in evidence-based treatments, youth mental health problems remain prevalent. Only 46.1% of Australians with a mental illness receive mental health services (Whiteford et al., 2014) and young people are among those least likely to access support (Slade et al., 2009). Computer-based therapies are well placed to improve access to evidence-based interventions for mental health problems in youth and circumvent many of the barriers to accessing treatment (Elkins et al., 2011). There is a growing body of research supporting the efficacy of computer-based therapies for young people across a variety of mental health problems (Donovan & March, 2014; Spence et al., 2011; Grist & Cavanagh, 2013; Sethi, 2013) with computer-based therapies demonstrating comparable levels of effectiveness to face-to-face interventions (Barak et al., 2008; Christensen et al., 2014; Grist & Cavanagh, 2013). Unfortunately, the uptake of these programmes has been recognised as being low in the past (Gun et al., 2011) and little is known about programme uptake within child and adolescent populations.There are many factors that may contribute to the poor uptake of computer-based therapies. The theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1985) emphasizes the role of attitudes in predicting behavioural intentions, which are in turn influenced by individual characteristics, knowledge, perceived benefits, and perceived problems. There is limited research exploring attitudes towards computer-based therapies for the treatment of mental health problems in young people, with the majority of studies focusing on the perceptions of mental health clinicians and the attitudes of consumers/clients themselves being relatively ignored. Clients of these services not only include young people, but also their parents who act as gatekeepers for child access to mental health support.Apart from studies which have examined consumer feedback on specific interventions for programme development or pilot trial (Cunningham et al., 2006; Salloum et al., 2013), there is only one study that has examined attitudes of youth towards computer-based therapies generally. Horgan and Sweeney (2010) examined the attitudes of university students (aged 18–24years) in the United Kingdom and found that the majority of students were willing to access mental health services online, with a third having done so already, and two thirds reporting that they would if they needed to. However, four out of five students reported a preference for traditional face-to-face support if both modes of therapy were available. Students who preferred internet support indicated that anonymity, privacy, confidentiality, accessibility, speed and cost were the greatest perceived benefits. Evidently, the only study that has examined attitudes towards computer-based therapies for youth mental health generally, has sampled young adults, not youth or their parents. Research conducted to date is therefore limited in its capacity to advance our understanding of consumer attitudes towards these services.Although in its infancy, research is this area is important, as the results may be used to inform effective models of dissemination and targeted promotion aimed at increasing the uptake of computer-based therapies, so that children and adolescents can ultimately benefit from improved access to effective psychological services. Research in this area may also inform the design and development of future computer-based therapy programmes. The current study sought to explore parental perceptions about computer-based therapy for their children, as parents are typically the primary gatekeepers for child and adolescent mental health services. Parental attitudes towards support services can therefore either promote or hinder the uptake of programmes by young people. To the authors' knowledge, there has been no research conducted to date that has explored parental perceptions of these services, exclusive of user feedback on a specific intervention programme (Salloum et al., 2013). In addition to investigating the content of parental attitudes, it is also important to examine factors that may influence these attitudes towards computer-based therapy for youth.The limited research conducted in the adult literature suggests that factors such as personality and use of technology may impact on attitudes towards computer-based therapies. For example, Klein and Cook (2010) found that lower trait loading on extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, and openness to experience was linked to adults' preference for e-therapies, although neuroticism was not related to preference in a study of young people conducted by Tsan and Day (2007). Greater technology access and higher computer fluency have also been linked with more positive clinician attitudes towards computer-assisted therapies for adult clients (Becker & Jensen-Doss, 2013), although no differences in technology access between those preferring ‘e’ versus ‘non-e’ therapies were found by Klein and Cook (2010).Mental health knowledge and attitudes are positive predictors of help-seeking in traditional mental health services (Cometto, 2014; Jorm, 2012). Following this, there is preliminary yet consistent evidence to suggest that knowledge of, and experience with, computer-based therapies is also associated with higher intended uptake. Mental health professionals who had been exposed to computer-based therapies have been found to perceive more benefits for their use in child and adolescent populations (Fleming & Merry, 2013). Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that previous users of, and those with knowledge of, internet-based programmes provide higher ratings of acceptability and greater intentions to use computer programmes compared to those with no prior experience or with limited knowledge (Gun et al., 2011; Klein and Cook, 2010). Thus, it seems logical, and indeed suggested by researchers (e.g. Carper, McHugh & Barlow, 2013) that a pronounced lack of exposure to computer-based therapies could account, at least in part, for the low rates of uptake found.It is evident that there is a shortage of empirical research examining predictors of attitudes and intended uptake of computer-based therapies and a complete absence of such research examining parental and youth predictors. What is available in the clinician and adult literature suggests that personality, technology factors, mental health knowledge and attitudes, and knowledge of computer-based therapies may be influential to attitudes and worthy of investigation.The first aim of the current study was to describe in a quantitative manner, parental attitudes towards computerised therapy for youth, such that the child or adolescent is completing the therapy programme. Attitudes described included 1) perceived benefits of computer-based therapies, 2) perceived problems with computer-based therapies, 3) perceived helpfulness of computer-based therapies, and 4) intentions to access computer-based therapies for their children. Parental recommendations for the availability of computer-based therapies for youth were also of interest. The second aim of this study was to assess parental factors predicting attitudes and intentions to access computer-based therapies for youth. Parental factors of interest include 1) demographics, 2) personality, 3) technology factors, 4) mental health knowledge and attitudes, and 5) knowledge of computer-based therapies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The findings of this study make a contribution to our understanding of parental attitudes towards computer-based therapies for youth mental health problems. With evidence-based treatments now available to families through computer technology, we have the opportunity to significantly improve the mental health of Australian youth. This study showed that uptake is currently low and that parental knowledge of computer-based therapies is poor. Yet, in spite of this, parents appear to be positive about the use of these new services. We also know that parental intentions to access computer-based therapies for their children seem to be linked to prior experience, positive attitudes towards mental health in general, and service-specific knowledge. Our challenge now is to draw upon these factors to create active change in the uptake of computer-based therapies by Australian families.The authors have no conflict of interest to report.