@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Who seeks ICBT for depression and how do they get there? Effects of recruitment source on patient demographics and clinical characteristics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Recruitment source had an impact on the clinical characteristics of an ICBT sample.Those recruited by online advertisements were as depressed as those from clinical settings.Those recruited by newspaper advertisement were less depressed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet interventions,Recruitment,Google,Newspaper,Methodology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Studies on internet-administered cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) frequently use several different sources of recruitment, yet no study has investigated whether different recruitment sources produce different clinical and demographic profiles among participants. Using data from a large sample (n=982) seeking ICBT for depression, we compared these characteristics on the basis of self-reported recruitment source. Recruitment sources that imply more active treatment-seeking behaviors (Google searches, viewing postings on mental health websites) presented more severe depression and anxiety than those recruited through more passive sources of information (newspaper advertisements, referrals by friends and family). In addition, a number of demographic differences between groups were found. These findings have important implications for ICBT research projects and clinical programs who employ open recruitment procedures and multi-modal recruitment strategies, and who wish to recruit representative samples or target specific subgroups. Replications in other countries will however be required to establish cross-cultural patterns.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
More than a decade of research has shown internet-delivered self-help based on cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT; Andersson, 2014, 2009) to be an efficacious treatment of depression (Richards and Richardson, 2012; Titov, 2011), anxiety disorders (Andersson et al., 2013) and somatic conditions (Cuijpers et al., 2008). More recently, the effectiveness of ICBT when implemented in routine psychiatric care has also been demonstrated (Andersson and Hedman, 2013).Participants and patients are often recruited to ICBT studies and clinical programs using several parallel recruitment mediums, such as advertisements in TV, radio, newspaper and social media, paid Google search results, and referrals by clinics (e.g., Lindner et al., 2013b; van der Zanden et al., 2011). Using several recruitment channels is presumed to increase the number of potential participants exposed to recruitment efforts, thereby potentially increasing enrollment numbers and recruiting a more heterogeneous sample, yet the effect on sample characteristics of this strategy is largely unknown. Although subject to regional variations and changes over time, media consumption behaviors often differ according to demographic variables. Internet usage in the US, for example, is more prevalent in lower age groups and among those with higher socioeconomic status (Pew Research Center Internet Project Survey, 2014). Certain demographic variables are in turn associated with the presentation of psychiatric disorders. Low socioeconomic status, for example, has been consistently associated with higher odds of being depressed (Lorant et al., 2003). Avoiding the pitfalls of the ecological fallacy, direct correlations between specific media usages and psychiatric disorders have also been demonstrated, e.g., between depression and computer usage, panic disorder and television watching (de Wit et al., 2011).All considered, it is reasonable to hypothesize that recruitment efforts through different media will attract clients and participants with different characteristics. While previous ICBT research has investigated characteristics of participants in ICBT (Titov et al., 2010) and the recruitment and cost effectiveness of individual recruitment sources such as Facebook (Ramo et al., 2014; Ünlü Ince et al., 2014), Google Ads (Gross et al., 2014) and the prevalence recruitment strategy (Woodford et al., 2011), no past study has compared clinical and demographic characteristics of participants recruited from different sources to an ICBT study. Knowledge of such potential effects could prove valuable for studies trying to avoid sampling bias and when the aim is to recruit a representative sample with high external validity; or alternatively, if the recruitment target is a specific clinical or demographic subgroup. In the current study, we used a large dataset (n=982) of screening information from an ICBT study for depression to investigate whether participants' clinical and demographic characteristics differed depending on recruitment source.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We show that self-rated recruitment source is associated with somewhat different clinical and demographic characteristics of individuals seeking ICBT for depression. Distinguishing effects were especially pronounced for those recruited by sources implying either more active treatment-seeking behaviors (e.g., via Google searches and visiting websites on mental well-being), and more passive ones (via newspaper advertisements and referrals by friends and family). Some demographic differences between groups were also found.