@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Facilitating and hindering factors in Internet-delivered treatment for insomnia and depression

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We performed a qualitative study, interviewing 35 participants in an RCT of Internet-delivered CBT for insomnia or depressionParticipants had comorbid insomnia and depressionQualitative analyses were deepened with quantitative and semi-qualitative dataParticipants in the insomnia treatment were more positive and less bothered by comorbid symptomsThe study generated hypotheses for future research: combination treatment, therapist support and acceptance as a mechanism

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Insomnia,Depression,Qualitative,Psychotherapy,Internet,Method-triangulation,CBT,ICBT,CBT-i,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Insomnia and depression is a common and debilitating comorbidity, and treatment is usually given mainly for depression. Guided Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (ICBT-i) was, in a recent study on which this report is based, found superior to a treatment for depression (ICBT-d) for this patient group, but many patients did not reach remission.AimsTo identify facilitating and hindering factors for patients in ICBT-i and ICBT-d and formulate hypotheses for future research.MethodQualitative telephone interviews at the time of the 6-month follow-up. Thirty-five interviews were done and analyzed with a grounded theory approach. Based on the qualitative results, an iterative method-triangulation including quantitative and semi-qualitative was performed.ResultsThe interviews were coded into 738 sentences, condensed into 47 categories and finally 11 themes. Four areas were investigated further with method triangulation: Opinions about treatment, adherence, hindering symptoms and acceptance. Patients in ICBT-i were more positive regarding the treatment than patients in ICBT-d. Using treatment components was positively associated with outcome in both groups. Symptoms of insomnia, depression and other comorbidities were perceived as more hindering for ICBT-d than for ICBT-i. Acceptance of diagnose-related problems as well as negative emotions and cognitions was positively associated with outcome for ICBT-i.Proposed future research hypotheses1) A combination of CBT for insomnia and CBT for depression is more effective than only one of the treatments. 2) Additional therapist support increases outcomes for patients with more comorbidities. 3) Acceptance is a mechanism of change in CBT-i.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Insomnia and major depression are probably the two most common psychiatric diagnoses, with a prevalence of around 10–20 and 5–8% respectively (Ohayon and Roth, 2003; Kim et al., 2000; Ford and Kamerow, 1989; Young et al., 2008; Wittchen and Jacobi, 2005). They both cause a lot of suffering for the individual and a great cost to society (Daley et al., 2009; Bijl and Ravelli, 2000). Insomnia is often more or less chronic if left untreated, and depression is likely to recur after the first episode (Burcusa and Iacono, 2007; Ford and Kamerow, 1989). Comorbidity between insomnia and depression is very common, with approximately two thirds of depressed patients also suffering from insomnia (Buysse et al., 2008; Soldatos, 1994).The most common treatment for both conditions is medication. There are effective psychological treatments, though generally more difficult to come by. The psychotherapy form with the most convincing scientific evidence for mild to moderate depression is cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) (Butler et al., 2006). For insomnia, CBT is considered the treatment of choice, and has shown long-term effects superior to that of sleep medication (Morin et al., 2006; Riemann and Perlis, 2009).The most common approach to treating comorbid insomnia and depression is to treat the depression. Depression has historically often been seen as the cause of the sleeping problems, and treating depression is expected to improve sleep. Previous studies show, however, that insomnia often precedes depression (Walsh, 2004), and that untreated insomnia increases the risk of relapse into depression (Perlis et al., 1997). In a previous randomized controlled trial (RCT) (Blom et al., 2015a) of guided Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy (ICBT), we found that ICBT for insomnia (ICBT-i) was more effective than CBT for depression (ICBT-d) for this patient group, but also that patients with comorbid insomnia and depression did not improve as much as expected, when compared to patients with one of the diagnoses (Hedman et al., 2013; Jernelöv et al., 2012; Blom et al., 2015b). This sample seemed to be more burdened than patients with one of the diagnoses.In order to understand more about how to improve the treatment, we wanted to formulate testable hypotheses regarding facilitating and hindering factors for these patients in their work with ICBT, and we decided to do this in a qualitative study, based on the previous RCT (Blom et al., 2015a) with the possibility to use available quantitative data to shed further light on qualitative findings.Previous qualitative studies examining randomized clinical trials of psychotherapy are few, and those that exist take different views and perspectives. A recently published review examined qualitative studies of insomnia and the current state of knowledge (Araújo et al., 2016). This review looks into the experience of insomnia and insomniacs' views on treatment. Among other things, they conclude that insomniacs are a frustrated group with insomnia affecting life 24/7. Insomniacs do not find that they are being fully understood by health care providers, who seem largely unaware of non-pharmacological treatment options.There is an increasing amount of qualitative studies looking at ICBT. The Internet is a fairly new way of disseminating psychotherapy, and there is an urge to learn more about how and why it works. Some of the previous qualitative studies on ICBT look into motivators and motivations (Donkin and Glozier, 2012), expectations and experiences in primary care (Beattie et al., 2009) and therapist behaviors (Paxling et al., 2013; Holländare et al., 2016). A study on ICBT for depression (Bendelin et al., 2011) found that the process of change corresponded to theories of change in face-to-face therapy, and that patients who attribute success to themselves and take responsibility for their treatment benefit more. The report that is perhaps most relevant to our study is about patients' experience of helpfulness in ICBT for depression (Lillevoll et al., 2013), even though the therapist support in this study was face-to-face, making it more of a blended therapy. That study emphasizes active engagement of the patient, guidance from the therapist and the content of the treatment as the most helpful dimensions.The aim of the present study was to investigate factors that hinder and facilitate the work with ICBT for insomnia or depression, for patients with both diagnoses, by means of qualitative telephone interviews and method triangulation using interview data, quantitative data and semi-qualitative clinical data from the Internet treatment platform. The findings were used to formulate research hypotheses that, if later evidenced, would help improve treatment for this patient group.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
