@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A 3d model of Complex A, La Venta, Mexico

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The importance of La Venta and its ritual precinct, Complex A, is briefly described.We explain how the archived field records of La Venta Complex A were digitized.We explain how the digitized data were developed into a 3d model of the site.Problems and successes in the digitization of archival records are discussed.New interpretations of Complex A׳s history and design derive from the 3d model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
La Venta,Olmec,Archival archeology,Clay architecture,3d Digital modeling,Digitization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
La Venta was a major regional center of the Olmec culture in Mesoamerica. Its apogee is dated to approximately 800–400BC (uncalibrated), roughly coincident with the Middle Formative period (Pool, 2007: 160). The site is located in the state of Tabasco in southern Mexico 15km inland from the Gulf coast (González Lauck, 1996: 73). First excavated in the 1940s La Venta became the “type site,” the basis for defining Olmec culture (Grove, 1997), especially its stone-working tradition and distinctive art style. Despite the absence of native stone on the coastal plain La Venta׳s artisans crafted colossal sculptures out of boulders brought from the Tuxtla Mountains some 100km to the west, and finely made small objects of serpentine and jadeite, the latter material originating nearly 500km to the east (Diehl, 2004).Although subsequent research in the Gulf coast area has provided more details on Olmec culture and chronology (Diehl, 2004; Grove, 1997; Pool, 2007), as the regional capital La Venta remains essential for understanding the Middle Formative Olmecs. Furthermore, the complex political and religious institutions evident at La Venta have long been thought to have influenced societal developments in many other parts of Mesoamerica, including neighboring Maya peoples to the east (Coe, 1968; Drucker et al., 1959; González Lauck, 1996).Once shrouded in tropical vegetation, the 1.5km long civic-ceremonial core of La Venta has now been mapped, revealing over 30 mounds and platforms. The site is dominated by a massive earthen pyramid over 30m high, perhaps the largest single structure at its time in Mesoamerica (González Lauck, 1988, 1996; Pool, 2007: 157). Just north of the pyramid is a group of clay platforms and small plazas designated Complex A. Excavations in Complex A first brought world attention to Olmec culture, revealing richly stocked stone “tombs” and numerous purposely buried clusters of jade and other artifacts (“dedicatory offerings”) (Stirling and Stirling, 1942). The most enigmatic finds at La Venta were three huge mosaic “pavements” all of the same design, crafted out of hundreds of polished rectangular blocks made from imported serpentine. The mosaics, as well as two large deposits of serpentine blocks not forming a design, were laid in great pits and then immediately covered with clay fill. Nothing comparable to these five “massive offerings” is known elsewhere in Mesoamerica (González Lauck, 1996: 78).Although Complex A was small relative to the entire site, it remains the most thoroughly excavated and documented portion of La Venta׳s civic-ceremonial center. Three major excavation projects were carried out in Complex A: in 1942 directed by Matthew Stirling and Philip Drucker (Drucker, 1952; Stirling and Stirling, 1942); in 1943 directed by Stirling and Waldo Wedel (Drucker, 1952); and in 1955 directed by Drucker and Robert Heizer (Drucker et al., 1959; Drucker and Heizer, 1965, 1975). This last project was the most extensive and was dedicated to investigating the construction history of the earthen platforms into which the dedicatory and massive offerings were buried (Drucker et al., 1959: 1). Built out of specially prepared clays, the platform surfaces and the floor of the principal court were regularly painted in colorful thin layers of clay and sand, much of it brought to the site. At several intervals, great pits were dug to house the blocks of serpentine, after which the platforms were enlarged and repainted.While the architectural biographies of the individual structures vary considerably, four construction phases (I–IV) were determined for Complex A as a whole based on the sequence of structural modifications initiated by the massive serpentine deposits (Drucker et al., 1959: 121–127; Drucker and Heizer, 1965; González Lauck, 2007). In the absence of chronological information elsewhere from the site, these four construction phases became the basis for the four “archeological” phases of La Venta׳s occupation (Grove, 1997; Pool, 2007). The phases were tentatively dated by radiocarbon, but samples were not obtained from every identified phase, leading to continuing questions about La Venta׳s chronology (Grove, 1997: 72).Soon after the 1955 project ended, the site was badly damaged by looting and development, especially Complex A (Drucker and Heizer, 1965), although some stratigraphic data were retrieved there during a brief expedition in 1967 (Heizer et al., 1968a). Interpretations of La Venta׳s history and function, and by extension of Olmec cultural practices, are thus dependent on the Complex A excavations published over a half-century ago. Especially important is the 1955 instrument-made map of Complex A. As Heizer later observed, Complex A was “so torn up by bulldozers that no surface feature whatsoever exists that can be identified as being present in 1955. The 1955 map of Complex A, therefore, is the best we will ever have” (Heizer et al., 1968b: 139).Unfortunately, the scant published excavation data are incomplete and inadequate. The maps and profile drawings in particular are inaccurate and misrepresent the field data (Coe and Stuckenrath, 1964). In the single major report of the 1955 field season (Drucker et al., 1959) it is impossible to correlate the textual descriptions of the excavations with the two-dimensional profile and plan views, many of which are schematic, leading archeologists to neglect the descriptive information in the text (Gillespie, 2011). Furthermore, the goal of the 1955 project was to reveal the four-phase history of construction of Complex A (Drucker and Heizer, 1965: 63) (Section 1.2). However, the various architectural strata that were assigned to those phases “float” in the published profile drawings because no datum was provided to anchor them in vertical space. Thus, the construction phases of one clay platform cannot be correlated with the phases of an adjacent platform (Coe and Stuckenrath, 1964).Heizer׳s reference (Section 1.2) to the “1955 map” is a single plan map showing the structure footprints, excavation units, and locations of offerings (Drucker et al., 1959, Fig. 4). This map compress all phases of the history of Complex A into one flattened image. Later maps of La Venta derived from the 1959 report omit important information or misrepresent the size or configuration of structures (Gillespie, 2011). Interpretations of Complex A have tended to emphasize its structural design, especially its notable bilateral symmetry (e.g., González Lauck, 1996: 76), although that design is best evident only in the final phase of construction shown in the single plan map. In sum, despite the site׳s importance in Mesoamerican prehistory, archeologists, being so dependent on maps and drawings, cannot make much sense of the La Venta excavations.The lack of adequate publication, especially by today׳s standards, does not mean that archeologists can never know more about Complex A; neither does it imply that the excavation projects themselves were poorly done or inadequately recorded. Although there are shortcomings in the published maps, the original field maps and supporting data recorded during the 1955 project still exist and provide the opportunity to create more accurate, computer-assisted images of Complex A.In 2007 Gillespie began a project, “Reconstructing the Architectural History of La Venta Complex A,” to create new profiles and plans primarily from the field records of the 1955 excavations. The project׳s research objective is to determine the sequence and technology of the ritual practices – the building and elaboration of the clay structures and placement of artifact caches – that created and modified Complex A over time, similar to the intentions of Drucker and Heizer (1956) (Section 1.2). Volk was added to the project for his expertise with digitization and visualization software and knowledge of landscape formations.Because the surface architecture of Complex A is destroyed, it is not possible to correlate the field records with the physical remains at the site today. We therefore had to rely entirely on the available archived field notes and drawings, made when mapping instrumentation and recording standards were quite different. All of the images had to be digitized to create 2d profiles and plans at a single scale that could then be developed into a 3d model of Complex A, to visualize how it looked at different periods of its construction history.The first objective is to summarize the digitization and modeling processes, detailing some of the problems, missteps, and successes (Sections 2 and 4). A second important goal is to briefly explain the great benefits of the 3d digital model (Section 3), which has transformed our understanding of the site and its history of use (Section 4). We now have very different interpretations than those of the 1955 archeologists, who lacked the technology and means to utilize all their mapping data to evaluate the chronology and function of the Complex A ceremonial precinct.Complex A was a small group of low platform mounds and plazas approximately 13,520m2 in extent located immediately north of the 30m tall pyramidal mound (Complex C) (Fig. 1). Its finished design plan is marked by bilateral symmetry – the arrangement of structures on either side of a virtual north–south centerline 8° W of N (Drucker et al., 1959: 15). Bisecting the centerline, from north to south, are the largest mound (A-2); a rectangular plaza (Feature A-1, the Ceremonial Court) measuring 2396m2 and partially walled with adobe bricks and columnar basalt pieces set vertically; the South-Central Platform within the Ceremonial Court; and a platform (Mound A-3) just south of the court. The other structures form pairs positioned equidistant east and west of the centerline: the Northeast and Northwest Platforms within the Ceremonial Court, the Southeast and Southwest Platforms on the court׳s southern boundary, and Mounds A-4 and A-5 flanking Mound A-3.A trench excavated along the centerline from Mound A-2 to south of Mound A-3, begun in 1942 and extended in 1943, revealed a number of buried caches – the “dedicatory offerings” – including several presumed tombs and deposits of finely made jade objects (Drucker, 1952). These finds further manifested the significance of the centerline in the complex׳s design plan. The five “massive offerings” placed in well-constructed pits were excavated in 1943 and 1955, revealing that much of La Venta׳s architecture is subterranean. Three were composed of hundreds of worked serpentine slabs arranged in a mosaic pattern. Two mosaics were buried in pits preceding the construction of the Southeast and Southwest Platforms, with a third deposited just south of Mound A-3. Under the mosaic “pavement” in the Southwest Platform the 1955 project discovered 28 stacked layers of serpentine blocks laid in a deep square pit; presumably a complementary massive stack exists under the Southeast Platform but it was not excavated. Two other massive offerings discovered in 1955 were rectangular pits whose bottoms were lined with one or more layers of serpentine blocks: Massive Offering 3 under the Ceremonial Court floor just south of Mound A-2 and Massive Offering 2 dug into Mound A-2 itself. The massive offerings were believed to have initiated construction phases II–IV.For this project three archives were consulted: the Robert Fleming Heizer Papers in the National Anthropological Archives (NAA) of the Smithsonian Institution in Suitland, Maryland; the Robert Fleming Heizer Papers in the Bancroft Library at the University of California, Berkeley; and the Richard H. Stewart photographs of the 1942 and 1943 La Venta projects at the National Geographic Society׳s Image Collection in Washington, DC. Many of the photographs and slides from Stirling׳s and Heizer׳s La Venta projects are now accessible online at the Smithsonian׳s “Olmec Legacy” website http://anthropology.si.edu/olmec/english/imagesDB/index.htm (accessed 12.04.14).The most important field records were from the 1955 project. They include nine instrument-made (alidade and plane table) maps, eight of them on oversize graph paper. These were the work of Robert Squier, a University of California, Berkeley graduate student who had principal responsibility for mapping the site and excavations (Drucker et al., 1959: 4). Squier׳s “Drawing 2” provided our crucial base map, locating all the structures and some of the major finds of 1942–43 still in situ. His “Map 3” located the 1955 excavation pits and trenches at the same scale. Both maps pinpointed the same mapping station (Datum 2) as a singular reference point (Maps Folder, R.F. Heizer Papers, NAA). Squier׳s maps formed the basis for the published plan view of Complex A (Drucker et al., 1959, Fig. 4), which depicts most of the clay structures in terms of their footprints or maximal horizontal extent. The field maps include Heizer׳s additions and corrections to Squier׳s original maps, and not all of Squier׳s observations were included in the published map.Other records consulted were the 1955 field journals of Heizer, Drucker, Squier, and Eduardo Contreras, a Mexican archeologist on the project (Box 2, R.F. Heizer Papers, NAA). Additional resources were the color slides and some miscellaneous papers, including loose drawings (Boxes 4, 19, 23, 24, R.F. Heizer Papers, NAA). Unfortunately, most of the slides were not labeled as to provenience, or were given a code designation we have not yet deciphered. We were able to identify the locations in virtually all of them by comparison with the field drawings, although some slides had been labeled upside-down.Most of the profile and plan views were in the field journals, on graph or lined paper pages. With the exception of Contreras׳s journal, they were not drawn to scale but were rough-sketched with notated measurements of features and strata. To create the images for the 1959 publication, in 1956 Contreras was given the daunting task of converting the sketched profiles to scale drawings (Drucker et al., 1959: 3). We used the color excavation slides to help correct the shape and configuration of strata and features in the original sketched drawings. However, slides of strata in the trenches were not reliable for actual redrawing due to the angle of the photograph and potential distortion.The most important new data in the field records were the over 600 spot elevations recorded by Squier. Significantly, these elevations were not used in the 1955 archeological interpretations or to create the published profiles, which therefore “float” in space. The elevations were critical to our project for aligning the trench profiles in vertical space, filling in unexcavated areas where no profile information was available, and comprehending the sequence of structural changes to the complex as a whole.The challenge was to compile, organize, and digitize the various pieces of archival information for each architectural feature and then compile them into a single rendering of the entire complex. The first step was to scan notes, drawings, and slides and convert them to jpeg, tiff, or Adobe® Acrobat® PDF files. For comparison, the published drawings from the 1942, 1943, 1955, and 1967 projects were also scanned. The initial scans were not always to scale or in proportion, and were corrected in either Adobe® Photoshop® 6.0 or AutoCAD® 2010. All of this information was then organized according to the individual structure or feature, such as the Southwest Platform or the Northeast Entryway. The next step was to coordinate plan and profile drawings of the same structures and features to check for any gaps or glitches indicating a problem to be resolved (Section 4.2). The resulting drawings were also compared with the color slides.The 1955 project uniquely recorded relative elevations in Complex A from three instrument stations, recorded in Squier׳s field journal, maps, and trench profiles. Conveniently, he standardized them all in reference to a single instrument station (Datum 2) to make the readings consistent. However, he did not convert the stadia rod readings (mostly negative) into absolute elevations above sea level. The stadia rod was marked with English measurement units (feet and tenths of feet), and English measurements were also used in all the 1955 field records. For convenience our project maintained the English system. Following common practice, we assigned an arbitrary elevation of 100׳ to Datum 2 to convert the rod readings to relative elevations. Because none of the features mapped in 1955 still existed unmodified by the 1960s (Section 1.2), we cannot accurately convert our arbitrary elevations to actual elevations from the contour map made in the 1980s (González Lauck, 1988).As these data were being digitized and organized by individual structure, the next task was to assess the best way to convert the original archival data into updated 2d profiles and plans, and compile them into a single rendering of the entire complex. We began by entering base point and line information for the site plan into ArcGIS® (ESRI ArcMap 9.3®) using the Editor toolbar and defining elevations for each feature. ArcGIS® is a readily available software package typically used for mapping and data analyses. Line and point entry was based on Squier׳s Maps 2 and 3 (Section 2.2), underlain and georeferenced in ArcMap®.As a preliminary step, we then experimented with exporting these data to ArcScene® to produce 3d visualizations, using TINS (triangular irregular networks) to define surfaces based on the points, lines, and elevations (Fig. 2). However, while ArcGIS® is well suited to processing and analyzing large amounts of complex data, it is not as appropriate for entering detailed line and point data of the type we were using. It also produced what initially seemed to be an error that we could not trace, in that the base of Mound A-2 was considerably lower than the bases of the other structures dated to construction Phase I (Section 1.2); this “error” is further discussed in Section 4.4. Due to the difficult and cumbersome nature of the process, we transitioned to a different type of software to continue our work.Our solution was to export the GIS data into AutoCAD® 2010 to complete our final updated 2d plans and profiles. Similar to the process used in GIS, we began by inserting and scaling raster versions of the archival plans and profiles into CAD. Where possible, portions or all of the archival drawings were traced, while also referencing dimensions and notes from various sources. Because most archival renderings were not drawn to scale or proportion, tracing was not an option except for isolated portions. In these situations, we relied on the dimensions and descriptions in various sources to create the drawing. We now have most of Complex A in a single multilayered AutoCAD® file; namely, Mound A-2 and the Ceremonial Court and its structures. This is the area of the complex with the best stratigraphic data for the different construction phases (Figs. 3 and 4).Our final step was to export the 2d AutoCAD® data (and any 3d data that were created) into Google® Sketchup® 6 to create a diagrammatic but still accurate 3d model. Sketchup® is a free program, extremely useful for fast and simple 3d modeling work. It presents disadvantages for complex models, both in terms of the capabilities of the native tools and the actual ability of the software to run and regenerate smoothly when working with a data-intensive model. It is less capable than AutoCAD® when dealing with precise dimensions and forms. However, the lack of precision in the 3d model was less of an issue for our 3d visualization and general interpretation requirements; precision is maintained in the 2d renderings.The resulting 3d model is based on a highly precise digital “skeleton” of strata, features, and embedded artifacts for visualizing the complex strata of Mound A-2 and the Ceremonial Court structures. Textures and colors were added in Sketchup® that, where feasible, are meant to resemble the original colorful sands and clays that painted the structures, such as the brilliant yellow and purple coatings, and the adobe brickwork of the Southwest and Southeast Platforms and the court wall (Fig. 5). We also imported jpegs of photographs of the major buried caches, in their appropriate scales and positions, and manipulated images in Photoshop® to add background and shadow figures.Quick Sketchup® renderings of the southern structures (A-3, A-4, and A-5), which were less intensively excavated, were used to complete the 3d model of Complex A. For visual effect we also added the pyramid (Mound C-1) immediately south of Complex A. That structure was digitized from a topographic map made in 1968 (Heizer et al., 1968); its basal elevation was tentatively matched with that of Complex A. Like all other maps and drawings of Complex A, our 3d model is anachronistic – the structures are shown at different periods of construction, in part because we cannot be sure of the appearance of every mound at the same point in time.The 3d model allows us to virtually experience the solid forms of the structures and their relationships to one another, enhanced by a “fly-through” 〈insert Complex A fly-over video clip〉. We can recreate the visual experience of approaching the elevated Ceremonial Court from the south, the likely principal entrance. The view of the court between the Southeast and Southwest “bastion-like” platforms was blocked by the expansive South-Central Platform. The view from the other direction, north to south, puts the impressive great pyramid in the view shed (Fig. 6) (Video 1).The fly-through also gives a sense of the relative elevations of the Complex A mounds. Importantly, the interior court platforms were only about knee-high, an experiential factor not appreciable from the 2d base map. We can also visualize the deep pits that held the massive offerings, marvel at how they could have been stabilized in the sandy subsoil, and observe how this “inverse” architecture truly dwarfs the above-ground clay structures. Furthermore, the ca. 4m thick adobe brick court wall, which has been almost completely ignored in published maps and drawings of Complex A (Gillespie, 2011), is revealed as an impressive boundary sheltering ritual activities inside the court.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
