@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The acceptability, usability and short-term outcomes of Get Real: A web-based program for psychotic-like experiences (PLEs)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PLEs have been associated with a range of adverse mental health outcomesGet Real is a new web-based program targeting PLEs in young peopleUser ratings supported the program's acceptability, usability and perceived utilityGet Real reduced the number, frequency and level of distress associated with them PLEs at 3 months follow -up.Further testing in randomized controlled trials is required.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web program,Internet,Intervention,Psychotic-like experiences, psychosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ABSTRACTBackgroundPsychotic-like experiences (PLEs) are subclinical delusional ideas and perceptual disturbances that have been associated with a range of adverse mental health outcomes. This study reports a qualitative and quantitative analysis of the acceptability, usability and short term outcomes of Get Real, a web program for PLEs in young people.MethodsParticipants were twelve respondents to an online survey, who reported at least one PLE in the previous 3months, and were currently distressed. Ratings of the program were collected after participants trialled it for a month. Individual semi-structured interviews then elicited qualitative feedback, which was analyzed using Consensual Qualitative Research (CQR) methodology. PLEs and distress were reassessed at 3months post-baseline.ResultsUser ratings supported the program's acceptability, usability and perceived utility. Significant reductions in the number, frequency and severity of PLE-related distress were found at 3months follow-up. The CQR analysis identified four qualitative domains: initial and current understandings of PLEs, responses to the program, and context of its use. Initial understanding involved emotional reactions, avoidance or minimization, limited coping skills and non-psychotic attributions. After using the program, participants saw PLEs as normal and common, had greater self-awareness and understanding of stress, and reported increased capacity to cope and accept experiences. Positive responses to the program focused on its normalization of PLEs, usefulness of its strategies, self-monitoring of mood, and information putting PLEs into perspective. Some respondents wanted more specific and individualized information, thought the program would be more useful for other audiences, or doubted its effectiveness. The program was mostly used in low-stress situations.ConclusionsThe current study provided initial support for the acceptability, utility and positive short-term outcomes of Get Real. The program now requires efficacy testing in randomized controlled trials.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Psychotic-like experiences (PLEs) are subclinical delusional ideas and perceptual disturbances that lie on a phenotypic continuum with psychotic symptoms and disorders. Community surveys indicate that adolescents and adults report 12-month prevalence rates of PLEs of between 6 and 28% (van Os et al., 2009; Kelleher and Cannon, 2011; Nishida et al., 2008a). While most PLEs are infrequent and cause little distress (Scott et al., 2008; Armando et al., 2010; Kendler et al., 1996, 2005), they are risk factors for a range of mental health disorders, including psychosis, depressive, anxiety and substance use disorders as well as suicidal behaviors (Dhossche et al., 2002a,b; Fisher et al., 2013; Saha et al., 2011a,b; van Os et al., 2002; Welham et al., 2009; Nishida et al., 2008b).Despite this, few studies have explored preventative treatments for PLEs in community samples of young people. A recent search of the literature found only two case series papers using cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) and a quasi-random trial of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. The majority of preventive treatment research has focused on treatment seeking populations of individuals at ‘ultra-high risk’ (UHR) for psychosis, which are defined by three alternative risk syndromes. Two of these syndromes overlap with PLEs; attenuated positive symptoms defined as symptoms that deviate from normal phenomena but that are not yet frankly psychotic and brief limited intermittent psychotic symptoms (BLIPS) which are of psychotic intensity but they are very infrequent, or have a total duration of <7days. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis of six CBT trials in UHR samples (not taking antipsychotic medication) found that it reduced the risk of transition to psychosis by more than 50% at 6, 12 and 18–24months follow-up, compared with treatment as usual or non-specific control treatments (Hutton and Taylor, 2013). Secondary analysis indicated that CBT was also associated with significantly greater reductions in sub-threshold psychotic symptoms at 12months follow-up. Reductions in both psychotic symptom frequency and distress, as well improvements in functioning and quality of life were observed in both the CBT and control treatments. These improvements may not only reflect spontaneous recovery, but also indicate that a range of mental health interventions may be beneficial in the UHR group. Thus, psychological interventions are likely to be helpful for individuals with PLEs, as improved functioning and reductions in distress and symptom frequency may help reduce the risk of developing mental health disorders among individual with PLEs.Young people who experience PLEs are likely to benefit from psychological treatment (Fowler et al., 2009), but are unlikely to seek mental health treatment. Barriers include stigma or embarrassment, poor mental health literacy, preferences for self-reliance, and inappropriate service models. Web-based interventions can overcome many of these barriers as they are accessible, can provide anonymity, are minimally stigmatizing and can support self-management in this group (Gulliver et al., 2010). They also have high levels of acceptability among young people as a source of information on and support for mental health issues (Oh et al., 2009; Rickwood et al., 2007). Internet programs have demonstrated effectiveness, especially for anxiety and depressive disorders, and multiple trials have demonstrated comparable efficacy compared with face-to-face therapy (Barak et al., 2008).This study examined users' responses to the OnTrack Get Real program (www.ontrack.org.au/web/ontrack/programs/get-real), a brief, freely available web-based eHealth program for young people with PLEs. Get Real aims to (i) improve users' ability to identify, understand and reduce any distress associated with PLEs; (ii) teach simple coping strategies for coping with PLEs, and (iii) facilitate appropriate help-seeking (when required). The current study used a combination of qualitative and quantitative approaches to assess the acceptability, usability and short term outcomes of the Get Real program.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our results suggest that Get Real, as an intervention for PLEs, has moderate to high levels of acceptability and usability, and may have a positive impact on PLEs. Further research is required to determine the programs' efficacy in controlled trials.Existing face-to-face early interventions run the risk of young people waiting until symptoms are recurrent or severe before they seek help. The web-based delivery of key early intervention strategies can dramatically increase treatment access and facilitate earlier help-seeking (when required). Integration of web, mobile or tablet interventions targeting PLEs into mass marketing of early detection and intervention programs for psychosis, is critical for the substantial community impact of these programs.