@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Image processing and visualisation of rock art laser scans from Loups’s Hill, County Durham

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Problems of traditional rock art recordings were discussedLaser scans of rock art carvings were processed in ArcGISDetailed DSMs of rock art surfaces were generated from TIN interpolationRasters with different surface illuminations were summarised with PCAArcGIS offers the possibility to visualise and enhance rock art carvings

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Contemporary rock art researchers have a wide choice of 3D laser scanners available to them for recording stone surfaces and this is complimented by numerous software packages that are able to process point cloud data. Though ESRI’s ArcGIS primarily handles geographical data, it also offers the ability to visualise XYZ data from a stone surface. In this article the potential of ArcGIS for rock art research is explored by focusing on 3D data obtained from two panels of cup and ring marks found at Loups’s Hill, County Durham, England. A selection of methods commonly utilised in LiDAR studies, which enhance the identification of landscape features, are also conducted upon the rock panels, including DSM normalisation and raster data Principle Component Analysis (PCA). Collectively, the visualisations produced from these techniques facilitate the identification of the rock art motifs, but there are limitations to these enhancements that are also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Two panels of rock art located at Loups’s Hill, Cotherstone Moor, County Durham (Fig. 1), were recently three-dimensionally (3D) laser scanned and this has provided an opportunity to conduct a pilot study involving an alternative methodology for the visualisation of the point cloud data. Loups’s Hill is one of many places containing noteworthy concentrations of rock art that are situated in open-air locations found spread across northern Britain and Ireland. British rock art is currently estimated to date from the Early Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age, approximately 4000–1500BC (Waddington 2007: 5; Sharpe et al., 2008: 4). The imagery depicted is commonly referred to as cup and ring marks and these were skilfully carved into natural stone surfaces ranging from simple clusters of cups to complex compositions involving cups and rings as well as other elements, such as meandering lines. Their importance to archaeological enquiries is significant as open-air rock art sites provide us with important clues about understanding different facets of the prehistoric landscape.The two Loups’s Hill panels reside within the boundaries of the Battle Hill Range – a Defence Training Estate (DTE) owned by the UK Ministry of Defence (MoD). The Battle Hill Range is one of several training areas found across Britain that contain rock art, prehistoric archaeology and other heritage assets which the MoD monitors through rural management plans (Abramson, 2010). The Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO) in conjunction with the DTE deployed the 135 Geographic Squadron to laser scan the panels in 2012. The collected point cloud data was, in turn, image processed and visualised by Wessex Archaeology (Cripps and Lymer, 2013; Lymer and Cripps 2013). This paper is the result of the collaboration between the MoD and Wessex Archaeology that aims not only to document the recent state of these fragile rock art panels at Loups’s Hill, but also offer visualisations of the laser scan data with the intention of informing future conservation management strategies.There are numerous software packages currently available with the ability to process point cloud data acquired from laser scans, and each one offers different options for image rendering and visualisation. Though the commercial package ArcGIS by ESRI is primarily intended for geospatial analysis at a geographic scale, its ability to convert a set of 3D coordinates into a digital surface model (DSM) provides a relatively unexplored approach in rock art research. Instead of the macroscale modelling of the landscape, it is possible to treat the surface of a rock as a microscale DSM from which localised morphology can be rendered into different scenarios. ArcGIS also offers the ability to enhance features in images through raster data Principal Components Analysis (PCA) – a technique that potentially provides another method for identifying anthropogenic modifications. This article presents the results of the application of these techniques in a limited trial that primarily focuses upon the two rock art panels laser scanned by the MoD from Loups’s Hill.2.1. Loups’s Hill (340m OD) rises above the grasslands of the eastern part of Cotherstone Moor. The moor is situated in a region of the Teesdale valley which runs along the eastern side of the Pennines. The underlying geology is classified by the British Geological Survey as belonging to the Stainmore Formation and comprises of sandstones, siltstones, mudstones, thin limestones and some coal deposits. Cotherstone Moor is also noted for its special biodiversity as it is a transitional mix between northern upland and lowland bogs comprising of a unique mixture of contemporary habitats, including an extensive blanket bog, dry heather communities, acid grasslands and freshwater flushes (Natural England, 1993).The Loups’s Hill panels belong to a collection of rock art sites situated in various open-air locations around Cotherstone Moor (Fig. 1). These have come to our attention through the discoveries made by local researchers and independent archaeologists over the past few decades (Beckensall and Laurie, 1998: 72; Brown and Brown, 2008: 281–285; Abramson, 2010: 133). Many of the rock art panels of Cotherstone Moor are situated on elevated ground that lies south of the river Balder, a tributary of the river Tees. In addition to the loose grouping of sites spread around Loup’s Hill, there is a cluster of panels situated along the eastern ridge of Goldsborough Hill (389m OD), which is known as the Goldsborough Rigg.There have been no discoveries, as of yet, of rock art along the crags of Goldsborough Hill, but at its summit there is the remains of a ring cairn. It consists of a circular bank made of earth and stone and corresponds with types found in northern England that are dated to the Early Bronze Age (SWAAG, 2012). Moreover, directly to the south of Cotherstone Moor is Bowes Moor which contains several Bronze Age cairn fields that have been excavated by archaeologists (Vyner et al., 2001: 59–60).It is also important to note that the phenomenon of cups and rings in northern England is directly associated with prehistoric burials. There are many examples of carved portable stones that were deliberated placed in Early Bronze Age burial cairns recovered from excavations in North Yorkshire, County Durham and Northumberland (Mazel, 2007: 240–245; Brown and Brown, 2008: 10). Additionally, there are also some cists and cairns that feature decorated covers and kerbstones found in North Yorkshire and Northumberland (Beckensall, 1986: 31).Fourteen locations of rock art have been so far identified within the vicinity of Loup’s Hill (Fig. 1 and Appendix 1). Nine of these panels became listed as Scheduled Ancient Monuments (SAM) (also known as Scheduled Monuments), which provide statutory protection for these important archaeological sites in England. Seven of the SAMs reside within the boundaries of the Battle Hill Range, while the remaining two are located just outside the northern and western perimeters.Many of the rock art panels of Cotherstone Moor have been reclaimed by the moor and have turf coverings, while some of the Loups’s Hill panels have stones placed atop them in an attempt to protect them from weathering. However, two of the SAMs on Loups’s Hill – BH Stones 5 and 7 (Appendix 1F and J) – have not been covered and the states of their preservation has been identified as requiring more closer monitoring (EH, 2009: 32; MoD, 2011: 34).BH Stone 5 is situated upon the north-facing slope of Loups’s Hill (Fig. 2a) and was discovered by Paul Brown in 1993 (Brown and Brown, 2008: 281). It was initially covered in turf that was carefully replaced after recording, but this had completely disappeared by 2006 (P. Brown, personal communication). The rock art motifs were carved or pecked into a relatively flat stone composed of coarse-grained sandstone (ERA, 2008a). It measures approximately 2.1×1.83m and slopes at approximately a 5° angle along the gradient of the hillside. The rock art carvings are noticeably eroded (ibid.) and their concavity is quite shallow; they can only be seen at certain viewing angles by moving around the stone and their visibility is greatly assisted by oblique lighting conditions. Identifiable motifs consist of a complex composition featuring a cup and ring placed on the upper slope of the stone that is surrounded by two arcing lines of cup marks. Further south-west from the cup and ring there is also a faint row of three cups.BH Stone 7 is located on the southern part of the hill in an area known locally as West Loups (Fig. 2b). The circumstances of its discovery are unclear but the rock became designated as a SMR in 1998 (EH, 2014). Eight cup-like depressions were found on the flat upper surface of a coarse-grained sandstone boulder, which measures approximately 5×3m while the depth at the southern end is about 1m. Due to the natural morphology of the sandstone surface, the friability of the rock and the effects of weathering, it is difficult to determine if these cups are natural or anthropogenic in origin (ERA, 2008b).It is the standard procedure in rock art studies to document and record images and contemporary researchers have a wide choice of methods at their disposal today as opposed to what was available two decades ago. Though the traditional techniques of free-hand drawing, tracing and rubbing have being superseded by digital methods, they still provide a lasting legacy in the history of documenting rock art panels.The earliest published traditional recordings of the Loups’s Hill panels were made by Beckensall and Laurie (1998: 74–75, 77)) and were followed a few years later ones produced by Paul Brown (Brown and Brown, 2008: 160). Beckensall’s recording of BH Stone 5 (Fig. 3a) employed a technique that involved gently rubbing the surface of thin, strong newsprint with dark coloured wax (Beckensall, 1983: 32). This method results in a negative image of the captured motifs. A grid was added to the rubbing and a scaled drawing was made upon a sheet of graph paper, which rendered negative areas into positive rock art motifs. The accuracy of the recorded features was also checked against photographs and videos of the rock art panel (Beckensall, 1986: 20; Beckensall and Laurie, 1998: 21).Paul Brown’s recording of BH Stone 5 (Fig. 3b) involved a combination of old and new techniques (P. Brown personal communication). It was based on his original recording in 1993 that involved the wax rubbing method but was updated with a second recording made in 2006. Photographs were taken at close range to the surface of the rock and then digitally stitched together on a computer to recreate the entire panel. The original rubbing was superimposed over top and a new recording of the rock art motifs was created from combining old observations with the new.There is also a free-hand measured drawing of BH Stone 5 (Fig. 3c) made in the field by volunteers (ERA, 2008a) involved in the Northumberland and Durham Rock Art Pilot (NADRAP) project that ran from 2004–2008 (Barnett, 2010; Oswald and Ainsworth 2010). A free-hand measured drawing was also made of BH Stone 7 (ERA, 2008b), but there seems to have been no other traditional recordings of this panel that have been published. Comparing the BH Stone 5 measured drawing with the previous recordings through superimposition, however, provides a fascinating result (Fig. 3d). This amalgam confirms what has already been documented in the literature that different people will produce different results in recording the same panel (Moore, 1991; Darvil, 2014: 25).The rubbing method creates a recording of the rock art panel at actual size and is able to pick up ephemeral rock art carvings as well as the natural features of the rock surface and its grain texture (Brown and Chappell, 2012: 209). It also involves the sense of touch as the recorder feels the edges of motifs during the rubbing process, but care must be taken as natural features could be misinterpreted as anthropogenic markings. This subjectivity in the process of making rubbings and other types of recordings demonstrate they are not objective documentations as they heavily rely upon the biases of the recorder (Darvil, 2014: 23). As Darvil also points out, the recorder is affected by the limitations of the materials or equipment utilised and can be adversely effected by the environmental conditions in the field during the time of recording. The visibility of cup and ring markings can significantly depend upon such factors as weather, wind and the time of day that the panel is observed.The rubbing method also involves the sheet of paper making contact with the 3D surface of the rock and may be pressed upon to mould to the concavity of the motifs. Newspaper’s main quality is that it is a relatively stiff, flat surface and it behaves quite differently from making a cast with plastic materials, such as wax or latex, which can easily conform to any manner of shape and create a truly detailed negative impression of the stone surface. Once the paper is flattened there will be varying degrees of metric distortion of the 3D motifs and these will be inadvertently picked up during the 2D reproduction of the measured drawing.The greatest disadvantage of the traditional rubbing and direct tracing methods is the very act of touching the rock surface could potentially abrade it, especially if the rock art is rubbed repeatedly (Díaz-Andreu et al., 2006: 1586; Darvil and Fernandes, 2014: 8). This problem, however, has been overcome in recent years with the development of digital recording techniques, such as 3D photogrammetry (e.g., Barnett et al., 2007; Chandler et al., 2007; Bryan, 2010) and 3D laser scans (e.g., Eklund and Fowles, 2003; Trinks et al., 2005; Barnett et al., 2007). Photogrammetry and laser scanning also provide the advantage of being non-invasive as well as offering higher accuracy measurements and recording precision. The 3D models generated from these methods also visually imitate the spatial and volumetric sensations characteristic of rock carvings and their natural rock surfaces. An appropriate example of this can be seen in viewing the 3D photogrammetric model that was generated from stereo-photographs of BH Stone 8 (Appendix 1D) from Loups’s Hill (ERA, 2008c). This is one of many 3D photogrammetric models of panels deriving from Northumberland and County Durham that were created during the NADRAP project (2004–2008) and are free to download from the internet for research purposes.A Leica HDS 3000 laser scanner was used to record a point cloud for the surfaces of BH Stones 5 and 7 and the datasets were initially handled by Leica’s Cyclone software. A point cloud is a large collection of points recorded from a surface by a laser and translated into measurements based on a three-dimensional coordinate system defined by the X, Y and Z axes. There are numerous ways these XYZ coordinates can be analysed, interpreted and visualised, and the following discussions explore methods of processing the BH Stones 5 and 7 point clouds in ArcGIS version 10.1 involving Triangular Irregular Network (TIN) interpolation and the creation of a normalised DSM (nDSM). ArcGIS, however, is unable to create photorealistic lightning for its hillshading effect that is needed for Reflectance Transformation Imaging (RTI) and a second DSM was created in E-On Software’s Vue Infinite 3D which was able to create a suitable virtual lighting environment. The rasters generated for the virtual RTI, though, were further processed in ArcGIS through raster data Principal Components Analysis (PCA), which is useful for image enhancement.Point clouds are usually converted to mesh models through a process commonly known as surface reconstruction. In the case of geographic information system (GIS) software, such as ESRI’s ArcGIS, the XYZ coordinates are usually converted through interpolation into a Triangular Irregular Network (TIN). A TIN is a digital data structure that generates a vector-based model of the surface morphology (DSM) by converting the XYZ points into nodes connected by a series of interlocking lines arranged in a manner to create the appearance of a mesh.ArcGIS utilises the Delaunay triangulation method to create the TIN network of triangles from the existing point cloud data in order to avoid situations which create long thin triangles. Moreover, triangulation is an exact method as it involves the positioning of the original data points exactly on the surface of the model (Hu, 1995). Thus, the process of triangulation generates accurate surfaces useful for GIS landscape modelling as it is able to create a wide range of topographic features, such as water channels, peaks, ridges and shorelines.The resulting TIN mesh (DSM) simulates a continuous surface, such as a geographical terrain, but in the case of BH Stones 5 and 7 the adjacent triangles recreate the contours of the rock surface (Figs. 4a and 5a). The TIN can be assigned any colour value and ArcGIS offers a variety of preset colour-shaded ranges which visualise elevation and depth. At the macroscale of a terrain model, the shades of colour basically simulate the effect of the sun illuminating the earth’s surface and visualise topographic features, such as hills and valleys in the landscape; however, at a microscale these colour shades emphasis the natural contours of the rock panel as well as the anthropogenic concavity of the rock art carvings. Changing the shade ranges to false colour schemes can also clarify the different levels of elevation, which is quite useful for assisting in the further identification of the cup and ring carvings, as is seen below in the normalised DSM section. However, the moss and vegetation that encroached the stones were not removed during the laser scan recordings and these growths prevented the detection of many of the edges of the rock panel, especially in the case of BH Stone 5 (Fig. 4b).The TIN mesh, though, does present some minor issues in rock art motif identification. The slope shading settings in ArcGIS visualises the DSM’s stone surface and cup and ring markings as negative local relief features and not all the motifs on BH Stone 5 could be seen (Fig. 4b). The size and shape of cup marks can also be morphologically similar to concave features of the natural stone surface. This situation, in particular, makes the task of identifying the eight cup marks on the DSM of BH Stone 7 a difficult undertaking (Fig. 5b). It is also worth noting that the Delaunay method of triangulation creates an exact TIN interpolation which is useful for high-precision modelling of surface areas, but upon close inspection the surfaces are not smooth and have a jagged appearance caused by the discontinuous slopes at the triangle edges and data points (Hu, 1995). Thus, the visualisation of the rock art panels looks better at more zoomed out views; high magnifications only emphasises the jagged and angular vertices of the triangular mesh and the faint concavity of weathered rock art motifs can become indistinct.Another potentially useful method in the identification of rock art carvings involves the flattening of the DSM. In landscape studies involving LiDAR (laser imaging, detection and ranging) data, the flattening out or normalisation of the three-dimensional aspects of the topography can greatly improve the visibility of natural features. This has also been demonstrated to be of practical use in enhancing archaeological features in the landscape generated from LiDAR data (e.g., Doneus and Briese, 2006; Devereux et al., 2008: 102–104). In particular, clarity of the archaeological features is obtained by generating a special surface model from a LiDAR dataset that reveals them in a topographical model reduced of features, such as trees, bushes and buildings (Devereux et al., 2008: 471). Creating this archaeological topography is achieved by first generating a DSM and then subtracting a digital terrain model (DTM) of only the ground, with no other objects, from it to create the new interpolation of a normalised DSM (nDSM).The normalisation of the Z axis values within the TIN DSM is possible in ArcGIS and was approached in this pilot study by subtracting the Z values of a flattened DSM and dividing them by their highest and lowest values. The flattening was achieved by using the method known as trend surface analysis. Trend surface is basically an effective way of removing broad features in a dataset and in ArcGIS’s Spatial Analyst toolbox there is the Trend tool that uses interpolation to smooth out surfaces. As opposed to the TIN method, which uses triangulation to generate surfaces from irregularly spaced points, the Trend tool uses a deterministic interpolation technique that produces surfaces represented by equally spaced data points (Childs, 2004). However, as Childs explains, it is also an inexact interpolator as the generated surface hardly ever passes through the input points, but this method is useful in illustrating broader trends in the sample data. The ArcGIS trend surface statistical method creates the surface by minimising variance between the points and results in a smooth surface that represents gradual trends. These smoothed surfaces can potentially reveal parts of a study area that display the greatest deviations from the overall trend (Hu, 1995).The trend surface was created in ArcGIS by taking the points from the TIN and converting them with the Trend tool using the linear interpolation option to flatten the surface of the stone. ArcGIS creates a raster file with new Z values that have reduced elevation heights. The Extract Values to Points tool is applied to this raster and creates a point file containing the original Z values alongside the reduced ones. These values are then statistically aligned to a normal distribution with ArcGIS’s Field Calculator tool by subtracting the new Z value from the original Z value and dividing them by the value that is the result from the subtraction of the minimum of the Z-coordinates from the maximum of Z-coordinates. These final Z values are aligned to a normal distribution that can be converted back to a TIN which visually represents a nDSM (Fig. 6).ArcGIS offers a choice of shade ranges, and the use of false colour schemes is effective in visualising the nDSM of the rock art panels. The colours highlight cup marks located in the upper left part of BH Stone 5 (Fig. 6b) that are not seen in the original TIN (Fig. 4a). This is useful in helping to facilitate the further identification of potential anthropogenic features, but prominent natural features can also be emphasised which may be indistinguishable from weathered rock carvings, as is the case of BH Stone 7 (Fig. 6d).In addition to laser scanning, Reflectance Transformation Imaging (RTI), which was developed in 2001 at the Hewlett-Packard (HP) Labs, provides another alternative method for documenting 3D surfaces. An early form of RTI is called Polynomial Texture Mapping (PTM) and it relies on the generation of a series of photographs of an object that is placed in a fixed position (Malzbender et al., 2001). Each photograph takes a shot of the object lit from a different angle. These images are combined to create a virtual light source that can be dynamically moved around the object through the use of software and this interaction between the object and varying lighting conditions visually reveals 3D surface details. RTI has already been used to document and monitor weathering on outdoor historic monuments and allows conservators to accurately observe minute changes of texture on planar surfaces (Gabov and Bevan, 2011). For similar reasons it has also began to be taken up in rock art studies as RTI provides an interactive tool for exploring rock carving details at close proximity, especially areas of weathered imagery (Earl et al., 2010: 220; Díaz-Guardamino and Wheatley 2013).BH stones 5 and 7 present significant challenges for capturing RTI images in the field. Both are quite large panels and the photographs needed for the RTI process require the camera and light source to be set at a distance three or four times the length of the surface being recorded (Díaz-Guardamino and Wheatley, 2013: 194). BH Stone 5 is 2.1m in length while BH stone 7 is 5m in length and the great distance required for the position of camera makes their RTI capture logistically difficult to achieve.It is possible, however, to effectively utilise the XYZ data in creating a virtual RTI lighting environment. ArcGIS can create a hillshade that simulates relief, but the light source generated is of limited use. There are many software packages available that are able to approximate realistic natural lighting and output photographic quality rasters as well as cinema quality videos. For the purpose of this pilot study, we had access to E-On Software’s Vue Infinite 3D (version 9). The laser scan datasets were converted into meshes in the freeware program MeshLab, saved as standard 3D object files (Wavefront’s obj) and imported into Vue Infinite 3D. A number of renders of the mesh in different lighting angles were taken from the same viewpoint using a virtual illumination dome that accurately simulates the required PTM light source positions (Goskar, 2010). A total of 62 light positions were devised that worked around the subject from low angles to ones overhead in order to achieve a high level of detail. Each individual lighting position was outputted as a greyscale raster (jpg) and all 62 them were composited in the RTIbuilder software package to generate a file for the RTIViewer, which creates dynamic light effects on the rock art panel surface (static outputs of fixed illumination scenarios are seen inFig. 7).The visibility of the images depends on the chosen illumination angle and illumination model and many different scenarios are needed to explore the features of the rock art motifs. RTI visually produces information about the subtle details of the surface of the rock art panel, but it does not provide the 3D geometry of a laser scan as the RTIViewer software only interacts with 2D raster images to create an illusion of a 3D surface. This visualisation of the surface topography, however, relies on collection of raster images and each individual RTI image offers tangible data that are valuable for research purposes and archival documentation.The greyscale rasters generated for the RTIViewer can also be subjected to image enhancement through raster data Principal Components Analysis (PCA). PCA is a mathematical approach to analysing complex datasets by reducing them into smaller principal components (PC). PCA is commonly used in statistics to reduce a large set of variables to a smaller set that still contains most of the information. An examination of this compressed dataset potentially allows a researcher to identify trends, patterns and outliers in the data, while the compaction of these features is useful for image processing, especially ones derived from spatial data (Demšar et al., 2012: 112–114). When applied to a given set of images, raster data PCA produces a new set of images, components, that are ordered in terms of the amount of variance they obtain from the original image set.PCA is able to summarise the features within a given dataset of rasters into amalgamations of all common features and is often used in LiDAR research to bring greater clarity to visual interpretation. PCA transforms a collection of ground images into a smaller number of component images that emphasise natural and artificial features in the terrain. This, of course, provides a useful means of analysis for the detection of archaeological features in landscape from LiDAR data (Devereux et al., 2008, 471). Here PCA is used to combine the information contained within several differently illuminated LiDAR images into composite singular images which can be of great value to archaeological surveys looking for such features as ditches, structural remains and hillforts.ArcGIS is able to perform raster data PCA on a set of raster bands (images) and generates a single multiband raster, a collection of the component rasters stored within a single file. The ArcGIS default setting produces the first three principal components (also known as the high order components) and assigns them a colour from the RGB model in the following order: PC1 red, PC2 green and PC3 blue.The results of this are quite fascinating when applied to the 62 greyscale rasters generated for the RTI visualisations of BH Stones 5 and 7 (Figs. 8 and 9). The underlying assumption of PCA analysis for these rasters considers the factor of illumination as being variably shared across all 62 images. ArcGIS visualises the three principal components as one amalgamated image that represents the total variability of the RTI illumination among the rasters which were generated in different lighting angles. This amalgamated image is visually generated by combining red, green and blue colours based on the RGB light model behind LED screens, and produces new colours from the overlapping RGB values. As seen in Figs. 7 and 8, the implementation of these RGB colour mixtures can be quite psychedelic in effect. Moreover, this false colour image visualises the weighted sum of the principal components of illumination in the rock art rasters. When seen separately, the first principal component (PC1 red) assembles as much of the variability in the raster illumination as possible, while PC2 (green) and PC3 (blue) contains as much of the remaining variability as possible.The amalgamated image and each high order component revealed about the same amount of motifs for BH Stone 5 (Fig. 8b), while the PCs for BH Stone 7 had a wider range of differences. The reduction to three raster PCs, was perhaps not enough, and 16 PCs were then generated to offer a wider range of amalgamations, but on the whole they did not offer any more clarification for both panels, and are not reproduced here. This is due in part to the fact that as we move towards the sixteenth component the amount of useful information slowly diminishes. The reduction of the large set of raster illuminations to a small set of 16 components will still contain most of the information in the large set; however, the first three components (high order) will usually contain a high percentage of information and variability of the original set of images (Devereux et al., 2008: 472).Within the limited scope of this pilot study the use of ArcGIS in processing 3D laser scan data offers a fascinating alternative to the visualisation of rock art panels. It has been demonstrated how a rock art surface can be visualised in different ways from TIN interpolation to the creation of a normalised DSM. ArcGIS also has the facility to perform PCA on raster images in the pursuit of enhancing anthropogenic features. Going down the ArcGIS route, however, is not without its inconveniences. Though it can render TINs from 3D point data, a powerful computer is needed in order to handle laser scans of large panels and the processing of images. The creation of a normalised DSM is a quite complicated procedure and users who prefer pressing a single button to achieve an instant result will find this cumbersome. The way ArcGIS creates lights and shadows is not photorealistic and there are other 3D software packages that are more suited to achieve this aim. Finally, ArcGIS is a commercial software package that is regretfully not a cost effective option for many independent researchers and amateur rock art enthusiasts.This pilot study has also explored main the advantage that the digital laser scanning of rock art has over traditional recording methods: it offers the possibility to utilise mathematical techniques which are able to visualise the surface of rock and the carvings in distinctive ways. In the case of BH Stones 5 and 7, the generating of a nDSM and conducting PCA on raster data did to a small degree enhance the visibility of ephemeral cup-marks, but they were not able to distinguish between borderline anthropogenic features from the natural concavity of the sandstone surface of BH Stone 7. The issue of differentiating natural features from anthropogenic one would require the development of other approaches beyond the scope of visualisation. However, when the combinations of visualisations (TIN, nDSM and PCA) are viewed together they provide a valuable dataset for identifying rock art motifs that is collectively greater than any individual output.The 3D laser scan of rock art from Loups’s Hill and their visualisations represent ongoing efforts to document and conserve these important pieces of Cotherstone Moor prehistory. Point cloud data enables the virtual reconstruction of fragile rock art images, while at the same time producing non-invasive recordings of the cup and ring panels. The different visualisations of the laser scan data even offer the possibility of a more enhanced visual perception of the cups and ring markings than is achievable by visiting the site itself. Moreover, these laser scans are important documents for assessing the alteration and degradation processes, which are having an impact both on the motifs and the surface of the rock, while offering a manageable means to perform necessary monitoring of these ancient monuments. Thus, the heritage value of these digital rock art recordings is immense as they facilitate the detailed study of the images and provide data important for the conservation and future observation of the cup and ring marks of Cotherstone Moor in the years to come.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
