@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Virtually reassembling Angkor-style Khmer temples

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposes a new, simplified description of each stone block used to build the temple.Introduces a similarity analysis that indicates the probability of two matching stones.Provides a complete workflow for the reassembly of digital bas-relief wall stones.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cambodian temples are severely damaged and their reconstruction is complex. Conservators are challenged by a magnitude of stones of unknown original position. Specialists resolve this large-scale puzzle by analyzing each stone, using their experience and knowledge of Khmer culture. Then a trial and error approach is applied which has disadvantages. The weight of the stones of up 1000kg complicates their movement and opposes a safety hazard to workers. Additionally the stones’ relocation should be reduced to a minimum as it promotes their deterioration. This motivated the development of a virtual approach, as computer algorithms lead to a potential solution in less time, thereby drastically reducing the amount of work. The basis for this virtual puzzle are high-resolution 3D models of 135 stones. These stones have an approximately cuboidal form and often feature indentations that are exploited by the algorithm to accelerate the matching process. The general idea is to (1) simplify the high-resolution models, (2) test all feasible combinations and (3) match best combinations and validate the results. Close collaboration with specialists on site ensures overall algorithmic correctness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The temple site of Banteay Chhmar is situated in the Northwest of Cambodia, about 15km from the Thai border. It was built by king Jayavarman VII between 1180 and 1220 AD to honor his son and four of his army generals for defeating the neighboring Cham, an enemy civilization. The site exhibits many similarities to the better-known Bayon temple in the Angkor complex of the same period. The Banteay Chhmar complex is surrounded by a moat and a stone enclosure wall. Together with its eight satellite temples this sanctuary comprises an area of about 9 km2 (Fig. 1).The temple with its elaborate carvings is a valuable documentation of Khmer history and culture at the end of the 12th century. As a result of its remote location it was abandoned quite early in Cambodian history and is today highly deteriorated. Additionally, severe looting took place in the 1990s. Today only about 20% of the original structure are remaining and even these sections are in immediate danger of collapse. To ensure the temple׳s preservation, the Global Heritage Fund (GHF) started a long-term preservation project in 2008 that includes training locals in stone conservation and temple repair. A manual reconstruction of the temple is very difficult and complicated by the temple stones’ weight of up to 1000kg. The working conditions on site are unfavorable, both in terms of safety of the workers and in terms of conservation of the stones. Additionally, untrained workers can destroy the valuable carvings of the stones. Encouraged by the Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts, GHF and the Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR) of Heidelberg University (IWR) have been working to develop appropriate technology to minimize the need to move the heavy sandstone blocks which threatens the safety of the local workers.The digital reconstruction of the temple will help to minimize reconstruction costs and danger to the workers and the temple. The stones are digitized by the help of digital surface scanners. Their achieved resolution is within the range of micrometers and enables a detailed digital description of the stone׳s surface. The output of these scanners are triangulated surface meshes that perfectly reproduce irregularities in the stone and detailed reliefs. Still it is difficult to virtually reassemble the individual stones. In this paper a suitable workflow is introduced that is able to reconstruct the Khmer bas-relief walls.Our contributions are:•a new, simplified description of each stone block used to build the temple,a similarity analysis that indicates the probability of two matching stones,a complete workflow for the reassembly of digital bas-relief wall stones.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
