@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Women's experiences of factors affecting treatment engagement and adherence in internet delivered Behavioural Activation for Postnatal Depression

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conducted a qualitative process study embedded in a randomized controlled trial.We interviewed 17 women using thematic analysis informed by grounded theory.Women reported several barriers to treatment adherence.These barriers led women to feel isolated, and promoted disengagement.They requested an interactive, individualised, intervention with support.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Postnatal depression,Internet,Behavioural activation,Cognitive behavioural therapy,Adherence,Randomized controlled trial,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionWomen with postnatal depression (PND) face significant barriers to treatment that may be overcome by internet based delivery of treatment. Demand for a self-help internet postnatal treatment offered via a parenting site was high, but attrition rates were also high.AimsTo gain patient perspectives on engagement and barriers to the Netmums' “Helping with Depression” treatment.MethodSemi-structured interviews were conducted with 17 participants selected from the Netmums trial.ResultsThematic analysis revealed motivators and barriers to treatment. Women reported that the flexibility and anonymity of internet interventions fit with their postnatal circumstances. They identified that the relevance of the intervention to their personal circumstances, expectations of motherhood, stigma about depression and motherhood, hopelessness about their ability to improve, previous negative experiences with treatment and treatment seeking, and a lack of practical and emotional support contributed to feelings of being overwhelmed. Women who felt more overwhelmed were more likely to discontinue treatment. Women suggested that support would reduce the impact of barriers and improve adherence.DiscussionOpen access, self-help internet interventions are acceptable to women with postnatal depression, but it is critical to provide tailoring and support to help overcome barriers and improve treatment adherence.Postnatal depression is common, affecting up to 13% of women (Gavin et al., 2005). Postnatal depression also negatively affects mother–infant relationship and has long-term negative consequences for the child (Pawlby et al., 2008; Murray et al., 2010). Despite this, recognition of postnatal depression amongst health professionals is poor (Ericksen et al., 2005) and help-seeking amongst postnatal women remains low (17%–25%; Buist et al., 2005).Postnatal women report preferring psychotherapy over antidepressants, particularly when they are breastfeeding (Dennis, and Chung-Lee, 2006). However, they face a number of barriers to psychotherapy. These barriers include struggles with transportation and childcare (Goodman, 2009), variable infant feeding and napping schedules that may interfere with regular appointment attendance, and stigma about postpartum depression (Goodman, 2009; O'Mahen and Flynn, 2008). A significant minority of women also report fears that their children will be removed from their custody if health providers discover that they suffer from depression (Dennis and Chung-Lee, 2006). Further, face-to-face and home based treatments can be costly and time-intensive for providers, reducing the capacity of reach of these treatments.Internet delivery systems offer an alternative, promising approach that may circumvent many of the difficulties of face-to-face delivery techniques (Khan et al., 2007). Internet treatments can be economically and flexibly delivered in contexts of the woman's choosing. Their relatively anonymous delivery may also overcome women's fears of stigma (Beattie et al., 2009).Working with women who suffered from postnatal depression, we designed and tested an online, self-help Behavioural Activation treatment for postnatal depressed mood in a preliminary trial (see O'Mahen et al., 2013 for details of the trial outcomes). We offered the treatment via a popular UK parenting website, Netmums.com. The treatment was marked by high initial demand; 910 women signed up to the trial. Intent-to-treat analyses demonstrated that women in the treatment condition had a greater reduction in their depressive symptoms compared to women in the Treatment-as-Usual condition, although the effect size was small. These results were qualified by attrition and adherence rates. Only 36% of women completed the outcome measures and views of the treatment sessions decreased significantly between sessions 1 and 3, although a sub-sample of women continued to view material through session 11. These rates of attrition and adherence are consistent with online, unsupported treatments. In quantitative data from the efficacy trial, a number of explanations for low rates of treatment uptake and adherence were offered. These explanations include specific characteristics of the sample of participants (e.g., perinatal-specific barriers), the organization, and the delivery of the treatment. These reasons are similar to explanations from a large primary care trial of a self-help intervention for depression, which included delivery and intervention content changes, and specific characteristics of the population (De Graaf et al., 2009a). There remains, however, little information about the direct experience and accounts of internet treatment participants in self-help internet treatments, and their perspective on factors affecting both their uptake of the treatment and treatment adherence (Waller and Gilbody, 2009). The dearth of in-depth, qualitative information is especially acute in specialist populations, who may have specific content and delivery needs (Hind et al., 2009).Following Kaltenthaler et al.'s (2008) recommendation, we included a qualitative study alongside the trial in order to determine patient acceptability of the treatment, with a specific focus on factors affecting women's adherence to the treatment. Recent qualitative studies of internet based Cognitive Behaviour Programs for depression have looked at participant's experiences (Bendelin et al., 2011; Lillevoll et al., 2013). However, we are aware of only one qualitative study that has looked explicitly at factors affecting adherence in a pure self-help internet intervention for depression in the general population (Gerhards et al., 2011). That study found that computer, social and research aspects of the intervention affected treatment adherence. Notably, individuals felt that the applicability of the course to their personal situations and the lack of support and feedback affected their continued adherence with the course.Because the perinatal period can present specific barriers and content needs (O'Mahen et al., 2012; O'Mahen and Flynn, 2008) we were interested in this study in exploring both general and perinatal specific factors affecting the acceptability of the treatment and treatment adherence amongst perinatal women. We asked the following questions: “What were women's views of an online treatment for postnatal depression?” and “What factors affected women's uptake and adherence to the treatment?”

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The findings from this study are consistent with the broader qualitative literature on factors affecting adherence to face-to-face treatment for postnatal depression, and specifically highlight the role of internet based treatments for women struggling with stigma, and practical barriers to treatment. Whilst also broadly consistent with the adherence and acceptability literature on internet treatments, this study emphasizes the unique needs of postnatal women regarding engagement and adherence, highlighting the importance of considering the dyadic nature of the mother and infant and its effect on maternal expectations and attributions for treatment. This study may therefore contribute to the refinement of internet and face-to-face treatment delivery designs, focusing on methods to improve engagement and adherence to treatment.