@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The impact of guidance on Internet-based mental health interventions — A systematic review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Guidance is a beneficial feature of Internet-based interventions.The difference in effect between guided and unguided interventions is less pronounced than reported before.The qualification of e-coaches providing guidance seems of minor importance.The evidence on further aspects of guidance is scarce

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet-based interventions,Telemedicine,Mental disorders,Guidance,Efficacy,Systematic review,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionThe aim of this study was to systematically review the impact of guidance on the efficacy of Internet-based interventions.MethodsIncluded were RCTs with a comparison of (1) guided vs. unguided interventions, (2) different doses of guidance, (3) different qualification levels of e-coaches, and (4) synchronous vs. asynchronous communication mode. Outcomes were symptom severity, completer rates and number of completed intervention modules. A systematic search of MEDLINE, CENTRAL and PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES and Psyndex (search date 4th June 2013) was conducted, as well as a hand search of trial-registers and the reference lists of included articles. Methodological quality was rated using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. Relevant study characteristics and outcome data were extracted. Random-effects analyses were conducted if appropriate.Results5328 articles were retrieved of which 14 fulfilled inclusion criteria. Guided interventions were significantly superior to unguided interventions ((symptom severity: standardized mean difference (SMD)=−.27 [95% CI: −.45; −.10]), n=8; completed modules: SMD=.52 [.37; .67], n=7; completer rate: OR=2.76 [1.68; 4.53], n=6). The four trials that examined different levels of e-coach qualification showed no significant differences on either of the outcome measures. Only one trial each examined the remaining two research questions, without significant effects on either of the outcome measures.ConclusionsGuidance is a beneficial feature of Internet-based interventions, although its effect is smaller than reported before when compared to unguided interventions. The qualification of the e-coaches seems of minor importance. However, methodological limitations need to be considered when interpreting these findings. Overall, the number of studies was small and mainly limited to depression and social phobia restricting the generalizability of the findings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Several reviews indicate that Internet-based interventions (IBIs) are efficacious in treating mental disorders (Richards and Richardson, 2012; Lin et al., 2013; Andrews et al., 2010), however, they also report substantial heterogeneity of examined treatment effects across included studies. A review by Richards and Richardson (2012) on the efficacy of Computer-based psychological treatments for depression, for example, highlighted a standardized mean difference (SMD) regarding depressive symptoms of g=−.56 in favor of Computer-based interventions compared to treatment as usual or waitlist, with single trial results ranging from −1.42 to 0.03. To dismantle this heterogeneity and to examine the efficacious components of IBIs, research focuses on the mechanisms underlying the efficacy of IBIs as well as possible predictors of therapeutic success or failure (Andersson et al., 2009; Nordgreen et al., 2012; Richards and Richardson, 2012). One of the core factors discussed in this context is guidance as part of IBIs. There are automated interventions independent of human support (self-guided or unguided interventions, e.g. Christensen et al., 2006) and interventions with some kind of human support (guided interventions, e. g. Nobis et al., 2013). Literature so far suggest that users benefit more from IBIs when guidance is provided (Andersson and Titov, 2014; Richards and Richardson, 2012; Johansson and Andersson, 2012). Beyond the dichotomy of unguided versus guided interventions, the efficacy of IBIs might further vary depending on the quantity (dose–response relationship) and quality of guidance (e.g. qualification of e-coaches providing guidance and communication mode used for guidance). Subgroup analyses conducted in the aforementioned review on depression (Richards and Richardson, 2012), suggested a hierarchy with therapist-supported interventions being most efficacious (g=.78), followed by interventions supported by non-clinical staff (g=.58) and unguided interventions (g=.36). Moreover, studies with asynchronously provided support (e.g. email contact; g=.70) showed a larger pooled SMD than studies with synchronous support (e.g. chat; g=.28, Richards and Richardson, 2012).While these findings are important to better understand the underlying mechanisms of IBIs, they need to be interpreted cautiously given their explorative character comparing results across trials. Confounding variables such as technological developments over time (unguided interventions were more frequently conducted in the early years of Internet intervention research; Richards and Richardson, 2012) might partly explain the aforementioned differences. Titov and colleagues' trials on Internet-based social phobia interventions, for example, indicated that the efficacy of unguided interventions can substantially be increased when adherence facilitating components such as automated prompts are incorporated (Titov et al., 2008, 2009a).To improve the validity of findings on the impact of guidance, it therefore seems important to focus on trials that experimentally examined the effects of guidance in randomized controlled clinical trials with a direct comparison of the aforementioned variations of guidance (i.e. unguided vs. guided; interventions with different doses of guidance; qualification of e-coaches; asynchronous vs. synchronous). The present systematic review extends the current state of evidence regarding these subjects by investigating the following four research questions:1.Is there a difference in treatment outcome between guided and unguided interventions?Is there a difference in treatment outcome depending on the dose of guidance?Is there a difference in treatment outcome depending on the qualification of the e-coaches?Is there a difference in treatment outcome between guided interventions with synchronous or asynchronous communication?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
