@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Internet-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy with and without an initial face-to-face psychoeducation session for social anxiety disorder: A pilot randomized controlled trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assessed ICBT for SAD with and without a face-to-face psychoeducation sessionBoth groups achieved moderate to large effect sizes on symptom measuresImprovements were maintained at 6-month follow-upThe initial face-to-face psychoeducation session did not lead to enhanced outcomes

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy,Self-help,Social anxiety disorder,Psychoeducation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundGuided Internet-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy (ICBT) is an effective treatment of social anxiety disorder (SAD). However, the treatment is not effective for all. The amount and type of therapist contact have been highlighted as a possible moderator of treatment outcome.ObjectiveThe aim of this study was to examine whether treatment effects of ICBT are enhanced with an initial 90min face-to-face psychoeducation (PE) session for university students with SAD.MethodUniversity students with SAD (N=37) were randomized into one out of two conditions: 1) an initial therapist-led face-to-face PE session followed by guided ICBT, 2) guided ICBT without an initial PE session. Data was analysed with an intent-to-treat approach.ResultsEight participants (21.6%) dropped out of treatment. A statistically significant reduction in symptoms was found for all outcome measures for both groups. There were no significant additional effects of adding the initial face-to-face PE. Moderate to large within-group effect sizes on self-rated social anxiety symptoms were found at post-treatment (d=0.70–0.95) and at a six month follow-up (d=0.70–1.00). Nearly half of the participants were classified as recovered.ConclusionsNotwithstanding limitations due to the small sample size, the findings indicate that guided ICBT is an effective treatment for students with SAD. Adding an initial face-to-face PE session to the guided ICBT did not lead to enhanced outcomes in the present study.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is the most frequent anxiety disorder with a lifetime prevalence of 12–14% (Kessler et al., 2005; Kringlen et al., 2001). Considering the negative impact of anxiety disorders on well being and quality of life (Mendlowicz and Stein, 2000), and the economic burden on the society (Smit et al., 2006), it is important to provide adequate health care interventions at an early stage. Population-based surveys, however, indicate that more than half of those with anxiety symptoms may never seek treatment (Roness et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2005), and only a few get evidence-based treatment (Shafran et al., 2009).Guided Internet-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy (ICBT) has been shown to be an effective treatment for a variety of anxiety disorders (e.g. Haug et al., 2012; Hedman et al., 2012), including SAD (Andersson et al., 2006; Boettcher et al., 2013; Carlbring et al., 2007; Furmark et al., 2009; Hedman et al., 2014). Patients also consider guided ICBT to be a credible and suitable alternative to face-to-face treatment (Gun et al., 2011; Mohr et al., 2010; Spence et al., 2011; Wootton et al., 2011). However, some patients do not improve from ICBT and an average of 31% drop out of treatment (Melville et al., 2010). It is therefore important to identify factors related to improved outcomes from ICBT. Increased therapist contact is suggested as a factor that may enhance treatment effects (Palmqvist et al., 2007; Haug et al., 2012).The question about what constitutes the optimal amount and modes of therapist contact (e.g. e-mail, telephone, face-to-face meetings) has been addressed in several studies (e.g. Andersson et al., 2006; Carlbring et al., 2006; Carlbring et al., 2007). The findings in these studies support the use of guided ICBT but give no clear indication on what might be the optimal way of providing therapist guidance. The degree of therapist support has been examined on ICBT for other disorders (Johansson and Andersson, 2012) but little work has been done on the effects of support on ICBT for SAD specifically. Boettcher et al. (2012) examined whether an initial diagnostic interview would increase treatment effects and found no effect on their primary SAD outcomes. Also Titov et al. (2010) compared ICBT with and without motivational enhancement strategies. This included lessons in managing ambivalence, developing and resolving discrepancy between values and symptoms and enhancing self-efficacy for change. Although there were less dropouts in the motivationally enhanced group, there were no between-group differences in outcome measures at the end of treatment or at the 3month follow-up.Psychoeducation interventions based on CBT-principles as a stand-alone treatment have been found to significantly reduce symptoms for anxiety, depression, and psychological distress, but with small effect sizes (Donker et al., 2009; Rummel-Kluge et al., 2009). Psychoeducation interventions usually consist of information about the development and maintenance of a particular mental disorder, the principles behind the treatment of that disorder, and suggestions for coping strategies. In accordance with the arguments that therapist support is a critical component in ICBT treatments (Johansson and Andersson, 2012), psychoeducation is thought to be a common factor that may enhance the patient's experience of accountability to the therapy and the therapist (Newman et al., 2003), stimulating the development of the therapeutic alliance (Horvath and Luborsky, 1993), and facilitate the process of entering a change promoting role (Ogrodniczuk et al., 2005). All together, these factors are thought to increase satisfaction, use, and treatment outcome among patients seeking help for anxiety disorders (Taylor et al., 2012). One can argue that while the ICBT treatment offers psychoeducation as a part of its treatment, it does not add the same gravitas and accountability as a face-to-face psychoeducation. Thus, the aim of the present study was to examine whether an initial face-to-face psychoeducation session would enhance outcomes and reduced drop-out in guided ICBT for SAD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
