@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Costs and effects of Internet cognitive behavioral treatment blended with face-to-face treatment: Results from a naturalistic study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the effects and costs of blended care using routine mental health care data.Blended care resulted in significantly more treatment time and higher costs.Blended care does not automatically lead to a more efficient ways of treating outpatients.Stronger implementation procedures are necessary in order to disseminate blended care.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Blended treatment,Depression,Anxiety,Internet-delivered treatments,Outpatient clinic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveResearch has convincingly demonstrated that Internet interventions are effective for anxiety and depression and it is suggested that these interventions can reduce therapist time and thus save costs. Therefore, many Dutch mental health organizations have started to implement these treatments into their services. They usually apply the Internet interventions in combination with the face-to-face treatments, i.e. blended treatments. To date, no empirical work has examined if implementing blended treatments actually contributes to treatment effects and cost savings. The objective of this naturalistic study was to examine this issue, using routine mental health care data for patients with depression or anxiety.MethodsAll 4448 records of patients with depression or anxiety seeking help at a large mental health service between October 2009 and December 2012 were obtained. Data on GAF-index, therapist time, and therapist costs of patients who received face-to-face treatments were compared with those who received blended care, using propensity score matching.ResultsBlended care was applied in 3.6% of all patients and was given more frequently to younger patients and patients with an anxiety disorder. There were no significant differences in symptom severity at baseline between the two treatment groups, nor were there significant differences between the two groups in symptom improvement. Patients who received blended care had more treatment sessions (face-to-face plus online sessions) than patients who received standard treatment, which resulted in significantly more treatment time and higher costs.ConclusionFindings suggest that in this sample blended care is more expensive compared to established face-to-face treatments and doesn't lead to additional benefits in terms of general functioning. This might be caused by suboptimal implementation strateges.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Anxiety and depressive disorders are common and have major consequences for the individual as well as for society (Kessler et al., 2005). Effective psychological treatments for these disorders are available. However, the impact of these treatments in reducing the global burden of disease is limited. A major reason for this is the significant gap between treatment availability and treatment demand. There is a lack of adequately trained and qualified professionals who can provide evidence-based psychological treatments (Weissman et al., 2006; Bower and Gilbody, 2005; Goldberg and Gournay, 1997; Lovell and Richards, 2000). This results in long waiting lists for psychological treatment and high caseloads for clinicians (Lovell and Richards, 2000). Many have suggested to use Internet-delivered treatments to reduce clinician time and increase access to treatment for those suffering from anxiety and depression (Hedman et al., 2014a,b; Titov, 2011; Nordgren et al., 2014). We define Internet delivered treatments as structured programs offered via the Internet which are based on evidence based therapies. Patients can work through these programs independently. It might be offered with coaching via telephone, email or face-to-face in order to keep patients motivated and to help them better understand the techniques and assignments.Several meta-analyses support the effectiveness of such Internet-delivered treatments for common mental disorders such as depression, social phobia, panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder (Andersson, 2012; Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Andrews et al., 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2009; Richards and Richardson, 2012; Van't Hof et al., 2009) and several studies demonstrate that guided treatments lead to better outcomes compared to unguided treatments (Palmqvist et al., 2007; Richards and Richardson, 2012). The effect sizes for guided Internet interventions are substantial, and the results indicate both short term and long term benefits. Furthermore, patients adhere to, and are satisfied with the Internet treatments (Gun et al., 2011; Andrews et al., 2010). Next to these randomized controlled trials there are a number of studies available on the effects of Internet treatments in routine mental health care. They also demonstrate that Internet treatments are effective and acceptable for depression (Williams and Andrews, 2013; Hedman et al., 2014b; Hoifodt et al., 2013), general anxiety disorder (Mewton et al., 2012), mixed depression and anxiety (Newby et al., 2014), and panic disorder (Hedman et al., 2013). Furthermore, studies indicate that Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (iCBT) can be more cost-effective than face-to-face treatments because Internet treatments are usually administered with limited professional support (McCrone et al., 2004; Hedman et al., 2011, 2012; Wright et al., 2005).Because of all the advantages of Internet treatments and a strong healthcare policy from the Dutch Ministry of Health that aims to increase online treatment, Dutch mental health centers (MHCs) are interested in its implementation in routine practice. However, the therapists often voice concern about the possible negative impact on therapeutic rapport and treatment outcomes (Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013). Therefore, rather than to offer those treatments on its own the MHCs prefer to blend them into their face-to-face treatments. This ‘blended care’ means that part of the treatment is carried out face-to-face, while other parts are delivered through online treatment sessions. The idea is that fewer face-to-face treatment sessions are necessary since patients can do part of their treatment online at home where they have unlimited access to treatment materials and exercises that might facilitate learning and retention. The face-to-face sessions however ensure that the patient will benefit from a therapeutic relation.Unfortunately, we know little about the optimal way to blend Internet and face-to-face treatments. The Internet interventions in previous studies are mostly offered as standalone treatments (i.e. not in combination with face-to-face sessions) or as a first step in a stepped care model in which patients start with a low intensity treatment and, if needed, step up to a treatment of higher intensity (van Straten et al., 2014). We do not yet know if blended treatments are (cost-)effective in comparison to pure face-to-face treatments or pure Internet treatments when delivered routine mental health care by clinicians. Nor do we know what the optimal dosage of online and face-to-face therapy is, or which elements can best be incorporated online and which can best be incorporated in face-to-face sessions.In this paper we evaluate for one large MHC in the Netherlands, that had implemented blended care in order to improve their service, the effects of blended care for patients with a depression or anxiety disorder. We compare the effects (GAF index) and costs (number of sessions, therapist costs) between blended and face-to-face treatments.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
