@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effectiveness of an online e-health application compared to attention placebo or Sertraline in the treatment of Generalised Anxiety Disorder

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Web-based intervention for GAD is compared to frontline antidepressant medication.Anxiety symptoms improved following Sertraline treatment and web intervention.Results suggest that GAD is responsive to both online treatment and Sertraline.Online treatment for GAD offers an alternative to medication.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anxiety disorders,Intervention,Early intervention,Internet,Online systems,Cognitive behavioural therapy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundGeneralised Anxiety Disorder (GAD) is a high prevalence, chronic disorder that can be treated effectively through a number of web-based programs. However, online web programs for GAD have not been compared to standard pharmacological treatment. The present study compares an Internet Intervention (Active Website) for GAD and a selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI) (Sertraline), with an online attention placebo condition (Control Website).ObjectiveTo evaluate the effectiveness of a web-based intervention for GAD in comparison to standard antidepressant medication and an online attention placebo condition over a 10week period, and with a follow-up at 6 and at 12months.MethodsThe study was part of a larger scale prevention program. 152 people aged 18–30years who met the criteria for GAD on the MINI received referrals to the treatment sub-study. The primary outcome was anxiety symptoms measured by the Generalised Anxiety Disorder 7-item Scale (GAD-7), and the secondary outcome was depression measured by the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D).ResultsThere was very poor uptake to the trial (around 14% of those referred). However, even in this small sample, Sertraline compared to the Control Website was significant at post-test and 6months, and the Internet Intervention was significant at post-test. Relative to the Control Website condition at post-test, for the GAD-7 and CES-D respectively, the between group effect sizes were d=2.43 and d=0.68 for the Active Website condition, and 3.00 and 0.20 for the Sertraline condition. The within group effect size for the Control Website from baseline to post-test was −0.04 for the GAD-7 and 0.31 for CES-D respectively.ConclusionsThe findings will need to be extended and confirmed in a larger trial. However, they do suggest that both standard pharmacological treatment and online interventions for GAD are effective in samples with a diagnosis of GAD recruited via online methods. The low rate of engagement for face-to-face treatment by those who opt first for a web program suggests that treatment preferences are important in help-seeking.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Generalised Anxiety Disorder (GAD) is a high prevalence (Johansson et al., 2013), chronic disorder that can be treated through the web (Christensen et al., 2014a). Web-based interventions have high acceptability, are accessible, engaging and effective. Indeed, five meta-analyses published since 2009 (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Andrews et al., 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2009; Griffiths et al., 2010b; Lewis et al., 2012) confirm the effectiveness of online interventions for anxiety. For GAD in particular, strong evidence has emerged for online cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) (Mewton et al., 2012; Robinson et al., 2010; Spence et al., 2011). Psychodynamic online interventions have also been found to be effective (Andersson et al., 2012). Sertraline, along with the SSRIs escitalopram and paroxetine, is a first-line pharmacologic treatment for GAD (Baldwin and Polkinghorn, 2005). Randomised, placebo controlled trials have found Sertraline efficacious for GAD in adults (Allgulander et al., 2004; Brawman-Mintzer et al., 2006), children and adolescents (Rynn et al., 2001; Walkup et al., 2008) over 9 to 12weeks, and Sertraline is a standard choice for GAD treatment in clinical settings. To our knowledge, a direct comparison of online therapy to a standard pharmacological intervention has not yet been reported for GAD.We undertook a treatment trial comparing an online program (Active Website) with SSRI/antidepressant medication (Sertraline), and a control condition (Control Website). Participants were recruited to the trial after they were excluded from the primary prevention trial, an exclusion that was based on their meeting criteria for GAD during a diagnostic interview. Participants were randomised to one of three conditions: Active Website offering iCBT, Sertraline, or a Control Website. Regardless of randomised condition, all participants were assessed and monitored by medical staff during the course of the trial.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
