@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Guided internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder: A randomized controlled trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We studied Internet-delivered cognitive behaviour therapy for PTSD.Guided ICBT was superior to a control condition.The findings adds to the growing literature on the effects of guided ICBT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
PTSD,Treatment,Cognitive behavior therapy,Internet-based treatment,Self-help,Randomized controlled trial,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this randomized controlled trial was to investigate the effects of guided internet-based cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Sixty-two participants with chronic PTSD, as assessed by the Clinician-administered PTSD Scale, were recruited via nationwide advertising and randomized to either treatment (n=31) or delayed treatment attention control (n=31). The ICBT treatment consisted of 8 weekly text-based modules containing psychoeducation, breathing retraining, imaginal and in vivo exposure, cognitive restructuring, and relapse prevention. Therapist support and feedback on homework assignment were given weekly via an online contact handling system. Assessments were made at baseline, post-treatment, and at 1-year follow-up. Main outcome measures were the Impact of Events Scale — Revised (IES-R) and the Posttraumatic Stress Diagnostic Scale (PDS). Results showed significant reductions of PTSD symptoms (between group effect on the IES-R Cohen's d=1.25, and d=1.24 for the PDS) compared to the control group. There were also effects on depression symptoms, anxiety symptoms, and quality of life. The results at one-year follow-up showed that treatment gains were maintained. In sum, these results suggest that ICBT with therapist support can reduce PTSD symptoms significantly.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lifetime prevalence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in the general population has been estimated to range from 5.6% to 8.3% (Frans et al., 2005; Kessler et al., 1995), indicating that PTSD is a common problem after experiencing traumatic events. While there are effective treatments for PTSD, like cognitive behavior therapy (CBT; Bisson et al., 2007), a substantial proportion of individuals with PTSD do not seek professional help or do not have access to effective help (Gavrilovic et al., 2005). Internet-based CBT (ICBT) could be a possible way to increase access to psychological treatment (Andersson, 2009; Andrews et al., 2010). Several studies have investigated the efficacy of therapist-guided ICBT for PTSD symptoms (Hirai and Clum, 2005; Knaevelsrud and Maercker, 2007; Lange et al., 2003), as well as for persons diagnosed with PTSD (Klein et al., 2009; Litz et al., 2007; Spence et al., 2011; for a review see Amstadter et al., 2009). There is also a related literature on the broader concept of telehealth interventions (Sloan et al., 2011).Lange et al. from The Netherlands were probably the first to develop and test a therapist-guided internet-based treatment protocol for PTSD symptoms in controlled studies (Lange et al., 2001, 2003). They named their protocol Interapy, and the program has since then been translated and tested in studies conducted in Germany (Knaevelsrud and Maercker, 2007), and Iraq (Wagner et al., 2012). Knaevelsrud and Maercker (2007) found that Interapy resulted in large effect sizes and sustained treatment effects over three months, and in an uncontrolled study by Wagner et al. (2012) a similar result was found. In addition, Interapy has been found to work in a large effectiveness study (Ruwaard et al., 2012).Most trials on PTSD have involved some form of therapist guidance. Guidance typically means that a therapist provides support and encouragement and consequently the contact with patients can be regarded as minimal. Unguided automated programs with no therapist contact generally lead to smaller effects and larger dropout rates (Spek et al., 2007), but can be useful in prevention (Andersson, in press). Few trials have been conducted on guided ICBT for persons with diagnosed PTSD. Litz et al. (2007) compared two therapist-supported internet-based interventions; ICBT and supportive online counseling (not based on CBT). They focused on military personnel who served during the attack on the Pentagon in 2001 and the following Iraq war, and all participants were diagnosed with PTSD. This proof-of-concept trial showed that dropout rate from ICBT was the same as in face-to-face CBT. Moreover, ICBT was better than supportive counseling and had greater effects than counseling on symptoms of PTSD, depression, and anxiety at 6months follow-up (Litz et al., 2007). Klein et al. (2009) included patients with a confirmed PTSD diagnosis (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and conducted an open trial over the course of ten weeks. The results indicated a clinical reduction of PTSD symptoms, and high ratings of therapeutic alliance, but there were no effects on other more general psychological problems (Klein et al., 2009). The most recent controlled study conducted within this field, is that of Spence et al. (2011) who included individuals with an established primary diagnosis of PTSD. This trial showed large pre-to-post-treatment effect sizes for the treatment group on both PTSD symptoms, depression, anxiety and disability. However, the between group effects were small as the waiting list control group showed a moderate improvement. Collectively, these trials indicate that ICBT is a promising treatment method for PTSD that has the potential to increase access to CBT for persons with PTSD. The studies also suggest that ICBT might be a suitable method for different clinical groups, including persons with sub-clinical PTSD as well as those with a confirmed primary diagnosis of PTSD.The current study focused on individuals with an established diagnosis of PTSD as measured by the Clinician-administered PTSD Scale (CAPS; Blake et al, 1990). The aim of the study was to investigate the effects of guided ICBT on measures of PTSD symptoms, depression, and other anxiety symptoms, as well as quality of life against a control group. Instead of using a pure waiting list group we included weekly minimal support via the internet in the control condition. We expected moderate to large between group effects in favor of the active treatment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
