@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy for depression and anxiety in Parkinson's disease — A pilot study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ICBT is a feasible new alternative to alleviate anxiety and depression in PD.The ICBT-program needs to be further adapted to the PD population to enhance adherence.Further studies should evaluate the short- and long-term efficacy of ICBT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Depression,Anxiety,Parkinson's disease,Internet-based treatment,Cognitive behavioral therapy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundParkinson's disease (PD) is often associated with depression and anxiety. The availability of evidence-based psychological interventions is low.ObjectiveThis pilot study investigates the feasibility and preliminary effect of internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy (ICBT) for depression and anxiety in PD.Methods9 patients with PD with comorbid symptoms on the relevant subscale of Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), of either depression (HADS-D>7) or anxiety (HADS-A>7) received 12weeks of ICBT, specially adapted for depression and anxiety in PD. Primary outcome was change in depression and anxiety symptoms, measured with HADS total score. Effects on non-motor symptoms, PD specific health and quality of life and insomnia were explored, plus the participant's involvement, satisfaction, and subjective evaluation of the treatment.ResultsParticipants reported lower symptoms on HADS after ICBT (Cohen's d=0.79, p<0.05). However, levels of inactivity were rather high and questionnaires and comments from participants suggested that the treatment can be improved, for example by adding more therapist support.ConclusionsThe results suggest that ICBT could be a feasible way to alleviate depression and anxiety in PD. However, a somewhat simplified treatment and different ways to provide support to enhance adherence and outcome are warranted.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease, often associated with motor symptoms such as rigidity and resting tremor. PD is also often associated with comorbid depression, anxiety and sleep problems which impair the quality of life. A recent systematic review is suggesting that the prevalence of clinically relevant depression in patients with PD is 30–35% (Aarsland et al., 2012). Even more patients have symptoms of depression and anxiety but do not meet all criteria for a diagnosis (Aarsland et al., 2012). Most patients with PD also have some form of sleep disorder (Larsen and Tandberg, 2001).There are only a few studies examining psychological interventions for depression and anxiety in Parkinson's disease (Yang et al., 2012). These studies suggest that cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can be effective. One randomized trial (n=80) has been made where the group receiving CBT experienced a clearly significant reduction in depressive symptoms compared with the group receiving the usual clinical monitoring (Cohen's d=1.59) (Dobkin et al., 2011a).The availability of CBT is unfortunately low, mostly because of lack of CBT-trained therapists (Larsson et al., 2009). New ways to administer CBT as self-help via books, telephone and internet, can increase access to treatment and reduce costs. Self-help with therapist support has proven to be as effective as traditional CBT in a range of conditions (Cuijpers et al., 2010).Besides the lack of CBT trained therapists, PD patients may have difficulty getting to weekly sessions at the clinic. In a survey, 31% of PD patients reported transportation as a barrier to mental health care utilization and 52% said that mental health services were not available locally (Dobkin et al., 2013). The same survey reported that a majority had access to phone, cell phone and internet, and felt comfortable using both phone and computer.A small case study (n=10) evaluated telephone-administered CBT for PD patients with comorbid depressive or anxiety disorders with promising results (Veazey et al., 2009). These study participants reported that they preferred to manage their CBT treatment from home compared to having to travel to the clinic once a week. Another uncontrolled, but larger study (n=21) of telephone CBT for depression in PD found promising improvements in depression score (Cohen's d=1.21) (Dobkin et al., 2011b). Both treatments used in these two studies of telephone CBT mirrored standard face-to-face CBT in both content and session length and where not based on guided self-help where the main content of the treatment is delivered via text or other media and the therapist is mainly giving additional support and feedback.Internet-based CBT (ICBT) usually consists of self-help texts, homework assignments, queries and guidance by an online therapist (Andersson et al., 2008). The evidence of guided ICBT's effectiveness and cost-benefit is rapidly growing (Hedman et al., 2012). ICBT has previously been used to treat both psychiatric conditions such as panic disorder (Hedman et al., 2013) and distress related to somatic problems such as tinnitus (Kaldo et al., 2008). Internet-based interventions have also been used successfully with other neurology patients in two smaller studies, one treating depression in epilepsy (n=40) (Thompson et al., 2010) and one managing fatigue in multiple sclerosis (n=40) (Moss-Morris et al., 2012). To our knowledge, studies of ICBT for depression and anxiety in Parkinson's disease are lacking.The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility and preliminary effect of ICBT for depression and anxiety in Parkinson's disease. We hypothesized that participants would improve on measures of symptoms of depression and anxiety. We also explored effects on PD non-motor symptoms, PD specific health and quality of life, and insomnia as well as involvement in treatment, the participant's satisfaction and subjective evaluation of the treatment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
ICBT for depression and anxiety in PD could be a time saving and accessible alternative. The results are encouraging in that ICBT had effect on depressive symptoms, however further adaptations of the ICBT program, the type of therapeutic support, and technical platform could probably improve the participants' involvement in treatment and satisfaction. More feasibility trials of ICBT in different forms, as well as larger randomized-controlled trials, with long term follow-up data, are warranted to evaluate the short- and long-term efficacy of ICBT for this group of patients.MK was funded by The Jacques and Gloria Gossweiler Foundation, NEURO Sweden (Neuroförbundet) and The Swedish Parkinson Fund (Parkinsonfonden). PS was funded by the regional agreement on medical training and clinical research (ALF) between Stockholm County Council and Karolinska Institutet. NL was funded by Stockholm County Council. VK was funded by the regional agreement on medical training and clinical research (ALF) between Stockholm County Council and Karolinska Institutet.The authors have no conflict of interest to report.Study design: MK, PS, NL, VK; Acquisition of the data: MK, PS; analysis and interpretation of the data: MK, PS, NL, VK; drafting of the manuscript: MK, PS, NL, VK; critical revision of the manuscript: MK, PS, NL, VK.