@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reaching and recruiting Turkish migrants for a clinical trial through Facebook: A process evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The recruitment of a randomized controlled trial among Turkish migrants is evaluated.Results showed that about 75% (n=224) of applicants were recruited through Facebook.Traditional strategies appear ineffective in recruiting ethnic minorities for research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ethnic minorities,Recruitment,Depressive symptoms,Internet-based treatment,Randomized controlled trial,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ethnic minorities are underrepresented in mental health research, especially in randomized controlled trials. Recruiting ethnic minorities is challenging and there is a need to develop effective recruitment strategies.This study used data from a randomized controlled trial examining the effectiveness of an online guided self-help intervention for Turkish migrants with depressive symptoms. The recruitment process comprised six strategies in Dutch and Turkish: 1) a press release; 2) digital mailing; 3) the distribution of research information leaflets; 4) advertisements; 5) the Internet (in general terms); and 6) Facebook (FB). We describe the content and approach of each of the strategies and how effective they were in recruiting participants for our study. FB is evaluated in a step-by-step description of the recruitment strategy, together with its results in terms of effectiveness, specifically regarding data of FB Friends and messages received by FB Friends through FB.Results showed that a total of 287 applied for the trial. The majority of applicants were recruited through FB (75.6%, n=224), of whom 74 (33%, n=224) were included in the trial. Traditional recruitment strategies were far less successful, yielding only 16.4% (n=47) of the total of 287 applicants, of whom only 3 (3.1%) were included in the trial.Traditional recruitment strategies, such as research information leaflets and advertisements in newspapers, appear ineffective in recruiting ethnic minority groups for research purposes. The use of FB proved to be a more successful method. Future research should examine the factors that account for the potential effectiveness of FB as a recruitment method for hard-to-reach populations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ethnic minorities are underrepresented in mental health research, and their inclusion in clinical research has been a challenge for many researchers (Miranda et al., 2003; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001; Hussain-Gambles et al., 2004). Research shows that cultural characteristics are an important factor hindering the recruitment of ethnic minorities in clinical research. These characteristics include language barriers, religious beliefs and a negative attitude towards psychotherapy (Brown et al., 2014). However, not all of these barriers are due to cultural characteristics (Brown et al., 2014). In a systematic review, Brown and colleagues (2014) identified several barriers for participation in research by ethnic minorities. It was found that more mundane factors in the family or community, in health services and in the research process itself also play a critical role in successful recruitment. These practical issues are also often encountered when working with native populations with a low socio-economic status and are thus not exclusive to ethnic minorities. Consequently, the underrepresentation of ethnic minorities in clinical research has several negative implications such as inhibiting psychotherapy development and delivery (Brown et al., 2014). This can affect the generalizability of the study findings towards the ethnic minorities concerned.In the past decades, several evidence-based psychotherapies have been developed in order to treat mental disorders, including depression. However, research examining the direct effect of psychotherapy in ethnic minorities is sparse (Ünlü Ince et al., 2014). A recent meta-analysis suggested that psychotherapy is equally as effective in ethnic minorities as in native populations, after examining the ethnicity proportion of the population samples in 56 clinical trials in relation to the effect of psychotherapy (Ünlü Ince et al., 2014). Although these first findings are promising, insufficient randomized controlled trials are available to make direct comparisons between ethnic minorities and native groups. Moreover, there is still a gap between the unmet needs for treatment of ethnic minorities in both clinical and research settings. Tailor-made recruitment strategies are factors that might play an important role in filling this gap.Although recruiting ethnic minorities in clinical research is difficult, Brown and colleagues (2014) have given several suggestions to overcome recruitment barriers. In their systematic review they suggest that the difficulty of recruiting ethnic minorities must be addressed at an early stage by modifying the protocol for research. Furthermore, human and financial resources should be expanded from the beginning of the research. It is noticeable, however, that all nine studies in this review were conducted in the United States, indicating a lack of European research on ethnic minorities. This focus on the inclusion of ethnic minorities in the United States may be positively influenced by US guidelines and policies that mandate the inclusion of ethnic minorities in clinical research by the National Institute of Health (NIH). European countries don't have such policies yet (Bhopal, 2009). Although several suggestions are given in the systematic review, these are mainly of a generic nature and do not provide concrete methods to improve recruitment strategies among ethnic minorities. It seems therefore, that more concrete strategies need to be developed to improve the inclusion of ethnic minorities in clinical research.An innovative way to recruit participants for research is via the Internet, which can be utilized in many forms, such as by offering online psychotherapy. For example, Internet-interventions are shown to be easily accessed, have a high level of anonymity and a low threshold for acceptability (e.g. Griffiths and Christensen, 2006; Muñoz, 2010). Numerous studies have confirmed the effectiveness of online psychological interventions in the treatment of depression in adults (Richards and Richardson, 2012; Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009). However, little is known about the effectiveness of Internet-based psychotherapies in ethnic minorities since ethnic minorities are so far underrepresented in randomized controlled trials as well (Ünlü Ince et al., 2014).Another advantage of the Internet may be the potential to recruit larger samples at low costs (Ramo and Prochaska, 2012; Jones et al., 2012; Barrera et al., 2014). Many Internet-based studies, however, continue to use more traditional recruitment methods such as newspapers and magazine advertisements, rather than the Internet itself (e.g. Alexander et al., 2008; Warmerdam et al., 2008).The current study used data from a randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of a web-based problem-solving therapy for Turkish migrants with depressive symptoms in the Netherlands (Ünlü Ince et al., 2013). The intervention was adapted to the specific needs of Turkish people living in the Netherlands. During the recruitment process, we faced several challenges in recruiting through traditional media, such as advertisements in Turkish newspapers. We also made use of recruitment strategies via the Internet, particularly through Facebook (FB). Because this was by far the most successful method, and is rather new, we decided to systematically describe how we used this method. We also provide some explanations for the potential success of this method in recruiting ethnic minorities for randomized controlled trials. Accordingly, we aim to contribute to the knowledge base of recruitment strategies for hard-to-reach populations, including ethnic minorities.This paper will provide a detailed description of the recruitment process and the effectiveness of each recruitment strategy applied during the trial. We will do this by: 1) describing the recruitment strategies used; 2) evaluating the effectiveness of each recruitment strategy; 3) providing a step-by-step description of the use of FB as a recruitment strategy; and finally 4) exploring the recruitment process through FB in terms of users (“Friends”) and messages received by “Friends”.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
