@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Customized CBT via internet for adolescents with pain and emotional distress: A pilot study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
I-CBT has not been used as an early intervention for adolescents with coexisting pain and emotional distressThe aim of this pilot study was to explore the effects of early I-CBT for adolescents with pain and emotional distressThe intervention consisted of 5-9 modules of customized I-CBT combined with personal supportThe effects were quite modest and larger studies are needed to further explore the outcomes

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adolescents,Pain,CBT,Emotional distress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this pilot study was to explore the effects of an early and customized CBT intervention, mainly delivered via internet, for adolescents with coexisting recurrent pain and emotional distress (low mood, worry, and/or distress). The intervention was based on a transdiagnostic approach, to concurrently target pain and emotional distress. A single case experimental design (SCED) was employed with six participants, 17–21years old, who were recruited via school health care professionals at the student health care team at an upper secondary school in a small town in Sweden. The intervention consisted of 5–9 modules of CBT, delivered via internet in combination with personal contacts and face to face sessions. The content and length of the program was customized depending on needs. The effects of the program were evaluated based on self-report inventories, which the participants filled out before and after the intervention and at a six month follow-up. They did also fill out a diary where they rated symptoms on a daily basis. The results were promising, at least when considering changes during the intervention as well as pre- and posttest ratings. However, the results were more modest when calculating the reliable change index (RCI), and most of the treatment effects were not sustained at the follow-up assessment, which raises questions about the durability of the effects. Taken together, this study indicates that this type of program is promising as an early intervention for adolescents with pain and concurrent emotional distress, although the outcomes need to be explored further, especially in terms of long-term effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recurrent pain is a common complaint in youth, affecting up to 50% of Swedish adolescents (Fichtel and Larsson, 2002), and among half of these suffer from functional impairments such as poor sleep (Haraldstad et al., 2011) and school absence (Korterink et al., 2015). Headache, abdominal pain, and muscle pain are frequently reported, and about 40% of pain sufferers convey several pain locations (Larsson and Sund, 2007). Adolescents with frequent pains report higher levels of disability as well as anxiety and depressive symptoms (Fichtel and Larsson, 2002; Hoftun et al., 2012). They are also at risk of developing future emotional and behavioral problems, such as reduced leisure time activities and somatic complaints other than pain (Larsson and Sund, 2007). Suffering from frequent pain in adolescence is thus closely linked to emotional distress such as anxiety and depressive symptoms both concurrently and in the future, and it is important to address coexisting pain and emotional problems early on.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for adolescents with chronic pain has shown significant effects in reducing pain intensity and improving function (for reviews, see Fisher et al., 2014; Eccleston et al., 2013; Palermo et al., 2010). Although internet-based CBT (I-CBT) for pain mainly has been tested out on adults, there is also evidence that it may be beneficial for adolescents with recurrent pain (e.g., Palermo et al., 2009, 2016; Trautmann and Kröner-Herwig, 2010; Hicks et al., 2006; for a review, see Bender et al., 2011). I-CBT may particularly fit this age group, considering that adolescents are often used to modern technology, and the treatment is easily accessible. I-CBT may be extra effective if applied early on, for preventing future disability. Early interventions have the advantage of targeting problems before they get too severe, and have shown to be effective for reducing anxiety and depressive symptoms in youth (see e.g. Mrazek and Haggerty, 1994; Mychailyszyn et al., 2012). To our knowledge, I-CBT has not been used as an early intervention for adolescents with coexisting pain and emotional distress.One explanation of the high levels of comorbidity between pain and emotional distress is that they share essential maintaining processes (Linton, 2013). Based on the transdiagnostic perspective, treatments should target shared processes to achieve improvements in co-morbid problems such as pain and depressive symptoms. One core transdiagnostic process is avoidance; both overt, such as avoidance of social and physical activities, and covert, such as avoidance of negative thoughts and feelings (Barlow et al., 2010). To our knowledge, only one earlier study, which was a case report of two adolescents, has used a transdiagnostic approach to target pain and concurrent anxiety and depression in this age group (Allen et al., 2012). In the current study, we developed an intervention where the main content focused on transdiagnostic processes such as avoidance, to simultaneously target coexisting pain and emotional distress. Additional modules targeting specific problem areas were added to optimize the treatment and promote engagement. Similar approaches have been applied to younger children and adolescents, with encouraging results, both individually (e.g. Warner et al., 2011), and in group format (Logan and Simons, 2010). However, an entirely new aspect in our study was to deliver a transdiagnostic intervention via internet, a delivery mode which particularly may fit this specific age group.Promoting engagement is extra important in adolescents, since there is a heightened risk for drop-outs (de Haan et al., 2013). Customizing the treatment content to fit the needs of the individual is one way of promoting engagement. In comparison to other internet-based interventions for pain in this age group, the customization of content and length of the intervention is a new feature in our study. Keeping personal contact through e-mails, phone calls or sms is another way of engaging youth. In the current project, we developed a unique intervention which was specifically adapted to suit adolescents, based on modern technology in combination with personal contacts. The main content focused on transdiagnostic processes, and additional components targeting specific problem areas were added depending on needs of the adolescent. As the participants partly had different emotional symptoms (e.g. with or without anxiety, depressive symptoms), the program was customized based on their problem description. The purpose of this pilot study was to explore the effects of an early and customized school-based CBT intervention, mainly delivered via internet, for adolescents with coexisting recurrent pain and emotional distress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results from pilot study preliminary endorse further development of an early and customized school-based transdiagnostic CBT intervention, mainly delivered via internet, for adolescents with coexisting recurrent pain and emotional distress. However, the results were modest, which underscores the need for more studies to further explore the effects of the intervention.The authors have no conflicts of interest in relation to this study.