@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Self-guided internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy (iCBT) for obsessive–compulsive disorder: 12 month follow-up

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Self-guided treatments have considerable public health potential.The present study reports the long-term outcomes of a self-guided internet-administered treatment for OCD.Large effect sizes were found (d=1.08) and 33% met criteria for clinically significant change at 12-month follow-up.No significant changes in symptoms were found 3-month to 12-month follow-up.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OCD,Anxiety,Obsessive,Internet,iCBT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy (iCBT) may reduce barriers to treatment faced by people with obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). To date, most research on iCBT for OCD has evaluated clinician-guided treatments. However, self-guided treatments, which do not involve contact with a clinician, have considerable public health potential and may be particularly advantageous for those patients who report stigma as a principal barrier to treatment. The findings of a recent trial of self-guided iCBT for symptoms of OCD highlighted the potential of this approach and found large within-group effect sizes from pre- to post-treatment on the YBOCS-SR (d=1.37), sustained at 3-month follow-up (d=1.17). In addition, 32% of participants met criteria for clinically significant change at 3-month follow-up. The present study reports the long-term outcomes of that trial (N=28). Twelve out of 28 participants (43%) completed the 12month follow-up. A large within-group effect size was found on the YBOCS-SR (d=1.08) and 33% met criteria for clinically significant change at 12-month follow-up. No significant changes in symptoms were found between 3-month follow-up and 12-month follow-up, demonstrating that participants maintained their treatment gains in the long term. These results add to the emerging literature supporting the potential of self-guided iCBT for individuals with symptoms of OCD.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by intrusive obsessions and related, anxiety reducing compulsions (APA, 2013). Effective cognitive-behavioral treatments for OCD exist and are well documented in the literature (Olatunji et al., 2013; Sánchez-Meca et al., 2014). However, there are numerous barriers to accessing traditional face-to-face treatments, including the direct and indirect costs of treatment, stigma, and difficulty accessing a trained therapist (Baer and Minichiello, 2008; Belloch et al., 2009; Goodwin et al., 2002; Marques et al., 2010). Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (iCBT) has increasingly been studied in recent years as a potential way to overcome many of these barriers.Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy involves the same evidence-based treatment techniques that are delivered in traditional face to face treatments; however, the treatment information is provided online (Andersson and Titov, 2014). Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy can be clinician-guided (i.e., with clinician contact provided via telephone or email) or self-guided (i.e., without any clinician contact). To date, the majority of the studies examining iCBT for OCD have examined guided interventions, involving at least weekly clinician contact (Andersson et al., 2011, 2012; Lenhard et al., 2014; Wootton et al., 2011, 2013), or contact with a technician (Mahoney et al., 2014). Several studies now support the efficacy of clinician-guided iCBT for OCD with effect sizes, across three different research groups, ranging from 0.87 to 2.29 on relevant OCD outcome measures (Andersson et al., 2011, 2012; Lenhard et al., 2014; Mahoney et al., 2014; Wootton et al., 2011, 2013). While the results of these studies are encouraging, self-guided interventions have an important advantage over guided treatments including that they may be more attractive to patients who have significant concerns regarding stigma than guided treatments.One recent study reported the results of two open trials exploring the efficacy of a new iCBT intervention for OCD, the OCD Course, when provided in a self-guided format (Wootton et al., 2014). Entry to both studies required a score of ≥16 on the self-report Yale–Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (YBOCS-SR) (Baer, 1991) and no clinician contact or support was provided to participants during assessment or treatment. In the first open trial (N=20), 44% of participants completed the OCD Course within 8weeks and significant improvements in OCD symptoms were observed from pre-treatment to post-treatment (d=1.05) and to 3-month follow-up (d=1.34) (Wootton et al., 2014). In the second trial (N=28), the time allowed to complete the intervention was increased (i.e., from 8weeks to 10weeks) to allow more practice of exposure and response prevention (ERP) tasks. Sixty-four percent of participants completed this revised OCD Course within the 10week timeline and significant reductions in symptoms of OCD were also found with large effect sizes obtained at post-treatment (d=1.37) and 3-month follow-up (d=1.17) (Wootton et al., 2014). Importantly, participants in these open trials reported the iCBT Course to be acceptable. At post-treatment 80% of participants in the first trial indicated that it was worth their time taking part in the Course, which increased to 100% in the second trial. In addition, 80% of participants in the first open trial indicated that they would recommend the Course to a friend and this percentage increased to 100% in the second trial.Currently, one of the limitations of the self-guided iCBT literature is the lack of long-term follow-up data. Recently, Andersson and colleagues reported the long-term outcomes for a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of clinician-guided iCBT for OCD (Andersson et al., 2014). Participants in this RCT were randomized, at post-treatment, to either receive no additional contact after treatment or to receive an internet-delivered booster program, and were followed up at 4-, 7-, 12- and 24-months post-treatment (Andersson et al., 2014). Results from this study indicated that both groups maintained their treatment gains with within-group effect sizes ranging from 1.58 to 2.09 across the follow-up time period (Andersson et al., 2014). Thus, there is emerging evidence to suggest that the clinical outcomes of clinician-guided iCBT for OCD are maintained over the longer term.The aim of the present study was to extend the existing literature by reporting the long-term follow-up of self-guided iCBT for OCD. It was hypothesized, based on recent findings in the literature, that participants would maintain treatment gains at 12-months post-treatment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
