@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing an integrated, Internet-based self-help programme for young people with depression and alcohol use problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Overall, the DEAL Project programme was well-received by young people and experts.The programme was found to be acceptable, and have potential utility.Major concerns related to program engagement and motivation.Modifications pertained to visual elements, simplification, reminders and summaries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Depression,Alcohol,Comorbidity,Internet interventions,Youth,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Depression and alcohol use problems represent two of the major causes of disease burden in young people today. These conditions frequently co-occur and this co-occurrence is associated with increased risks and poorer outcomes than either disorder in isolation. Integrated treatments have been shown to be effective, however, there remains a significant gap between those in need of treatment and those receiving it, particularly in young people. The increased availability of Internet-based programmes to complement health care presents a unique opportunity in the treatment of these conditions. This paper presents the findings of a development stage of the first Internet-based programme for young people (aged 18–25years) with co-occurring depression and alcohol use problems: the DEAL Project (DEpression-ALcohol). This stage involved engaging young people and mental health professionals to provide feedback regarding the acceptability and feasibility of a draft version of the programme.The 4-module draft programme incorporated evidence-based cognitive-behavioural therapy techniques and motivational enhancement principles. A series of focus groups with young people (n=25) and interviews of key professionals (n=6) were conducted. The feedback provided by this phase of testing was used to inform revisions to the programme.Overall, the DEAL Project programme was well-received and provides an innovative new platform for the treatment of co-occurring depression and alcohol use problems in young people. The next phase will include an evaluation of programme efficacy. If found to be efficacious, the programme has the potential to improve outcomes, reduce disease burden, and increase treatment uptake in this vulnerable group.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Depression and alcohol use problems are two of the major causes of disease burden in young people (Gore et al., 2011) and commonly these conditions co-occur (Teesson et al., 2009). Where this occurs these conditions serve to maintain and ex]acerbate one another (Quello et al., 2005). Compared to those with a single condition ‘comorbidity’ is associated with increased symptom severity and suicidality (Esposito-Smythers and Spirito, 2004; Sher et al., 2009; Sher and Zalsman, 2005), and poorer functioning (Erfan et al., 2010; Sullivan et al., 2005) and quality of life (Lubman et al., 2007).The National Comorbidity Survey — Adolescent version (NCS-A) found approximately one-quarter (25%) of young people affected by at least one class of disorder also met criteria for a disorder from one additional class; 11% were affected by three classes of disorders; and 7% were affected by four or five classes of disorder (Merikangas et al., 2010). Similarly, data from the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being (NSMHWB) indicates that 18.4% of young people (aged 16–25) with a lifetime alcohol use disorder (AUD), also met criteria for major depressive disorder (MDD) at some point in their lives (ABS, 2008). Conversely, 36.6% of those with a lifetime MDD also met criteria for AUD at some point in their lives.AUDs are defined as substance use disorders and sub-classified as mild, moderate, and severe by Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Similarly, MDD (commonly referred to as depression) a mood disorder characterised by varying degrees of sadness, disappointment, loneliness, hopelessness, self-doubt, and guilt. These diagnostic criteria are only part of the story especially in younger populations who show high rates of hazardous alcohol use (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2010) and subthreshold depression (Fergusson et al., 2005), which have the potential to dramatically affect vitally supportive relationships, or significantly disrupt career and study plans (Davis et al., 2004; Masten et al., 2004; Vander Stoep et al., 2000).As a result of the severe impact of these conditions intervening early is crucial to long-term health and wellbeing. However, this group is considerably less likely to access traditional health services (Reavley et al., 2010) and therefore innovative intervention approaches are needed to resolve this gap. Internet-based interventions have recently emerged as an effective means of treating depression (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Cuijpers et al., 2011) and alcohol use problems (Riper et al., 2011; White et al., 2010). Despite increasing support for integrated psychotherapeutic approaches to comorbidity (Hesse, 2009; Kelly et al., 2012), no Internet-based comorbidity interventions of this kind exist (Deady et al., in press; Deas and Brown, 2006; Singh, 2009).These therapies have the unique potential to overcome a number of traditional barriers (via flexibility, anonymity, and accessibility) to treatment-seeking in young people (Rickwood et al., 2007). Furthermore, widespread youth Internet use (ABS, 2009; Fox, 2011) makes this form of treatment particularly encouraging for use with younger populations (Burns et al., 2009; Christensen and Griffiths, 2000). Research suggests that young people also feel empowered online (Valaitis, 2005), and are comfortable accessing both general health information and specific mental health treatment online (Gould et al., 2002; Nicholas et al., 2004). Furthermore, Internet-based treatments have the potential to increase treatment standardisation (McCrone et al., 2004; Taylor and Luce, 2003), reduce costs associated with treatment (by reducing contact time with the therapist), and overcome imbalances in access and availability (Blanchard et al., 2008).In response to this treatment gap, the authors began the development of the DEAL Project—the first Internet-delivered, integrated treatment package for young people (aged 18–25years) with co-occurring depression and alcohol use problems. The draft DEAL Project consists of four, 1-hour modules, to be completed (one per week) over a 4-week period and uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and motivational interviewing (MI) techniques to deliver an integrated psychological treatment for depression and alcohol use problems.This paper presents the final development phase (Craig et al., 2008) of the DEAL Project in which young people and mental health professionals were engaged in order to enhance and refine the programme and explore the acceptability and preliminary feasibility of programme elements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Overall, the DEAL Project programme represents a novel and innovative approach to addressing the significant problem of depression and alcohol use problem comorbidity facing young people today. The current study indicates that the intervention is acceptable, applicable, and may have potential utility to young people.