@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Combining photogrammetry and photographic enhancement techniques for the recording of megalithic art in north-west Iberia

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use different but complementary techniques to register rock art.We have incorporated polarised light photography as an habitual technique.Photography techniques are successfully used in non-visible wavelengths.Strict photogrammetric processing procedures are used.All methods are combined in order to achieve precise digital tracings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Photogrammetry is an indirect technique that allows one to obtain different recording products – orthophotographs, planimetries, 3D models, etc. – that are essential for the study of prehistoric rock art. We believe nonetheless that there is no single technique capable of effectively registering an entire rock art site, so it is highly recommended to use a combination of several systems – that is to say, the development of a specific recording methodology – in order to obtain a documentation which is as thorough as possible. In this regard, different possibilities of combination of photogrammetry with other photographic techniques have been analysed, with the aim of obtaining an accurate recording of the art and its support, seeking also to incorporate into this recording other essential data for the study of its state of preservation.The use of photogrammetric techniques will be described, along with the tests carried out with photographic techniques such as polarised light photography or those that register images at both ends of the visible spectrum, both in the ultraviolet (UV) and in the infrared region (IR). These techniques enable the revelation of invisible details to clarify issues concerning technology and to explore scarcely noticeable forms of alteration. In some cases, these experiences have been complemented by the use of laser scanning in order to compare the effectiveness of both techniques.With all the experience acquired, it is possible to propose a rather precise recording methodology that requires no specialised technical training and no complex equipment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We are sure that any person who dares to read this article is more than aware of the complexity involved in trying to record a place where rock art is present, regardless of its characteristics. In trying to do so, we have all experienced the obstacles imposed by the task of recording items in a delicate state of preservation, on geometrically complex surfaces, with limited visibility and other problems that affect our work to a greater or lesser degree.Megalithic art does not escape from those conditions. What is more, we dare suggest that its recording needs to be done under particularly complex conditions. Nonetheless, some clarification should be given to such an exaggerated statement. The prehistoric art that is contained in megalithic structures (Fig. 1) can be expressed with the aid of various technologies (Carrera, 2011). This is often achieved by using carving techniques (Fig. 2) which do not usually involve great difficulty. Another different technique is the one we have named “simple painting”, carried out by the direct application of paint on the supporting stone, generally using white, black or red colours (Fig. 3). However, in North-West Iberia we often find a third technique that we have named “complex painting”: in order to reduce the irregularities of the stone׳s surface (caused by the grainy texture of the rocks employed: granite and similar), a layer of plaster created from whitish clay (generally rich in kaolin) was applied. Once hardened, this plaster became the surface to which paint (usually red and black) was applied (Fig. 4).Finally, we should consider one more characteristic: the superimposition of creation stages, often found in other rock art sets too. These techniques are usually applied to the same surface one on top of the other, thus demanding identification and accurate separation from those researchers who intend to record the surface.Our experience in recording megalithic art reaffirms all we have said: it can be very complicated to distinguish all the layers of the plaster, since its colours and textures often remind us of stone. Moreover, the frequent existence of several paint layers (with different plasters) makes it necessary to perform an accurate recording in order to distinguish each layer from the other, a task that, even in situ, can only be carried out with the aid of a magnifying glass (Fig. 5). Similarities in the colour palette (white, red and black) are an added difficulty, since these colours are used in all of the artistic techniques we have described. It might even be hard to distinguish between paint layer and supporting stone: e.g. in those areas where the stone (granite) shows chromatic alteration and can be mistaken for iron oxide-based pigments.Finally, we must consider the delicacy and fragility of pictorial techniques. In addition to suffering very important losses, the paintings often show a marked tendency to pulverulency and, in the case of those we find over a plaster, to the separation (and fall) of the supporting stone. In fact (and unfortunately), there are some dolmens whose paintings have completely disappeared because of their exposure to rain after excavation (Fig. 6), while other monuments are still suffering from active deterioration. This situation demands protection policies where, undoubtedly, the use of non-invasive recording techniques is considered a priority.That weakness renders more difficult and inadvisable the cleaning work previous to recording, thus recommending the use of subtle recording techniques. Nevertheless, it is common to find paintings covered by a thin layer of soil which often becomes thicker at the bottom of the orthostats as well as in those areas affected by surface runoff. Finally, we should consider the limitations of our work space (Fig. 7), which often becomes an extra problem because of the deterioration of the architectural structures in most of the sites we study.Given all these constraints and limitations, it becomes necessary to find a recording methodology capable of minimising the effect on rock art without neglecting accuracy. With that aim, we propose a procedure based on photogrammetric techniques which are combined with other systems that enable us to record items that are hardly visible if we just resort to conventional digital photography. This proposal will be explained in the following pages.At least as far as prehistoric art is concerned, nobody questions the fundamental importance of graphic documentation as a tool for study, cataloguing and protection. Consequently, we can no longer accept any methodologies which may cause damage, alteration or even mere physical contact with the object to be recorded. In its turn, this requires us to make an effort in order to perfect and diversify the recording techniques we use.In fact, direct tracing traditional systems involved intervention on rock art (at least, cleaning work), as well as long fieldwork periods and considerable geometric inaccuracy problems. The increased use of digital photography and image processing software has proved to be a huge step forward which has been consolidated – improving both precision and speed – with the aid of close range photogrammetry.Furthermore, the potential of digital photography has been enormously improved by the creation of new ways of analysis and image processing. These techniques are described in other articles that can be found in this issue (Rogerio-Candelera and Díaz-Guadarmino, among others). From among them all, DStrecht11http://www.dstretch.com.arose as the most important innovation.As a complementary tool, the use of a laser scanner can offer an extraordinary accuracy without direct intervention and, above all, provide us with the spatial context (3D) we need to combine with the digital tracings of the motifs created with the aid of other techniques (Domingo et al., 2013). Although applied research will undoubtedly provide us with new tools in this field, some technologies (structured-light scanner) already allow digital tracing with a considerable degree of precision (Cortón et al., 2013).Despite all these major advances, there are still deficiencies in the information contained in the original photographic shot, which simply cannot offer miraculous digital information if it lacks it. As mentioned in the introduction, the existence of superimposed layers or dirt deposits complicates photo shooting. Consequently, when absolute accuracy in the recording was needed (e.g. in the case of stones or monuments intended for public exhibition and subject to cleaning work) we occasionally employed direct tracing systems (Fig. 8). Despite our reluctance to use them, they are still the most exhaustive recording tool. In fact, photography and conventional digital processing are still insufficient in cases of paint superimposition and paint layers hidden by dirt deposits.Nevertheless, we are aware that it is necessary to be constantly on the lookout for ways of improving: we should not be content with an imperfect system. Consequently, for some time now (Carrera and Fábregas, 2003) we have been using photography methods which record non-visible wavelengths (infrared and ultraviolet) and enable us to perceive details that go beyond the scope of conventional photography. Such an attempt has also been addressed by other teams working in megalithic art, who have produced major pieces of research in regard to these documentation techniques (Bueno et al., 2012; Balbín et al., 2012). In spite of their being widely accepted and well-known (Backes, 2004; Fredlund and Sundstrom, 2007; Henderson, 1995; Verhoeven, 2008; Vicent et al., 1996; Wainwright, 2002), these methods do not seem to be frequently applied to rock art recording. As it will be stated in Section 9, we understand that the techniques used to capture images produced by infrared radiation reflection (reflectography and multispectral cameras) are one of the fields in which research will make progress in the future.As previously stated, the application of conventional photography to recording prehistoric art must face a series of obstacles•The existence of partially hidden patinas, deposits or plasters over the paint.The frequent superimposition of artistic paint layers which prevent us from seeing the previous ones.The lack of contrast between plasters and paint in relation to their supporting stone.The frequent lack of colour intensity, either due to the technique used itself or to centuries of deterioration.Our intention was, therefore, to introduce in recording processes the use of non-conventional photography techniques which enabled us to observe “invisible” items and appreciate colour contrasts, achieving a very high level of precision in recording tasks that would facilitate digital tracing. Thus, both undesirable direct tracing and previous cleaning tasks could be avoided. All this led us to the exhaustive employment of special photography and image processing techniques. In addition to the application of these methods, our aim was to develop the full potential of the original photographic shot, prior to digital image processing.To such objectives we must add our desire to correct all the geometric failings which were present in the traditional systems by using photogrammetric techniques. Moreover, our methodology was intended for everyday use, so it was essential to design an accessible system in both financial and methodological terms. Consequently, our work was divided into four phases1.Digital photogrammetry was used in order to create the geometric frame (that is, to draw the orthostats) in which rock art digital tracings would be subsequently incorporated. It is essential to take a large number of photographs of each megalithic stone to ensure a high resolution in the final image.When pictorial complexity, dirt or deterioration provoke imperfection in our photographic recording work, we must resort to:–Polarised light photography, which eventually became the usual process in photogrammetric restitution, replacing strictly conventional photography.Infrared reflection photography.Ultraviolet fluorescence photography.The generated images are photogrammetrically processed. The resulting orthophotos add information to the original photograph and the result is used to create digital tracings. The techniques and the basics of each method will be described in the following pages; each of them provides complementary information which adds to the basic data we obtain through conventional photography.The results can also be used to create other graphic products: detailed alteration maps of each orthostat, accurate drawings of the whole set, etc.Interference – either caused by the state of the paint (erosion, pigment weathering, light deposits, etc.) or related to the photography technique applied (excessive brightness, etc.) – can reduce the final quality of the photograph. All this visual noise contributes to a progressive decrease of the quality, by reducing the intensity of the colours and the precision in outlining.Polarised light photography tries to find a solution to the aforementioned problems. The technique we suggest is aimed at eliminating all the external reflectance that is generated by the light on the surface (either affected by erosion or patina) on which we find paint. In contrast, we try to enhance the recording of the internal reflectance (backscattered) of the light that, by penetrating (and scattering in) the paint, is partially reflected back to the outside.Light is propagated in many directions by means of waves perpendicular to the direction in which they move. By polarising, we achieve the selective transmission of the light that vibrates in a determined angle convergent with that of the polarisation axis׳ direction. The amount of light that is absorbed, transmitted or reflected by a material depends on its polarisation. Given that the human eye is not very sensitive to this phenomenon, we will choose those techniques which can help us make the most of this property.If an object is illuminated with a polarised light (vibrating in only one plane), the superficial reflection remains in the same vibration plane. Therefore, if we place another cross polarised filter in front of the lens, the superficial reflection will be completely blocked. On the contrary, the backscattered component depolarises inside the paint, so it is not absorbed by the cross polarising filter we are using with our camera.The brightness of the surfaces affected by the light depends on their refractive index (subject to the characteristics of each material) and the angle of the radiation. When the surface is reached, a reflection in different angles occurs. Such reflection can be controlled through light polarisation. Consequently, we can reduce the reflections which prevent us from visualising those paintings that are reflection-prone (what is often provoked by the use of different alteration products).In this section we will describe the equipment that is necessary for polarised light digital photography (Fig. 9).Most light sources emit non-polarised light, that is, light vibrates in random directions in the plane in which it is contained. It is possible to control light in two orthogonal directions by using polarisers. In order to achieve this, it is necessary to work with an equipment that we can polarise adequately (by using a filter holder), adapting a linear polarising laminated film22Manufactured from a highly dichroic material (“Polaroid”), a polyvinyl impregnated with iodine which absorbs more polarised light in one direction.and maintaining colour temperature as constant as possible. Thus, when propagating through this material, the light that was originally depolarised becomes linearly polarised.In order to obtain satisfactory results, it is important to use linear polarising laminated film in the light source, since the filters which are placed in front of the lens can only act on previously polarised light, not on diffuse light.For polarisation by transmission to be possible, we need to place the filters of the light sources in parallel, that is, their axis must be coinciding. If this condition is not fulfilled, all the light emission will be blocked. In our tests, we used two continuous light sources,33TRED model 840D Fluo 4×55W, fluorescent. Colour temperature: 5.400°K.whose intensities were adjustable, that hardly generated heat and which were equipped with flaps intended for luminous efficacy.If we make polarised light go through a second polariser, it will be necessary to consider if polarisation direction coincides with light vibration. If the angle which separates both directions is lower than 90°, a determined percentage of light will pass through. In our case, we carried out several different polarisation tests, although “cross polarisation techniques” were those we used the most. This means that the linear polarising laminated films placed on the lights will be in parallel (that is, their axis will be in the same direction) and the light beam will be at 45° in relation to the object to be photographed. The polarising filter placed in front of the lens provokes the cross polarisation, by producing an orthogonal angle with the lights׳ filters.Since we are dealing with visible light photography, specific equipment (camera and lens) is not required. In fact, the optical system will gradually adjust to our needs, depending on whether we are interested in a bigger or smaller visual angle, more or less brightness or the perception of hardly visible details.For photo shooting, we will place a circular polarising filter in front of the camera lens. These filters are made out of tiny crystals which we place between two optical glasses in order to polarise light. They have a specific polarisation plane and, depending on the rotation, we can obtain or control the proportion of light at which we give way to the sensor. Thus, we will obtain higher or lower colour intensity (saturation), an increase in image contrast and the reduction or elimination of certain annoying reflections; this will often make it easier for us to recognise the represented motifs. We will have to take into account the effects that this have on exposure, compensating the light that it absorbs, which is approximately 1.5 to 2 diaphragms.After studying the results obtained in the previous stage, we proceed to organise, analyse and finally select those files we consider the most interesting. Next, we begin digital image processing with the aid of specific software. In our case, we used Adobe Camera Raw. We set a sequence of actions for image digital processing (the methodological order can vary according to our specific requirements and aims). This sequence can be summarised as follows44This method has also been applied to IR and UV photography.:•Photograph selection (RAW).Crop tool (only if necessary).White balance adjustment (colour temperature).Processing adjustments and parameters.Photoshop is often used to complete image processing, by carrying out selective amendments and working in different layers, since some of the actions we can undertake with Adobe Camera Raw affect the whole image, which may be inconvenient. Should that be the case, we will need to go to “Workflow options” and make sure that the image is saved at a depth of 16 bits/channel for its subsequent processing.The amount of light which is absorbed, transmitted or reflected by the motif will depend on the degree of polarisation that we apply; therefore, several tests are needed to obtain accurate results.The recording obtained through polarised light has enabled us, generally speaking, to appreciate prehistoric painting more clearly, both in the case of red and black pigments. This is not surprising if we take into account that, by using this technique, we eliminate annoying reflections (brightness reduction), we intensify colours (saturation) and we enhance image contrast, which results in a better visibility.It can even be stated that the results we obtained through polarisation before image processing have been considerably good. However, image processing will enhance those results and help us achieve our specific aims.The most noticeable effect has been a considerable strengthening of red pigments and a slight “cleaning” of the surface (Fig. 10). In our opinion, this is a very useful technique whose application to prehistoric art recording should be widespread.When we talk about infrared digital photography (from this point forward, IR) we refer to a technique which employs near-infrared, that is, a region of the electromagnetic spectrum with a wavelength comprised in the visible (from 700nm to 1200nm). As for the far-infrared region (up to 20,000nm), it is used in thermography.The main advantages of applying this technique to prehistoric paintings are a greater capacity than visible light to penetrate solids and the reflecting properties of pigments when iluminated with IR.Infrared photography is based on wavelength׳s capacity to penetrate a surface. Moreover, some substances are more or less transparent in infrared. Therefore, if we succeed in registering the images which are created in those wavelengths, we will be able to see the layers that underlie those substances.Infrared radiation has a greater capacity to penetrate (blurred elements, thick layers etc.) due to its long wavelength. This happens because the light which goes through the layer is less scattered, what enables us to see the underlying layers. Furthermore, the IR band generates noticeable differences in light transmittance or reflectance. Most pigments absorb visible light, reflect and transmit in the near-infrared, which contributes to making some materials “transparent” in IR images. This applies, above all, to ochre, red and white pigments. On the contrary, some pigments (charcoal) absorb IR very well and are thus easy to observe in IR photographs. This fact explains why IR has traditionally been used for recording charcoal drawings.For best results when using this technique, we must consider the following factors:•The sensitivity of the camera׳s sensor.The transmittance of the lens.The emission spectrum of the selected light source.The transmittance of the radiation in the atmosphere.To use infrared photography techniques, we will need the following equipment (Fig. 11):We can use either natural or artificial light provided that the IR radiation from the selected source is constantly and sufficiently emitted. We are especially interested in its efficiency in the useful infrared band (from 800 to 950nm). In any case, it is essential to control the heat that is produced by some of the aforementioned sources in order to avoid any possible alterations in the materials.Cameras׳ photosensors are not only able to capture light in the visible spectrum, but also to register wavelengths – both infrared and ultraviolet – in the non-visible electromagnetic spectrum. Most cameras (notably the most recent ones) are equipped with an internal filter located on the sensor. This filter is very effective for blocking any non-visible radiation. Thanks to this, manufacturers achieve an accurate colour adjustment for conventional photography. Moreover, this filter has a double function: on the one hand, the “low pass”, whose function is to eliminate any interference patterns (anti-aliasing (AA)55Effect which appears in the outlines of the image and looks like sawn teeth.y anti-moiré66Interference effect which occurs when two patterns are overlapped.); on the other hand, the “hot mirror” filter, which prevents infrared radiation from penetrating the sensor.In general, we can state that those cameras whose sensor does not have a filter that blocks radiation excessively are suitable for IR photography. In our case, we have used a Nikon D70 body.At this point, we must add that CCD sensors77“Charge Coupled Device”. Light-detection method frequently used with scanners and digital cameras.are more appropriate than CMOS sensors,88“Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor”. As in the case of CCD, this is a light-detection method, but based on a different technology.since in the latter case the blockage carried out by the filter (hot mirror) is more effective.All lenses are valid to take this kind of photograph; it is the sensor which sets the limits. Nevertheless, we will need to consider both the specific needs of each motif we desire to represent (in relation to their angle of view) and their luminosity. It is true that there exist quartz and fluorite lenses which are specific for longer wavelengths, but they are very expensive. For the infrared photography we are interested in, ordinary lenses (or even mirror or catadioptric lenses, which are aberration-free) are valid.It is essential to remember that the infrared image is created in a plane that is further than the visible one (the motif is related to the existent chromatic aberrations), so it will be necessary to modify the focus with respect to the image in visible. This is necessary because the wavelength of the incident radiation is different to that of the visible wavelength (the refractive index of the materials decreases when the wavelength of the incident radiation increases).Finally, it should be noted that it is highly advisable to make an effort to maximise the depth of field in order to compensate the existing differences in the focal point with visible light with respect to the infrared and thus enhance the sharpness of the image. However, we must not forget that using a very small diaphragm aperture implies excessively long exposure times, which, in their turn, produce image noise. Therefore, we must search for a reasonable balance. Moreover, in order to tackle this problem, it is important to adjust the sensitivity of the sensor to a not very high ISO, since the more these values rise, the more image noise there is due to the amplification of the signal of the digital sensors.In order to determine which filters are suitable for facilitating the passing of specific wavelengths it is essential to resort to the information provided by the manufacturer, where we can consult the filter׳s transmission curve.If we are interested in obtaining results from pure IR, we must use a special filter able to block visible light. The most popular ones are B+W 093, Hoya IR83, Heliopan RG830 (cut-off limit: about 800nm) and Hoya RM90 (930nm).It should be noted that the results we obtain when using pure IR filters are monochrome, so it will be necessary to convert the image to black and white, as we will indicate later.As for the softest red filters, they are an interesting option when their use is combined with the “false colour” technique. The fact that we are employing a less-dense red filter (cut-off: ±700nm) will enable darker red to pass through, which will provide us – due to digital processing – with chromatic information which, despite not being real, can help us to distinguish areas affected by loss of material due to decay, poor adhesion of paint to the surface, wash-off, bio deterioration, etc. Among other filters, we can mention B+W 092 and Hoya R70.We have been able to record traces of paint which are currently hidden by layers of varied composition and depth. Precisely, the features of such layers play an essential role in the final result:–Green algae layers are completely invisible to infrared, which makes it possible to record the paintings underneath them. Nevertheless, thick layers of bio deterioration generated by the superimposition of several species, are only partially penetrated in infrared photography.Infrared light cannot go through soil deposits in most of the cases, so that any underlying paintings are not recorded correctly. In any case, the density of the layer is essential: in cases of loose soil, visibility improves.The use of red filters (less dense) to partially block visible light has enabled us to determine the scope and the limits of the different areas affected by abundant biological colonisation (algae and mosses), characterised by their blackish tones. Thus, it is possible to differentiate the aforementioned alteration from those areas in which we can find black paint.We must also consider the relative visibility/invisibility of the different paint colours when observed in infrared photography–In general, the recording of red and black pigments is good when there exists a white bottom layer (kaolin).Black pigments are always recorded with great sharpness. This colour absorbs an important amount of IR radiation, as with visible light. Visualisation is very precise, so the results we obtain are, in general, very clarifying. On the contrary, other colours (such as red) are completely reflected, which increases the contrast between the black pigment and the rest. From our own experience, we can say that only the presence of a black pigment acting as a contrast (and control) element will enable us to make a right assessment of the success or the failure of the validity of the IR image.Red pigments are not recorded perfectly in IR photography, since the reflectance which is produced by such pigments is very low, so they become practically invisible if there does not exist a white underlying layer or a thick paint layer. In relation to this, results have revealed a general improvement in sharpness.Finally, in the few cases where we find white pigments, the visibility of the latter is enhanced due to contrast with the dark colour of the bottom stone.IR techniques (as well as UV ones) are not interested in large photo frames (whole orthostats, in our case) when their objective is to identify, record and document hardly visible or even invisible paintings. In the latter case it is necessary to achieve a certain degree of detail to ensure that the infrared image can provide useful information. We have established an area of approximately 40×30cm2. This means that, using a lens of 50mm, images are taken at a distance of no more than 90cm from the object to be photographed. Next, with the aid of photogrammetric techniques, we will create mosaics by putting together several photographs in order to obtain large surfaces. We used this technique for generating IR photographs after cleaning the orthostats of the monument of Monte dos Marxos. The results we obtained complemented –and, in many cases, improved – those achieved through conventional photography, “cleaning up” all superficial deposits (Fig. 12).Ultraviolet (from now on, UV) radiation is defined as the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum between X-rays and visible light (from 400nm to 10nm). Among the different regions which can be distinguished in the UV, we will use the near UV (UV-A) for photography work (from 400nm to 320nm). Ultraviolet light – commonly known as “black light” – is generated with the aid of special fluorescent lamps which are covered with a violet glass called “Wood׳s glass”, which blocks most visible light over 400nm (hence these sources are also called “Wood׳s lamps”).When absorbed by materials, UV radiation becomes visible due to fluorescence, that is, a substance׳s capacity of immediately emitting light as a result of exposure to certain radiation (ultraviolet, cathode rays, X-rays etc.). The absorbed radiations are transformed into visible light, whose wavelength is longer than the incident radiation. The effect of UV fluorescence depends on the chemical nature of certain materials. This especially applies to organic matter, which explains why this system is now widespread in the study of art, in which fluorescence is particularly useful when there is some kind of varnish, binder, repainting, etc.We can distinguish two different photographic methods which use the same kind of light but a different filter. Results will be thus different•Ultraviolet fluorescence photography is a technique through which we record the fluorescence caused by different materials when illuminated with an ultraviolet light source. Colour intensity and hue will depend not only on technical factors, but also on the characteristics of the binder, the pigments and any physical and biological alterations that materials might have experienced with the passage of time. This is the technique that has been used in the present study.UV reflection photography records the ultraviolet radiation which is reflected by materials; this results in gaining more information about the texture and the relief of the motif that we are studying. For using this technique, it is necessary to consider, apart from the spectrum of emission of the ultraviolet radiation source, the sensitivity of the camera׳s sensor and the lens׳ transmittance.To use ultraviolet fluorescence photography techniques, we need the following equipment (Fig. 13):It is possible to use black light fluorescent tubes99Sylvania Blacklight Blue UV tubes.(emission peak: 360nm), which are very efficient because of their low price and their considerable durability. If using an electronic flash, it will need some manipulation, since it barely emits UV with its default settings. Using a flash is very advantageous, since exposure times are noticeably reduced.Finally, it is essential to ensure that there are no other kinds of light in the workplace, since this would obviously affect the results we obtain.We can use a conventional camera, since the image is generated because of the fact that certain materials can turn invisible radiation into visible light.In order to record UV fluorescence, we will need to use a UV blocking filter aimed at eliminating UV excitation radiation and to capture only visible light in the sensor. It should be noted that a B+W 486 UV–IR CUT filter could be used for this purpose; nevertheless, this filter can produce fluorescence too, what results in yellowish tones and a reduction of the contrast. Therefore, it seems more advisable to opt for a Baader UV–IR reflection filter, which has proven to be very effective and also fluorescence-free.This technique is difficult to use in the field (it is necessary to mount a camera obscura in the dolmens or to take the photographs at night). It is advisable to test each substance to check whether it produces fluorescence or not and at what wavelength this happens. Here are some tips derived from our own experience(Fig. 14)–Damage, disaggregation and areas in which part of the paint is missing on the original surface are clearly observed, no matter if we resort to fluorescence or to darkening. It should be noted that the state of the original surface is recorded in more detail when using this technique instead of conventional photography.In the case of bio deterioration organisms, they produce fluorescence if they are active: red (algae) or white (lichens). Recording the scope and intensity of biological colonisation is very useful for creating alteration maps.As for pigments, we appreciate no difference: red and black do not produce any fluorescence; they can actually be confused.It is important to mention that the existence of kaolin is easy to demarcate. The slight fluorescence produced by this clay enables us to perfectly visualise not only its existence but also its distribution and amount depending on the specific area we are studying. We have found out that different levels of thickness in these white layers correspond to different levels of fluorescence intensity, which provides us with very useful information.According to the definition provided by the ISPRS (International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing),1010This definition has been obtained from Statute II of the ISPRS (International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing).Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing is “the art, science, and technology of obtaining reliable information from non-contact imaging and other sensor systems about the Earth and its environment, and other physical objects and processes through recording, measuring, analysing and representation”. It can also be defined as the group of methods and procedures which enable us to infer the shape and dimensions of an object from its photograph (Santamaría and Sanz, 2011).This technique has often been used in immovable cultural heritage documentation tasks for years; nevertheless, it has been hardly applied to the field of archaeology and, more particularly, to that of rock art. Indeed, only the recent evolution of these techniques has increased their application to rock art, due to the development of low-cost systems that, in many cases, make it possible for a non-expert user to obtain a photogrammetric mapping in a relatively short period of time.There are a number of advantages to the application of this technique to rock art (megalithic art, in this case). The main advantage is that this is an indirect technique: measures are taken from the images of the object, therefore, physical contact with it is not needed, which prevents the decorated surface from being damaged or contaminated in any ways.Moreover, it is a very flexible system: fieldwork is quickly carried out, so that it does not condition any other interventions or tasks that may be needed in the site. The use of this technique does not require very specific equipment (only a camera and software), so that it is an affordable method. Besides, the fact that only a photo camera is needed for undertaking fieldwork makes it a very versatile system when it comes to registering remote or hard-to-access sites.Finally, the technical specifications of most of the available software make it an easy-to-use system for those with basic notions of photogrammetry: its employment requires a basic learning, but not strong knowledge of very technical concepts; therefore, we can consider that all these tools are accessible to any researcher or professional who works in the field of archaeology.A number of photogrammetry software packages are currently available. These programmes can be found at various costs (even for free) and their use is relatively simple. As for rock art documentation, the literature usually refers us to the employment of two essential programmes: Agisoft Photoscan – developed by the Russian company Agisoft LLC- and Photomodeler Scanner – developed by the Canadian firm Eos Systems Inc. Both pieces of software enable us to obtain, relatively quickly, high-quality textured 3D models through automatic correlation. In the case of Agisoft Photoscan, the model-generation process is very fast and simple, while using Photomodeler requires higher technical skills as workflow is more complex. However, Photomodeler is not only more inexpensive and functional, but also more versatile when it comes to controlling the resulting point cloud, since it allows us to take part in the process by correcting the residual error of the points from which the cloud is calculated, as a result of the combination of photogrammetric methods and automatic correlation algorithms.Despite the fact that both software products have proved to be effective in the field in which we are working (Plets et al., 2012; Tejerina et al., 2012), we will describe the procedure with Photomodeler Scanner 2012.0.0. Using this programme, the photogrammetric recovery process is divided into three stages: camera calibration, photo shooting and image processing.The photographs to be used for recovery must be taken with a calibrated camera, since we do not know their internal geometry. According to the manufacturer itself, camera calibration is the process of finding the true parameters of the camera that took your photographs. In order to do this, it is necessary to take some photographs of the calibration grid that is included in the software. This is a sheet which contains 100 points (four of which are control points) that we must photograph from different angles so that, once the images have been introduced in the programme, we can obtain the parameters of the internal orientation of the camera (such as focal length, lens distortion, format size and principal point).Despite its simplicity, this step is probably the most important in the whole process, since it has a strong influence on the subsequent working phases. It is necessary to take several photographs of the object, by moving the camera after each shot so as to obtain several overlapping photographs that are at right angles to the relevant surface. All the features of the object we intend to represent must appear in at least three photographs. Therefore, it is highly advisable to plan everything in advance, including the design of a scheme that indicates the number of photographs needed and the different angles from which they should be taken. This step will ensure not only better final results, but also a noticeable reduction in the total time we need to create our 3D model.When taking the photographs, it is vital to consider the following parameters, as they will influence the next stage (image processing):•Appropriate lighting conditions: light should be as flat and uniform as possible in order to avoid glare, shadows, etc. This is the most complicated task to undertake when working on the interior of megaliths, as it is very complicated to find a stable lighting system that guarantees nothing will cast a shadow on the surface to be photographed.Camera: we can use either fixed-focal length or zoom lenses (provided, in the second case, that the same position is kept).Tripod: its use is highly advisable, as it prevents camera movement and provides stability, avoiding blur and enhancing image quality.Depth of field: a high depth of field is necessary in order to avoid blur.Overlapping: photographs should be overlapped at 60% (minimum) or, ideally, at 80% (Ruíz et al., 2013).The first step to be taken for the photogrammetric reconstruction of the object is image orientation, in other words, to choose at least six points that are common in the photographs and reference them – this is to identify analogous points, telling the programme which points are the same in each of the images – after which Photomodeler will carry out the relative positioning of the photographs by calculating the positions of the camera in the space. It is essential to ensure that the location of these points is as precise as possible, so we frequently resort to the placement of coded targets on the surface of the object to be recorded. These targets are automatically identified by the software. Nevertheless, given that the indirect nature of this technique is considered vital to guarantee the harmlessness of the action and the stability of the paintings, we have decided to work with natural targets, that is to identify manually natural marks on the object that are easy to recognise in all of the pictures.It is important to point out that Photomodeler includes a tool – SmartMatch – that automatically identifies equivalent points. The final quality of the products obtained through this tool is good, but inferior to the projects where there has been a manual control of the quality (residual error) of the control points from which the point cloud will be generated. Once images orientation and point referencing processes have been completed, we proceed to create the point cloud by means of a MVS algorithm. In order to achieve this, it is necessary to select pairs of photographs from which it is possible to obtain such cloud by comparing pixels in the images.The results obtained with Photomodeler will depend on the following factors:•Right camera calibration: error values must be inferior to 1.00 in the whole project and less than 0.5 in the residual error.Quality of the camera and image resolution.Camera positions when taking the photographs.Number of photographs in which we can find the referenced points.Precision in the positioning of the control points (the points that are used to orient images). This factor will be dependent on our drawing skills and, more particularly, on the quality and the resolution of the photographs, which will ease or complicate noticeably point positioning.Control point distribution: ideally, they should be evenly distributed over the object׳s surface.When processing images, Photomodeler uses some of these factors (number and distribution of points, angle from which the images have been taken, number of images, etc.) to calculate how exact the resulting model is. By doing this, if we consider that the level of accuracy is not enough, we can not only add or remove images but also correct manually the positioning of the points until the error is reduced.The photogrammetric reconstruction process herein explained enables us to obtain three kinds of products:They have a high point density and a great measurement quality.Although this software includes a specific orthophotograph creation option, its results are not satisfactory when we intend to record complex “organic” forms (like in the case of megalithic art). However, the quality of our orthophotos can be easily improved with the aid of a simple snapshot of the point cloud, oriented in the most appropriate plane. This system will be used for developing the methodology we suggest (Cortón et al., 2013).With this term we refer to a drawing of the outlines of the orthostats, including fissures, fractures and any other relevant morphological features. These planimetries can be made directly with Photomodeler by marking and referencing all those features that we desire to reconstruct (a laborious process), but we can also use AutoCAD to “trace” directly whatever we want to recover from the orthophotos, given the high measurement quality of the latter.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The consolidation of this methodology, which has been widely tested, is a fact. Nonetheless, it is still susceptible to adjustments and improvements. Indeed, other authors in this issue suggest interesting solutions – especially in the digital processing stage – in order to perfect and improve this proposal.There is not a unique model: all of them have their advantages and disadvantages, and they are usually adapted to the specific conditions of the rock art site to be recorded. To deal with megalithic art, we have had to experiment with special photography techniques which enabled us to record in more detail not only art but also – and equally important– its state of preservation.The method we propose enhances the quality of the recording and shows invisible and deteriorated items. Its results will depend on the nature and composition of both the hidden items and those that conceal them: black pigments (as we knew) are accurately recorded in infrared; red pigments are greatly intensified by using a polarised light; kaolin is improved with ultraviolet radiation. Naturally, this does not mean that we are talking about a “miraculous” method that can work in every situation: very deep deposits or a very high level of bio deterioration can prevent it from individualising, penetrating or showing the rock art we wish to record.As for the problems we are most concerned about, we understand that there is still a long way to go in image recording in non-visible wavelength: reflectography equipment is an interesting option (Falcone et al., 2007) and, most importantly, a better and more spread application of multispectral cameras (Liang, 2012) will be very useful when recording hidden paint layers.Beyond all this, the combination of both photography and digital processing techniques achieves exhaustive, precise results. The resulting documentation is interesting, as it represents a combination of techniques that generates a multiform, dynamic final product. These features have enabled us to obtain, as previously stated, graphic products related to art preservation and to the creation of materials intended for promotion.