@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Online self-help for suicidal thoughts: 3-month follow-up results and participant evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three-month follow-up results for first RCT into online self-help for suicidal thoughts.Effects from post-test were generally maintained at follow-up for intervention group.Evaluation indicates that online self-help for suicidal thoughts is acceptable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Suicidal thoughts,Self-help,Internet,Follow-up,Evaluation,Cognitive behavioral therapy,Online,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAs a substantial proportion of people with suicidal thoughts does not receive treatment, the internet can be a utilized to reach more people who need support.AimsTo examine maintenance of effects of online self-help for suicidal thoughts at 3-month follow-up within the intervention group of a randomized controlled trial (of which between-group 6-week post-test results have previously been reported, showing a small effect of 0.28 for suicidal thoughts in favour of the intervention group), and to investigate acceptability of the intervention through participant evaluation.Methods236 adults with mild to moderate suicidal thoughts were randomized to the intervention (n=116) or a waitlist control group (n=120). Assessments took place at baseline, post-test (6weeks later), and follow-up (3months after post-test). This paper reports on the intervention group and follow-up assessment only.ResultsEffects established at 6-week post-test were generally maintained at 3-month follow-up in the intervention group. Participant evaluation revealed that a majority thought their suicidal thoughts had decreased during the study, that adherence to the intervention was below average, and that levels of satisfaction were acceptable.LimitationsThe control group could not serve as a comparator as they had received access to the intervention at post-test.ConclusionsEffects of online self-help for suicidal thoughts can be maintained for up to three months. Participant evaluation indicated that online self-help for suicidal thoughts is acceptable, but there is also room for improvement.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The internet is increasingly used to deliver interventions in mental healthcare and web-based programmes for a range of mental health problems such as depression, anxiety and problem drinking have been found to be effective (e.g. Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Andrews et al., 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2009; Riper et al., 2007). In the field of suicide prevention, there is growing interest in online suicide-related communications and content (e.g. Kemp and Collings, 2011), and prevention efforts (e.g. Barak, 2007; Mokkenstorm et al., 2010; Mishara and Kerkhof, 2013). As a substantial portion of people with suicidal thoughts does not receive treatment (Bruffaerts et al., 2011), it is a promising means to reach more people. Still, very few effectiveness studies have been conducted in online suicide prevention (Pietrzak and McLaughlin, 2009; Luxton et al., 2011; Christensen et al., 2013; Watts et al., 2012).A review into traditional face-to-face treatment for people with suicidal thoughts shows that cognitive behaviour interventions such as cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) can be effective and that treatment effect persists up to two years (Tarrier et al., 2008). Other cognitive based therapies that have some evidence for reducing suicidal thoughts include mindfulness based cognitive therapy (MBCT) (Forkmann et al., 2014) and problem solving therapy (PST) (Brown and Jager-Hyman, 2014).A randomized controlled trial (RCT) recently conducted in the Netherlands found significant effects at 6-week post-test in favour of online self-help for people with suicidal thoughts compared with a waitlisted information control group (between-group effect size 0.28 for suicidal thoughts) (van Spijker et al., 2014). In addition, the programme was found to be cost-effective (van Spijker et al., 2012). The current paper presents the 3-month follow-up results for this trial. It is important to note that the control group was provided with access to the self-help programme at 6-week post-test, making between group comparisons at this final 3-month follow-up impossible. Follow-up data reported here therefore only pertain to the intervention group participants and maintenance of their results 3months after post-test. It is expected that their results will persist at final follow-up, as benefits of web-based treatments for depression and anxiety generally seem to be maintained at follow-up (Andrews et al., 2010). In addition, this paper describes the results of the participant evaluation that was part of the 3-month follow-up questionnaires. This may provide insight into utilization, reasons for non-adherence, perceived helpfulness, and satisfaction of online self-help for suicidal thoughts. Moreover, it may indicate potential areas for improvement.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
