@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
AstroTaverna—Building workflows with Virtual Observatory services

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
AstroTaverna is a plugin we developed for the Taverna workflow management system.It integrates VO web services as first-class building blocks in Taverna scientific workflows.Digital capture of otherwise lost procedural steps, manually performed in GUIs, is now possible.Integration of STIL Tool Set, Aladin VO software and SAMP-compliant astronomy tools.It allows enhanced documentation and comprehensive view of automated digital VO recipes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual observatories,Astroinformatics,Methods: miscellaneous,Astronomical databases: miscellaneous,E-Science,Scientific workflows,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent decades Astronomy has witnessed the development of instrumentation performing observations of the sky across the full range of the electromagnetic spectrum. The advent of automated survey facilities has dramatically increased the number of archival datasets and transformed the approach to deal with key science topics, now potentially benefitting from seamless access to interoperable multi-wavelength data. The International Virtual Observatory Alliance22http://www.ivoa.net/.(IVOA) was created with the goal of developing standards and their implementations for exchange of astronomical data, and maintaining registries of data repositories and services. The Virtual Observatory (VO) provides a way to transparently access and extract scientific knowledge from multiple archives of astronomical data, enabling standardized services discovery and access to interoperable data. It consists of a network of web-distributed data services which provides free access to astronomical catalogs, images and spectrum data, that combined with tools for local visualization and analysis (VO Apps) allow astronomers to graphically explore the different datasets, all following IVOA recommendations.VO Apps are any kind of local software able to access the elements of the VO data network, following IVOA protocols, and sometimes permitting discovery of services available in the VO Registry (Benson and Walton, 2009) in order to provide the users with their datasets of interest. Current VO Apps are mainly of two-kinds: general purpose software for accessing a particular kind of data (catalogs, images, or spectra); and custom-built programs and scripts created by astronomers in order to perform their scientific research. Both mechanisms are typically used together for a science use case, with the user performing each step with different tools. This means that, in order to register the fully procedural protocol so it can be reproduced and possibly encapsulated in a more complex process, the user needs to manually capture the dependencies between steps, which is currently accomplished by writing scripts driving the execution of other tools or scripts.Digital scientific workflows (Gil et al., 2007; Gil and Rey, 2008) allow capturing the actions performed in accessing distributed data, their aggregation and analysis using third-party services, as they identify and record the provenance leading to the final obtained results. They facilitate the means to come up with in silico reproducible research, that can be shared, executed or even modified by other scientists in the community. Workflows provide a comprehensive explicit exploratory view of the scientific protocol, while being at the same time the precise and well-codified description needed by the underlying engine to execute the whole multi-step process. Unlike traditional pipelines, which tend to produce scientifically exploitable data, most of the scientific workflows are aimed at producing scientific insight.Taverna33http://www.taverna.org.uk/.(Wolstencroft et al., 2013) is an open source, domain-independent scientific workflow management system that has grown popular in fields like bioinformatics, chemistry, text mining, and image analysis. It is a suite of tools including Taverna Workbench, a desktop client application used to graphically design, create, edit and execute scientific workflows. Taverna workflows can also be executed on the command line or on an installation of the Taverna Server.The Taverna Workbench is specially designed to combine distributed web services and local tools into complex workflows, the basics building blocks of VO-services-based scientific workflows. It also integrates workflow discovery and publishing through dedicated UI for access to the myExperiment44http://www.myexperiment.org/.(Goble et al., 2010) public digital library of workflows. Moreover, its plugin architecture allows loose integration and open-source developments of plugins, decoupled from core developments of Taverna Workbench.In this paper we present AstroTaverna, a plugin that simplifies the use of VO services from within the Taverna Workbench 2.x, by providing VO-service discovery facilities, and building blocks for VO data access and manipulation. AstroTaverna provides astronomers with the means to compose scientific workflows of standardized VO-services, together with existing local and distributed tools. In Section  2 we provide a very brief overview of workflow-related initiatives we are aware of in Astronomy. In Section  3 we describe the Taverna Workbench and the main VO architectural elements taken into account in the implementation of AstroTaverna. In Section  4 we provide a description of the functional drivers that led the developments of AstroTaverna as well as its main features, illustrating them all with an example use case. In Section  5 we provide a discussion on the impact of the use of workflows in the community in the context of the results issued from AstroTaverna developments, as well as future plans for its dissemination and improvements. Finally, in Section  6 the main conclusions of the exposed work are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented AstroTaverna, a plugin for Taverna Workbench 2.x that provides the means to build astronomy web services-based workflows upon VO services discovery and VOTable efficient manipulation. It integrates SAMP-enabled VO Apps, as well as the possibility to execute Aladin scripts and macros. The plugin is easy to install for any user and operating system, installation instructions may be found in the AstroTaverna Website (see footnote 30). The plugin has been illustrated with a specific use case that considers a workflow making use of local services for VO data gathering, manipulation, transformation and inspection.AstroTaverna enables astronomers to capture, in a digital reproducible workflow, the experimental protocol and provenance information otherwise lost in procedural steps manually performed in GUIs of VO Apps. A collection of workflow snippets has been produced with the name of AstroTaverna Starter Pack (see footnote 25) in order to encourage self-learning by example and avoid reinvention.Future work considers providing support for discovery and execution of TAP services, a client for PDL self-described services that will allow data input validation before service invocation, and the possibility to execute AstroTaverna workflows in the Taverna Server, as well as handling potential multiple endpoints for a VO service in the discovery process.