@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The impact of telephone versus e-mail therapist guidance on treatment outcomes, therapeutic alliance and treatment engagement in Internet-delivered CBT for depression: A randomised pilot trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Individuals with depression received Internet-delivered CBT.Therapist guidance was delivered either via telephone (n=19) or e-mail (n=19).Groups showed equal, large symptom reduction.Groups showed equal therapeutic (working) alliance and treatment engagement.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Depression,Therapist guided,Cognitive behavioral therapy,Internet intervention,Telephone,E-mail,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundInternet-administered cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) is an effective treatment of depression, yet much remains to be learned about the specific mechanisms influencing symptom reduction. Although previous research has consistently shown that therapist-guided iCBT is more effective than unguided iCBT, it is unknown whether the medium used for therapist-client communication has an impact on results.MethodsThirty-eight subjects with major depression were recruited from the waiting list of another iCBT study and randomised to a guided iCBT program with therapist guidance either by telephone calls (n=19) or e-mail correspondence (n=19). Outcome measures were self-rated measures of depression, anxiety and quality of life.ResultsAt post-treatment, both groups showed significant and large symptom reductions yet did not differ from each other. Neither was there any between-group difference in client-rated therapeutic alliance or treatment engagement. Symptom reductions were maintained at a three-month follow-up.ConclusionTherapist guidance by telephone does not appear to differ from therapist guidance by e-mail in iCBT for depression, although further research featuring larger samples is necessary to draw more definite conclusions.Trial registration: None

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Accumulating evidence shows that Internet-delivered self-help based on cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) (Andersson, 2009) is an effective treatment of depression (Richards and Richardson, 2012; Titov, 2011), somatic disorders (Cuijpers et al., 2008) and a range of anxiety disorders (Andersson et al., 2013a). The addition of a therapist to guide the client through the self-help program has been shown to yield greater effects (Johansson and Andersson, 2012; Newman et al., 2011; Palmqvist et al., 2007; Spek et al., 2007), equal in size to traditional face-to-face CBT (Andersson et al., 2013b, in press; Cuijpers et al., 2010). The mechanisms behind these effects have not been the subject of much research and remain largely unknown (Andersson et al., 2009). In particular, much remains to be learned regarding what specific aspects of the therapist-client interaction that influence treatment outcomes in iCBT. Recent iCBT research has investigated the effect of the amount, intensity and content of the therapist support (Bendelin et al., 2011; Paxling et al., 2012; Titov, 2011; Titov et al., 2010), the potential added benefit of additional telephone support (Andersson et al., 2003) and the development of a therapeutic alliance (TA) (Andersson et al., 2012; Bergman Nordgren et al., 2013; Jasper et al., 2014). To our knowledge, no previous study on depression has directly investigated the potential impact of the medium by which the therapist-client communication is provided in iCBT, e.g. via telephone or e-mail. Nor has there been any meta-analysis published directly comparing these two ways of delivering therapist guidance. Hence, it is currently unknown whether the therapist-client communication medium influences treatment outcomes.Although there is scarce prior research to motivate a hypothesis of superiority of one specific type of communication medium, equality cannot be assumed. Communication via telephone is more similar to traditional, face-to-face CBT and may be experienced by some as more personal, thereby possibly aiding the formation of a therapeutic alliance and indirectly influencing symptom reduction. Communicating via e-mail, on the other hand, allows for more time to reflect upon content and to formulate thoughts and feelings into comprehensible words, which are some of the goals and assumed therapeutic mechanisms of all psychotherapy. Thus, both communication formats have inherent benefits of importance for symptom reduction. We hypothesised that real-time feedback and therapist contact over the telephone would be more beneficial than asynchronous e-mail contact in part due to the telephone calls requiring scheduling and that they would thus be less easy to avoid and postpone compared to reading the e-mail feedback. Indeed, there is some evidence that scheduled support boosts treatment effects (Kenwright et al., 2005). If guidance by telephone would be found superior to guidance by e-mail, this would have great implications for the design, implementation and effectiveness of future iCBT interventions. Here, we report a pilot randomised trial designed to investigate this question.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results of this pilot study suggest that in Internet-delivered, therapist-guided cognitive behavioural therapy for depression, therapist guidance by telephone appears to be equal to therapist guidance by e-mail with regards to symptom reduction, therapeutic alliance and patient-rated treatment engagement. Further research using larger samples and additional clinical populations is required to conclude what aspects of therapist guidance influence treatment outcomes.