@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effectiveness of internet cognitive behaviour therapy (iCBT) for social anxiety disorder across two routine practice pathways

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
iCBT for social anxiety has demonstrated efficacy in research trials, but effectiveness data are needed.We evaluated iCBT when delivered via two clinical pathways (N=560).Symptom reductions occurred for patients guided by both primary care and specialist practitioners.iCBT can be effectively implemented into routine practice.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet therapy,Internet cognitive behavioural therapy,iCBT,Social anxiety,Social phobia,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is a common, chronic and disabling mental disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT) is a highly effective treatment of SAD and internet CBT (iCBT) offers a cost-effective and convenient alternative to face to face approaches, with high fidelity and demonstrated efficacy. The aim of the current paper was to evaluate the effectiveness of an iCBT programme for SAD (The This Way Up Clinic Shyness Programme) when delivered in routine practice through two different pathways. Patients in the prescription pathway (Study 1, N=368, 50% female, mean age=34) were ‘prescribed’ the Shyness Programme by a registered practitioner of the This Way Up Clinic who supervised their progress throughout the programme. Patients in the referral pathway (Study 2, N=192, 50% female, mean age=36) were referred to the This Way Up Clinic and supervised by a specialist CBT clinician at the clinic. Intention-to-treat marginal model analyses demonstrated significant reductions in primary outcomes of social anxiety symptoms (Mini-SPIN) and psychological distress (K10), corresponding to large effect sizes (Cohen's d=.82–1.09, 95% CIs .59–1.31) and secondary outcomes of impairment (WHODAS-II) and depressive symptoms (PHQ9), corresponding to small effect sizes (Cohen's d=.36–.46, 95% CIs .19–.68) for patients in both pathways. Results provide evidence of the effectiveness of iCBT for social anxiety disorder when delivered in routine practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Social anxiety disorder (SAD), characterized by an excessive fear of negative evaluation or judgement (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), is one of the most common mental disorders with lifetime prevalence rates estimated at 12.1% (Kessler et al., 2005). SAD is characterized by an early onset and chronic course, and is associated with significant distress and impairment (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Moreover, a majority of individuals with SAD also experience comorbid mental health concerns such as depression, which is associated with increased distress, impairment and risk of suicide (Ruscio et al., 2008). Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) has shown to be highly effective in the treatment of SAD and is recommended as a first line treatment of choice in clinical guidelines (Pilling et al., 2013). Meta-analyses of CBT for SAD report controlled medium to large effect sizes of Cohen's d=0.70–0.86 (Acarturk et al., 2009; Powers et al., 2008). Although effective treatments exist, less than half of sufferers seek treatment (Crome et al., 2014; Gross et al., 2005; Issakidis and Andrews, 2002). An even smaller proportion (about 24%) receives minimally adequate treatment (Issakidis and Andrews, 2002). Access to treatment is further reduced amongst individuals in rural areas, in individuals with low income, in ethnic minorities, and in individuals over 60years of age (Wang et al., 2005).One cost-effective and pragmatic means of increasing the quality of treatment available and the reach to under-serviced populations is through the use of internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) programmes. Internet-based treatment affords many benefits over the traditional face-to-face modality, such as high fidelity, greater accessibility, convenience, and reduced cost to patients (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009). In addition, internet-based interventions may have specific advantages for patients with SAD when considering the specific fears that characterize the disorder (e.g., fear of revealing information or interacting directly with a therapist). Several international research groups have been instrumental in the development and evaluation of iCBT for social anxiety (Andersson et al., 2006; Berger et al., 2009; Titov et al., 2008c) and randomized controlled trials document the efficacy of these (and similar) programmes for SAD (see Andersson et al., 2014). In a review of 21 studies (N=1801) of both guided and unguided iCBT, large within-group effect sizes and superiority over both waitlist and active control comparators were reported (Boettcher et al., 2013). Treatment gains have been maintained when measured from 3months to 5years post-treatment with mean pre-to-follow-up medium to large effect sizes (d=.64–1.67) (Hedman et al., 2011b). Evidence also suggests that iCBT can produce comparable effect sizes to best-practice face-to-face CBT (Andrews et al., 2011; Hedman et al., 2011a).The next step is to move beyond evaluations of feasibility and efficacy to demonstrate that iCBT for SAD can be effectively delivered in routine healthcare settings. Initial evaluation data supports the effectiveness of iCBT when incorporated into routine practice (Andersson and Hedman, 2013; Hedman et al., 2013, 2014; Mewton et al., 2012; Newby et al., 2014; Williams and Andrews, 2013). To add to the body of effectiveness literature, in the current studies we investigated outcomes of our iCBT programme for SAD when delivered to patients in routine practice via two separate pathways: when supervised by primary care practitioners in the community and when supervised by specialist clinicians.11The Clinical Research Unit for Anxiety and Depression (CRUfAD), a not-for-profit joint initiative of the University of New South Wales and St. Vincent's Hospital, in Sydney, Australia operates an internet-based clinical service known as This Way Up Clinic (https://thiswayup.org.au/clinic/). We provide iCBT programmes for anxiety disorders and depression for patients to access under the supervision of a registered practitioner of the service (see Andrews and Williams, in press for details on this clinical service).In both pathways, patients were treated as part of routine clinical care and a clinical audit was conducted to determine outcomes in these patients. In the first pathway, patients who presented to primary care clinicians (e.g., doctor or psychologist) who were existing users of our online service were directly prescribed the SAD iCBT course and supervised by their primary care clinician. In the second pathway, patients were referred for assessment and treatment by their primary care clinician, and supervised by a clinician based at our university hospital clinic, where we have been using iCBT as part of routine care for several years (see the Method section below for additional details). We predicted significant reductions in core symptoms of social anxiety, psychological distress, disability and comorbid depressive symptoms when iCBT was delivered in both treatment pathways.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The current study provides evidence of the effectiveness of an internet-based CBT (iCBT) programme for Social Anxiety Disorder when delivered in routine practice via two separate care pathways. Intention-to-treat analyses demonstrated that the Shyness Programme is effective in reducing social anxiety symptoms, distress, impairment, and depressive symptoms when delivered in routine practice. Symptom reduction corresponded to small to large effect sizes, irrespective of whether clinical guidance was provided by general practitioners or specialty-trained CBT clinicians. These results complement initial findings of the transferability of iCBT effects from controlled trials and provide encouraging support for the integration of iCBT for social anxiety in routine care. Programme adherence in the current investigation (52% in the prescription pathway; 59% in the referral pathway) was consistent with average completion rates for our depression — 55% (Williams and Andrews, 2013), GAD — 55% (Mewton et al., 2012) and transdiagnostic — 47% (Newby et al., 2014) iCBT programmes when delivered in routine care. Although this rate aligns with median completion rates (56%) reported in a meta-analysis of computerised CBT (Waller and Gilbody, 2010), identifying moderators of adherence should be a focus of future research in order to improve uptake of the full treatment package. Our research group has previously demonstrated that much of the therapeutic benefit (as indexed by psychological distress — K10 scores) is achieved by completion of Lesson 4 of our iCBT programmes (see Sunderland et al., 2012). However, as relapse prevention is presented in the final Lesson (and is arguably a core component of CBT), we would encourage adherence to the full programme to ensure exposure to all active treatment ingredients.The current findings should be considered in light of the limitations of the naturalistic design. Data were collected to ensure ongoing quality assurance and therefore measures were limited to validated questionnaires that imposed minimal response burden on the patient while facilitating interpretation on the part of the supervising practitioner. The Mini-SPIN was designed to screen for individuals with social anxiety disorder in primary care, psychiatric, and other medical settings where brevity in assessment is crucial. Although brief, the Mini-SPIN does demonstrate sensitivity to treatment effects and correlates well with more comprehensive social anxiety measures (Seeley-Wait et al., 2009). Further, the Mini-SPIN has demonstrated good discriminant validity to distinguish individuals with SAD from those without SAD, covering avoidance of speaking or performing activities (Connor et al., 2001). In the absence of a structured diagnostic assessment, we cannot be assured that all patients met full diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder. However recent evidence from our research group suggests that outcomes following iCBT are similar whether patients are assessed by a specialist psychiatrist or are screened for suitability based on an automated questionnaire battery (Mason and Andrews, in press).As data were collected in the context of routine clinical practice and there was no comparison group, the effects of natural remission or placebo response over the programme access period (typically 3months) cannot be separated from response to the specific treatment. Further, we did not assess outcomes beyond the treatment period, therefore it is unknown whether gains were maintained over time. It is also important to note that we did not collect information on medication use. It is possible that a proportion of patients would have also been prescribed medication; however clinical guidelines (e.g., NICE, 2013) only recommend pharmacological interventions after non-response to recommended psychological therapies. Effectiveness research is aimed at evaluating the feasibility, acceptability, and effectiveness of treatments in environments where most patients will be treated (Roy-Byrne et al., 2003). We are confident that the current results reflect routine practice of one form of iCBT delivery currently operating in Australia. Future research should explore the feasibility of delivering iCBT in a range of health care settings to maximize uptake by individuals who may be particularly resistant to traditional treatment options.