@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Self-supervised, mobile-application based cognitive training of auditory attention: A behavioral and fMRI evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mobile devices are feasible platforms for self-supervised cognitive training.Mobile cognitive training increases performance in selective auditory attention.Mobile cognitive training induces neural plasticity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile application,Self-supervised,Cognitive training,Auditory attention,Dichotic listening,Neural plasticity,fMRI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Emerging evidence of the validity of collecting data in natural settings using smartphone applications has opened new possibilities for psychological assessment, treatment, and research. In this study we explored the feasibility and effectiveness of using a mobile application for self-supervised training of auditory attention. In addition, we investigated the neural underpinnings of the training procedure with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), as well as possible transfer effects to untrained cognitive interference tasks. Subjects in the training group performed the training task on an iPod touch two times a day (morning/evening) for three weeks; subjects in the control group received no training, but were tested at the same time interval as the training group. Behavioral responses were measured before and after the training period in both groups, together with measures of task-related neural activations by fMRI. The results showed an expected performance increase after training that corresponded to activation decreases in brain regions associated with selective auditory processing (left posterior temporal gyrus) and executive functions (right middle frontal gyrus), indicating more efficient processing in task-related neural networks after training. Our study suggests that cognitive training delivered via mobile applications is feasible and improves the ability to focus attention with corresponding effects on neural plasticity. Future research should focus on the clinical benefits of mobile cognitive training. Limitations of the study are discussed including reduced experimental control and lack of transfer effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In health and sickness, humans are preoccupied with their cognitive abilities and programs have been developed to train these abilities (Berry et al., 2010; Fisher et al., 2010; Kesler et al., 2013; Klingberg et al., 2005). However, many training programs are impracticable since participants need to visit the laboratory or have to sit behind a personal computer. Mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, iPod touches), on the other hand, offer greater flexibility for self-supervised training, allowing the individual to train his/her cognitive abilities at any time or location (e.g., on the bus, in a café, at the hospital) and without direct supervision. Although, in recent years, mobile devices have found their way into psychological research, allowing for the collection of self-administered experimental data in real-life settings (e.g., Bless et al., 2013b; Dufau et al., 2011; Killingsworth and Gilbert, 2010, for a review, see Miller, 2012), little is known about the applicability of these devices for training of cognitive functions.The aim of the present study was to assess the feasibility of using a mobile application for self-supervised training of attention in healthy individuals. For this purpose, we have developed a mobile auditory attention training application for the iPhone/iPod touch, which is based on the forced-attention conditions of the consonant–vowel dichotic listening (CV-DL) paradigm (Hugdahl, 2003; Hugdahl and Andersson, 1986), and which has been validated in a previous study (Bless et al., 2013b). This paradigm requires participants to focus attention on syllables played in the right ear or left ear, while ignoring those played simultaneously in the other ear. In general, when confronted with two speech sounds at the same time, individuals tend to report the right-ear stimulus more often than the left-ear stimulus (e.g., Bryden, 1988; Hugdahl, 1995; Kimura, 1967), a phenomenon termed right-ear advantage (Shankweiler and Studdert-Kennedy, 1967). Thus, attending to and reporting the left-ear stimulus is considered to be more difficult than attending to and reporting the right-ear stimulus, posing different processing demands on auditory attention and cognitive control (Hugdahl et al., 2009; Kompus et al., 2012). As such, the paradigm serves as an analogue to everyday life situations, in which one auditory event, e.g. the response of our conversation partner, competes with multiple auditory streams, such as verbal utterances of other speakers or environmental sounds (traditionally referred to as the cocktail-party phenomenon) (Cherry, 1953). The ability to master such situations, however, is prone to individual differences (Conway et al., 2001), since deficits in auditory attention abilities have been reported in aging (Hugdahl et al., 2001; Passow et al., 2012; Takio et al., 2009), and in various clinical groups, e.g. schizophrenia patients (Hugdahl et al., 2013), preterm-born adolescents (Bless et al., 2013a), and children with dyslexia (Facoetti et al., 2003). Thus, the results of the current study, although based on healthy individuals, may offer new solutions for administering cognitive training in these patient groups. For example, feasibility of home-based cognitive training in schizophrenia patients has recently been reported (Hegde et al., 2012; Ventura et al., 2013).Measuring the success of cognitive training can be approached on different levels of analysis. Certainly, improvement on the trained task itself has to be achieved. This has been shown previously using the CV-DL task (Soveri et al., 2013). However, such improvement is substantiated by investigating the neural correlates of the training effects in order to reveal underlying mechanisms (see Nyberg et al., 2003). For the present task and for mobile-application based cognitive training in general, this has to our knowledge not been explored previously. At the latest since Donald Hebb's theory of learning (Hebb, 1949), which has found due support by animal models (e.g., Bliss and Lomo, 1973; Kandel and Schwartz, 1982), behavioral changes (learning) are linked to neural mechanisms in the brain, mainly reflected in synaptic growth and neuronal firing. However, in recent years, this picture has been enriched by the notion that “less could be more” on both the anatomical (synaptic pruning) and the functional level (neural activation). One way of directly addressing this question is by examining training effects with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Indeed, studies have shown that cognitive training results in both activation increases (e.g., Dahlin et al., 2008, Exp.1) as well as decreases (e.g., Schneiders et al., 2011); sometimes the same study reports increases in some and decreases in other regions (for a review, see Buschkuehl et al., 2012; Klingberg, 2010).Thus, in the present study we expect successful training to be reflected by, (a) performance increase on the trained task, as well as (b) corresponding changes (increases or decreases) in neural activation in brain areas associated with speech perception and attention. In addition, to explore possible transfer of the trained task to other attentional tasks, we also included two cognitive interference tasks, one in the visual and one in the auditory domain.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present findings suggest that mobile devices are feasible platforms for self-supervised cognitive training. The ability to focus on auditory input during competing stimulus conditions was increased as a result of training and accompanied by decreases in neural activation indicating more efficient stimulus processing at early and late stages of selective auditory attention. The greater flexibility that mobile-application based cognitive training offers over laboratory or PC-based training may be particularly beneficial in clinical settings where patients often have to follow strict routines and may not be able to leave the hospital facilities. This should encourage future research into the use of mobile applications for cognitive training with an emphasis on aging and various clinical populations with prominent auditory attention deficits.