@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of therapist support and treatment presentation on the clinical outcomes of an Internet based applied relaxation program

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study shows that enhancing treatment presentation or support does not improve the outcome of internet based relaxation.Adherence to homework assignments rather than the online program was associated with treatment outcome.Improving adherence to behavioral prescriptions is important to further improve the outcome of online therapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Relaxation,Stress,Anxiety,Internet,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Symptoms of stress are common in the general population and associated with health risks and economic costs. Applied relaxation training has shown to be effective for reducing stress and worry both as a self-help treatment and as an internet-based intervention with therapist support. However, what factors may affect the outcome of internet based relaxation training is unclear. The aims of the present study were to investigate the effect of a brief internet based relaxation program for people with symptoms of stress or worry and to assess whether enhancing the quality of intervention presentation or therapist support had an impact on outcomes.Participants were randomized in a full factorial design to either Normal or Enhanced treatment Presentation and either Normal or Enhanced therapist Support in a four-week online program with applied relaxation. The main outcome measures were self-report instruments of stress and worry.A total of 162 participants were included in the study and 94 and 84 participants completed the post and follow-up measurements respectively. Participants in all conditions improved significantly on the main outcome measures, and the different levels of Presentation or therapist Support did not significantly affect treatment outcome. Registered number of completed exercises was a predictor of better treatment outcome, but this effect was independent of treatment condition. Enhancing internet based interventions by improving presentations and the quality of support may thus not be the best way to further improve the effect of internet based interventions. More specific knowledge of the mechanisms that affect outcomes in online psychotherapy is needed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mild to moderate symptoms of stress and anxiety symptoms are common in the general population (Connor et al., 2007; Johansson et al., 2013; Löwe et al., 2008) and are associated with low quality of life and economic costs for the society (Achat et al., 1998; Andlin-Sobocki & Wittchen, 2005). While there are effective interventions for anxiety symptoms and stress there are never the less reasons to develop and investigate treatment modalities that can potentially deliver treatments on a large scale (Hedman et al., 2012). Stress is a non-specific physiological response to perceived threats or environmental demands such as high work load or social conflicts in a context of low subjective control (Häusser et al., 2010; Ursin & Eriksen, 2004). This means that chronic stress may be elicited by diverse factors such as chronic disease, working environment or economic pressures (Kivimäki et al., 2006; Melchior et al., 2007). The stress response is characterized by a sympathetic activation including increased muscle tension, blood pressure and proliferation of stress hormones that may over time lead to negative health consequences (Brotman et al., 2007; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984) and increased risk for several severe diseases such as coronary heart disease and depression (Cohen et al., 2007; Hammen, 2005). Further, stress often leads to harmful coping behaviors, such as smoking, or problems, such as insomnia, that may further increase the risk of disease (S. Cohen et al., 2007). Taken together, prolonged stress can be a harmful condition even at moderate levels, and it is important to find treatment approaches suitable for the general population.Broadly, interventions for stress management may either target the primary stressor, e.g., at the environment or organization level, or the individual's perception or coping of the stressful environment. Interventions focusing on the organization level may be effective but are often difficult to implement. It may be more feasible with interventions that focus on the individual level and include teaching coping skills, problem-solving or other cognitive or physical exercises (Dewe et al., 2010). Several treatment models have shown to be effective for reducing stress symptoms, including Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), mindfulness-based interventions and relaxation training (Grossman et al., 2004; LaMontagne et al., 2007; Richardson & Rothstein, 2008; Zetterqvist et al., 2003).Progressive relaxation training is one of the most frequently used interventions for stress, arguably due to its relative simplicity and general scope. It has previously shown to be effective in reducing stress and anxiety symptoms in non-clinical populations (Agee et al., 2009; Francesco et al., 2010). The relaxation treatment model is based on the fact that stressors elicit startle responses including muscle tension and in prolonged exposure to stressors, muscle tension develops into chronic tension and physiological hyperactivity (Barlow et al., 2007; E. Jacobson, 1938). By training muscle relaxation, this sympathetic activation is counteracted, the process can be reversed and the stress response ameliorated (Conrad & Roth, 2007). With sympathetic down-regulation, symptoms of anxiety and worry are also decreased (Manzoni et al., 2008).Applied relaxation is a development from progressive relaxation that specifically aims at being easy to implement in everyday life in order to reduce anxiety symptoms (Öst, 1987). Applied relaxation has shown to be effective in reducing stress symptoms and ameliorate anxiety symptoms in patients with General anxiety disorder to a degree on par with that of CBT (Öst & Breitholtz, 2000). It is also effective in reducing symptoms in other anxiety disorders such as Panic disorder and Social phobia (Hayes-Skelton et al., 2013). One of the major benefits of applied relaxation is that it can be provided in a relatively condensed self-help format and has shown to be effective when delivered via the internet (Carlbring et al., 2007). Internet-based treatments are effective for a range of problems within behavioral medicine such as sleeping problems and chronic pain (Cuijpers et al., 2008). Sometimes relaxation training is an integral part of interventions, such as in tinnitus care, but it is seldom provided as a standalone treatment other than as a control condition.Investigating and evaluating interventions that may alleviate stress and anxiety symptoms is important since, even though the impact on overall health may be small, it may be very important for the individual. Providing such interventions via the internet for the general population has the benefit of being cost effective (Hedman et al., 2012) and potentially having a wide reach (Bennett-Levy et al., 2010). How to deliver these internet based interventions in the most effective way is still largely unknown. Several studies have shown that therapist support has a positive effect on self-help treatment outcome, but this effect seems to be independent of therapist training or mode of delivery (Gellatly et al., 2007; Titov et al., 2009). Similarly, using presentation techniques that follow pedagogical and learning principles and incorporate multimedia content may also improve treatment effects though this is somewhat less clear (Danaher et al., 2006).In a previous study focusing on improving adherence in internet based CBT, we saw that improving support increased treatment progress but not adherence to behavioral prescriptions (Alfonsson et al., 2015). There was no analog effect of improving treatment presentation on treatment progress or adherence. The aim of the present study was to build on these results and evaluate the possible treatment effects of enhanced presentation and support on the outcome of the same stress management intervention. The secondary aim was to investigate whether treatment effects were moderated by treatment adherence. The main outcome variables were self-report instruments of stress, anxiety symptoms and other psychiatric symptoms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
