@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of SiC powder mixing electrical discharge machining on white layer thickness, heat flux and fatigue life of AISI D2 die steel

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We studied the effect of EDM and PMEDM parameters on fatigue life, WLT and heat flux of D2 Steel.Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to design the experimental work matrices.Mathematical models were created and accuracy of the experimental results was verified.Analyzing and developing numerical models for the total heat flux generated by using FEM.3-D modeling and simulation fatigue lives were developed by FEM using ANSYS 15.0 software.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EDM,PMEDM,Silicone carbide powder,RSM,FEM,WLT,Total heat flux,Fatigue life,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper deals with studying the effect of powder mixing electrical discharge machining (PMEDM) parameters using copper and graphite electrodes on the white layer thickness (WLT), the total heat flux generated and the fatigue life. Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to plan and design the experimental work matrices for two groups of experiments: for the first EDM group, kerosene dielectric was used alone, whereas the second was treated by adding the SiC micro powders mixing to dielectric fluid (PMEDM). The total heat flux generated and fatigue lives after EDM and PMEDM models were developed by FEM using ANSYS 15.0 software. The graphite electrodes gave a total heat flux higher than copper electrodes by 82.4%, while using the SiC powder and graphite electrodes gave a higher total heat flux than copper electrodes by 91.5%. The lowest WLT values of 5.0 µm and 5.57 µm are reached at a high current and low current with low pulse on time using the copper and graphite electrodes and the SiC powder, respectively. This means that there is an improvement in WLT by 134% and 110%, respectively, when compared with the use of same electrodes and kerosene dielectric alone. The graphite electrodes with PMEDM and SiC powder improved the experimental fatigue safety factor by 7.30% compared with the use of copper electrodes and by 14.61% and 18.61% compared with results using the kerosene dielectric alone with copper and graphite electrodes, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The mixing of a suitable abrasives and metallic material in powder form into the dielectric fluid is one of the latest advancement for improving the innovations and enhancement capabilities of EDM process [1]. This process is called powder mixed EDM (PMEDM). In this process, the electrically conductive powder particles are mixed in the dielectric fluid, which reduces the particles' insulating strength and increase the spark gap distance between the tool and workpiece to spread the electric discharge uniformly in all directions. As a result, the process becomes more stable, thereby improving material removal rate (MRR) and surface finish [2,3].Razak et al. [4] conducted investigations on powder concentration and powder particles size of silicon carbide PMEDM based on Taguchi orthogonal array. The outcomes are expected to be capable of increasing MRR, improving surface finish, reducing TWR, and reducing machining time and cost.EDM is a thermal erosion process [5]. Instantaneous temperature rise during the machining process changes the physical properties of the machining surface layer, resulting in the presence of residual stress, which is one of the key factors affecting the machined surface quality and its functional performance.Abhijeetsinh and Kapil [6] studied the influence of process parameters and electrode shape configuration on AISI 316 Stainless steel workpiece material and pure copper as electrode material. Detailed analysis of structural features of machined surface is done by using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) to understand the mode of heat affected zone (HAZ), recast layer thickness and micro cracks, which alternatively affects structure of machined workpiece and hence tool life.The high magnitude thermal residual stresses, which are created on the upper layer of workpiece surface due to rapid solidification of EDM processes, influence the component properties. They increase with increasing pulse energy [7,8]. EDM components are commonly applied in high temperature, high-stress, and high-fatigue-load environments. Under such conditions, the cracks on the machined surface act as stress raisers and lead to a considerable reduction in the fatigue life of the component. Accordingly, the current study conducts an experimental investigation of the powder mixing method, which does not require post-treatment processing to identify the optimal EDM machining parameters that suppress the formation of cracks in the recast layer for longest lives under different fatigue loads.Mehdi et al. [9] used Response surface methodology (RSM) to analyze the effect of EDM input parameters for machining AlMg 2Si composite material on microstructure changes. The results show that voltage and current, and pulse on time are the most significant factors on microstructure of machined surfaced.A considerable amount of work has been reported by the researchers on the measurement of EDM performance on the performance parameters with various DOE and optimization techniques especially utilizing the Response surface methodology [10–15].The objective of this study concerns the effects of SiC powder mixing (PMEDM) parameters on the total heat flux generated, white layer thickness (WLT) and fatigue life properties of the selected AISI die steel workpiece, and developing numerical models for verifying the experimental results by using the response surface methodology (RSM) and the finite element method (FEM) with ANSYS 15.0 software.The adoption of the current work goals were intended within other targets to reach the best combination parameters because this type of die and mold steel owns its global importance in engineering industries as well as the significance of EDM processes.The workpiece material was prepared for chemical composition, mechanical properties tests and Rockwell hardness tests on the bases of ASTM-77 steel standard for mechanical testing of steel products [16]. The workpiece specimens were prepared with dimensions 89.9 × 30 × 4.25 mm, according to requirement of the Avery type 7305 plain bending fatigue testing machine, as shown in Fig. 1.The average values of chemical composition of the selected workpiece material and the equivalent values given according to ASTM A 681-76 standard specification for alloy and die steels [17] are listed in Table 1. The results of tensile test and Rockwell hardness tests are given in Table 2. The chemical composition of the copper electrodes are listed in Table 3. The used kerosene dielectric was tested according to the ASTM (D 3699-90) industry standard specifications for kerosene. The chemical composition of the silicon carbide powder was tested for compositions by using the X-ray diffraction tester.Two types of electrode materials were selected (Copper and Graphite) with dimension of 30 × 24 × 24 mm. The copper electrode material was examined for chemical composition properties using the X-Met 3000TX HORIZONT metal analyzer. Both selected electrode materials have their own extensive industrial applications. Copper is more widely used, while graphite is also used in industrial and researches areas. The current work will attempt to prove the high role of graphite in improving the performance responses of the process. There are other electrode materials used, but with less applications, like aluminum and even steels.SiC powder was chosen as a mixed powder with kerosene dielectric because it has many important properties such as high melting point, strength and electrical resistivity. The average grain size for silicon carbide powder is 95.502 µm.The powder with this particle size has been used to increase the micro shooting effect of its solid particles and consequently increases the material removal rates, and improves surface residual stresses and other properties of machined workpiece in addition to the cheapness price, which makes the process of mixing very suitable in economic terms.The EDM parameters are: the gap voltage VP(140 V), the pulse on time duration period Ton(40 and 120 µs), the pulse off time duration period Toff(14 and 40 µs), the pulse current IP(8 and 22 A), the duty factor (ƞ = 75%), two sides flashing pressure = 0.73 bar (10.3 psi.) and the SiC powder mixing concentration (0 and 5 g/L).In this work, for optimum machining performance measures, selecting the proper combination of machining parameters is an important task. Generally, the machining parameters were selected on the basis of data provided by the EDM manufactures and research works. Such data were not available for the AISI D2 die steel, especially when using the graphite electrodes, the SiC and graphite mixing powder.In this work, the analytical and statistical response surface methodology (RSM) method was used to select best combination of process parameters for an optimum machining performance and giving the beat design of experiment DOE matrix with minimum numbers of experiments. RSM analyze the experimental data by plotting Interaction graphs, residual plots for accuracy and response curves [12]. A Box–Behnken design as a type of response surface design was used, which does not contain an embedded factorial or fractional factorial design to determine the best responses conditions.For the purpose of powder mixing with dielectric fluid (PMEDM), a stainless steel container (of about 30 liters volume and overall dimensions of 400 × 300 × 230 mm with a cover of 400 × 230 mm and 3 mm thickness) was fabricated, which contained kerosene dielectric pump, an electric motor (300 RPM) connected to a mixer and stainless steel impellers, a workpiece clamping fixture, valves and pipe accessories. For the power supply, an AC/DC converter for driving the special kerosene pump was installed in an electrical board made especially for this work. This board contained also a pressure gauge (one bar capacity) as shown in Fig. 2.In this work, two groups were planned, each containing 22 experiments using a new set of workpiece and electrode in each experiment. The first 11 experiments in each group were machined by using the copper electrodes, while the last 11 experiments were done by using the graphite electrodes. The specimens after EDM machining with the used copper and graphite electrodes for both groups are shown in Fig. 3.For studying of the influence of EDM parameters and electrode material types on the surface recast white layers micro defects, the optical stereo microscope (OSM) was used. The selected specimens were prepared after grinding, polishing and etching processes for surface topography examination. The white layer thickness (WLT) inspections were implemented by using the Optical microscope (OM).Due to the random, high complexity and uncertainty nature of EDM, the following assumptions have been considered to make the problem mathematically feasible for all proposed EDM and PMEDM models unless otherwise specified:1An axisymmetric model has been considered.Workpiece materials are homogeneous and isotropic in nature [18].The material properties of the workpiece and tool are temperature dependent.Density and element shape are not affected [19].EDM discharge spark channel is considered as a uniform cylindrical column shape.The heat source is assumed to have Gaussian distribution of heat flux on the surface of the workpiece material during pulse on time period [20,21].Temperature analysis is considered to be of transient type [18,22].The channel diameter is approximately between 10 µm and 100 µm, thus the electrode can be considered as a semi-infinite body.The magnitude of the heat flux incident on the electrodes is independent of the affected surface profile.Many authors have considered uniformly distributed and the hemi-spherical disc heat source within a spark [23,24]. This assumption is far from reality for thermal modeling in EDM. However, Dibitonto et al. [20], Eubank et al. [25] and Bhattacharya et al. [26] have shown that the Gaussian heat distribution is more realistic than disc heat source for modeling the heat input in EDM. This fact is evidenced from the actual shape of a crater formed during EDM.The intensity of heat imparted to the workpiece surface, which is denoted by Qw, is a function of instantaneous spark radius (r). The Gaussian distribution of heat applied at the axis of a spark for a single discharge with a maximum radius (R), and then the heat flux Qw(r) at radius r of the system is given by the following relation [18]:(1)Qw(r)=4.57∗Rw∗Vb∗Ip∗Knπ⋅R†e-4.5r†R†The rate of energy incident on the workpiece is equal to the rate of energy supplied, which is equal to Rw*VP*IP, where Rw is the energy percentage fraction of heat input to the workpiece, Vbis the breakdown voltage (different from the applied voltage), R is the spark radius in µm, and IPis the discharge current.The value of Rw has been determined by Shuvra et al. [19], Dibitonto et al. [20] and Patel et al. [21] who have suggested that a constant fraction of the total power is transferred to the electrodes. They have used the value of Rw as 8% as the percentage of heat input absorbed by the workpiece for their theoretical work of conventional EDM, and the same value was used in this work. The Rw values during PMEDM in the present model have been assumed to be 9% of the total heat lost in the workpiece. Shankar et al. [22] have calculated that about 18% is absorbed by the cathode and the rest is discharged to the dielectric fluid.The breakdown voltage value (Vb) is taken as 20 V, while for PMEDM it is about 20%–30% lower than that for EDM, i.e., Vb= 15 V. The spark radius (R) was taken as 15 µm, and the heat flux for AISI D2 die steel isQw(r)=680MW/m2Kfor various values of discharge current. The spark radii for PMEDM processes were taken to be 40% larger than traditional EDM.The new parameter (Kn), which takes into account the effect of suspended powder particles on the spark frequency and breakdown voltage, was also calculated. The value of Kn depends upon the type of powder and the powder properties, such as shape, size, concentration etc. The values of Kn factor were experimentally estimated for EDM and PMEDM machining groups as given in Table 4using the results of material removal rates which were experimentally calculated.Marafona and Chousal [27] suggested an equation called the equivalent heat input radius R(t) or the radius of plasma channel (µm), which is dependent on the current intensity (IP) and pulse on duration (Ton), thereby:(2)R(t)=2.04∗IP0.43∗Ton0.44The total heat flux generated and absorbed by the workpiece, electrode and dielectric can be calculated for machining area is about 500 mm2 and the effective geometric machining area is about 0.75% of the above total machining area and about 10% of the total numbers of discharge sparks generated instantaneously during one pulse on period of time, then:(3)Thetotalnumberofdischargesparks(SN)=Totalmachiningarea×20%×0.75/AreaofonedischargesparkThe total heat fluxes for all EDM experiments were calculated using equation (1), but this equation needs to modify as:(4)Qw(r)=4.57∗Rw∗Vb∗Ip∗Knπ⋅R†e-4.5r†R†×SN/MachiningareaoftheworkpieceThe results for the total heat fluxes entering the workpiece, the electrode and the dielectric fluid during the on-time for all PMEDM experiments are given in Table 5. The theoretical and numerical total heat flux generated by the using copper and graphite electrodes and FEM and ANSYS solutions for experimental group (2) is given in Table 6. The percentage increase in the value of the experimental total heat flux using SiC mixed powder (group 2) compared with that in group (1) using kerosene dielectric alone is given in Table 7.The maximum total heat flux generated by the discharge processes and obtained by the FEM and ANSYS solutions and simulations after EDM machining using copper and graphite electrodes for group (2) are given in Fig. 4. In the present study, a three-dimensional axisymmetric model is developed to predict the total heat flux in AISI D2 die steel workpiece using the transient thermal FE Analysis ANSYS software.The three-dimensional meshed domain models of the workpiece, the electrode and the used kerosene dielectric were done by using the mapped meshing technique with a triangle element pattern shape with more elements mapped toward the heat-affected regions for better study. The total elements and nodes numbers are 54,407 and 46,664, respectively. The numbers of contact elements are 31,444 and the solid elements are 22,963. The smoothness of elements is of medium size and their minimum edge length is 2.51−3 m.Fig. 4 shows two simulations models for maximum values of input EDM parameters using copper and graphite electrodes, respectively. The right figures represent the total heat flux generated form of the electrode, the workpiece and the kerosene dielectric after hiding the stainless steel container. The figures in the left show the thermal model of the electrode and workpiece after the hiding of kerosene dielectric with the values of maximum heat flux generated and the input EDM and PMEDM processes parameters and also the verified percentage errors between the experimental thermal models compared with the theoretical calculations.Three levels factorial response surface methodology (RSM) and the Design-Expert 9.0 software were used to analyze the obtained total heat power for each parametric subgroup, the analysis of results for both experimental groups using copper and graphite electrodes are shown in Figs. 5 and 6.The Model F-value of 31,212.03 implies that the model is significant. The “Pred R-Squared” of 0.9997 is in reasonable agreement with the “Adj R-Squared” of 1.0000; i.e. the difference is less than 0.2.The predicted equation of the total heat flux generated for PMEDM experimental group (2), using copper electrodes and kerosene dielectric with SiC powder mixing, is:(5)Totalheatpower=+4986.48607+125.03143∗Pulsecurrent−44.22331∗Pulseontime(Ton)And, using graphite electrodes, the equation is:(6)Totalheatpower=+7447.41107+125.03143∗Pulsecurrent−44.22331∗Pulseontime(Ton)The total heat flux generated by the discharge processes for experimental group (2), using the copper electrodes and SiC mixed powder reached the maximum value as 5.827*109 W/m2 at a pulse current value of 22 A and a pulse on time of 40 µs. While, when using graphite electrodes, the total heat flux values reached the maximum value as 1.009*1010 W/m2 at the same input current and time on period.This means that the use of graphite electrodes and the kerosene dielectric with SiC mixed powder yields higher total heat flux values by 91.5% when compared with the use of copper electrodes and by 285.3% and 602.7% more when using copper and graphite electrodes and the kerosene dielectric alone, respectively.The high total heat flux levels are obtained when using the graphite electrodes and the SiC mixed powder as both own low thermal and electrical conductivity and high electrical resistivity compared with copper electrodes. Therefore, when high pulse current passage through the gap between the electrode and the workpiece, a plasma channel with high thermal energy is generated, but cannot able to transform them into fusion state, because of the high milting points of both materials. Then this plasma channel moves to the surface of the workpiece and starts the main effect of the abrasive powder working on enlarged the electrodes gaps and give more arranged discharge plasma channels consequentially an increase in the amount of metal removal rate were caused by increase of the melting and eroded areas within the heating periods.The average of three values of workpieces WLT measurements after EDM machining for both experimental groups using the two groups is given in Table 8.The Model F-value of 7.33 implies that the model is significant. The “Pred R-Squared” of 0.9998 is in reasonable agreement with the “Adj R-Squared” of 1.0000; i.e. the difference is less than 0.2. The predicted equation of WLT for EDM machining using copper electrodes and SiC mixed powder obtained from using the three levels factorial response surface methodology (RSM) and the Design-Expert 9.0 software is:(7)WLT=+4.40179+0.023214∗Pulsecurrent+0.055125∗Pulseontime(Ton)And, for graphite electrodes, the equation is:(8)WLT=+5.17679+0.023214∗Pulsecurrent+0.055125∗Pulseontime(Ton)The average of WLT for after PMEDM machining using the copper and graphite electrodes is shown in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. For experimental group (2) using the SiC mixed powder and copper electrodes, the WLT reached the minimum value as 5.0 µm at a current value of 22 A and a pulse time of 40 µs, whereas when using the graphite electrodes, the WLT reached the minimum value as 5.57 µm at the input current 8 A and with the same time on a period of 40 µs. This means that there is improvement by 134% and 67% when compared with using of copper and graphite electrodes, and using kerosene dielectric alone, respectively.The lower levels of the obtained WLT when using the copper electrodes and the abrasive SiC have high hardness work on removal of the melted white layer at high rates by micro shot peening process with a short period of time on/off and then with high pulse current. This is because a high sparks heat power produced with a good arrangements of the plasma channels and the use of dielectric flushing from the both sides of cutting zone. The micro shot peening process required a longer period of time when using the graphite electrodes because, they producing a lower discharge heat power.The images in Tables 9 and 10show the macro graphic and microstructure of the heat affected zones (HAZ) for the workpieces surfaces for each subgroup input parameters after EDM and PMEDM processes (groups 1 and 2) using copper and graphite electrodes. These images reveal that the craters sizes increased with the increase in the pulse current and the time on duration, and they reached their minimum sizes, especially when using the graphite electrodes where higher plasma discharge heat power was generated.The construction of these microscopic layers and HAZ for experimental group (2) indicates that lower layer thicknesses and defects exist due to the high abrasive and micro shot peening properties of the silicon carbide powder and the plasma discharge pressure of the process as well as the high role of the dielectric flushing of the formed craters from both sides of the cutting areas. With high pulse current value and time on duration, the defects sizes were increased in these layers, especially when using the copper electrodes due to the high thermal energy generated. These figures show the discontinuity and uncompleted formation of the white recast layer, especially when using the copper electrodes due to the high heat power produced and the abrasive properties of the SiC powder materials.In the present work, the three-dimensional analysis and modeling for EDM of AISI D2 die steel was studied. The damage model was developed to study the influence of different parameters on the workpiece fatigue life. The objective of fatigue analysis is to explain the characterizing capability of a material component to serve the designed cycles loads during its lifetime [28].The main assumptions of the models are as showing below:1The EDM and PMEDM damaged layers cannot carry any load cycles during fatigue. Therefore, the fatigue damage begins beneath the damaged layer, not at the top surface of the specimen.Since the residual stresses are produced at the damaged layer, their effects on the fatigue life are ignored.The size effect is not considered, because the thickness of the damaged layer is small.The crack growth is determined primarily by both the levels of the actual stress and the electrical pulse-induced damage.This study used the stress life fatigue modeling analysis by using the ANSYS software 15.0. The cyclic fatigue of the material was obtained from completely reversed, constant amplitude tests with a load ratio of −1 at room temperature. The Goodman mean stress correction theory is a good choice for hard materials. The flat bending workpieces were used for the fatigue test. The test frequency of the machine was maintained constant at 60 Hz. All the fatigue limits were defined at the stress level of 106 loading cycles. The von Mises stress theory, which takes the sign of the largest absolute principal stress, will be used to compare against the experimental stress value.The Multiphysics, static structural models domain loads, includes the environment temperature, the fixing supported and the loading force. The fatigue strength concentration factor (Kf), which is equal to 1 and 0.72 for flat as received specimens and for PMEDM machining workpieces [29], respectively, was set. The experimental fatigue results after EDM and PMEDM machining are given in Table 11for the two groups.The three-dimensional meshed domain models for the workpiece, using the triangle surface meshed mapping technique where the element pattern shapes meshing, were created with more elements mapped toward the machined regions for better study. The total elements and nodes numbers for establishing S/N curve for the flat as received specimens are 134,280 and 195,027, respectively and for EDM and PMEDM machining workpieces specimens are 83,824 and 123,748, respectively.The experimental average values of fatigue stress at 106 cycles and numerical fatigue safety factor values for group (2) are given in Table 12. The fatigue safety factor values were calculated at 106 cycles of the experimental result respect to the fatigue stress at 106 cycles of the as-received material, which is equal to 270 MPa. The percentage enhancement in the value of experimental fatigue stresses at 106 cycles using SiC mixed powder (group 2) is compared with using kerosene dielectric alone (group 1) as shown in Table 13.The maximum fatigue life and safety factor obtained by the FEM and PMEDM with ANSYS solutions and simulations using the copper and graphite electrodes using the pulse current of 8 A and pulse on time of 40 µs are given in Fig. 9. Each simulation model in this figure shows two models for each of input parameters of PMEDM sub-group. The right figures represent the numerical modeled fatigue safety factor. The figures in the left show the fatigue life models simulations with the values of fatigue stresses at 106 cycles obtained from the S/N curves of each experimental sub-group, the input EDM process parameters and the model loading force.The S/N fatigue stress at 106 cycles curves for both groups after EDM and PMEDM machining is shown in Figs. 10 and 11using pulse currents 8 A and 22 A, respectively. These figures show that fatigue life increasing with decreasing the pulse current and increasing the pulse on duration time, and copper electrodes gave fatigue life values higher than graphite electrodes, after EDM experimental group (1). Whereas, graphite electrodes gave fatigue life values higher than copper electrodes after PMEDM experimental group (2).The three levels factorial response surface methodology (RSM) and the Design-Expert 9.0 software were used to analyze the obtained fatigue safety factor for each parametric subgroup.The Model F-value of 444.81 implies that the model is significant. The “Pred R-Squared” of 0.9991 is in reasonable agreement with the “Adj R-Squared” of 1.0000; i.e. the difference is less than 0.2.The predicted equation of the fatigue safety factor for PMEDM experimental group (2) using kerosene dielectric with SiC mixing powder and copper electrodes is:(9)FatigueSafetyFactor=+0.96768−0.010179∗Pulsecurrent+7.81250E−004∗Pulseontime(Ton)And, using graphite electrodes, the equation is:(10)FatigueSafetyFactor=+1.10518−0.010179∗Pulsecurrent+7.81250E−004∗Pulseontime(Ton)The predicted equation of the fatigue stress at 106 cycles obtained by using copper electrodes is:(11)Fatiguestressat106cycles=+253.08929−1.33929∗Pulsecurrenttime+0.12187∗Pulseontime(Ton)And, using graphite electrodes, the equation is:(12)Fatiguestressat106cycles=+271.83929−1.33929∗Pulsecurrenttime+0.12187∗Pulseontime(Ton)The analysis of results for fatigue safety factor for experimental group (2) using the copper and graphite electrodes are shown in Figs. 12 and 13, respectively. While, the fatigue stresses at 106 cycles for all experimental groups using the copper and graphite electrodes are shown in Figs. 14 and 15, respectively.The fatigue safety factor using the copper electrodes for experimental group (2) increases with the decrease in pulse current values and the increase in pulse on duration time, reaching its maximum value as 0.97, experimentally (0.95) at a current value of 8A and pulse time of 120 µs. While, when using the graphite electrodes, the fatigue safety factor values reached their maximum values as 1.13, experimentally (1.02) at the same input current and pulse on time period, as shown in Fig. 13.This means that after PMEDM processes, the use of graphite electrodes and the kerosene dielectric with SiC mixed powder gives higher experimental fatigue safety factor values by 7.37% compared with the use of copper electrodes and higher by 14.61% and 18.61% when compared with the results of group (1) using the copper and graphite electrodes, respectively.The reason behind obtaining higher fatigue safety factor is because the use of low pulse current generates lower thermal energy, which cannot work to make a large metallurgical changes in the crystalline structure of the workpiece surface. Although the graphite electrode generates thermal energy more than that of copper, it works with the longer pulse time on annealing the workpiece surface and on reducing the creation of martensitic structure, assisted by the use of hard SiC particles powder that increases the removal rate of this layer by increasing erosive rates, and all that will lead to reducing the fatigue failure thereby increasing the fatigue life.The fatigue stresses at 106 cycles after PMEDM experimental group (2) using the copper electrodes increase with the decrease in pulse current and the increase in pulse on duration time, reaching the maximum value as 257 MPa at a current value of 8 A and pulse on time 120 µs. Whereas, when using the graphite electrodes, these fatigue stresses values reached their maximum value as 275 MPa at the same input current and pulse on period time, i.e. improved by 7% as shown in Fig. 15.This means that the use of graphite electrodes and the kerosene dielectric with SiC powder mixing yields higher fatigue stresses at 106 cycles values by 7.00% when compared with the use of copper electrodes and gives a higher fatigue life than the situation when working without mixing powder by 14.58% and 18.54% using the copper and graphite electrodes, respectively.The stress values are equal to the ratios 0.95 and 1.02 for copper and graphite electrodes, respectively, compared with the fatigue stresses at 106 cycles for the as-received material.Higher fatigue safety factor levels were obtained when using the copper electrodes with low current and high pulse on time period as lower heat discharges energy at the gap produced between the electrode and the workpiece. The longer time on period with the high abrasive effect of SiC powder work as micro shot peening of the machining surfaces, producing less brittle carbides formation, fewer defects and lower white layer thickness.Also, the better surface roughness (SR) and white layer thickness (WLT) workpieces gave longer fatigue lives as less micro cracks and other surface defects were observed with less stress risers and stress concentration areas, helped eliminate the creation of cracks initiation and propagation, and then increased the dynamic service lives of the components.And, all these factors are strengthening the workpiece against fatigue failure, and then longer lives were obtained.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
1The total heat flux values were increased with the increasing of pulse current values up to 22 A and the decreasing of pulse on duration time to 40 µs.The graphite electrodes gave a total heat flux higher than copper electrodes by 82.4%, while using the SiC powder and graphite electrodes gave a higher total heat flux than copper electrodes by 91.5%, and by 285.3% and 602.7% more than using the copper and graphite electrodes and the kerosene dielectric alone, respectively.The lowest WLT values of 5.0 µm and 5.57 µm were reached at a high current and low current with low pulse on time using the copper and graphite electrodes and the SiC powder, respectively. This means that there is an improvement by 134% and 67% when compared with using the copper and graphite electrodes and kerosene dielectric alone, respectively.The fatigue safety factor as compared with as-received material and fatigue stresses increased with the decrease of pulse current, and increase of pulse on time.Using graphite electrodes with PMEDM and SiC powder yielded experimental fatigue safety factor values of 1.02, which is higher by 7.30% when compared with the use of copper electrodes and higher by 14.61% and 18.61% when compared with results of using the kerosene dielectric alone with copper and graphite electrodes, respectively.The use of graphite electrodes with SiC powder gave fatigue stresses at 106 cycles as 275 MPa, which is higher by 7.00% when compared with the use of copper electrodes, and yielded a higher fatigue life than when working without mixing powder by 14.58% and 18.54% using the copper and graphite electrodes, respectively.All predicted fatigue stresses to the fatigue stresses at 106 cycles for the as-received material ratio are close with those results of fatigue safety factors for the same input parameters, and this proves the accuracy of EDM and PMEDM models developed by FEM using ANSYS software.