@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Motivational Interviewing support for a behavioral health internet intervention for drivers with type 1 diabetes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Is therapist support is needed to enhance engagement with, adherence to, and completion of, Internet interventions?This paper describes a Motivational Interview to target usage of an Internet intervention for drivers with diabetes.MI therapist support did not increase program completion but related to faster completion of follow-ups.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet intervention,Therapist support,Motivational interviewing,Diabetes,Program adherence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While Internet interventions can improve health behaviors, their impact is limited by program adherence. Supporting program adherence through telephone counseling may be useful, but there have been few direct tests of the impact of support. We describe a Telephone Motivational Interviewing (MI) intervention targeting adherence to an Internet intervention for drivers with Type 1 Diabetes, DD.com, and compare completion of intervention benchmarks by those randomized to DD.com plus MI vs. DD.com only. The goal of the pre-intervention MI session was to increase the participant's motivation to complete the Internet intervention and all its assignments, while the goal of the post-treatment MI session was to plan for maintaining changes made during the intervention. Sessions were semi-structured and partially scripted to maximize consistency. MI Fidelity was coded using a standard coding system, the MITI. We examined the effects of MI support vs. no support on number of days from enrollment to program benchmarks. Results show that MI sessions were provided with good fidelity. Users who received MI support completed some program benchmarks such as Core 4 (t176 df=−2.25; p<.03) and 11 of 12 monthly driving diaries significantly sooner, but support did not significantly affect time to intervention completion (t177 df=−1.69; p<.10) or rates of completion. These data suggest that there is little benefit to therapist guidance for Internet interventions including automated email prompts and other automated minimal supports, but that a booster MI session may enhance collection of follow-up data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Internet interventions are increasingly used to improve health behaviors to manage chronic illness, but their efficacy is limited by patient adherence to the program. Many participants never complete a health-behavior focused Internet intervention, limiting the potential impact (Blankers et al., 2009; Christensen et al., 2009,2009; Ritterband et al., 2008). Characteristics of Internet interventions that seem to foster more program adherence include highly relevant content, tailored interactivity, and personalization of feedback and user assignments (Ritterband et al., 2009). A systematic review of the technology features of web-based programs in health revealed that the presence of specific technology strategies, including primary task support, dialog support, more frequent intended usage, and more frequent contact with a counselor and more frequent reminders explain more than half of the variance in adherence to the program (Kelders et al., 2012). However, even with such features, users may require additional strategies to increase their motivation to engage in, and fully utilize, Internet interventions.Some developers of Internet interventions assert that therapist support such as weekly email or telephone calls providing guidance might be required to improve patient outcomes via better usage and completion of the Internet intervention, while unguided self-help interventions are appropriate as population-level preventive interventions (Andersson et al., 2011). In contrast to this view, meta-analyses have found that some unguided Internet interventions are efficacious, even in the areas of mental health (Christensen et al., 2009) and alcohol problems (Riper et al., 2014). However, there have been just a few direct tests of the impact of therapist support or guidance on program use, completion, or provision of follow-up data. In an Internet intervention for social anxiety, researchers found that the impact of therapist guided vs. unguided interventions varied by a set of patient characteristics and that some patients benefitted from Internet interventions without therapist support (Nordgreen et al., 2012). Currently, investigators are comparing a therapist guided vs. unguided mobile and Internet combination Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) intervention for social anxiety and panic disorder; this trial is ongoing and results are not yet available (Lindner et al., 2013). Unfortunately, we could not find any tests of therapist support to enhance program adherence in the area of diabetes. Therefore, it is unknown whether the emerging information about unguided mental health interventions applies to diabetes interventions.When therapist support is provided, it is often based on CBT, but in general, focuses on the behavioral target, such as depression. When targeting program completion however, there is a need to increase motivation to use programs and persist until completion. In these cases, it may be appropriate to use the counseling style of Motivational Interviewing (MI). MI facilitates behavior change for many health behaviors beyond its foundation in treating drinking problems, including alcohol and drug use, medication adherence, uptake of exercise, and others when delivered as 1–4 sessions of 15min or more (Hettema et al., 2005; Lundahl et al., 2010; Rubak et al., 2005). MI sessions include processes of Engaging, Focusing, Evoking, and Planning, culminating in behavior change that is freely chosen by the patient (Miller and Rollnick, 2012). MI has a large evidence base, and several meta-analyses have shown that it has a small to moderate effect size, similar to other psychotherapies (Burke et al., 2003; Heckman et al., 2010; Hettema et al., 2005; Hettema and Hendricks, 2010; Lundahl et al., 2010; Rubak et al., 2005; Smedslund et al., 2011; Vasilaki et al., 2006). MI has been tested in a number of studies as a prelude to enhance adherence to a primary intervention, and has been found to improve session attendance and outcomes (Carroll et al., 2006; Coyne and Correnti, 2014; Martino, 2011; Miller and Rollnick, 2012).MI is promising when delivered over the telephone for 1–2 sessions (Aharonovich et al., 2012; Bennett et al., 2008; Cook et al., 2009; Farrell-Carnahan et al., 2013; Walker et al., 2007). Telephone delivery is important in Internet-delivered interventions, because participants from wide geographic areas may enroll, making face to face sessions impractical if not impossible. We hypothesized that MI might improve usage of an Internet program, and could lead to improved completion of the program, or of follow-up assessments.The purposes of this paper are 1) to describe a Telephone Motivational Interviewing (MI) therapist support intervention targeting completion of an Internet intervention for drivers with Type 1 Diabetes, DD.com, and 2) to compare program utilization by those randomized to Internet intervention plus MI vs. those randomized to the Internet intervention alone.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
These findings suggest that therapist support using a single session of telephone-delivered Motivational Interviewing prior to an Internet intervention had a non-significant effect on adherence to or completion of the intervention, but that it may significantly speed completion of follow-up assessments. Those who received MI support completed some intervention period benchmarks sooner as well. We found no effects on intervention program components completed or study components completed. These findings contribute to a small but growing literature suggesting that therapist support targeting adherence does not improve adherence to an Internet intervention, at least when programs already include automated support such as reminders. However, it also highlights a potential benefit in promoting completion of assessments.