@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development and perceived utility and impact of a skin care Internet intervention

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Pressure ulcers (PrUs) in people with spinal cord injury (SCI) are a common, mostly preventable, skin complication with serious health consequences.This paper presents the development, theoretical bases, and perceived usefulness and effectiveness data for iSHIFTup.org, a skin care Internet intervention to prevent pressure ulcers in adults with SCI.A majority of users indicated that they were able to implement program recommendations, and all users believed the Internet was a good method for delivering pressure ulcer prevention programs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
SCI,Skin care,Pressure ulcer prevention,Rehabilitation,Internet intervention,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pressure ulcers (PrUs) in people with spinal cord injury (SCI) are a common, mostly preventable, skin complication with serious health consequences. This paper presents the development, theoretical bases, and perceived usefulness and effectiveness data for iSHIFTup.org, a skin care Internet intervention to prevent pressure ulcers in adults with SCI. Participants (n=7) were, on average, 36years old (SD=10.09), tetraplegic (71%), paraplegic (29%), and caucasian (86%), with an average time since injury of 10.43years (SD=9.64years). During the six weeks of program access, participants' usage of the program was tracked and analyzed. Participants subsequently completed measures focused on usability, likeability, and usefulness (the Internet Evaluation and Utility Questionnaire; IEUQ), and on their perceptions of the impact of the program on targeted behaviors (using the Internet Impact and Effectiveness Questionnaire; IIEQ). Participants generally reported positive experiences using iSHIFTup, indicating it to be useful, effective, easy to use, and understandable. All participants reported that iSHIFTup helped them to manage their skin care, improved their skin care routine, and supported healthy skin care activities. A majority of users indicated that they were able to implement program recommendations, and all users believed the Internet was a good method for delivering pressure ulcer prevention programs. This is the first paper to focus on a skin care Internet intervention for adults with SCI.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) produces immediate functional changes that usually result in mild to severe paralysis and loss of sensation below the level of injury (Krause et al., 2008). Pressure ulcers (PrUs) are a common secondary complication following traumatic SCI (Garber et al., 2002), and every individual with SCI is at life-long risk for developing PrUs post injury (Krause and Broderick, 2004). The National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel (NPUAP) defines a pressure ulcer as an area of unrelieved pressure over a defined area, usually over a bony prominence, resulting in ischemia, cell death, and tissue necrosis. Twenty to thirty percent of individuals with SCI will have at least one PrU within the first five years after injury (Chen et al., 2005; Krause and Broderick, 2004; Krause et al., 2008), and more than 50% of adults with SCI incur at least one severe PrU (stage 3 or stage 4) in their lifetime (Fuhrer et al., 1993; Garber et al., 2000; Jackson et al., 2010).PrUs negatively impact both quality of life for individuals with SCI, and their ability to live independently and to contribute to society (Krause and Broderick, 2004). Adults with SCI who develop PrUs have higher rates of medical complications and mortality than those without PrUs (Krause et al., 2008). Having a PrU also puts one at higher risk for future PrUs (Garber et al., 2000). PrUs and their associated complications may prolong length of stay in health care facilities and negatively impact rehabilitation progress (Zanca et al., 2005). When PrUs develop, they may require months or years to heal (Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine, 2000), and are expensive to treat, with estimated annual costs amounting to $1.4 billion in the Unites States attributed to PrU treatment after SCI (Gelis et al., 2009).Structured, face-to-face prevention education programs delivered to adults with SCI by health care providers have been shown to be effective in increasing knowledge of PrUs and how to prevent them as well as in reducing PrU occurrence or recurrence (Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine, 2002; Garber et al., 2002; Krouskop et al., 1983; Rintala et al., 2008). While preventing PrUs through routine health maintenance is widely encouraged, many people with SCI lack access to PrU prevention and management strategies and practices (Regan et al., 2009).Using the Internet to deliver a PrU prevention intervention may help overcome some of the barriers associated with traditional face-to-face PrU prevention programs, including making it more readily available. The Internet has been found to be an accessible method for delivering information to adults with SCI (Goodman et al., 2008). As reported in one trial by Goodman et al. (2008) 69% of participants with SCI use a computer and 94% of these individuals access the Internet. The majority of these Internet users (68%) went online 5 to 7days a week.Given the high rate of utilization of the Internet by individuals with SCI, the Internet appears to hold considerable potential as a means for delivering Internet-based prevention and intervention programs. Internet interventions are structured, self-guided programs delivered over the Internet using proven behavioral strategies to promote behavior change (Ritterband et al., 2003). Internet interventions have been found to be efficacious in changing behaviors for a variety of behaviorally-based problems (Barak et al., 2009; Ritterband et al., 2009; Wantland et al., 2004). This paper describes the development of iSHIFTup (Internet Skin Health Intervention for Targeted Ulcer Prevention), a skin care Internet intervention for adults with SCI to promote preventive skin care behaviors and prevent pressure ulcers. Findings related to participants' perceived impact and utility of the intervention are summarized.iSHIFTup was developed at the University of Virginia Behavioral Health and Technology Laboratory in collaboration with Woodrow Wilson Rehabilitation Center with funding from the Virginia Commonwealth Neurotrauma Initiative (2009–2012).iSHIFTup development followed a process shown to be valuable in the creation of other Internet interventions (Hilgart et al., 2012; Ritterband et al., 2009). Content development utilized a comprehensive set of theory-driven instructional strategies recommended for health education (Kinzie et al., 2002). A condensed version of Gagne's events of instruction (Gagne et al., 1985) was used as a starting point, or framework, on which the health belief model, social cognitive theory, and diffusion theory were drawn as key health behavior change theories to inform instructional strategy development (Bandura, 1986; Hilgart et al., 2012; Kinzie et al., 2002; Rosenstock et al., 1994). The Model of Internet Interventions was used as a guide for ensuring appropriate components were included, resulting in a testable program (Ritterband et al., 2009).An advisory panel of eight community member adults with SCI, three caregivers, an occupational and physical therapist who work with adults with SCI, a rehabilitation physician, a wound specialist nurse, a clinical health psychologist, and an instructional designer was established to provide input and feedback on the development of iSHIFTup. This group met three times in the first year of the project to review findings from previously published sources on PrU prevention education (including the Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine, 2000, 2002; Cuddigan et al., 2009; Schubart et al., 2008). This process was implemented to identify gaps in existing recommendations and to reach consensus on a set of goals for iSHIFTup that aligned with published PrU prevention literature. During advisory panel meetings, the research team presented materials in a semi-structured format and elicited feedback to guide content and design. All feedback and ideas were recorded, transcribed, and later distributed to panel members via email. From the complete list, items were rank ordered by panel members with top-ranking items then used to inform further design. Using this method, program goals were evaluated and confirmed with the advisory panel. The result was identification of a set of ten connected PrU prevention behaviors. These behaviors aligned with previously published guidelines for PrU prevention (see Fig. 1).Advisory panel members also contributed to crafting iSHIFTup content objectives. Objectives refer to what users are expected to know, do, think and feel as a result of using iSHIFTup. The panel identified a set of objectives that apply to all adults with SCI. These are the “Core” objectives of iSHIFTup. Additionally, a number of objectives were identified related to skin care and pressure ulcer prevention that apply to a subset of adults with SCI. These adjunct objectives are the “Module” objectives of iSHIFTup. Initially, design and learning activities were evaluated by members using paper prototypes via email. Six cycles of paper-based review of Core and Module learning activities were completed between 2010 and 2012. The final program specifications resulted in three Core units, and sixteen adjunct Modules focused on specific issues surrounding skin care that are recommended on a tailored basis (see Fig. 2).Formative evaluation (ongoing review and revision of the program materials and activities) was conducted throughout the development period in which identified items were prioritized, and those most easily implemented were made prior to the study. These included updating elements of navigation design; adding additional graphics and instructions to the program tutorial; changing link colors; and updating audio files. Items not feasibly implemented prior to study launch remain part of an optimization plan to be implemented in future program revisions. For example, a revision that remains on the optimization plan is adding a feature to the Cores and Modules allowing users to make notes that can be printed or accessed later.iSHIFTup incorporates a media rich format of text, audio, graphics, animation, and video, providing an interactive and engaging experience for users. When users log in to iSHIFTup, they begin on the Home screen. Information on the Home screen changes based on the user's status, providing instruction on what to do and where to navigate within the program. The bulk of the program content is embedded in three Cores, sixteen Modules, and three Follow-Ups, which are to be completed over a four week period (see Fig. 3). Users also complete daily diaries in order to prospectively track skin care behaviors.When users first begin iSHIFTup, they are instructed to complete the program Cores. Core units are completed sequentially, during the first week of use, with each Core estimated to take a typical user about an hour. The three iSHIFTup Cores include: Core 1, which makes a rationale for awareness of life-long PrU risk, encourages taking responsibility of skin care, and gives an overview of the program; Core 2, which focuses on the knowledge portion of PrU prevention and identifies a set of connected behaviors to best prevent PrUs; and Core 3, which is the behavioral component of the program and supports engagement in the identified set of preventive behaviors. Each Core (and Module) begins by clearly informing users what they should be able to do after completing that unit of the program. Users are given the opportunity to self-assess and are provided feedback on their performance of key skills and behaviors. iSHIFTup uses interactions to simulate “hands on” practice of behaviors and skills, and provides feedback in the form of audio and visual content based on user input. For example, in Core 2: Pressure Ulcers in Real Life, users perform a “virtual” skin check which provides the opportunity to select the places on the body PrUs are most likely to occur. Feedback is given based on the choices users make. Additionally, in Core 3, Healthy Skin Behaviors, users are given opportunities to select and view/listen to others modeling “best-practice” skin checks in stories and expert videos. Users also select stories of people who describe or demonstrate an inability to perform skin checks or who perform them incorrectly, and thus see the consequences of these negative examples. The models (actors used in stories) represent people of different age, ethnicity, and gender, as well as level and completeness of SCI and time since onset. Models also differed in their level of competence in performing behaviors, or their attitudes in taking charge of their skin care, thereby allowing users to select the types of models they find most helpful. Fig. 4provides a listing of Core content and the primary instructional strategies used.iSHIFTup recommends Modules based on a Follow-Up set of 20 questions users answer one week after completing the three Cores. These Follow-Up questions help determine how well the user is implementing program recommendations (e.g., “Have you performed pressure relief while sitting?”, “Have you checked your skin 2× per day?”). And, based on the user's responses, specific Modules are assigned to address identified issues, providing a tailored experience. Users are prompted to complete these recommended Modules during the next 7days. This cycle of completing a Follow-Up and receiving recommended Modules is repeated three times; users, however, may continue to use the program after these are completed.Diaries allow users to track their skin care behaviors while using iSHIFTup. The Daily Diary consists of ten questions on user behaviors that make up a skin care routine. Tracking behaviors helps users see cause and effect relationships among behaviors and outcomes. For example, a user who typically sits 8h each day in a wheelchair and then finds a skin problem after sitting 10h, may more easily connect the problem to the additional sitting time when behaviors are being tracked. Diary items include number of hours sitting in wheelchair, number of hours in bed or lying down, number of pressure reliefs each hour, number of skin checks, whether problem areas were found, and if so, what was found and where on the body. Users also answer questions about changes in equipment and environment and are provided a notes area to enter detailed information on changes that occurred and additional items they wish to track.Once diaries have been entered, users can view this information using the Diary Charts feature in iSHIFTup (Fig. 5). The diary charts graphically display the key behaviors over time, thus allowing participants to better understand patterns in their skin care behaviors. For example, users can view how their sitting time, frequency of pressure reliefs, and number of skin checks varied over a given period.iSHIFTup includes a number of strategies and techniques shown to be beneficial in engaging individuals when using Internet interventions and encouraging the prescribed behaviors (Ritterband et al., 2008; Ritterband et al., 2009, 2012). In addition to detailed guidance on how to perform specific behaviors and daily diaries to track behaviors over time, iSHIFTup makes considerable use of tailoring, automated prompts, goal setting and behavioral contracting.Basic tailoring has already been mentioned with respect to the Follow-Ups and assigned Modules. iSHIFTup also offers tailored content to users based on their PrU history, self-assessed prior knowledge of PrUs, and their baseline skin care regimen. In each case, users are asked to make selections from multiple choices (e.g. “I have never had a pressure ulcer,” “I get a pressure ulcer every year”) and based on their selections, specific content, relevant to that choice is provided. In addition, content specific to the user's own selected risk factors for pressure ulcers is provided. Tailored messages are also sent to users based on predefined triggers and time periods, such as when users complete, or fail to complete, assigned activities. Automated prompts in the form of emails are sent throughout use of the program to encourage the user to return to the program, highlight upcoming events, and generally increase engagement.A motivational interviewing approach was used to encourage users to establish when and what they are willing to do to care for their skin and prevent pressure ulcers, in a non-judgmental context (Rollnick et al., 2010). Behavioral contracts and goal setting have been implemented giving users the opportunity to set goals. A subset of users, however, may find they are not ready to set goals when provided the opportunity. Users answering “yes” to the question, “Are you ready to set goals?” progress to the goal setting screen, whereas those answering “no” are asked questions to identify reasons they are not ready to set goals and receive content based on the answer choices they make. Users are then provided additional content based on their explicit needs and preferences.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
