@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Online physical activity interventions for mental disorders: A systematic review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We systematically reviewed online physical activity (PA) interventions for mental disorders.Only two trials evaluated online PA interventions.Results were inconclusive with only one study finding significant group differences.More studies are needed to evaluate online PA interventions for mental disorders.Future studies need to explore the mechanism of change in online PA interventions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online,Internet,Physical activity,Mental disorders,Depression,Exercise,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAccumulating evidence indicates that face-to-face physical activity interventions improve the physical and mental health of people with mental disorders. However, it is unclear whether internet-delivered physical activity interventions are also efficacious.ObjectiveOur aim was to determine the effect of online physical activity interventions on the severity of symptoms of mental illness among people experiencing mental disorders.MethodsA systematic review of major electronic databases was conducted from inception to January 2015. Randomised controlled trials of internet-delivered interventions to increase physical activity participation in adults (>18years) with a DSM, ICD, clinician-confirmed diagnosis, and/or those receiving specialist mental health treatment were eligible for inclusion. Outcome data for symptom severity (depression) and physical activity participation was extracted.ResultsTwo trials (N=95 participants) met the inclusion criteria, which investigated online clinician-guided interventions of 9–10week duration. Results were discrepant across studies. One study found a moderate between-groups effect size compared to wait-list control on depression outcomes (d=.67) but no differences in physical activity participation. In the other study, there were no significant differences between an online physical activity intervention versus treatment-as-usual in a university counselling service.ConclusionThe preliminary findings suggest that online physical activity interventions may have positive effects on depression symptoms, but the size of the effects and mechanism of change remain unclear. Further research is critically needed to explore the efficacy and acceptability of online physical interventions for people with mental disorders.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The effectiveness of internet-delivered cognitive behavioural treatment for those experiencing common mental disorders has been previously demonstrated (Andrews et al., 2010). A large body of clinical evidence from randomised controlled trials (RCTs), effectiveness studies, and meta-analyses of internet-delivered CBT (iCBT) programmes demonstrate that iCBT is feasible and efficacious for treating depression (Perini et al., 2009; Ruwaard et al., 2009), a range of specific anxiety disorders (Hedman et al., 2011; Klein et al., 2010; Paxling et al., 2011; Titov et al., 2008; Wims et al., 2010), mixed anxiety diagnoses (Carlbring et al., 2011; Johnston et al., 2011) as well as comorbid anxiety and depression (Johansson et al., 2012; Newby et al., 2013; Titov et al., 2011). Adherence rates are high in clinical trials (70–90%: e.g., Titov et al., 2011), clinically significant reductions are observed in symptoms, disability and distress, with medium to large effect pre- to post-treatment effect sizes (0.88, NNT=2.13) (Andrews et al., 2010; Spek et al., 2007), and the positive effects are sustained post-treatment (Andersson et al., 2013; Hedman et al., 2011). Together, the evidence provides strong support for the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of iCBT programmes in the treatment of mental disorders.To-date, out of the available evidence-based treatments for common mental disorders that have been adapted for delivery over the internet, CBT protocols are the most common and widely available. CBT lends itself to online delivery because of its' structured nature, and its' focus on psychoeducation and skills-practice. However, not all patients recover during iCBT, and drop-out rates are not trivial (up to 45%), especially when iCBT is delivered in routine clinical care (Newby et al., 2014). Therefore, increasing efforts have been made in the field to develop and evaluate a range of additional internet-delivered treatment options, beyond the CBT approach. These include diagnosis-specific interventions from therapeutic modalities other than CBT, such as behavioural activation, and acceptance and commitment therapy, as well as more general programmes that teach certain skills (e.g., mindfulness-based interventions, behavioural stress management) to reduce emotional distress across disorders.The focus of this review is to examine the literature on online physical activity interventions for people with common mental disorders, including depression and anxiety. Why investigate the impact of general physical activity interventions for mental disorders, and why look at online delivery? First, there is evidence that common mental disorders are associated with increased sedentary behaviour, the development of comorbid chronic physical diseases (e.g., type 2 diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, chronic pain), and even premature mortality (Gan et al., 2014; Holt et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2013). Sedentary behaviour is recognised as a key modifiable risk factor contributing to the premature mortality experienced by those with serious mental disorders (De Hert et al., 2009; Scott and Happell, 2011; Vancampfort et al., 2012a).Physical activity interventions directly address sedentary behaviour, and are a feasible, acceptable and efficacious co-treatment strategy for a range of mental disorders regardless of psychiatric diagnoses (Cooney et al., 2013; Rosenbaum et al., 2014a; Stanton et al., 2014). Positive effects of physical activity and exercise (a structured subset of physical activity) have been found across a broad range of mental disorders including depression (Cooney et al., 2013), anxiety (Jayakody et al., 2013), schizophrenia (Gorczynski and Faulkner, 2010; Vancampfort et al., 2012b, 2012c) and bipolar disorder (Wright et al., 2009) with effect sizes (SMD) ranging from 0.46 to 1.0. Examples of successful physical activity and lifestyle interventions for people experiencing mental illness are increasing (Bruins et al., 2014; Daumit et al., 2013), with growing interest in the role of physical therapists and exercise physiologists to facilitate the delivery of such interventions (Rosenbaum et al., 2014b; Stanton, 2013; Stubbs et al., 2014).Despite the demonstrated benefits of physical activity and lifestyle interventions for people experiencing mental disorders, it is still unknown how generalist physical activity interventions compare in efficacy to specific programmes targeting specific mental disorders. In addition, the optimal method of implementation and integration of such interventions within existing services requires further research (Bartels, 2015; The Lancet, 2014). Physical activity interventions are traditionally delivered face-to-face, either individually or in groups. This mode of delivery may limit accessibility for key target groups, due to high transport costs or lack of access to qualified exercise specialists in particular settings (e.g., rural and remote communities) (Rosenbaum et al., 2015).Delivering interventions for increasing physical activity among people with mental disorders over the internet presents a potentially useful implementation strategy, because of the low cost, and ability to reach a large number of people in the community. There has been extensive research in this area in the general adult population. Supporting the results of an earlier meta-analysis (Davies et al., 2012), a recent systematic review of 46 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of internet-delivered physical activity interventions found that internet-based interventions were effective in increasing physical activity (Joseph et al., 2014). However, the question as to whether online physical activity interventions are effective for people with mental disorders has not yet been systematically reviewed or evaluated. To address this gap, the aim of this systematic review was to comprehensively summarise the literature to determine the effect of online physical activity interventions on the severity of symptoms of mental illness among people experiencing mental disorders.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The potential to utilise online delivery of physical activity interventions for people with mental disorders is largely unrealised; given the ready scalability that the online delivery mode offers, it may be possible to greatly improve access to an intervention that has shown great promise as a co-treatment for reduction of psychiatric symptoms and improvement of physical health outcomes when delivered in-person. Based on past success in implementing iCBT interventions, there are grounds for optimism that similar positive outcomes can be achieved for physical activity interventions.All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.