@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stress management for middle managers via an acceptance and commitment-based smartphone application: A randomized controlled trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First RCT for stress management in organizational context using a smartphone app.Small to moderate within-group effect sizes for the treatment group.Small to moderate between group effects when compared to waitlist control group.Results provide support the smartphone stress intervention among middle managers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stress management,Acceptance and commitment therapy,Leadership,Middle managers,Smartphone,Application,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Stress is a major health problem in today's workplace. Recent studies suggest that acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is effective for reducing stress at work, specifically among managers. Moreover, smartphone-delivered treatments have been developed and increasingly used in research. The objective of our study was to evaluate the efficacy of an ACT-based smartphone treatment among middle managers at medium- and large-sized companies (>50 employees) in Sweden. A total of 73 participants were randomized to either receive the six-week stress intervention (n=36) or to a waitlist control group (n=37). Results showed small to moderate within-group effect sizes (Cohen's d range 0.37–0.62) for the treatment group, and small to moderate between group effects (Cohen's d range 0.41–0.50). In conclusion, the study indicates that a smartphone administered stress intervention based on ACT can reduce perceived stress and increase general health among Swedish middle managers in the private sector.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Stress is a major health problem in today's workplace (American Psychological Association, 2009). Prolonged occupational stress has been associated with increased risk of burnout (Maslach et al., 2001), anxiety and depression (Melchior et al., 2007). Moreover, somatic problems such as cardiovascular disease (Cohen et al., 2007) and impaired function of the immune system (Mommersteeg et al., 2006) have been reported in association with stress. In the United Kingdom, 40% of work-related illness is related to stress (Health and Safety Executive, 2013), and in the United States, 40% of all professionals state that their job is very or extremely stressful (American Psychological Association, 2009). Stress-related illness is also associated with large costs for society (Boorman, 2009), with increased absenteeism and reduced efficiency at work being two consequences (Hardy et al., 2003).Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is a form of Cognitive-Behavior Therapy (CBT) that has been applied to organizational settings (Moran, 2011). The general objective in ACT is to promote psychological flexibility, i. e. the ability to be present in the here and now and adjust one's behavior according to personal values. This ability is increased in ACT by using six central processes: acceptance, mindfulness, defusion, self as context, values and committed action (Hayes et al., 2006b). Recent studies suggest that ACT is effective for reducing stress at work (Hayes et al., 2006a). For example, one study showed a large between group effect size (Cohen's d=1.31) for reducing psychological distress among working individuals when comparing ACT against a waitlist control group (Flaxman and Bond, 2010). In addition, the study showed that ACT worked just as well as the well-established CBT-method Stress Inoculation Training (Flaxman and Bond, 2010). In other studies, a one-day intervention with ACT has been shown to reduce fatigue symptoms and related sickness absence (Dahl et al., 2004; Hayes et al., 2004). Moreover, initial studies have found that ACT is effective for reducing stress specifically among managers (Bond et al., 2006). Since research suggests that managers at intermediate levels (middle managers), are particularly vulnerable to stress (Holden and Roberts, 2004), this is an attractive target group to develop a stress intervention for. However, research on ACT-based stress interventions is relatively new and more studies are needed, particularly with middle managers as a target group.Since research has shown that the ability to cope with stress is crucial for leader performance (Bartone et al., 2009), there are reasons to believe that an ACT-based stress intervention might improve leadership as well. According to Stewart et al. (2006) there are parallels between the presumed mechanisms in ACT and the theory of transformative leadership (Bass and Riggio, 2012), e.g. the focus on acting in line with one's values and persisting in the face of challenges. The “Full-range theory of leadership”, where transformative leadership is one of the main components, is one of the most established leadership models in research (Bass, 1998). Transformative leadership is characterized by four factors: idealized influence, inspirational motivation, intellectual stimulation and individualized consideration. Meta-analyses have shown that transformative leadership has a positive effect on employees' performance and motivation (Dumdum et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2011). To our knowledge, no studies have examined the effects of an ACT intervention on transformational leadership.It is well established that guided self-help interventions, administered through the internet, can have positive effects in a clinical psychological context (Andersson, 2009; Andersson and Titov, 2014). Guided treatments distributed digitally have provided a way to reach a larger number of patients in a manner that in most cases requires less therapist time than face-to-face psychotherapy, but with similar clinical outcome (Andersson et al., in press). Recently, a number of studies have also investigated interventions administered via smartphones (Webb et al., 2010; Ly et al., 2014). Morris et al. (2010) concluded that these studies are promising and show the possibility of delivering psychotherapy in a new and efficient way. The smartphone as a platform for psychological interventions has, however, not yet been investigated to any great extent in an organizational context. Since smartphones already are socially accepted and come at relatively low costs considering their functionalities (Boschen and Casey, 2008), it has been suggested that smartphones will be integrated even further in society (Ly et al., 2014), and therefore may be important in distributing psychological and health interventions both in a clinical (Donker et al., 2013) and an organizational context.The main objective of our study was to evaluate the efficacy of a smartphone administered stress intervention based on ACT's six basic tools (Hayes et al., 1999) among middle managers working in medium- and large-sized companies (>50 employees) in Sweden. We hypothesized that the participants given the smartphone stress intervention would, in comparison to a waitlist control group, 1) reduce their perceived stress; 2) increase their general health; and 3) increase the effect on transformative leadership.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The current study provides support for the idea that a smartphone administered stress intervention based on ACT can reduce perceived stress and increase general health among Swedish middle managers in the private sector. Since no previous studies are available in this area, it is necessary to replicate the study before drawing firm conclusions' about the findings. It may be considered promising that a type of stress intervention, previously shown to be effective in other formats (Brinkborg et al., 2011; Flaxman and Bond, 2010), also appears to work with an entirely smartphone-based administration without any physical meetings. We believe that there are advantages to the smartphone format in the workplace context, since smartphone interventions might be more assimilated into people's daily life compared to other interventions, and thus be more accessible. The smartphone format might also help increasing users' awareness of being in an intervention, even in a workplace setting, and therefore better help users to create direct incentives for activities related to the intervention in their work life. We hope that this study might pave the way for other studies using smartphones in the working life context. Possible future studies could investigate a similar program but on a population with higher stress levels than middle managers. Also, it is worthy to investigate other types of interventions using the smartphone format, for example a program that focuses entirely on transformative leadership. Another important area that future studies could look at is the possible side effects of the intervention, since it has been suggested that there is insufficient knowledge concerning the characteristics of negative effects in digital distributed treatments (Rozental et al., 2014).KHL and KA were the project managers for the study. KHL has developed the application. KA has developed the content in the stress program. KHL and KA drafted the current manuscript, and participated in analysis and interpretation of data. GA was the principal investigator and participated in the conception of the study and its design. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.The Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare sponsored this study with funding (Dnr: 2012-0599).