@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The use of automated assessments in internet-based CBT: The computer will be with you shortly

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined the effectiveness of internet-CBT in routine clinical care.Patients underwent an automated assessment or an assessment by a psychiatrist.Both groups showed significant improvement in symptoms of anxiety and depression.There were no differences between groups at post-treatment.Automated assessments can lead to good treatment outcomes in etherapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
iCBT,Etherapy,Anxiety,Depression,Cognitive behavioral therapy,Assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is evidence from randomized control trials that internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy (iCBT) is efficacious in the treatment of anxiety and depression, and recent research demonstrates the effectiveness of iCBT in routine clinical care. The aims of this study were to implement and evaluate a new pathway by which patients could access online treatment by completing an automated assessment, rather than seeing a specialist health professional. We compared iCBT treatment outcomes in patients who received an automated pre-treatment questionnaire assessment with patients who were assessed by a specialist psychiatrist prior to treatment. Participants were treated as part of routine clinical care and were therefore not randomized. The results showed that symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased significantly with iCBT, and that the mode of assessment did not affect outcome. That is, a pre-treatment assessment by a psychiatrist conferred no additional treatment benefits over an automated assessment. These findings suggest that iCBT is effective in routine care and may be implemented with an automated assessment. By providing wider access to evidence-based interventions and reducing waiting times, the use of iCBT within a stepped-care model is a cost-effective way to reduce the burden of disease caused by these common mental disorders.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Anxiety and depressive disorders are the most common mental health disorders (Kessler et al., 2005; Andrews et al., 2001). They can be treated effectively using cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT; Roy-Byrne and Cowley, 2007; Barlow, 2008) as well as medication (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; Montgomery, 2006; Van Der Linden et al., 2000; Gorman and Kent, 1999). Despite the success of these interventions, there are significant barriers to treatment access and long-term treatment outcomes. Specifically, many patients are reluctant to take medication and relapse rates are elevated once medication is terminated (e.g., Gould et al., 1995, 1997). Although the effects of CBT outlast the treatment itself, it is widely recognized that there are simply not enough trained clinicians to cater for the number of patients who could benefit from it (Lovell and Richards, 2000; Williams and Martinez, 2008). This discrepancy between supply and demand has led to lengthy waiting lists; indeed, waiting times from between 6 and 12months are not unusual (Lovell and Richards, 2000; Shapiro et al., 2003). Internet-based treatments, which greatly facilitate the dissemination of evidence-based interventions, provide a valuable tool for overcoming this difficulty and it is clear that the use of internet-based treatments has increased dramatically over recent years.Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy (iCBT) has been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of anxiety and depression. Specifically, the efficacy of iCBT has been demonstrated in the treatment of Generalized Anxiety Disorder (Robinson et al., 2010*, Cuijpers et al., 2009),11*References marked with an asterisk are published efficacy trials of the courses used in the current study.Social Anxiety Disorder (Titov et al., 2008b*, Titov et al., 2009a*, Titov et al., 2009b*, Carlbring et al., 2009), Panic Disorder with and without Agoraphobia (Wims et al., 2010*, Carlbring et al., 2006), Depression (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Perini et al., 2009*), and mixed anxiety and depression (Titov et al., 2011*, Newby et al., 2013*). A recent meta-analysis of 22 studies demonstrated that iCBT had a mean effect size of 0.88 (Number needed to treat=2.13; Andrews et al., 2010). Moreover, internet treatment has been shown to be as effective as face-to-face treatment (for review, see Andrews et al., 2010). Further, iCBT is highly acceptable to patients and adherence rates are high (Andrews et al., 2010). As one would imagine, iCBT is also more cost-effective than face-to-face treatment.There is now also evidence which demonstrates the effectiveness of iCBT in clinical practice (Williams and Andrews, 2013; Mewton et al., 2012; Hilvert-Bruce et al., 2012; Sunderland et al., 2012; Newby et al., 2013, 2014; Hedman et al., 2013, 2014; Bergstrom et al., 2009; Ruwaard et al., 2012). We currently have two routes by which patients can access iCBT in routine clinical care — (1) Patients can obtain a referral for a specialist face-to-face assessment at our clinic and then receive supervision through the course by one of the clinicians working at the clinic; or (2) Patients can receive a “prescription” for the iCBT course by their general practitioner (GP) who is registered with This Way Up Clinic. In that pathway, the “prescribing” GP also supervises them through the course. There are barriers to the uptake of treatment in both of these pathways. In the specialist pathway, patients are required to attend a face-to-face clinical interview with a specialist psychiatrist, which is both costly to the health system and time-consuming for patients. In the primary care pathway, doctors may feel that they lack the time or expertise to supervise patients through the course and thus be less inclined to prescribe an iCBT course for a patient presenting with an anxiety or depression disorder. Both of these factors limit the extent to which evidence-based iCBT treatments are used.In this study, we sought to implement and evaluate a new pathway in order to overcome these potential barriers to the uptake of iCBT. Specifically, we designed a pathway by which patients could access online treatment by completing an automated assessment, rather than seeing a specialist health professional, and receive supervision from a clinician at our clinic rather than from their GP. In this “automated” pathway, the patient's GP in the community referred the patient for an online assessment to determine suitability for iCBT and course recommendation. Patients in that pathway received supervision through the course by a clinician at our clinic, rather than their referring GP. In order to evaluate this new pathway, treatment outcomes from this group of patients, who completed an automated assessment, were compared to treatment outcomes for patients who were seen for a face-to-face assessment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the treatment of mental disorders, it has long been believed that seeing people face-to-face is important. However, with the rapidly emerging field of internet-based interventions for mental disorders, it is now becoming increasingly accepted that therapy over the internet leads to significant therapeutic gains. Nevertheless, a specialized assessment in person or over the phone continues to be the norm in this field. In this study, we showed that not only can patients in real-world settings benefit significantly from online cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and depression, but that the pre-treatment assessment can also be completed online, without any therapist involvement, without compromising treatment outcome. These findings have implications for the treatment of anxiety and depressive disorders in routine clinical practice. In particular, they suggest that specialized mental health clinicians may not be essential for the online treatment of anxiety and depression. Using an automated assessment and online treatment can greatly lessen the burden of disease related to anxiety and depression by reducing waiting times and significantly increasing access to evidence-based interventions. Future work should continue to examine further factors that influence treatment outcome, and ways in which to increase adherence rates in real-world settings.