@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Facebook recruitment of young adult smokers for a cessation trial: Methods, metrics, and lessons learned

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Facebook used to recruit young adults to a smoking cessation intervention.36 ads generated 5,895 clicks, at $0.34 each and $8.80 per consented participant.Images of smoking and newsfeed ads yielded the most clicks at the lowest cost.Facebook can be a useful cost-effective recruitment source for young adult smokers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Facebook,Participant recruitment,Young adult,Tobacco,Smoking cessation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Further understanding is needed of the functionalities and efficiency of social media for health intervention research recruitment. Facebook was examined as a mechanism to recruit young adults for a smoking cessation intervention. An ad campaign targeting young adult smokers tested specific messaging based on market theory and successful strategies used to recruit smokers in previous clinical trials (i.e. informative, call to action, scarcity, social norms), previously successful ads, and general messaging. Images were selected to target smokers (e.g., lit cigarette), appeal to the target age, vary demographically, and vary graphically (cartoon, photo, logo). Facebook's Ads Manager was used over 7weeks (6/10/13–7/29/13), targeted by age (18–25), location (U.S.), and language (English), and employed multiple ad types (newsfeed, standard, promoted posts, sponsored stories) and keywords. Ads linked to the online screening survey or study Facebook page. The 36 different ads generated 3,198,373 impressions, 5895 unique clicks, at an overall cost of $2024 ($0.34/click). Images of smoking and newsfeed ads had the greatest reach and clicks at the lowest cost. Of 5895 unique clicks, 586 (10%) were study eligible and 230 (39%) consented. Advertising costs averaged $8.80 per eligible, consented participant. The final study sample (n=79) was largely Caucasian (77%) and male (69%), averaging 11 cigarettes/day (SD=8.3) and 2.7 years smoking (SD=0.7). Facebook is a useful, cost-effective recruitment source for young adult smokers. Ads posted via newsfeed posts were particularly successful, likely because they were viewable via mobile phone. Efforts to engage more ethnic minorities, young women, and smokers motivated to quit are needed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Studies of tobacco use and other health behaviors have reported great challenges in recruiting young adults (Bost, 2005; Davies et al., 2000). More successful methods have reached youth in settings where they frequent (e.g., schools, bars/nightclubs), emphasized privacy and flexibility, and made use of peer “informants” to determine recruitment locations (Berg et al., 2011; Kalkhoran et al., 2013). With the potential for wider reach and greater engagement, social media sites, such as Facebook and Twitter, are widely popular among young adults, and are demonstrating utility in health-related research (Gold et al., 2011). Social media are used most often and by an overwhelming majority of online 18 to 29year olds (89%), with Facebook alone visited by 70% of young adults on a typical day (Duggan and Brenner, 2013). Social media can meet young adults where they frequent, at any hour of the day, with the potential for private interactions, and the appearance of peer outreach. Further, marketing campaigns on Facebook offer the opportunity to target advertisements by age, location, or keywords, for engaging research participants who meet specific recruitment criteria.A 2012 review of approximately 20 studies using social media for research recruitment found that social media appears cost-effective, efficient, and successful in engaging a diverse range of individuals (Ryan, 2013). In the area of health research, use of Facebook has largely centered on recruitment of adults for cross-sectional surveys. Examples include studies of nutrition education programming with low-income Pennsylvania residents; (Lohse and Wamboldt, 2013) adult therapy preferences; (Rogers et al., 2009) adult sexual orientation; (Vrangalova and Savin-Williams, 2012) and birth preferences of pregnant women, with costs of $11.11 per enrollee (Arcia, 2013). Intervention studies have used Facebook to recruit Veterans for a web intervention targeting alcohol problems and post traumatic stress disorder symptoms (Brief et al., 2013) and a depression prevention intervention (Morgan et al., 2013), though Facebook's targeting was found to be too specific and more costly than Google (AUD $11.55 per participant from Google vs. AUD $19.89 per participant from Facebook). One group is using Facebook to implement respondent-driven sampling (Decide2Quit.org); results are forthcoming (Sadasivam et al., 2013a,b). Another group showed that participants recruited to smoking cessation clinical trials through Facebook did not differ from those recruited through more traditional means on smoking characteristics or demographics other than age; Facebook recruits were younger (Frandsen et al., 2014).A few studies have reported on Facebook recruitment of young adults; most have been cross-sectional survey studies—on post-traumatic stress; (Chu and Snider, 2013) general health; (Fenner et al., 2012) sexual health; (Ahmed et al., 2013; Young et al., 2013) tobacco; (Ramo and Prochaska, 2012) and other substance use (Bauermeister et al., 2012)—with one longitudinal intervention trial, promoting sexual health (Nguyen et al., 2013). In a national online survey study of young adult smokers, a Facebook ad campaign reported a cost of $4.28 per valid, completed survey (Ramo and Prochaska, 2012), which was more cost-effective than buying ads on other websites ($43 per completed survey) or recruiting via a survey sampling company ($19 per completed survey), and was better targeted with more valid results than free advertisements on Craigslist. (Ramo et al., 2010) While Facebook has demonstrated utility as a channel for reaching young adult smokers age 18 to 25, engaging this same group in a cessation intervention is anticipated to be more challenging, given the greater time commitment of longitudinal research and possible expectations inherent in a treatment study.To provide further understanding of the functionalities and efficiency of social media for health intervention research recruitment, the current study reports on a Facebook ad campaign targeting young adults for a smoking cessation study. This study reports on recruitment methods, time, and cost; examines ad types that were more or less successful; and presents characteristics of the participants ultimately receiving the intervention.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using Facebook for intervention study recruitment with young adults, this study built upon strategies learned in previous experience and benefited from testing a wide range of marketing strategies targeted to the study population. Particular utility was found in targeting more directly mobile users by buying a greater proportion of newsfeed ads, and focusing on simple (yet obvious) images and messaging. Future investigations should examine systematic comparisons of different advertising types and messages, and compare paid and unpaid Facebook advertising campaigns. Given that young adults are increasingly conducting daily communications online, rather than face-to-face or telephone, traditional methods of recruitment and assessment are increasingly obsolete. Researchers desiring to reach young adults for recruitment and to change health behaviors (especially stigmatized behavior) should consider social media as a viable option for recruitment.All authors declare no completing interests associated with this study.No financial disclosures were reported by the authors of this paper.