@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Experiences of non-adherence to Internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy: A qualitative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Qualitative study on experiences of non-adherence to Internet-delivered treatmentExplores treatment features relevant to participants' experience of premature treatment terminationExplores negative effects

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet treatment,Attrition,Non-adherence,Generalized anxiety disorder,Cognitive behavior therapy,Behavior therapy,Self-help,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many trials on Internet-delivered psychological treatments have had problems with nonadherence, but not much is known about the subjective reasons for non-adhering. The aim of this study was to explore participants' experiences of non-adherence to Internet-delivered psychological treatment. Grounded theory was used to analyze data from seven in-depth interviews with persons who had non-adhered to a study on Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. The process of non-adherence is described as an interaction between patient factors and treatment factors. A working model theory was generated to illustrate the experience of nonadherence. The model describes a process where treatment features such as workload, text-content complexity and treatment process don't match personal prerequisites regarding daily routines, perceived language skills and treatment expectations respectively, resulting in the decision to nonadhere. Negative effects were also stated as a reason for non-adherence. Several common strategies used for increasing adherence to Internet-delivered therapy in general are by these non-completers regarded as factors directly related to their reason for non-adherence.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many published trials on Internet-delivered psychological treatments have had problems with a high degree of non-adherence, where a majority of study participants do not complete the entire treatment program (Christensen et al., 2009; Dunn et al., 2012; Eysenbach, 2005). Systematic reviews indicates that non-adherence to Internet interventions is comparable to other forms of treatment (Christensen et al., 2009; Kaltenthaler et al., 2008), although few studies have compared Internet and face-to-face interventions regarding variables such as adherence-rates (Andersson et al., 2014; van Ballegooijen et al., 2014). Web-based psychological treatments are effective, and as with psychological treatments in general, a challenge for further increasing effectiveness is to increase the proportion that completes the full treatment.Providing participants with therapist contact for online guidance and support during the treatment period has been found to increase adherence and effect sizes (Andersson, 2009; Christensen et al., 2009; Spek et al., 2007). Even with added therapist support the proportion of non-completers is still a crucial factor for web-based treatment programs. In addition to therapist guidance several strategies have been explored to further increase adherence to Internet-delivered treatment programs. For example adding telephone calls from the therapist (Clarke et al., 2005) increasing the frequency of e-mails from the therapist (Klein et al., 2009), allowing choice of treatment course and timing, adding clinician contact and varying the economic cost for the patients (Hilvert-Bruce et al., 2012). Overall, regular and more frequent therapist contact, reminders and more frequent intended usage seem to predict better adherence (Kelders et al., 2012). However, as noted by Postel et al. (2011) the success of specific initiatives seems in part to be related to the setting in which they are performed, e.g. adding telephone prompts yields different effects in different studies (Clarke et al., 2005; Farrer et al., 2011). As mentioned adding e-mail support from a therapist increases adherence but increasing therapist e-mail support (from one to three times a week) did not affect adherence significantly in the study by Klein et al. (2009).Baseline predictors of adherence also vary between studies. A systematic review (Christensen et al., 2009) found that factors such as disease severity, treatment length and chronicity predicted adherence in Internet-delivered CBT. Clinical factors such as severity have also been related to adherence to web-based interventions targeting problematic drinking (Bewick et al., 2008). Other fields of online interventions have identified different predictors and no consistent pattern of predictors for non-adherence in online interventions is evident (Linke et al., 2007; Postel et al., 2011).Even if there are previous studies that describe aspects of prematurely exiting a psychological treatment (Wierzbicki and Pekarik, 1993), few studies elaborates on why individuals choose to non-adhere. In a study on the reasons for non-adhering in an eating disorder treatment (Vandereycken and Devidt, 2010), the authors found that several patients did not complete treatment since they believed that they had achieved “sufficient progress”. Analogously lack of progress is in several studies not related to non-adherence (Christensen et al., 2009; Klein et al., 2009). When reasons for non-adherence are studied, common answers often concern personal reasons (Christensen et al., 2009).Individuals who non-adhere to psychological treatment do not generally get better on their own without further treatment (Beumont et al., 1993; Fairburn et al., 1993), and considering the ambiguous results of research on predictors of adherence and strategies for improving adherence there seems to be a need to further investigate the reasons and circumstances surrounding non-adherence. Specifically there is a gap in the literature concerning in-depth exploration of the subjective reasons for non-adhering to online psychological treatments.To our knowledge few studies, if any, have examined experiences of non-adhering to guided ICBT. In this study we focus on an Internet-delivered, guided self-help program for generalized anxiety disorder, with the aim to gain more knowledge about the factors that might play a role in the decision not to complete an ICBT treatment. By interviewing and qualitatively analyzing the participants' experiences of non-adherence we aim to generate a new theoretical working model on how non-adherence occurs in Internet-delivered treatments.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study contributes with perspectives on experiences of non-adherence to Internet-delivered therapy. A working model theory is used to illustrate the experience of non-adherence. The model describes a process where treatment features such as workload, text-content complexity and treatment process don't match personal prerequisites such as daily routines, language skills and treatment expectations respectively. Negative effects were also salient as a reason for non-adherence, along with a wish for face-to-face contact. Several of the strategies used for increasing general adherence in Internet-delivered therapy (e.g. modular approach, high intended use) is by these non-completers regarded as factors directly related to their reason for non-adherence. A discrepancy between participants' expectations of the treatment process and the actual experiences of the therapy was related to the participants' non-adherence. This discrepancy could potentially be avoided by beforehand better preparing and educating the participant of the treatment process.Based on the results of this study it is important to further investigate the relationships between access to prior information before commencing treatment and its relationship to non-adherence and experiences during treatment.Considering the role of negative treatment effects on adherence among several participants, it would be relevant to explore potential disadvantages of adherence-increasing initiatives. Possibly, providing strong incentives for continuing treatment could be hazardous in regard to those with negative treatment effects.Building upon the results from this study it would be interesting to further investigate why so many of the non-completers experienced a limitation in their own ability related to the demands of the treatment. Previous studies have not indicated that constraints such as reading and writing difficulties are related to non-adherence. However, it is evident from this study that non-completers on occasion experience the demands from the treatment as overwhelming, and further knowledge about this factor could lead to better treatments with improved adherence.