@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Participant adherence to the Internet-based prevention program StudentBodies™ for eating disorders — A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Adherence to StudentBodies™ was investigated across 10 trials from Germany and the US.Adherence was high across a number of trials, settings and countries.Participants on average accessed 49%–83% of the assigned intervention content.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adherence,Internet,Prevention,Eating disorders,Review,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Study and treatment dropout and adherence represent particular challenges in studies on Internet-based interventions. However, systematic investigations of the relationship between study, intervention and patient characteristics, participation, and intervention outcomes in online-prevention are scarce. A review of participation in trials investigating a cognitive-behavioral, Internet-based, 8-week prevention program (StudentBodies™) for eating disorders, moderators of participation, and the impact of participation on the relationship of outcome moderators and outcomes was performed. Seven US and three German studies with a total of N=1059 female participants were included. Two of the U.S. and one of the German trials explicitly addressed high risk samples in a selective prevention approach. Across studies, dropout rates ranged from 3% to 26%. The women who participated in the trials accessed on average between 49% and 83% of the assigned intervention content. None of the study characteristics (universal vs. selective prevention, incentives, country, participants' age) predicted adherence or study dropout. After adjusting for adherence, intervention outcomes (EDI Drive for Thinness and EDI Bulimia) were only moderated by participant's age, with smaller effects in one sample of adolescent girls.Adherence to StudentBodies™ proved to be high across a number of trials, settings and countries. These findings are promising, but it is likely that adherence will be distinctly lower in the general public than in research settings, and intervention effects will turn out smaller. However, the intervention is readily available at minimal cost per participant, and the public health impact may still be notable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Disordered eating is a common problem among young women. While only 1–3% of young women meet full diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa or binge eating disorder (Hoek and van Hoeken, 2003; Hudson et al., 2007), up to 25% report partial syndromes or symptoms that meet criteria for subthreshold eating disorders (Leon et al., 1997; Shisslak et al., 1995).In recent years, a number of risk factors for eating disorders have been identified in longitudinal studies, including frequent dieting and restrictive eating as well as an extreme preoccupation with weight and body shape (Jacobi et al., 2004). Structured and/or manualized psychoeducational programs have shown to reduce the impact of these risk factors (Stice et al., 2007) as well as, in some high-risk groups, the onset of full-syndrome eating disorders (Stice et al., 2008; Taylor et al., 2006). Such programs, particularly when they are available electronically, have the potential for wide-spread dissemination at low cost per participant.StudentBodies™ is an Internet-based program for the prevention of eating disorders (Winzelberg et al., 2000; Winzelberg and Taylor, 1998). It is a structured, cognitive-behavioral program with 8 sessions over 8weeks for adolescent girls and women that addresses factors presumed to lead to or alleviate eating pathology, including high weight and shape concerns. Universal as well as selective prevention approaches have employed StudentBodies™. In universal prevention approaches, every girl or woman interested in participating in the intervention was eligible for participation. In selective prevention approaches, participation was limited to women with elevated weight and shape concerns and/or initial eating disorder symptoms. Almost 1000 adolescent girls and young women in both the USA and Germany took part in ten randomized controlled trials evaluating the program. Across all trials, the intervention was associated with moderate improvements in eating disorder related attitudes, especially reductions of negative body image and the desire to be thin (Beintner et al., 2012).Apart from efficacy, adherence is a key factor in prevention programs. Poor adherence can preclude a positive impact of prevention programs that have the potential to be effective. This is especially important from a public health point of view: an intervention that has been proven efficacious in circumscribed lab conditions but is not adopted and accepted in more generalized settings will have little impact on public health (Glasgow et al., 1999).Adherence has been defined as ‘the extent to which the patient's behavior matches agreed recommendations from the prescriber’ (Haynes et al., 1979). While medication adherence has been given much attention (e.g., Andrade et al., 2006; Cramer et al., 2008; Farmer, 1999; Haynes et al., 2001) and some research on adherence to psychotherapy (e.g., Edlund et al., 2002; Ogrodniczuk et al., 2006; Olfson et al., 2009; Scheel et al., 2004), and Internet-based self-help (e.g., Christensen et al., 2009; Eysenbach, 2005; Wangberg et al., 2008) has been conducted, comparatively little is known about adherence to prevention programs.However, previous research on self-directed interventions reveals that initial risk status (e.g., Linke et al., 2007) and participants' age (e.g., Buller et al., 2008; Christensen et al., 2009; Donker et al., 2013; Stopponi et al., 2009) may affect adherence and dropout. Incentives have been shown to increase response rates in surveys (Edwards et al., 2009; Simmons and Wilmot, 2004; Singer et al., 1999), and may also reduce study dropout from trials on Internet-based interventions (Alexander et al., 2008; Khadjesari et al., 2011).Knowing which moderators impact both adherence and outcomes can facilitate clinical decision making by (1) ensuring that Internet-based prevention programs are not offered to participants who are unlikely to benefit from them in the first place and (2) ensuring that participants who would benefit, but need extra encouragement to use the program, receive the appropriate additional support.In contrast to non-online preventive interventions, Internet-based preventive interventions have an inherent potential to obtain objective measures of adherence utilizing participants log-on data. These data have been reported for most of the StudentBodies™ trials. Adherence to the program seems to rise with increased structure of the program (Celio et al., 2002). In one of the individual studies, predictors of adherence, as well as adherence effects on outcomes, were investigated: Higher adherence was linked to more pronounced eating disorder related attitudes at baseline (Taylor et al., 2006) and–in the same sample–higher adherence predicted a greater reduction in EDI Drive for Thinness, but no other outcomes (Manwaring et al., 2008). The study is noteworthy because it includes analyses on the relationship of adherence to specific program components and outcomes and thus attempts to determine the most meaningful adherence measure. The main finding was that the duration of program use, the amount of content read and the number of postings in self-monitoring journal program use were associated with post-intervention outcomes while participation in online discussions did not predict outcomes.With this review, we aim to expand past investigations on adherence to StudentBodies™ (Celio et al., 2002; Manwaring et al., 2008) and our previous meta-analysis (Beintner et al., 2012) to further examine adherence across trials. We will 1) integrate adherence data reported in individual studies on StudentBodies™, 2) investigate the impact of potential moderators (universal vs. selective prevention approach, country where the study was conducted in, the mean age of participants, incentive) of adherence and 3) analyze whether and to what degree differences in adherence contribute to the moderation of intervention outcomes. In order to do that, we need to identify moderators of adherence, moderators of intervention outcomes, and examine if and how associations between those moderators and intervention outcomes change when adherence is taken into account.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
