@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Earth conical shadow modeling for LEO satellite using reference frame transformation technique: A comparative study with existing earth conical shadow models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A spherical Earth conical shadow prediction method for LEO satellites is studied.Sun–Earth reference frame transformation is illustrated.Proposed model is compared with other existing Earth conical shadow models, STK and the real time data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Satellite position vector,Sun centered reference frame,Sun vector,Umbra,Penumbra,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this article, we propose an Earth conical shadow model predicting umbra and penumbra states for the low Earth orbiting satellite considering the spherical shape of the Earth. The model is described using the umbra and penumbra cone geometries of the Earth’s shadow and the geometrical equations of these conical shadow regions into a Sun centered frame. The proposed model is simulated for three polar Sun-synchronous Indian Remote Sensing satellites: Cartosat-2A, Resourcesat-2 and Oceansat-2. The proposed model compares well with the existing spherical Earth conical shadow models such as those given by Vallado (2013), Wertz (2002), Hubaux et al. (2012), and Srivastava et al. (2013, 2014). An assessment is carried out of the existing Earth conical shadow models with Systems Tool Kit (STK), a high fidelity commercial software package of Analytic Graphic Inc., and the real time telemetry data.Satellite position vector in the ECI frameEquatorial radius of the EarthRadius of photosphere of the SunDistance between the Sun and EarthEarth’s shadow umbra cone angleEarth’s shadow penumbra cone angleEarth’s umbral cone radius in the ECI frameEarth’s penumbral cone radius in the ECI frameSun vector in the ECI frameMagnitude of the Sun vector in the ECI frameSun vector other thanr→⊙Unit vectors inx,yandz-directions in the SCRF frameTransformation matrix from the ECI frame to the transformed frameSatellite position vector in the rotated frameSun vector in the SCRF frameComponents of the satellite position vector in the SCRF frameRadius of the satellite orbitEarth’s umbral cone radius in the SCRF frameEarth’s penumbral cone radius in the SCRF frame

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A satellite realizes partial or full eclipse when it passes over the Earth’s night side. Apart from occultation of the Sun by the Earth, the Moon may also cast shadow on the satellite; however these events occur less frequently because the Moon is constantly in motion with respect to the satellite orbit, unlike the Earth shadow eclipse case where the occulting body is fixed at the focus of the orbit (Evans, 1998). Computation of the shadow eclipse conditions is generally mentioned for the Earth as the occulting body. These partial or total eclipse conditions define the regions known as penumbra and umbra, respectively. The shape and size of the Earth’s umbra and penumbra regions depend on sizes of the Earth and Sun, and the distance between these two celestial bodies. The portion of the orbit when a satellite is fully inside the shadow region of the Earth is of most importance. Fig. 1depicts umbra and penumbra regions considering the spherical Earth as an occulting body.For any Earth orbiting satellite, the Earth shadow prediction model can be classified into two classes: cylindrical and conical shadow models. Escobal (1976) used both type of models by finding two non-spurious roots of a quartic polynomial by solving it in a closed form using the quadratic radicals, whereas Vallado (2013) illustrated these Earth shadow models geometrically as well as numerically. Wertz (2002) illustrated a spherical Earth conical shadow model based on the angular separation between the Sun and Earth, whereas Montenbruck and Gill (2005) described a spherical Earth conical shadow model using penumbra and umbra cone angles. We notice that algorithm [34] given by Vallado (2013), and Montenbruck and Gill (2005) model are the same model; Vallado (2013) wrote the model algorithmically whereas Montenbruck and Gill (2005) described the model emphasizing geometry as well as mathematics involved in the model. Hubaux et al. (2012) produced an innovative approach of Escobal (1976) by defining two smooth shadow functions for umbra and penumbra cone crossings to utilize these functions in the Symplectic integration of the space debris motion. Adhya et al. (2004) developed a conical shadow model accounting oblateness of the Earth by finding roots of the quadratic polynomial. However, a numerical investigation Vokrouhlicky et al. (1996) has shown that oblateness of the Earth did not bring significant differences, compared to a spherical Earth. Recently, Srivastava et al. (2013) and Srivastava et al. (2014) described Adhya et al. (2004) model using both spherical and oblate shape of the Earth for the Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellites. Further, Srivastava et al. (2014) described a projection map approach to investigate umbra and penumbra entry and exit conditions considering the spherical shape of the Earth. The cylindrical shadow model totally ignores the penumbral region where the flux gradually diminishes. From the computational point of view, cylindrical models are simple to implement but they result in errors in precise orbit computation. It has been found that with respect to a spherical Earth, the main variations occur in the timing of umbra and penumbra transitions and in overall period of the eclipse intervals (Vokrouhlicky et al., 1996; Srivastava et al., 2013, 2014). The variations on solar radiation pressure during the transition from umbra to penumbra and full sunlight have various applications such as consequences for the precise numerical integration of the orbit trajectories (Woodburn, 2000), influence on the available energy consumed by the scientific payload onboard the satellite and optimization of their usage under the eclipse constraints; the influence on satellite’s attitude prediction (Zanardi et al., 2005), and the thermally induced oscillations due to a sudden change in heat flux of solar radiation (Shen et al., 2013).In this article, we develop a spherical Earth conical shadow model and its comparison with other existing geometrical Earth conical shadow models while simulating these models for three polar Sun-synchronous IRS satellites: Cartosat-2A (CAR-2A), Resourcesat-2 (RES-2) and Oceansat-2 (OCN-2). The model is described using the Earth shadow’s umbra and penumbra cone geometries and transformation of the Earth centered inertial (ECI) frame to a Sun centered frame. The remaining part of the article is categorized as follows: in Section  2, the proposed model is described. Application and comparison of the model with other existing Earth’s conical shadow models such as algorithm 34 (Vallado, 2013), Wertz (2002), Hubaux et al. (2012), ESCM (Srivastava et al., 2013) and SECSM (Srivastava et al., 2014), the oblate Earth conical shadow model OECSM (Srivastava et al., 2014), Systems Tool Kit (STK) and the real time telemetry data, is given in Section  3 and a concluding discussion is presented in Section  4.We assume that the Earth is a spherical shape; therefore it produces a conical projection of the Earth shadow regions: umbra and penumbra (see Fig. 1). It allows for description of the Earth umbral or penumbral cone by considering the Earth and Sun diameters and the separation between these two celestial bodies.Let vectora→=(a1,a2,a3)represent the satellite position vector in the ECI frame,R⊕be the equatorial radius of the Earth,R⊙be the radius of photosphere (i.e. the visible surface) of the Sun (Wertz, 2002; Montenbruck and Gill, 2005) andd⊙⊕be the distance between the Sun and Earth. The Earth’s shadow umbra and penumbra cone angles,ϕuandϕpare expressed as(1)sin(ϕu)=(R⊙−R⊕)d⊙⊕sin(ϕp)=(R⊙+R⊕)d⊙⊕},where the subscriptsuandpdenote umbra and penumbra, respectively.Now, the parametric equations of the Earth’s umbral cone can be given as(2)xu=xuyu=(R⊙sin(ϕu)−xu)tan(ϕu)cosθzu=(R⊙sin(ϕu)−xu)tan(ϕu)sinθ},wherexu∈[0,hu],huis the height of the Earth’s umbral cone andθ∈[0,2π).Similarly, the parametric equations of the Earth’s penumbral cone can be expressed as(3)xp=xpyp=(−R⊙sin(ϕp)+xp)tan(ϕp)cosθzp=(−R⊙sin(ϕp)+xp)tan(ϕp)sinθ},wherexp∈[0,hp],hpis the height of the Earth’s penumbral cone andθ∈[0,2π).The umbral and penumbral cone radii,ruandrp, respectively, in the ECI frame can be formulated as(4)ru=(−xu+R⊙sin(ϕu))tan(ϕu)rp=(xp−R⊙sin(ϕp))tan(ϕp)}.The equations of umbral and penumbral cones are formulated with respect a frame which has its origin at the center of the Sun,xaxis along the line joining the centers of the Sun and Earth,yaxis along a line which is perpendicular to the plane of the Earth’s rotation around the Sun andzaxis is such that it completes the triplet of the Cartesian coordinate system (refer Fig. 2). As the Earth rotates around the Sun, this frame also rotates, we give a name to this frame as a Sun centered rotating frame (SCRF). The direction ofzaxis is decided by the cross product of the Sun vector of the Earth’s shadow prediction date, and the Sun vector of any date other than the prediction date’s Sun vector. Since, these two Sun vectors are always in the Earth’s orbital plane; their cross product gives the direction of the orbit plane normal.Letr→⊙=(r1,r2,r3)denote the Sun vector on the calendar date at which one wants to find umbra and penumbra conditions of the satellite,‖r→⊙‖denotes the magnitude ofr→⊙andr→⊙,defaultdenote the Sun vector other thanr→⊙, then in the transformed frame, the unit vector(xˆ⊙−⊕,yˆ⊙−⊕,zˆ⊙−⊕)inx,yandz-directions is described as(5)xˆ⊙−⊕=−r→⊙‖r→⊙‖yˆ⊙−⊕=r→⊙×r→⊙,default‖r→⊙×r→⊙,default‖zˆ⊙−⊕=xˆ⊙−⊕×yˆ⊙−⊕},where the symbol×denotes the vector product.LetTbe the transformation matrix which transforms ECI frame to the transformed frame, then it can be written as(6)T=[xˆ⊙−⊕yˆ⊙−⊕zˆ⊙−⊕]t,wheretdenotes the transpose of the matrix.The transformation map which transforms the ECI frame to the transformed frame can be expressed as(7)[iˆjˆkˆ]=[(T)−1][xˆ⊙−⊕yˆ⊙−⊕zˆ⊙−⊕],where(iˆ,jˆ,kˆ)are the ECI unit vectors inx,yandz-directions, respectively.The inverse matrix can be written as(8)[(T)−1]=(t11t12t13t21t22t23t31t32t33),where(tij);i,j=1,2,3are the elements obtained from inverse of the matrixT.The satellite position vector,a→⊙−⊕=(x⊙−⊕,y⊙−⊕,z⊙−⊕), in the rotated frame, is expressed as(9)x⊙−⊕=a1t11+a2t21+a3t31y⊙−⊕=a1t12+a2t22+a3t32z⊙−⊕=a1t13+a2t23+a3t33}.Similarly, the Sun-vector,r→⊙−⊕=(x1,y1,z1), in the SCRF frame, is given by(10)x1=r1t11+r2t21+r3t31y1=r1t12+r2t22+r3t32z1=r1t13+r2t23+r3t33}.Hence, the satellite components,(xsat,ysat,zsat), in the SCRF frame, is given as(11)xsat=x⊙−⊕−x1ysat=y⊙−⊕−y1zsat=z⊙−⊕−z1}.Therefore, radius of the satellite orbit,rsat, in the SCRF frame, is given by(12)rsat=[(ysat)2+(zsat)2].Similarly, the Earth’s umbral and penumbral cone radii,ruuandrpp, respectively, in this frame are given by(13)ruu=(−xsat+R⊙sin(ϕu))tan(ϕu)rpp=(xsat−R⊙sin(ϕp))tan(ϕp)}.The condition for any Earth bound satellite to be either in sunlit or in shadow side of the Earth is as follows: ifxsat<‖r→⊙‖, the satellite always faces sunlit, otherwise ifrsat<rppandrsat≤ruu, it is in umbra, ifrsat≤rppandrsat>ruu, it is in penumbra, else it is in sunlit condition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article, an Earth’s conical shadow model is proposed to predict the penumbra and umbra conditions for the low earth orbiting satellite using the reference frame transformation method. The proposed model is simulated for three polar Sun-synchronous satellites: CAR-2A, RES-2 and OCN-2. A study is performed among the proposed model and existing Earth conical shadow models together with STK and available real time data. From the study, it is observed that the proposed model and other spherical Earth conical shadow models give the same results. However, from the assessment of these conical shadow models, we notice that the results obtained by the oblate Earth conical shadow model is very close to STK and the real time data than the spherical Earth conical shadow models.