@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The UniWellbeing course: A randomised controlled trial of a transdiagnostic internet-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) programme for university students with symptoms of anxiety and depression

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cognitive behavioural therapy via the internet (iCBT) may benefit university students.A randomised controlled trial examined iCBT for students with anxiety and depression.Treatment group effect sizes on symptom measures were moderate to large.Students with clinical level symptoms significantly improved compared to controls.Improvements were maintained at 3-month follow-up. Students rated iCBT as acceptable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anxiety,Depression,Transdiagnostic,Internet,Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT),University students,Randomised controlled trial,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Anxiety and depression are prevalent among university students and many universities offer psychological services to assist students. Unfortunately, students can experience barriers that prevent access to these services and many university services experience difficulties meeting demand. The present pragmatic randomised controlled trial examined the preliminary efficacy and acceptability of a transdiagnostic and internet-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) programme for university students seeking help with anxiety and depression. Participants were randomly allocated to either a treatment group (n=30) or a waitlist-control group (n=23). The treatment group received weekly contact with a therapist, via telephone or a secure messaging system, as well as automated emails that guided their progress through the programme. Significant reductions were found on standard measures of anxiety (Cohen's d=0.66; 95% CI: 0.13 to 1.17) and depression (Cohen's d=0.81; 95% CI: 0.27 to 1.32) among the treatment group participants, but no significant differences were found between the treatment and control groups at post-treatment. However, more pronounced reductions were found among treatment group participants with clinical level symptoms of anxiety (Cohen's d=1.33; 95% CI: 0.62 to 1.99) and depression (Cohen's d=1.59; 95% CI: 0.81 to 2.30), who reported significantly lower levels of symptoms than control group participants at post-treatment. These reductions were maintained at 3-month follow-up and participants rated the intervention as acceptable. The results provide preliminary support for the potential of iCBT for university students with anxiety and depression. However, larger scale implementation trials considering a broader range of outcomes are required.Trial registrationAustralian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry: ACTRN12612000212853.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Psychological distress among university students is significantly higher than the general population (Stallman, 2010) and the prevalence of mental health difficulties among university students appears to be increasing (Storrie et al., 2010). However, research indicates that the utilisation rates for student counselling and psychological services is very low (Raunic and Xenos, 2008) with many students avoiding or delaying access (Eisenberg et al., 2007; Stallman, 2010; Storrie et al., 2010). The barriers to accessing treatment among university students are similar to the general population and include stigma, long wait-times and a preference to seek help from family, friends and the internet (Brimstone et al., 2007; Lui et al., 2014; Rickwood et al., 2007; Ryan et al., 2010). A challenge facing university counselling services is how to reduce these barriers while providing access to evidence-based treatment in a cost-effective way.There is now considerable evidence for the efficacy of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) in the treatment of anxiety and depression (Butler et al., 2006; Cuijpers et al., 2008; Stewart and Chambless, 2009) and a growing recognition of the need for innovative models of service delivery that increase both access to treatment and the capacity of treatment services (Kazdin and Blasé, 2011; Kazdin, 2015). Over the last decade, there has been increasing interest in the potential of internet-delivery of CBT (iCBT) as an approach for increasing access to effective psychological treatments (Andersson and Titov, 2014). There is now strong meta-analytic support for the efficacy of iCBT for anxiety and depression over control conditions (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Cuijpers et al., 2009). There is also emerging evidence of the comparability of clinical outcomes between face-to-face and internet-delivered CBT (Cuijpers et al., 2010) as well as the cost-effectiveness of iCBT (Hedman et al., 2012). iCBT interventions provide the same information and teach the same skills as traditional face-to-face CBT, but provide this information via structured materials accessible by computer and the internet. Internet-delivered treatments can be clinician-guided, coach-guided or entirely self-guided, with most approaches involving a fraction of the time required by traditional face-to-face psychological treatments (Andersson and Titov, 2014; Hedman et al., 2012).Despite their potential only a limited number of randomised controlled trials have examined the use of iCBT with university students (Cukrowicz and Joiner, 2007; Day et al., 2013; Ellis et al., 2011;Kenardy et al., 2003; Lintvedt et al., 2011; Mitchell and Dunn, 2007; Orbach et al., 2007; Santucci et al., 2014; Sethi et al., 2010) and a recent meta-analysis found that, although such interventions can be beneficial, some caution is needed when interpreting the results of existing studies because of important methodological issues (Davies et al., 2014). For example, one of these studies (n=83) examined a self-guided 6-week anxiety prevention programme for students with high levels of anxiety sensitivity and found reductions in anxiety-related cognitions and symptoms of depression, but not anxiety sensitivity, compared with a waitlist-control group (Kenardy et al., 2003). However, the study was limited by the use of a convenience sample of first year psychology students rather than students presenting or requesting assistance for mental health difficulties and did not include any follow-up assessment. Other studies have examined the feasibility of the established Beating the Blues Programme (n=10; Mitchell and Dunn, 2007) and compared the efficacy of this programme provided with and without email reminders (n=57; Santucci et al., 2014). Both studies reported improvements in depression scores, however, one study reported very low treatment completion rates (i.e., <20%) (Santucci et al., 2014) and neither study included parallel control groups. Thus, while the findings of existing studies are encouraging, there is still relatively limited empirical data and more research is required concerning the efficacy and acceptability of iCBT for university students.The present study examined the efficacy and acceptability of a new iCBT programme, the UniWellbeing Course, for university students experiencing symptoms of stress, anxiety, low mood and depression. The intervention is delivered with weekly support from a clinician and is designed to be appropriate for students with subclinical as well as clinical symptoms of anxiety and depression. Using a two-group randomised controlled trial (RCT) design, it was hypothesised that: (1) the treatment group would report significantly reduced symptoms of anxiety and depression at post-treatment compared with the waitlist-control group, (2) that treatment group participants with clinical level symptoms would report reductions in symptoms of anxiety and depression consistent with those observed in previous iCBT studies, and that (3) symptom reductions would be sustained at 3-month follow-up and participants would be satisfied with the treatment. The present study was setup as a pragmatic RCT and, consequently, several modifications to the length and number of lessons in the programme were made during the trial, based on participant feedback, in order to maximise the acceptability of the intervention.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
