@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
RTI and the study of engraved rock art: A re-examination of the Iberian south-western stelae of Setefilla and Almadén de la Plata 2 (Seville, Spain)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
RTI produces a robust record of rock art containing shape and colour information.RTIViewer tools enhance the perception of the shape of the rock surface.We argue that RTI is particularly useful for the interpretation of engraved rock art.RTI is applied to examine surface marks, their production and eventual superimposition.New motifs, varying techniques and later modifications are revealed in two Iberian south-western stelae.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reflectance Transformation Imaging (RTI),Rock Art,Engraving Techniques,Life Histories,Late Bronze Age,South-western stelae,Iberian Peninsula,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
RTI is a powerful technique for recording, interpreting, and disseminating rock art. RTI enhances the perception of the micro-topography of the rock surface and it is particularly helpful for the study of engraved art. Subtle details, such as the traces left by different engraving techniques, the outlines of motifs or superimpositions are more clearly revealed through RTI's interactive re-light and enhancement tools. This paper describes the application of RTI for the re-examination of two Iberian south-western stelae, Setefilla and Almadén de la Plata 2, whose preserved decoration is engraved. Previous studies focused on the iconographic analysis of motifs and employed methods of examination and recording that posed limitations. Based on the more robust data provided by RTI and supported by RTI's tools for surface interpretation, we provide a new analysis of the decorated surfaces of both stelae, including insights into their manufacturing techniques and later modification.Reflectance Transformation Imaging (RTI) is a computational photographic method that uses the reflectance properties of any surface to enhance the perception of its shape (Earl et al., 2010; Mudge et al., 2006; Mudge et al., 2012). RTI requires the capture of around 60–70 images of a still object from a fixed camera position with changing and knowable light directions spaced evenly through a hemisphere. RTI software uses these datasets to calculate the reflectance function of the object's surface per-pixel and to extract 2.5D information about its shape (surface normals per-pixel). The resulting RTI files produce isometric (2.5D) representations of the object's surface through interactive re-illumination and the application of various transformations that enhance perception of its texture and shape.There are two main methods of capturing the images required to produce RTI files. One is a semi-automated method that uses a physical lighting dome of fixed size which is populated with a number of lights whose positions are known. A more flexible system is the so-called Highlight-RTI (HRTI) method (Cultural Heritage Imaging, 2013b), which uses a glossy sphere incorporated into the scene to record the highlight of the source for every image. This information is then used to calculate the source light directions during RTI processing. HRTI is ideal for capturing large objects that do not fit within a physical dome or for any setting where a physical dome is not a viable option, such as rock art sites.RTI processing is quite easy and accessible. The software required, the RTIBuilder11Available at: http://culturalheritageimaging.org/What_We_Offer/Downloads/Process/index.html (last accessed 15/12/2014)., is open source, and the steps are described in detail in a comprehensive guide published by Cultural Heritage Imaging (CHI) (2011). Once produced, the RTI file can be explored with the free RTIViewer22Available at: http://culturalheritageimaging.org/What_We_Offer/Downloads/View/index.html (last accessed 15/12/2014).(Cultural Heritage Imaging, 2013a), also available from the CHI website. RTIViewer enables enhanced perception and interpretation of the object's surface through interactive rendering the surface with dynamic re-lighting and permitting the application of various enhancement transformations, called ‘rendering modes’, to shape and/or colour information per pixel. Specific views can be ‘snapshotted’ and saved as separate JPEG files or saved as ‘bookmarks’ associated with the RTI file (bookmarks record the parameters that define a particular view, allowing its recreation and annotation by other viewers), fostering the engagement of multiple researchers in the interpretation of the view or detail in question.RTI has already been successfully applied for the representation, conservation and analysis of a wide range of cultural heritage artefacts (e.g. Earl et al., 2011, 2010; Kotoula and Kyranoudi, 2013; Piquette, 2011) and its application to rock art is gaining momentum (e.g. Díaz-Guardamino and Wheatley, 2013; Mudge et al., 2006; Mudge et al., 2012; Pitts et al., 2014a; Pitts et al., 2014b). RTI is an extremely powerful technique for recording, interpreting, and disseminating rock art: RTI enhances the perception of the micro-topography of the rock surface and is, therefore, particularly helpful for the study of engraved art. Subtle details, such as natural fissures and cracks in the rock surface, traces left by different engraving techniques or outlines of engraved motifs are more clearly revealed using RTI's interactive re-lighting and enhancement tools and because the use of raking lighting, for example, is familiar to many rock art specialists, RTI provides a relatively ‘natural’ digital methodology that draws on and enhances the existing interpretative skills of the specialist community. Overall, RTI's interactive rendering tools facilitate the interpretation of the shape of these features and the rock canvas, their interrelationship and structure, allowing archaeologists to explore them in terms of cultural production.This paper describes the application of RTI for the re-examination of two Iberian south-western stelae, Setefilla and Almadén de la Plata 2 (Seville, Spain), whose preserved decoration is engraved. Previous research on Iberian south-western stelae has typically been focused on the formal analysis of their iconographies: little or no attention has been devoted to the techniques employed in their making, or to the modifications they underwent throughout later stages of their long-term ‘lives’. As argued below, these aspects could greatly advance our understanding of Iberian south-western stelae in social, cultural and historical terms. Additionally, research on south-western stelae has usually employed methods of examination and recording that posed limitations for their interpretation, i.e. scale drawings and tracings made from photographs, aided by limited sources of raking light. Based on the more robust data provided by RTI and supported by the use of RTI tools for surface interpretation, here we provide a new analysis of the decorated surfaces of both stelae, including some insights into the techniques involved in their making and later modifications, as well as new interpretative tracings.The stelae examined in this paper, those of Setefilla and Almadén de la Plata 2, belong to a well-known stelae tradition that developed in the west and the south-west of the Iberian Peninsula, along the western and south-western periphery of the Iberian Central Plateau and the middle-low Guadalquivir valley, throughout the Late Bronze Age and the beginning of the Early Iron Age (c. 1400/1200-750 BC) (Díaz-Guardamino, 2012) (Fig. 1). These are variously known as ‘Extremaduran’, ‘Tartesian’,’Warrior’ or ‘South-western’ stelae (for recent syntheses see: Celestino Pérez, 2001; Díaz-Guardamino, 2010; Harrison, 2004). More than 130 stelae have been published until now while at least a further dozen have been reportedly found in recent years and await scientific examination.Traditionally, research on south-western stelae has been focused on the formal analysis, classification and seriation of their iconography and on the cultural affiliation of the objects represented on them (Almagro-Gorbea, 1977; Celestino Pérez, 2001; Gomes and Monteiro, 1977; Pingel, 1974). Relevant issues, such as their landscape dimension, archaeological context, the biographies of these monuments or the techniques involved in their making have only started to be explored more recently (Díaz-Guardamino, 2006, Díaz-Guardamino, 2008, 2010, 2012;Díaz-Guardamino and Wheatley, 2013; Enríquez Navascués and Fernández Algaba, 2010; Galán Domingo, 1993; García Sanjuán, 2011; García Sanjuán et al., 2006).South-western stelae are large (c. 50–160cm long), often dressed, stone blocks that bear engraved decoration on one of their sides, usually in their upper and middle regions. The lower part is usually left plain and/or unworked, probably because the stela was meant to be imbedded in the ground. The preserved decoration consists of engraved motifs depicting, among other things, weapons (spear, sword, and shield and sometimes helmet), human figures, two-horsed chariots, objects relating to personal grooming (such as combs and mirrors), brooches and small quadrupeds, possibly dogs. Although these stelae could have been painted, no analysis has been undertaken to prove this possibility until very recently33Dr. Miguel Ángel Rogerio Candelera, from the Instituto de Recursos Naturales y Agrobiología of Seville (IRNAS-CSIC), Spain, has applied digital image analysis techniques to the study of the south-western stela of Mirasiviene (Seville). The results will be soon published as part of the publication of the broader research led by the first three authors (MDG, LGS and DW) to study the stela of Mirasiviene and its archaeological context.. These decorated monoliths are generally found as un-stratified remains in the open landscape and, as a result, have mainly been treated as decontextualised remains. Almost no systematic archaeological examination of their find-spots has been undertaken until very recently44See note 3.(García Sanjuán et al., 2006) and only a very few stelae have been discovered within, or in association with, conventional (stratified) archaeological contexts. Most of these contexts have not been recorded archaeologically and our knowledge of them is mostly based on the oral accounts of the discoverers (Díaz-Guardamino, 2012, 2014).In terms of their iconography, south-western stelae have conventionally been classified into three main groups which are defined by the presence/absence of particular motifs (Almagro-Gorbea, 1977: 168–174; Díaz-Guardamino, 2012; Gomes and Monteiro, 1977: 185–188; Pingel, 1974). Subtype IIA (also called B or ‘Basic’) are restricted to representation of three elements – the spear, shield and sword – arranged on the stone surface as if the stone itself were the representation of a body. Subtype IIB (or B+O: basic with additional objects) may include the same basic panoply but with some additional objects such as combs, brooches or mirrors. Finally, subtype IIC (or A: with anthropomorphic figure) includes the basic panoply, additional objects, and also a schematic human figure which tends to occupy a prominent place in the iconographic display. Some stelae may include two or more human figures, occasionally in compositions that seem to have a narrative arrangement, perhaps constituting a fourth subtype IID.The ascription of south-western stelae to a ‘tradition’ relies on the resemblance they share, which mainly emerges from the combined representation of swords, shields, spears and/or human figures that are depicted in similar styles. Within this tradition, the broad ‘types’ or groups traditionally distinguished by researchers – described above – show supra-regional distributions. In this context, the understanding of the iconographic variability of south-western stelae in cultural and social terms becomes challenging, because their variability in terms of presence/absence of motifs shows no obvious geographical pattern. In fact, a recent study of motifs represented on south-western stelae by means of Correspondence Analysis suggests that the objects that are being represented are the objects – or the knowledge of them – that are circulating across western Iberia throughout the Late Bronze Age and the beginning of the Iron Age, and that their inclusion in the iconographic vocabulary of Late Bronze Age stelae is closely related to the changing patterns of long-distance social interaction documented in the peninsula during those periods (Díaz-Guardamino et al., 2015). Our current research is focusing on the analysis of other layers of variability that may advance our understanding of this tradition in social and historical terms. We are starting to investigate the positioning and topology of motifs which may exhibit some spatial patterning. We are also examining the techniques employed in the manufacture of stelae in order to clarify their variability at higher resolutions, to assess different technological styles, the skill of the engraver, and how these varied in time and space. Currently, we suggest that south-western stelae appear to exhibit different degrees of standardisation at different levels (i.e. presence/absence of motifs, their topology on the stone canvas and the technique employed in their manufacture), and each of these needs to be examined separately to achieve a cogent understanding of this complex tradition as a social product that emerged through time.The commemorative role of these monuments has also been examined during the last decade (Díaz-Guardamino, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2014; García Sanjuán et al., 2007; García Sanjuán and Wheatley, 2010). These monuments were clearly conceived to endure and must have been visible in the landscape. Some of them were actively involved in social life long after their conception and manufacture: they could be reused in many different ways, even modified through later interventions that sought to transform the original engravings (by erasing or re-engraving old motifs or engraving new motifs), or even destroyed (e.g. fragmentation of the stones) (García Sanjuán and Díaz-Guardamino, 2015: 189–196). Documenting these later interventions is therefore also key to assessing the enduring social impact of these monuments through time.The stelae of Setefilla and Almadén de la Plata 2 have been studied previously, although their histories of research are rather different. The stela of Setefilla (Fig. 2:A) was discovered in 1927, during the excavations carried out by G.E. Bonsor and R. Thouvenot at the necropolis of Setefilla (Lora del Río, Seville, Spain) (Bonsor and Thouvenot, 1928: 35–37). Overall, Bonsor and Thouvenot explored ten tumuli, some of them covering large monumental burial chambers, and ten isolated flat graves, all dated to the Iron Age, as well as six Roman graves. When found, the stela was laid – presumably in secondary position – covering a flat grave with its decorated surface facing lateralwards (Fig. 2:B). The grave, dug into the soil and bedrock, was about 65cm deep, and contained the remains of an urn, charred bones and a poorly preserved skeleton orientated north-south. Perpendicular to this grave was a second one containing another skeleton and pottery sherds dated to the Early Iron Age (Bonsor and Thouvenot, 1928: 32).These authors published a preliminary sketch of the decoration of the stela (Fig. 3:A) which included a human figure, a shield and a possible helmet, and mentioned the width of the engravings, 7mm (Bonsor and Thouvenot, 1928: 32, Fig. 25). Bonsor and Thouvenot did not provide information on the techniques they employed to examine and represent the engravings of this stela. Given the techniques available at the time, we may assume that they deployed raking light and scale drawing. The same may be suggested for the more detailed drawing (Fig. 3:B) published by M. Almagro Basch some decades later (Almagro Basch, 1974), which only differed from that published by Bonsor and Thouvenot in some minor details (Almagro Basch, 1974: 11–15,Fig. 5). Almagro Basch offered a formal analysis and description of the engraved motifs found on the stela, but did not consider other aspects such as the techniques employed in their making.During the 1970s, Aubet (1975, 1978) undertook new archaeological excavations at the necropolis of Setefilla. Her intervention focused on two of the already-known tumuli containing burial chambers – dated to the Early Iron Age – and two tumuli discovered beneath them in the course of these excavations covering a series of plain stelae and several pits containing urn-cremations. Currently, these underlying tumuli and cremations are dated to the end of the Late Bronze Age and the beginnings of the Iron Age – between the 9th-8th centuries BC (Torres Ortiz, 2004: 430–431) – whereas the rest of the tumuli with monumental chambers and most of the flat graves, possibly also the one covered by the stela, may be broadly attributed to the Early Iron Age (8th–6th centuries BC) (Aubet, 1975, 1978; Torres Ortiz, 2004: 425–456). So far, the evidence suggests that the site was most intensively used for mortuary practices during the end of the Late Bronze Age and the Early Iron Age but, as further data reveals, the site seems to have been persistently used for mortuary purposes well before (Late and Middle Bronze Age) (Aubet, 1997 , 2009: 84) and after this period (Late Iron Age, Roman period) (Aubet, 1978; Bonsor and Thouvenot, 1928).The description of the context in which the stela was found is quite concise but strongly suggests that the grave it covered dates to the Early Iron Age. The manufacture of the stela can only be loosely dated by considering the motifs depicted on it, which would suggest a date around the 11th–10th centuries BC as a terminus post quem, which would mean a timeframe of two-three centuries if we take into account the timespan attributed to this stela-making tradition (Díaz-Guardamino, 2012: 397). This strengthens the hypothesis of the reuse of this stela during the Early Iron Age, which has been supported so far by most scholars (Aubet, 1997; Celestino Pérez, 2001; Díaz-Guardamino, 2012). This underlines the durability of these monuments and the long-term biographies they may have accrued, an aspect that has not been given serious consideration until very recently (e.g. Díaz-Guardamino, 2006; García Sanjuán and Díaz-Guardamino 2015; García Sanjuán et al., 2007) and, as a result, most drawings of stelae do not differentiate modifications that stelae may have undergone in later stages of their life-histories.The most recent examination and recording of the stela of Setefilla has been published by Celestino Pérez (2001: 417–418). Again, the techniques employed to examine and record the engravings are not made explicit but, taking into account the methods used at the time, these may have included photography with raking light and tracing from photographs. The main differences between his interpretation and previous ones are in the representation of the helmet, the handles of the sword and the shield, and in the feet (Fig. 3:C). With respect to the engraving techniques employed, this author mentions traces of surface preparation and the shallowness of the engravings, interpreted as the product of erosion of the rock (Celestino Pérez, 2001: 417–418).The stela of Almadén de la Plata 2 was discovered in 2005 by one of us (LGS) when inspecting the find-spot of another stela (Almadén de la Plata 1) at Dehesa del Viar (Almadén de la Plata, Seville, Spain) (García Sanjuán et al., 2006). The study of the stela of Almadén de la Plata 2 included petrological characterisation of the rock (identified as a tuff known from the local area), description of the iconography, and some consideration on the techniques involved in its manufacture. The study of its engravings relied on a series of high-quality studio photographs taken under oblique light which were also used to produce a scale drawing of the stela (Figs. 4 and 5).The iconography comprises two anthropomorphic figures of equal size, each with their heads adorned: one apparently with a headdress or diadem and the second with horns (perhaps indicating a helmet with horns), the latter accompanied by a shield and a sword. This study highlighted the existence of marks left by the shaping of the rock on its decorated face and laterals, the use of incision to engrave the motifs and the existence of (possibly old) marks left by detached flakes that affected the engravings in an area of special significance for the interpretation of the stela, the place where the hands of the figures may have originally met (García Sanjuán et al., 2006: 135–152). The stelae of Almadén de la Plata 1 and 2 were found in association with a clearance cairn formed by farmers as they remove large stones from land to be cultivated. An intensive surface survey of the site revealed an unusual high density of white quartz and quartzite pebbles (Fig. 5) which is potentially meaningful since white quartz pebbles have been found associated with megalithic mounds in the area, and these are also sometimes covered by clearance cairns (García Sanjuán et al., 2006: 140–143 ).We selected the stelae of Almadén de la Plata 2 and Setefilla to apply RTI because they were particularly relevant to our ongoing fieldwork research and both were available for study. By applying RTI we aimed to:•assess previous interpretations and evaluate the techniques previously employed in the examination and representation of these stelae;document and investigate the techniques employed in the manufacture of these stelae (e.g. describe and compare them, assess the skill of the engraver, evaluate the existence of possible ‘technological styles’);examine traces that could have been added later in the lives of these stelae, evaluating their possible intentionality or unintentionality;evaluate the contribution of these results to the advancement of our understanding of this stela-making tradition in social, cultural and historical terms.Both stelae are currently on display in the Museum of Archaeology of Seville, and can be found in the Bronze Age room (Number IV) located on the ground floor of the museum. This setting was ideal for carrying out HRTI capture since we could control the ambient light. Nonetheless, due to space restrictions, and since the stelae could not be moved55The stela of Setefilla is 170cm long (and 45cm wide), so its upper end is situated close to the ceiling and its lower end close to the floor. Additionally, the base of the stela is embedded in a platform, so the surface in this area is concealed and could not be recorded. The stela of Almadén de la Plata 2 is much smaller (76cm long by 53cm wide) but its upper part slightly leans towards the wall behind it, so the positioning of lights was also constrained in those angles., we found some limitations in sampling the whole hemisphere intended to cover each of the stelae, since the adequate distance between the light source and the stela should have been at least 2 times the diagonal measurement of the stela. We tried to compensate this by taking more shots with light coming from additional angles in the sections of the hemisphere within which we could reach the necessary distance. The resulting RTI files provide best results for the central and middle-upper part of the stela of Setefilla, and for the lower, central and middle-upper part of the stela of Almadén de la Plata 2.In applying the HRTI capture method we used the following equipment:•Nikon D300 camera with sensor resolution 2848 × 4288 (12.3 megapixels) and Nikon AF-S 18–70mmf/3.5–4.5G IF-ED DX lens;Tripod;Light source: Nikon SB900 Speedlight flash connected to the camera through radio remote triggers;A black snooker ball (a black sphere with a highly polished surface);String to maintain a constant distance between the light source and the stela.We undertook two capture sequences with different camera positions of the stela of Almadén de la Plata 2 and one of the stela of Setefilla. We then processed the image data with the RTI Builder v.2.0.2 (Cultural Heritage Imaging, 2011), employing the Polynomial Texture Map (PTM) fitting algorithm (Malzbender et al., 2001: 519–528).During the exploration of the resulting RTI files we took between 20 and 30 snapshots of each of them produced through varying rendering modes provided by the RTIViewer (notably varying values for Diffuse Gain and Specular Enhancement). These snapshots, which offered the best views of the details that were relevant to our research questions, were then imported as JPEG files into Corel Draw X7 as superimposed layers and finally the raster information available on each layer was used to generate synthesis drawings of our interpretations. This process was also aided by the simultaneous real-time visualization of the RTI files.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The interpretation of engraved rock art poses specific challenges to researchers. RTI offers a comprehensive and affordable solution that produces a robust record of engraved rock art, the RTI file, while it enhances the perception of the shape of the stone surface through the tools provided by the RTIViewer, facilitating its interpretation significantly. The level of detail offered by RTI depends to a great extent on the quality of the lighting during the capture session and on the sharpness and resolution of the photographs. If the capture fulfils the necessary prerequisites, and photographs are well focused and captured at high resolution, RTI can provide enough detail to answer questions that go beyond the identification and delineation of engraved motifs. Detailed scrutiny of marks can provide key information to make inferences about the techniques that were employed to work the stone and their sequence. Additionally, RTI files can now be annotated and easily disseminated, facilitating the sharing of data and collective interpretation of the subject at hand within a community of researchers as well as its dissemination to the general public.The application of RTI to the Iberian south-western stelae of Setefilla and Almadén de la Plata 2 is a good example of the potential offered by this technique since in both cases it has enabled us to reassess known motifs, detect new ones, identify a broad variety of additional marks, trace their outlines, identify and characterize techniques of manufacture and (in some instances) identify their sequence. In the case of Setefilla, we were able to identify two new possible motifs (a spear point and a cup mark), draw a reliable outline of the delineation of all engraved motifs to resolve discrepancies between previous interpretations, and characterize the techniques employed in the making of the stela, which may be considered simple in technological terms. Additionally, we have detected removal marks invading a large area of the centre that affect the engravings. The orientation of these extraction marks is indicative of the direction from which they were performed: the left of the stela from the viewer’s perspective. Since the stela was lying down precisely on its right side, the extractions need to have been done before it was reused to cover the Early Iron Age burial grave on which it was found, implying that before its reuse there had been a deliberate attempt to erase part of its engravings.In the case of Almadén de la Plata 2 we were able to detect surface preparation marks, delineate known motifs, detect possible new motifs (bracelet and shield handle), and assess their manufacturing techniques, evidencing the combination of these, as well as the integration into the iconography of previous marks which were possibly left through the preparation of the surface. Finally, we were able to trace a series of flake marks affecting various motifs. The former were necessarily produced at a later stage than the latter. The flaking marks on the centre of the stela, which obliterated the area where the hands of both human figures met, are of particular interest since they could have been produced intentionally to erase such motifs.To conclude, we can highlight two main contributions of RTI to our own research. Firstly, RTI has enabled us to gather relevant information on later interventions that altered the original iconography of both stelae, illustrating later stages of their life-histories and, secondly, we have been able to gather relevant data on the techniques involved in their manufacture. In fact, one of the most relevant findings of this research emerges from comparing the two stelae in technological terms. While sharing a common iconographic language and formal conventions that are widespread across various regions of south-western Iberia, these stelae, found only 42km from each other, are manufactured with entirely different sets of techniques which required differing levels of knowledge and skill. This may be suggesting that there was no shared consensus on how to manufacture a stela, that these stelae were probably manufactured by locals, probably non-specialists, who had different levels of knowledge and skill, which perhaps may be related to differences in local rock art traditions.