@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Path dependence in Operational Research—How the modeling process can influence the results

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The results of modeling process can depend on the problem solving path.Awareness of the possibility of path dependence is important in OR.The drivers are: system, learning, procedure, behavior, motivation, uncertainty and context.Sociopsychological dynamics create a system in participative problem solving.Ways to cope with path dependence are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioral Operational Research,OR practice,Path dependence,Behavioral Biases,Ethics in modelling,Systems perspective,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In Operational Research practice there are almost always alternative paths that can be followed in the modeling and problem solving process. Path dependence refers to the impact of the path on the outcome of the process. The steps of the path include, e.g. forming the problem solving team, the framing and structuring of the problem, the choice of model, the order in which the different parts of the model are specified and solved, and the way in which data or preferences are collected. We identify and discuss seven possibly interacting origins or drivers of path dependence: systemic origins, learning, procedure, behavior, motivation, uncertainty, and external environment. We provide several ideas on how to cope with path dependence.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Path dependence is a concept which has been widely used in different areas including economics [1–3], policy studies [4,5], ecology [6,7], complex adaptive systems [8,9], sociology [10–12], political science [13], and organizational decision making [14]. The general idea is that ‘history matters’, i.e. the current state of the world depends on the path taken to reach it. The concept also often refers to the lock-in phenomenon: the development of strong anchor points from which it is not easy to move forward. The most famous example is the QWERTY layout which has become the worldwide standard for keyboards [1].We have earlier discussed path dependence in decision analysis [15] and in this paper we want to bring path dependence into focus also in modeling and Operational Research (OR) in general. We see that the topic is of both theoretical and practical interest in model supported problem solving and decision making. A path is the sequence of steps that is taken in the modeling or problem solving process. The steps can include, for example, the initial meeting between the problem owners and modelers, formation of the problem solving team, the framing and structuring of the problem, the choice of model, the order in which different parts of the model are specified and solved, the way in which data or information about preferences are collected, communication with the model, as well as the implementation of the results in policy and practice. Earlier research on path dependence in other disciplines has focused on exposing and describing it. In OR we also want to find ways to mitigate the risks related to it. Behavioral and social effects are likely to be the most important drivers of path dependence in OR. We see path dependence as an important topic in the emerging area of Behavioral Operational Research (BOR) [16]. Although the focus of this paper is mainly in OR, we believe that the ideas and the phenomena described in this paper are relevant in policy analysis, systems analysis, and generally in all model supported problem solving approaches.There are usually alternative ways of using models to support problem solving. The possibility that different ‘valid’ modeling paths lead to different outcomes was acknowledged already early by Landry et al. [17] but the topic has received little interest later in the OR literature. Path dependence is implicitly recognized in the papers on best practices in OR as this literature recognizes the possibility of following different practices (see, e.g. [18–21]). Little [22] and Walker et al. [23] have suggested that models should be adaptively adjusted as the process evolves and intermediate results are obtained. This naturally results in one form of path dependence as the model outcomes change in response to changes in the model. Also the literature on the ethics of modeling discusses how the modeling process matters [24,25]. These papers clearly acknowledge that the process can influence the results in model supported problem solving. Still, research on the drivers and consequences of path dependence in different modeling contexts remains scattered and very limited. We see that the term path dependence is useful as an integrative term referring to the different phenomena that originate from the modeling and problem solving process and influence its outcome.The ideal situation in OR is that we have a model and a solution procedure which produces one optimal solution. In OR practice, the risk of path dependence still exists. Awareness of path dependence and its possible consequences is important especially in major policy problems in areas such as environmental management [26] and in long term policy analyses involving deep uncertainties [27]. Yet, when the main goals of the process are related to learning and creation of a common view about the problem situation, then path dependence might not only be a negative phenomenon. Working through the process along different paths with different outcomes can sometimes be useful. It can show the sensitivity of the solution and that a model can give rise to different conclusions.This paper studies the origins and drivers of path dependence in model supported problem solving. We also discuss possible ways to cope with path dependence in practice. We identify seven types of origins for path dependence: systemic, learning, procedure, behavior, motivation, uncertainty and external origins. These possibly interacting drivers and origins relate to humans, technical systems, as well as the problem context. In practice, the listing or categorization of the drivers and origins is not a goal in itself but it is important to try to consider all possible causes of path dependence.In the following, we describe the seven drivers and origins of path dependence. These can interact and occur together. A summary is provided in Table 1.Systemic origins of path dependence relate to the social system formed by the interaction of people involved in the problem solving process, the organizations related to the process, the stakeholders, and the system under study.Groupthink, studied by Janis [28], is a social phenomenon which can occur in cohesive modeling communities of practice. Members of a problem solving team can convince each other of the correctness of the approach designed by the team without critical thinking or consideration of alternative approaches. According to Janis [28] groupthink is more likely to occur if the group is insulated, the background of the group members is homogeneous, and also if there is high stress due to external threats. In the OR context the team members can all have their background in the same modeling community dedicated to the use of a particular approach. External threat could be created for example by competing modeling teams or result from time constraints to complete the project.A related human trait is the need for closure, which has been studied in model based group decision making by Franco et al. [29]. A group with high need for closure wants the problem solving process to end up in an unambiguous uncontested outcome. Once the first clear solution candidate has been obtained, the group members can start to endorse this solution and refrain from further deliberation.The way in which the modelers initially interact with the participants in the social setting can greatly influence the results in participatory modeling processes [30]. Mehrotra and Grossman [31] provide an example where trust earned from the frontline workers of the client organization was essential for successful communication and problem identification. Social phenomena which occur in groups also include the contagion of emotions. This phenomenon can naturally play a role when the people engaged in the modeling process meet and communicate with each other. Contagion of positive mood has been found to increase cooperation and decrease conflicts in group problem solving [32]. Yet, contagion of positive mood does not necessarily improve the modeling process as elevated positivity can reduce critical thinking and cause groupthink [32].In practice it can often be impossible to undo the steps taken and restart the modeling process again once one path is initiated. A lock-in to one approach and one software can emerge when the problem solving team and the organization become more and more involved and have invested time and resources in the process. This is a problematic situation if there are new, better, approaches available but the organization keeps on using the old one. The sunk cost effect can sometimes explain the lock-in situation but it can also be due to the fact that old (modeling) habits die hard [33]. Another perspective is that users of models can be ‘lazy’ [34]. When faced with new requirements for the model, the user may prefer the option that takes the least initial effort. This often means incremental adjustments to the old approach.Sydow et al. [14] discuss organizational reasons that could prevent restarting modeling processes. These include overcommitment due to the social pressures faced by the managers in charge and due to structural inertia in large organizations. Restarting can be impossible also due to practical reasons such as lack of personnel, budget or time. It is important to consider the risk of lock-in and irreversibilities in decision making and policy processes when working with large complex issues such as climate policies [4]. Lock-in situations do not necessarily occur only due to systemic origins but can result also from, e.g., behavioral and motivational phenomena.In today’s academic world disciplinary silos can become a significant source of systemic path dependence. It is often the case that researchers in different communities do not follow what is happening outside of their own specialty.The possibility of lock-in emphasizes the starting point of the problem solving process. The mental models and preconceptions of the people who participate in the process can matter a lot. They have an influence on the initial problem framing and choice of tools and procedures. If the same problem solving process would be replicated with different participants, they might not follow the same path. Cultural background is one factor that also can influence the mental models and the process (see, e.g. [35]).Systemic origins of path dependence can also be technical. The dynamics of nonlinear systems can create path dependence due to increasing returns, bifurcation points, and feedback loops. It is also well known that complex nonlinear systems can be very sensitive to initial conditions.Increasing returns is identified as the cause of path dependence in the seminal paper on technological development by Arthur [2]. The dynamics of a technology can be such that the technology becomes increasingly valuable as it becomes more widely adopted and the number of other technologies based on it grows. Consequently, it may become increasingly costly to change the technology that was initially adopted. Development of regional economies and organizational decision making are other examples where path dependence can occur due to increasing returns resulting, e.g., from learning, coordination benefits, or synergies [3,14]. Today spreadsheets are widely used and the number of Excel based OR models including, e.g. optimization and Monte Carlo simulation has grown rapidly [36]. This represents the increasing returns phenomenon as it has become increasingly easy to develop new applications on this platform.Bifurcation points are typical, for example, in fishery models [6] where the collapse of a fishery can represent such a point. If overfishing causes the collapse of a fishery, then it can be impossible to restore it in the short run by regular fishery management policies. Thus, optimizing the policy is dependent on the history. The modeling of feedback loops is the focus in systems dynamics (see, e.g. [37]) where the models typically include behavioral dynamics. Sterman and Wittenberg [10] demonstrate that feedback loops can drive path dependence in the development of science. In their model, higher confidence in a scientific paradigm increases the rate at which the paradigm is used to solve puzzles and vice versa. The same argument could also apply to problem solving with models.During the modeling process the OR expert as well as the problem owners and stakeholders learn and their understanding increases about the problem which is being modeled. The interests of the modeling team can be directed to different aspects and perspectives as they learn different characteristics of the problem (see, e.g. [38]). The fact that learning takes place in the modeling process has been recognized especially in systems dynamics [39,40] and problem structuring [41] as well as in the literature on participatory decision analysis [42,43]. Studies on management simulators and games explicitly aim at supporting managerial learning (see, e.g. [44]). Learning can affect the outcome of the OR intervention because the learning process is likely to depend on the people involved and on the properties and structure of the problem solving process.Modeling tools used by the problem solving team can naturally shape the learning process. Lane [38] notes that when systems dynamics models are considered, then the attention often quickly turns into the dynamic aspects of the problem. This observation relates to the priming effect discussed in the psychological literature (see, e.g. [45,46]). When one is first exposed to systems dynamics tools, one can become primed to be most sensitive to issues related to the dynamic phenomena within the problem.In participatory processes, the time of formal engagement with the problem owners and representatives of the stakeholders is important. The participants can have started a heuristic problem solving process before the OR process and the facilitator are introduced. This can have already fixed the participants’ expectations of the results. Then it can be difficult to launch an open model based problem solving process and unlearn the early expectations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Acknowledging the possibility of path dependence challenges us to critically evaluate our approaches and improve our modeling practices. In the practice of model based problem solving, path dependence can originate from systemic causes, learning, procedure, behavior, motivation, uncertainty, and external origins. These interacting origins and drivers are related to human behavior and social interaction and also to the technical properties of the procedure used and the problem context. By considering these origins, the practitioner should be better able to identify path dependence and find ways to analyze whether it could or should be avoided. We should take seriously the risk that the modeling team is fixed to one approach and only looks for refinements in the model that was initially chosen. Such lock-in can leave better approaches unnoticed.Increased awareness is the natural first step to reduce the risk of path dependence. The existence of path dependence emphasizes the importance of early reflection in the beginning of the OR process. We should be open to multiple approaches. In important policy problems such as climate policy we should consider the use of more than one parallel independent problem solving process. One modeling team can be assigned to the role of Devil’s advocate. This can help us to detect path dependence and possibly to improve our confidence in the results which are obtained. Adaptive modeling is another natural way to mitigate the effects of path dependence. In this approach the modeling process is revised at checkpoints, where intermediate results are obtained, learning has occurred, and possibly new data has become available.Path dependence is an important theme in Behavioral Operational Research where the essential question is to understand the human impact on the whole OR process. This naturally leads us to consider the path that is followed in the process. We do not claim that our analysis is comprehensive. Path dependence can well originate also due to other causes than those discussed in this paper. Future research should consider especially the human related drivers of path dependence in more detail in different contexts and in different modeling processes.