@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Group versus Internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy for procrastination: Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two treatment formats for procrastination are being compared.The treatments specifically target students suffering from procrastination.This is the first clinical trial for procrastination using clinical interviews.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Procrastination,Cognitive-behavioral therapy,Internet interventions,Group intervention,Students,Randomized controlled trial,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Procrastination is defined as a voluntarily delay of an intended course of action despite expecting to be worse-off for the delay, and is considered a persistent behavior pattern that can result in major psychological suffering. About one-fifth of the adult population and half of the student population are presumed having substantial difficulties due to recurrent procrastination in their everyday lives. However, chronic and severe procrastinators seldom receive adequate care due to preconceptions and the lack of understanding regarding procrastination and the treatment interventions that are assumed beneficial. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is often deemed a treatment of choice, although the evidence supporting its use is scarce, and only one randomized controlled trial has been performed. The primary aim of the proposed study is therefore to test the efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy delivered as either a group intervention or via the Internet. Participants will consist of students recruited through the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet. A randomized controlled trial with a sample size of 100 participants divided into blocks of thirty will be used, comparing an eight-week Internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy intervention, and an eight-week group cognitive-behavioral therapy based intervention. It is believed that the proposed study will result in two important findings. First, different treatment interventions in cognitive-behavioral therapy are assumed to be helpful for people suffering from problems caused by procrastination. Second, both an Internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy intervention and a group intervention are presumed suitable for administering treatment for procrastination, which is considered important as the availability of adequate care is limited, particularly among students. The proposed study will increase the knowledge regarding the efficacy of different treatments of procrastination, as well as enhance the overall comprehension of the difficulties related to dilatory behavior.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Postponing tasks and assignments that need to be performed is a common phenomenon in everyday life. Albeit sometimes perceived as stressful, most people are able to complete their commitments in due time without having to experience any major psychological suffering. However, for some individuals, deferring what needs to be done can become a persistent behavior pattern that results in a number of negative consequences (Stead et al., 2010). The given definition for procrastination, “to voluntarily delay an intended course of action despite expecting to be worse-off for the delay” (Steel, 2007), involves the decision to adjourn the initiation or completion of a given task or commitment until the last minute, after the predetermined deadline has occurred, or indefinitely (Dryden, 2000). Procrastination shares much in common with difficulties prioritizing, being self-assertive, as well as having perfectionistic standards, but requires an active choice between competing activities in which one is being avoided in favor of the other (Steel, 2007). Evidence suggests that chronic and severe procrastination is associated with decreased well-being, poorer mental health, and fewer mental health-seeking behaviors (Sirios, 2004, 2007). Stress, worry, and feelings of guilt are particularly evident among individuals that procrastinate recurrently (Pychyl et al., 2000; Steel, 2007). Deferring commitments on a regular basis is also related to treatment delay and fewer wellness behaviors in general, resulting in the exacerbation of physical illness (Sirios et al., 2003). In addition, procrastination is never a helpful behavior in terms of performance, affecting the quality of tasks and assignments and having a negative impact on school and work (Tice and Baumeister, 1997; Steel, 2007; van Eerde, 2003).According to self-report measures, procrastination is highly prevalent in both the adult and the student population. Approximately one-fifth of all people perceive themselves as engaging in dilatory behavior to the extent that it can result in personal distress (Harriott and Ferrari, 1996). However, the prevalence among students is assumed to be much higher, with almost half of the respondents experiencing great difficulties by habitually postponing their day to day commitments (Day et al., 2000). For students, procrastination may be especially troublesome, as it can interfere with the ability to perform tasks and assignments related to their curricula, putting both coursework and the opportunity to attain a university degree at risk (Ferrari and Scher, 2000). Furthermore, procrastination might in turn result in other psychiatric conditions as a consequence of having problems with initiating and completing commitments (Brown, 1991), most notably stress, anxiety, and depression. Receiving adequate care at an early stage in order to manage procrastination is thus important, helping students overcome academic procrastination, enhance psychological flexibility, and increase their well-being (Mulry et al., 1994; Glick et al., 2014).Despite the many negative consequences that can be attributed to procrastination, research on treatment interventions has long been neglected in favor of exploring underlying mechanisms that could be related to deferring tasks and assignments, most notably personality factors (Steel, 2007). Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is often regarded as treatment of choice, but the evidence for its use is still scarce, and the few clinical trials that exist lack validated outcome measures and randomized conditions, thus obscuring the results and making it difficult to determine its efficacy (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013). Still, many treatment interventions that are used in CBT involving both cognitive and behavioral approaches are assumed to be beneficial for people that procrastinate. Automaticity, stimulus control, and stimulus cues have, for instance, all been found suitable in order to facilitate routines, reduce the risk of becoming distracted, and prevent mental fatigue, i.e., working on tasks and assignments at specific locations and hours of the day, removing stimuli that might interfere with performance, and introducing stimuli that remind the individual of implementing a more adaptive response (Steel, 2007). Likewise, gradual exposure may help overcome the tendency to defer commitments due to feelings of discomfort or worry, similar to exposure in vivo often used for many anxiety disorders (Brown, 1991). In addition, goal setting, learned industriousness, and value clarification may aid time management and increase motivation by clarifying the rewards of completing tasks and assignments (Locke and Latham, 2002; Steel and König, 2006). Also, targeting unrealistic standards, fear of failure, and self-doubt are presumed useful to inhibit procrastination caused by irrational beliefs (Flett et al., 2012), and can include the administration of behavioral experiments and cognitive restructuring, as well as using motivational interviewing to instigate behavior change (McDermott, 2004; Miller and Rollnick, 2012).The objective of the proposed study is to investigate the efficacy of CBT delivered as either a group intervention or via the Internet (c.f., Andersson et al., 2013), thereby extending the research of one previously performed randomized controlled trial of Internet-based CBT for procrastination that yielded promising results (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013). In addition, because the availability of adequate care is lacking, partly due to preconceptions and insufficient knowledge concerning what treatment interventions are presumed helpful for managing procrastination, it is important to explore the possibility of also delivering CBT as a group intervention (c.f., Bergström et al., 2010). This might be especially true for the student population, where difficulties related to procrastination are widespread and particularly disabling for their academic achievements and well-being (Day et al., 2000). Both conditions are assumed to be beneficial in reducing procrastination, and the proposed study is believed to contribute valuable knowledge concerning dilatory behavior among students, its comorbidities, and the treatment interventions that might help circumvent problems of chronic and severe procrastination.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
