@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
From 2D to 3D at macro- and microscopic scale in rock art studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Photogrammetry is suitable for 3D modeling at macroscopic scale.Most relevant criteria for the traceology of petroglyphs are in the scope of photogrammetry.Focus stacking enlarges the depth of field of photomicrography and gives data for relief elevation.Consumers devices and software provide effective solutions for macro- and microscopic recording.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rock art,Petroglyph,Photogrammetry,Focus stacking,Macroscopy,Microscopy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thanks to the regular increasing of computing power, 3D imaging is about to become a common tool in archeology with a diversity of solutions, from consumers free services up to high ends professional equipments. Inside archeology, most of the practice has focused on monuments and art objects, involving different techniques according to the size and morphology of the subject.The most common one, but not the simplest, is lasergrammetry, which is particularly suitable for big volumes and distant recordings. However, resolution is not the main quality of a device initially designed for quantitative recording, while chromatic data has to be fixed separately.Photometric stereo (Pintus, 2007; Vanzi et al., In press) and reflectance transformation imaging (RTI), which are both fundamentally based on the same principle, are restricted to the modeling of surfaces, size of which is limited by the range of the turning light, but they are appreciated in various fields of cultural heritage, such as epigraphy, numismatic or painting restoration (e.g. Mudge et al., 2005; Earl et al., 2010, 2011; Artal-Isbrand et al., 2011; Manrique Tamayo et al., 2013; Dufy, 2010; Duffy et al., 2013; Manfredi et al., 2014) and can be even used at macroscopic scale (Kotoula, 2013). Promising works presented during the workshop let think that they will be soon more regularly used than today in the field, since the requested equipment (digital camera, flash and tripod) and the method for recording the primary data are quite simple.Photogrammetry is today the most flexible solution which combines the relative simplicity of RTI and photometric stereo with the polyvalence of lasergrammetry, with two advantages over laser scanning shared by photographic based methods. The first one is the dissociation of the photographic recording and of the 3D modeling, which means that resolution is not fixed by a laser stripe width, in the stage of the recording, but by the capacity of the software to correlate the photographic details, in the second step of the process. Each generation of software improves the modeling quality, while to get a better laser model implies to scan again the subject with a more resolute instrument. The second advantage is that each point of the photogrammeric dense cloud has its own color. The photographic texture, which can be optionally added to the meshed surface, comes from the set of photographs from which the spatial data is extrapolated. The practical drawbacks of photogrammetry versus lasergrammetry are a shorter working distance, which can be critical when it is not possible to come close to the subject, such as in the Chauvet or Cussac cave, and the requirement to have most parts of the frame in focus, what depends on the depth of field.In the field of rock art studies, 3D modeling has been mainly used for reconstructing the volume of the caves or the morphology of the painted or engraved walls and as a substitute to graphic and photographic recording of the prehistoric pictures. Among its numerous advantages, it provides 2D orthographic projection, high resolution improved viewing (Lima et al. 2014), volume comparison (Pinçon et al., 2008, 2010), understanding of the relation between the motifs and the rock surface, surimposed enhanced tracing on the wall with or without its colored texture (e.g. Fritz et al., 2010a, 2010b; Domingo et al., 2013), virtual reconstruction (e.g. Delannoy et al., 2010, 2012; García Puchol et al., 2013), etc. The most commonly used recording technique, for research and patrimonial valorization, at the scale of the archeological sites, is lasergrammetry (e.g. Warzee et al., 2008; Lacanette and Malaurent, 2010; Lasheras Corruchaga and de las Heras, 2010; Pinçon et al., 2010; Abbott and Anderson-Whymark, 2012). Designed for industrial purposes (Bouillon and Cassen, 2008) and initially available by the intermediary of private companies, it is the most appropriate for large volumes such as Prehistoric caves. Since a few years photogrammetry is becoming a valuable alternative (e.g. Núñez et al., 2013), even for underground network (Arles et al. 2013), thanks to its lower cost and its lighter implementation which make archeologists more autonomous. After a pioneer time, when computers were not powerful enough (Fryer et al., 2005; Chandler and Fryer, 2005; Chandler and Bryan, 2007), photogrammetry turns out now to be a normal extension of digital camera for recording in 3D parts of site, selected panels, blocks, details of figures, etc. (e.g. Sanz et al., 2010; Plets et al., 2012a, 2012b; Kjellman, 2012; Pintus et al., 2012; Olsen and Bryant, 2013; Lerma and Muir, 2014; McCarthy, 2014). Photometric stereo and RTI cannot cover complete walls or rocks nor complex volumes but they have been efficiently used for steles and petroglyphs recording (Mudge et al., 2006; Duffy, 2010; Duffy et al., 2013; Díaz-Guardamino and Wheatley, 2013; Kleinitz, 2012, 2014; Olsen and Bryant, 2013; Pitts et al., 2014; Miles et al., 2014).When dealing with details of the tracings, the scale and the goals are changing, as well as the viewing and the recording procedures. Questions are no longer purely stylistic and semantic, but primarily technologic, biologic, crystallographic: chronology of the marks, type of tool used, composition of the pigments, agents of alteration, etc. They are involving a larger range of disciplines, methodologies and equipments, but have the common need of centimetric, millimetric or submillimetric observations in contexts which are not as comfy as the laboratory.In the laboratory, from the stereoscopic to the confocal microscope, there is a diversity of optical instruments for observing and imaging surface details, but most of them are not only very expensive but simply not portable to the field. Not more transportable is the microtopographical scanner such as the one used for the analysis of the Magdalenian engraved stone plaquettes of La Marche (Vienne, France) (Mélard, 2010; Gaussein, 2012) and not much is the high resolution scanner tested on the Magdalenian plaquettes of Gönnersdorf (Güth, 2012) or the one brought in the rock shelter of the Colombier (Azéma et al. 2010), while handy scanners have a lower effective resolution.No doubt that models fitting our needs (resolution, portability, cost) will be on the market in a near future, but for now the only device proposed to archeologists for doing observation and 3D recording at high magnification on cave walls is the so called “3D Digital microscope” which is an optical zoom coupled to an integrated imaging system based on the principle of focus stacking. Contrary to the extravagant claims of magnification promoted by its advertisers (up to 5000×, optically impossible and based in fact on enlargement to a 15in. or 17in. screen rather than the sensor plane), this hybrid instrument works in the magnification range of a classical stereoscopic microscope but with a monocular structure. Between “20×” and “50×” (in fact 0.5× to 1.2×, according to the size of the sensor and the frame of the image) it does not magnify more than the macro-lens of a SLR digital camera (Figs. 12, 14–17) but provides an image with a lower resolution and a shorter dynamic range than this consumer device by fault of a minuscule sensor (2.11Mp 1/1.8in. color CCD). Since it is quite heavy and electrically dependent (10–15kg and >300VA for models from Hirox, Keyence or Leica; however the light portable zoom camera head of the Nikon model can be dissociated from its motorized focusing stand and from the touch panel monitor for an autonomous 2D viewing and recording), the 3D Digital microscope cannot be seen as a convenient solution for rock art studies in the field.Rather than spending public money on costly closed equipments which are for now unsatisfying technical compromises, we have explored the potential of already commonly available hardware and software tools by combining and adapting them to our purpose.Our intention was to take profit of digital imaging for the techno-traceological study of petroglyphes, on the basis of the pioneers works of D’Errico for engraving (D’Errico et al. 2002) and of Girja for pecking (Girja and Dèvlet, 2010, 2012; Girja et al., 2011), which dealt with the third dimension but by way of silicon imprints. Today the use of this invasive technique on patrimonial objects is forbidden; fortunately digital substitutes are becoming affordable and they offer a greater potential for viewing, measuring, sharing, duplicating, etc. Our challenge was to adapt and appraise them in different archeological case studies: open air and cave sites in France, Portugal and Russia. We will focus here on the recording step.Pecking traces and engravings are not at the same scale: while the ones are often deep and clearly visible, the others are sometime so faint that they are poorly distinguishable with the naked eye.Until very recently (Rodríguez-Vidal et al., 2014) the use of photogrammetry for recording petroglyphs has not been further than large frames and/or low resolution with details not shown by the relief of the model but by its photographic texture (Lerma et al., 2006). Since depth of field decreases when magnification increases, it was unsure that photogrammetry, which requests most parts of the image to be in focus, could be suitable for macroscopic recording. Therefore we did tests at different scales on experimental and archeological glyphs, using various SLR cameras: Canon 1000D (10Mp) with Canon EF-S 60mm f/2.8 Macro USM objective, Nikon D90 (12Mp) and Nikon D7000 (16Mp) with AF-S DX Micro Nikkor 40mm f/2.8G and AF-S Micro Nikkor 60mm f/2.8G ED objectives, coupled to a ring flash. After comparing different softwares and on line services (Plisson, 2014, in press) we choosed the standard edition of Photoscan developed by the Russian company Agisoft, which is by far, at a very low price in Educational license, the best available photogrammetric solution, since this very flexible program is in the same time tolerant with out of focus areas of the images and precise in their correlation, and it provides useful tools for optimizing the final model.On soft rocks such as schist and sandstone, in the sites of Foz Côa (Guarda district, Portugal), Shalobolino (Krasnoyarsk Kraï, Russia) and Malaya Boyarskaya (Republic of Khakasiya, Russia), the differences between lithic and metallic tools imprints, according to the experimental models of Girja (Girja and Dèvlet, 2010, 2012; Girja et al., 2011; Zotkina, 2013; Zotkina et al., 2014), are clearly registered (Figs. 1–3, Supplementary 3D model 1 Video S1). Also they are for deep engravings such as in Kalbak Tash (Altai Republic, Russia). Photoscan is able to deliver very dense point clouds which are like tridimensional photographs since each pixel has its own spatial coordinates. Once meshed, measurement and cross section (Figs. 2 and 3) can be easily done with various softwares, what allows more precise comparisons than with simple photos, while the infinite depth of field, the orthogonal projection, the rotation of the virtual light and the removing of the colored texture (or the use of specific shaders in software like Meshlab) greatly improve the display of the relief, sometime revealing details which are poorly visible in the field (Fig. 4).On harder rocks such as the granite of the site of Kalguty (Altaï Republic, Russia) (Čeremisin et al., 2013), where petroglyphs are there stylistically supposed to be Paleolithic, tools marks have much less relief. One can then questions the reliability of a photogrammetric model for making comparison when the discriminating features are faint. In optimal condition, with high quality photographs from a 12Mp camera, tests done by the laboratory Archéovision (Mora et al., 2012) have measured an accuracy better than 1 for 1000 (i.d. 1mm for 1m). With a 30cm high stone Buddha head, most deviation between points between the photogrammetric and lasergrammetric (Faro Arm) dense clouds was lesser than 0.1mm, and with an experimental engraved stone plaquette of 20cm long the difference was in the margin of error of the scanner (Mangier, 2011). However, the short depth of field in photomacrography prevents from getting optimal shots. For that reason it was necessary to see whether the photogrammetric model is relevant for distinguishing submillimetric details.In order to be able to make reproducible observations we took an experimental sandstone abrader grooved by the sharpening of bone needles as a reference sample (Fig. 5); not a piece of art, but the same morphology of mark that could be examined as a symbolic tracing in another context (Rodríguez-Vidal et al., 2014). The grooves of this abrader were scanned by P. Mora (Archéovision lab) with a Fusion Faro Arm (0.1mm resolution) and photographed under different angles with a 16Mp Nikon D7000 SLR camera at 1:3 (37 shots) and 1:2 (53 shots) magnification. The two series of shots were processed at the highest resolution of Photoscan (high accuracy of alignment and ultra high dense cloud). The results are convincing since both photogrammetric models have registered the relief of crystals and deposits which are indiscernible on the real object without a stereoscopic microscope (smaller than a hundredth of the photographic frame at 2:1) (Fig. 6). At such magnification, the Fusion Faro Arm cannot compete despite its 0.1mm resolution: the polygons of the meshed surface are visible (Fig. 7). Also were the ones of the models produced by the high resolution scanner ATOS III/GOM tested on engraved Magdalenian plaquettes from Gönnersdorf, on area of 65×65mm2 at a resolution of 30µm (Güth, 2012) when enlarging 0.85mm wide grooves. With the sensor size of a Nikon SLR camera (16×24mm2), an area of 65×65mm2 is covered at 2.5:1 magnification. Most details of our archeological samples were shot between 1:4 and 1:2. If we compare the example of Gönnersdorf (Güth, 2012, Fig. 7) with a similar engraving in Foz Côa (Figs. 8–10), we see that photogrammetry provides models more resolute at macroscopic scale. Scanner technology is still evolving and we can expect more resolute models in a near future, but for now photogrammetry is a more appropriate solution for macroscopic 3D recording in the field. In a certain measure it is possible to get some more details starting with photographs from a more resolute sensor taken at a shorter distance, but the limits are an increasing diffraction (the smaller are the sensor photo diodes, the greater is diffraction for a same diaphragm aperture of the objective) and a decreasing depth of field (the higher magnification is, the shorter is the depth of field for a same aperture); in practice to close more the objective diaphragm does not help. We did some attempts at a magnification of 1.5:1, with the tip of a quartzite engraving pick from Olga Grande (Coa Valley, Portugal), but the 104 images of 10Mp had to be reduced to 3Mp before processing in order to restrain the noise and for getting an acceptable model (Fig. 11 and Supplementary 3D model 2). We are there at the practical limit of photogrammetry with direct photographs. As other researchers (Gallo et al., 2014), we tried to combine photogrammetry and focus stacking, but the process is so constraining that it is poorly usable in the field, not to say problems of distortion depending on the focusing mode (with rail, with fixe focal lens, with changing focal lens according to the focusing range).Since SLR cameras are able, with standard macro-lens, to record details not visible with the naked eye they also can be used as a macroscopic viewing device. Their very small screen are far from being convenient for such purpose, but inexpensive apps for Android and Mac OS can turn a touch tablet into a performing monitor and complete remote controller, adding functions absent of the camera: most of the camera adjustments can be manipulated on screen while automation of the shots is possible with specific parameters, including progressive step by step changes in focus, what produces a vertical scan of the sample. In fact, by combining current consumers gear it is possible to make a serious challenger to the digital microscopes (Figs. 12 and 13). Aside fantasist magnification claims, the main technical reason is that a 16×24 mm2 sensor with 16 or 18 and now 24Mp gives you more free scope for zooming into the image (Figs. 14–16, 29 and 30) than a 7.2×5.3mm2 sensor with only 2.1Mp (Figs. 12 and 17). On a touch tab screen connected to a Nikon D7000 (16Mp) or Canon 550D (18Mp), submillimetric details are clearly visible through a common macro-objective lens at 1:1 magnification (Figs. 14–16).If one need more magnification, additional extension rings are a simple means for reaching up to 5:1. However, beyond 3:1, it is more efficient to replace the macro-lens with a 4–5× or 10× microscope objective (finite design) (Pétillon et al. 2011, Figure 14) or the whole extension device and the macro-objective with a 200mm telezoom to which is fixed the microscope objective (but of infinite design) (Littlefield, 2010; Plisson, In press; Dubreuil et al., 2015;Figs. 18 and 19). The narrow shape of the microscope objective allows the lens to get closer to the subject and its larger aperture provides a higher resolution. The telephoto objective acts like the tube lens of the microscope: it collects the parallel rays virtually coming from infinity such as in landscape photography. The microscope objective, which produces here the primary image, is attached via a mounting adapter easily available on internet (e.g. RJ camera accessory store). The combination of a telephoto zoom with a microscope objective on a SLR camera makes a very flexible combo which has the same optical quality than a laboratory compound microscope. The main difference is that the light is not coming through the lens (bright field) but is external. It clearly outperforms the digital microscope, both by its image quality (Figs. 13 and 18) and by its portability.3D capture by focus stacking is available with several remote control softwares and apps such as Helicon Remote, ControlMyNikon, DSLR Remote Pro, DslrDashboard or DSLR Controller, which automate the step by step shooting (Fig. 20). Once the stack is done it has to be processed by another software for producing an hyperfocused 2D image from the depth map of which a 3D model can be extrapolated. The most commonly used software are Combine Z (freeware, but PC only), Zerene Stacker and Helicon Focus; Photoshop can also give good results, but without the large range of options and functions provided by Helicon Focus, from the Ukrainian Heliconsoft company, which is the most comprehensive software package. A depth map can be exported from Zerene Stacker and Helicon Focus and the latter includes a 3D viewer which converts the depth map into a polygonal object however limited to 512×512. Professional software like Mudbox, Rhino, Maya, and the last version of Photoshop can do the same in full resolution at a license price which also is professional. As an alternative is a plugin, programmed by the laboratory Archéovision, for the mesh processing software Meshlab, which creates a textured calibrated elevation from a depth map on the basis of the number of photos in the stack, the distance between each photo and the width of the frame (Figs. 21–24). This plugin will be soon available for free under GNU General Public License.3D modeling by focus stacking (also called image stacking, Z-stacking, depth of field stacking, multifocus, focal plane merging or image fusion) is not restricted to photomicrography, however the resolution of the three-dimensional reconstruction depends on the number and regularity of shots, therefore on the depth of field and on the preciseness of the focusing device motor (included in the objective or body of the SLR or external). Focus stacking and photogrammetry are complementary because they have opposite requirements: whereas photogrammetry needs a wide depth of field, focus stacking requires a low depth of field. The inconvenience of focus stacking, which is the only modus operandi at high magnification, is that the Z axis has to be calibrated according to the shooting condition (Berejnov, 2009) and that the volumetric reconstruction, before smoothing, has a stepped appearance (Figs. 23 and 24), the coarseness of which depends on the number of shots.We have tested our DIY equipment (SLR camera+telephoto zoom coupled to a microscope objective+netbook or touch pad+remote control software+Helicon focus+Meshlab plugin) into three French Palaleolithic caves with fine engraving (Deux Ouvertures cave) and painting (Grotte aux Points and Font de Gaume caves). In the open air sites, the surface weathering was too strong for intending a microscopic analysis of the tools marks.However, even in the caves, our experience is that in most cases the magnification power of a microscope is too high for doing relevant technological observation, because of the wall moisture and of the calcite deposit (Figs. 25 and 26). The relative chronology of the tracings, when perceptible, is better seen at a lower magnification, just by playing with the light, at a scale where the tridimensional resolution of both focus stacking (Figs. 27 and 28) and photogrammetry is not sufficient for reproducing accurately enough the relief of narrow and superficial traces. We have not yet tried reflectance transformation imaging, however we suspect that this computational photographic method would be there particularly appropriate.In the Grotte aux Points cave, where painted panels are free of calcite, the migration of pigments from superimposed black comas to hand palm red imprints prevented to distinguish their relative chronology without a chemical cartography in the cross section of a sampling (Hoerlé, 2014). However, the black pigments to be collected for 14C dating appeared, under high magnification examination (Fig. 19), covered by contemporary organic fragments (Figs. 29 and 30). True microscopic observation in situ gives access to a larger range of information, not necessarily expected.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
