@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Contribution of 3D technologies to the analysis of form in late palaeolithic rock carvings: The case of the Roc-aux-Sorciers rock-shelter (Angles-sur-l’Anglin, France)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the contribution of 3D technologies in the study of a Magdalenian carved frieze (recording, analysis, modelling).3D technologies as tools for stylistic analysis (morphometry and volumetry, comparisons of form).3D comparisons of form question the issue of authorship.3D technologies to help precise and model the successive rock art assemblages of the wall stratigraphy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rock carving,Magdalenian,Style,Wall stratigraphy,Modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of 3D technologies in the process of recording palaeolithic parietal art has spread widely throughout the scientific community since the mid-2000s: caves of Cosquer (Thibault, 2001), Chauvet (Aujoulat and Pérazio, 2005), El Castillo (Warzée et al., 2009), La Peña de Candamo (Corchón et al., 2009a, 2009b), Las Caldas (Corchón et al., 2009b), Marsoulas (Fritz et al., 2010), Lascaux (Feruglio et al., 2010), Altamira (Lasheras Corruchaga and de las Heras, 2010), La Baume-Latrone (Azéma et al., 2012), La Garma (Arias and Ontañon, 2014), Cussac (Feruglio et al., forthcoming), etc. In this framework, our research on carved parietal art has given a special attention to the development of analytical applications of these technologies that have ensured methodological improvements in the study of these rock art sets. Four decorated sites of Western France, attributed to the Middle Magdalenian culture (18,500–17,000 cal. BP) are concerned: the Roc-aux-Sorciers (Angles-sur-l’Anglin, Vienne), the Chaire-à-Calvin (Mouthiers-sur-Boëme, Charente), Reverdit (Sergeac, Dordogne) and Cap-Blanc (Marquay, Dordogne) (Pinçon and Bourdier, 2009; Pinçon et al., 2009; Bourdier, 2010;). Because of its extension, complexity and remarkable conservation, the Roc-aux-Sorciers carved frieze constitutes the main testing ground on which this paper focuses on.Situated at the margins of Aquitaine and of the Paris Basin, the Roc-aux-Sorciers is a massive rock shelter that opens in a south-facing cliff on the bank of the Anglin river (Fig. 1). It is divided into two areas with contrasting geomorphologies: a classical rock shelter in the downstream part (“Abri Bourdois”), and a wide karstic cavity parallel to the cliff in the upstream part, whose huge ceiling collapsed (“Cave Taillebourg”). Discovered in 1927 by L. Rousseau, the site was mainly excavated between 1947 and 1957 by de Saint-Mathurin and Garrod who unearthed the rock art (Rousseau, 1933; Saint-Mathurin and Garrod, 1949, 1951; Saint-Mathurin, 1984). It has been the subject of a multidisciplinary study supervised by Pinçon since 1992.The excavations yielded evidence of an intensive sequence of occupation during the Middle Magdalenian (MM hereafter). Two thick archaeological layers were identified by L. Rousseau and later by de Saint-Mathurin and Garrod in both areas of the site: layers TCD and TCC in the “Cave Taillebourg”, layers RSD and RSC in the “Abri Bourdois”. In the “Abri Bourdois”, the radiocarbon dates obtained extend from 14,160±80 BP (17,571–16,923 cal. BP, GRN 1913) to 14,770±140 BP (18,515–17,609 cal. BP, GifA 94190) (Saint-Mathurin, 1984; Iakovleva and Pinçon, 1997).11[1] Dates calibrated with OxCal 4.1, IntCal 09 curve (Bronk Ramsey, 2009; Reimer et al., 2009).These layers contained many hearths and a rich and diverse material. Lithic and osseous industry, fauna, portable art and personal ornaments indicate that a wide range of activities were performed in the site, relating to the domestic, hunting and symbolic spheres (Pinçon, 2009–2010). The faunal remains – mainly reindeer and horse – suggest intensive and/or repeated occupations (Bignon, 2009–2010; Valensi, 2009–2010). However, the accurate characterization of the occupations can hardly be defined at present.A central aspect of the Roc-aux-Sorciers lies in the association of a luxurious parietal art with these occupations. The site contains the most exceptional carved frieze known in the European Upper Palaeolithic, both the longest and the most diverse in terms of motifs. These bas-reliefs are combined with paintings and with fine and large engravings The parietal art extends for more than 50m, occupying the back wall and the fallen ceiling in the “Abri Bourdois”, but restricted to the ceiling in the “Cave Taillebourg” where it is now fragmented into several hundred blocks (Saint-Mathurin op. cit.; Iakovleva & Pinçon op. cit.) (Fig. 2). Studies are still underway, but more than a hundred motifs are known at present, with on the one hand engraved and carved figurative designs, and on the other hand red-painted abstract designs (lines, dots, quadrangles) (Abgrall, 2009-2010, 2010). The figurative corpus is diverse, with the identification of ten themes, some of them particularly scarce in European Palaeolithic iconography (saïga antelope, canid). With 60 bas-reliefs currently known, the carved imagery is dominated by the classical MM triad of Horse–Bison–Ibex together with felines and humans as a specific feature of this parietal assemblage (Fig. 3). These representations show a strong realistic trend which is typical of the local stylistic tradition, especially applied to depiction of humans (Bourdier, 2013; Fuentes, 2013). The bodies are complete and well-proportioned, with many internal details depicting organs, muscles and bones. In the “Abri Bourdois”, the bas-reliefs are organized in thematic panels naturally delimited by the topography of the shelter (Iakovleva & Pinçon op. cit.). A body of evidence attests that all the parietal art can be attributed to the MM sequence of occupation: decorated wall partly covered by the fallen ceiling in the “Abri Bourdois”, fallen decorated ceiling covering the MM layers in the “Cave Taillebourg”, pieces of carvings found in the MM layers in the “Abri Bourdois”, ochre and manganese pencils and molettes as well as carving equipment in the MM layers from both areas (de Beaune, 2009–2010; Chehmana and Beyries, 2009–2010; Beyries and Catin, 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, 3D technologies have proved to be very efficient analytical tools in the stylistic study of rock carvings. The data produced are more accurate and more reliable. Moreover, the manipulations used to obtain the data are also much easier to make on these virtual objects than in reality, which gives one the opportunity to look at issues that have scarcely been tackled in Prehistory. Three-dimensional digital models have renewed the scientific approach to palaeolithic sculpted parietal art. As instruments for testing and validation, they have revealed themselves, in some of their applications, to be tools for the formulation of complex hypotheses to be investigated in prehistoric archaeology. In order to be effective, their use needs to meet specific problems. Their great attraction lies in their direct exploitation by researchers. In particular, this direct reappropriation makes it possible, on the one hand, to limit the subjective part of the modelling, and, on the other, to help the scientists engage actively in the process of mediating this patrimony. It does not necessarily require a total mastery of the assemblage of 3D software and tools. However, it would be interesting to share this partial and sporadic expertise in meeting specific needs, by creating a common library of 3D tools illustrated by examples. The range of these technical acquisitions and applications and of their evolution would then be a resource for scientists which would enable them to enrich in a motivated way their problems, by having access to technical tools that are well adapted to their analyses.