@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Internet-based information and self-help program for parents of children with burns: Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Study protocol of a novel RCT evaluating an information and self-help program for parents of children with burnsThe intervention is based on cognitive-behavior therapy and is inspired by Acceptance and Commitment TherapyThe program will offer parents of children with burns information and support

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Burns,Child,Parent,Internet intervention,Randomized controlled trial,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundA burn is one of the most traumatic and painful injuries a child can experience and it is also a very stressful experience for the parents. Given the great psychological distress and perceived lack of multi-professional support experienced by the parents, there is a need for support during in-hospital treatment as well as during recovery. The aim of the study is to develop and evaluate an internet-based information and self-help program for parents of children who have been hospitalized for burn injury. The program aims to decrease parents' symptoms of stress.MethodsParticipants will consist of parents of children treated for burns between 2009 and 2013 at either of the two specialized Swedish Burn centers. The study is a two-armed randomized controlled trial with a six-week intervention group and an inactive control group, with a pre- and post-assessment, as well as a 3- and 12-month follow-up. The main outcome is stress (post-traumatic stress, general perceived stress and parental stress). The data will be analyzed with the intention-to-treat principle. The intervention is based on Cognitive-Behavior Therapy (CBT) and is inspired by Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT). It is psycho-educational and provides basic skills training in communication and stress management.ConclusionWe believe that this program will offer parents of children with burns information and support, decrease symptoms of stress, and that parents will perceive the program as useful. If the program is found to be beneficial, it could be implemented in burn care as it is accessible and cost-effective.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Young children up to four years of age constitute almost 30% of all burn victims in Sweden, and another 10% are children aged five to 14years (Åkerlund et al., 2007). Similar rates have been observed in other western countries (Brusselaers et al., 2010). Burns are one of the most traumatic and painful injuries a child can experience. It is also a very stressful experience for the parents with symptoms of anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) following the burn (Bakker et al., 2013). For example, studies have shown that almost half of the parents have symptoms of PTSD in the first months after the burn (Hall et al., 2006) and 14–42% up to 5years post-burn (Bakker et al., 2013). There is increasing evidence that parents' psychological health is of importance for the health of the child (Cuijpers et al., 2015; Gunlicks and Weissman, 2008). In burns research it has been observed that PTSD symptoms in the mother were related to the child's stress reactions following burn, and family functioning and parenting stress were associated with the child's adjustment, while burn severity was not (Bakker et al., 2013). Thus the parent's health and functioning following a child's burn is likely to also be important for the child's health and recovery after the injury.Considering the significant psychological distress experienced by the parents, parents need support following the burn of the child (McGarry et al., 2015). However, up to 20% of the parents of children with burns perceive a lack of psychological or other support and information during treatment and rehabilitation (Willebrand and Sveen, preliminary data). This could be improved by the health care professionals, for example, by providing educational programs and written information about both the physiological and psychological aspects of burn injuries. Previously described parent and caregiver support programs are diverse in purpose and design. For instance, a study on the health determinants of adult caregivers of children with cerebral palsy supported a biopsychosocial framework that was family-centered rather than focused exclusively on the child (Raina et al., 2005). A conclusion was that prevention of caregiver health problems might be feasible through providing parents with cognitive and behavioral strategies to manage their child's behaviors (Raina et al., 2005). A randomized controlled trial (RCT) of an educative-behavioral program for parents of premature infants showed that the program decreased maternal stress, length of stay in hospital, post-discharge anxiety and depression, and increased positive parent-infant interactions (Melnyk et al., 2006). As of yet, no such program for parents of children with burns has been formally evaluated. A questionnaire with open-ended questions administered to close persons of children with burns indicated that a family support program should include the following categories: 1) provide advice and support regarding family members' acceptance of the child's altered appearance, 2) provide advice and support and information regarding scars and appearance, 3) provide support in understanding changes in the child after the burn, and in coping with altered family dynamics, and 4) to provide advice on how to deal with uncomfortable social encounters (Phillips and Rumsey, 2008). Further, in a summary of clinical experiences from an outpatient parent support group in South Africa, the following core themes were reported: blame and guilt (linked to isolation and stigma), fear that the child would die, gratitude that the child survived, concern about scarring, religion as an anchor and a way of making sense of the event, description of the child's changed behavior (more clingy, frightened), and family problems (Frenkel, 2008). Although many themes are likely to be universal, cultural adaptation of parent support programs is necessary, both in terms of themes and in terms of format. Group-based interventions with face-to-face sessions may not be feasible, beneficial or necessary for all parents, especially considering the varying degree of symptoms, the vast geographical spread of the injuries in Sweden, and the relatively low yearly incidence of burns in Sweden (Åkerlund et al., 2007).Internet-based cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) is an increasingly used strategy and it is reported to have several advantages over traditional CBT, such as anonymity, accessibility and being less expensive (Andersson and Titov, 2014). In addition, it can be designed with varying levels of therapist support in order to meet the specific needs of a patient group. ICBT with therapist support has better effect than ICBT without support (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Saddichha et al., 2014; Spek et al., 2007). ICBT has been found to be effective in individuals with PTSD (Ivarsson et al., 2014; Spence et al., 2011). In addition, it has been advised that self-help interventions should be based on CBT principles rather than being purely educational (Gellatly et al., 2007). In keeping with this, a web-based posttraumatic stress psycho-educational program for parents of children with physical injury was found to increase early knowledge post-intervention, but it did not reduce symptoms of PTS (Marsac et al., 2013), whereas a pilot study of a web-based psychological support program for caregivers of children with cystic fibrosis was reported to improve parental mental health and quality of life (Fidika et al., 2015).As of yet, no internet-based information and self-help program has been formally evaluated for parents of children with burns. The project aims to develop and evaluate an internet-based information and self-help program for parents of children and adolescents who have been hospitalized for burn injury. A hypothesis is that parents in the intervention group will report decreased levels of stress, in particular symptoms of post-traumatic stress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
