@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An automatic 3D CAD model errors detection method of aircraft structural part for NC machining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The 3D CAD model of an aircraft structural part is partitioned into multiple local regions in terms of the base faces.The fillet association level graph is proposed to represent the local region for exploring the CAD model errors.An automatic CAD model error detection method based on heuristics rule is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heuristic rule,CAD model errors,Aircraft structural part,Feature-based NC machining,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Feature-based NC machining, which requires high quality of 3D CAD model, is widely used in machining aircraft structural part. However, there has been little research on how to automatically detect the CAD model errors. As a result, the user has to manually check the errors with great effort before NC programming. This paper proposes an automatic CAD model errors detection approach for aircraft structural part. First, the base faces are identified based on the reference directions corresponding to machining coordinate systems. Then, the CAD models are partitioned into multiple local regions based on the base faces. Finally, the CAD model error types are evaluated based on the heuristic rules. A prototype system based on CATIA has been developed to verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid development of aircraft manufacturing technology, plenty of integral aircraft structural parts with thin walls are used in new generation aircraft [1]. However, the NC programming time of integral aircraft structural part is much longer than its NC machining time, which affects the production efficiency of enterprise seriously. Under the supports of application requirements drive and high-tech, the emerging feature-based NC programming system [2,3], which has the characteristics of intelligence, automation and rapidity, greatly improves the efficiency of NC programming for aircraft structural parts. However, the input of the feature-based NC programming system usually requires that no CAD model errors (e.g. tiny faces, sharp face angles, non-tangent faces, etc.) exist in the aircraft structural parts. Unfortunately, the 3D CAD models of the aircraft structural parts generated from the design departments are far from the model requirements of the NC programming systems due to the complex shapes of the aircraft structural parts. In addition, the 3D CAD models with errors will result in the failure of feature recognition [4] and the tool path generation [5], and thus make the feature-based NC programming systems lose its function and advantages. Therefore, how to find the errors in the 3D CAD model becomes an urgent problem to be solved for the featured-based NC programming systems.Previous studies on finding 3D CAD model errors can be classified into two kinds: CSG model based approach and B-Rep model based approach. In the CSG model based approach [6], the relationships between the various feature commands, as well as the relationships between the parametric data of each feature, are defined to check the CAD models errors through rule reasoning of an expert system. Yang et al. [7] proposed a method based on the design history for 3D CAD model errors detection, which can preserve parametric information and capture the design intent. However, it is usually suitable for the simple part without complex structure, not for the aircraft structural parts. In the B-Rep model based approach [8], CAD model errors are checked through a mathematical computation of a data structure that represents the topological and geometric elements of the B-Rep model. Gu et al. [9] proposed an approach to identify, correct, and avoid errors in CAD models which affect interoperability. However, it is not for NC machining, and thus cannot be directly used in the preprocessing stage of the feature-based NC programming.In this paper, a novel CAD model errors detection method of aircraft structure parts for NC machining is proposed to overcome the above-mentioned problems. First, the base faces of the aircraft structural part are identified according to the reference directions, which are manually selected by the user. Then, according to the base faces, the 3D CAD model is partitioned into multiple local regions, which can be represented by an attributed adjacency graph (AAG) [10]. Finally, for the CAD model errors imbedded in the local regions, their error types are detected based on the heuristic rules, which are constructed in terms of the characteristics of topology and shape of the CAD model errors.In this section, we first define some basic concepts, and then briefly outline our approach.Definition 1CAD model error. A CAD model error is a local face region which has adverse impact on feature-based NC programming.Definition 2Reference direction (RD). The reference directionnzis defined as the z-axis of the machining coordinate system (MCS).Definition 3Base face. If a planar face fimeets the following condition:n(fi)//nz, fiis defined as the base face ofnz, wheren(fi) is the normal of fi.Definition 4Edge convexity. The edge convexity between two adjacency faces can be classified into three kinds: convex, concave and smooth.Definition 5Associated fillet (AF). The fillets adjacent to the base face with a concave edge or smooth edge are called associated fillet.Definition 6Extended associated fillet (EAF). The adjacent associated fillets and its side corners with a concave edge or smooth edge are called extended associated fillet (Fig. 1).By statistics analysis, above 70% of the CAD model errors of the aircraft structural parts are generated due to the misuse of fillet operations, and the others are mainly generated since the designers are lack of machining experience or they make mistakes in the design process. According to the base faces, from bottom to up with respect to the reference direction, the 3D CAD model of the aircraft structural part can be represented with a set of associated fillet or extended associated fillet, and then the CAD model fillet errors detection can be set in the base face and its associated fillet or extended fillet. The systematic overview of our approach is described inFig. 2. It can be seen that our approach contains three main parts:(1)Heuristic rules library construction. According to the topology and shape characteristics of the existed CAD model errors, the experienced engineers construct the heuristic rules library. For the new emerging CAD model errors not covered in the heuristic rules library, we need to update and extend the heuristics rules library constantly.Faces clustering based on reference direction. According to the given reference direction, the base faces {fi} of the aircraft structural part are identified first. Then, taking the base face fias the seed face respectively, all associated fillet or extend associated fillet, which can be represented with an AAG denoted as {G(fi)}, are generated from the AAG G of 3D CAD model, and the other faces not contained in {G(fi)} are denoted as G/{G(fi)}.CAD model errors type evaluation. Based on the heuristic rules, traverse {G(fi)} and G/{G(fi)} to identify the CAD model errors respectively.Based on the analysis of the modeling history for the CAD model errors, they can be classified into the following three categories (Fig. 3):(1)Missing fillet errors that come from the missing fillet operations, which mainly appeared in the pockets, ribs, etc., and the topological representation of these errors is the concave edges on the CAD model.Fillet errors that occur in the misuse of fillet operations, which mainly appeared in the complex pockets, and the topological and shape characteristics of these errors are the discontinuity, local variation, inconsistent radiuses and tiny faces of fillets on the CAD model.Other errors that take place due to the poor machining experience or mistakes of the designers, and the topological and shape representation of these errors are the narrow spaces or residual faces on the CAD model.We analyzed all existed CAD model errors in all aircraft structural parts which are provided by a large aircraft manufacturer. Based on common topological and geometric characteristics of these CAD model errors, we establish the following heuristic rules:Rule 1If the relative area spiof the non-fillet fiis smaller than a certain threshold δ, then fiis a tiny non-fillet face, that is(1)spi=si∑fk∈SAsk+si<δwhere skis the area of fk, SAis the adjacent faces of fi.If the common edge between a non-fillet face fiand its adjacent face fpis a concave edge econcave, then fiis a concave edge face, that is(2){fi∩fp=econcavefp∈{f1,f2,⋯fn}where {f1, f2, f3, …, fn} is the adjacent face set of fi.If the common edge between a fillet fi(fi∈AF) and its adjacent face fj(fj∈AF) is a concave edge econcave, then AF is discontinuity, that isGiven two fillets fi(fi∈AF) and fj(fj∈AF), and their radiuses are riand rjrespectively, if riis not equal to rj, we call that the fillet radius of AF is inconsistent, that is(4){ri≠rjfi∈AFfj∈AFi≠jIf the relative area sfiof the fillet fiis smaller than a certain threshold σ, then fiis a tiny fillet, that is(5)sfi=si∑fk∈AFsk+si<σSuppose that the edge between tiny fillet fjand base face f is ej, and the radius of the non-tiny fillet fkis rk, if rkis different from the curvature radius of ej, we call that there exists local variation in AF, that is(6){f∩fk=ekf∩fj=ejrj≠rkfj∈AFfk∈AFj≠kGiven two side corner fiand fj(fi, fj∈EAF/AF), if there exists a common edge between fiand fj, we call that the side corner is discontinuity, that is(7){fi∩fj=efi∈EAF/AFfj∈EAF/AFi≠jAccording to the characteristics of CAD model errors, we classify all CAD model errors into two categories: narrow space and residual faces errors, and fillet errors. Based on the combination of the above rules, the corresponding detection rules of the two types can be established. The corresponding rules are as follows:(1)Narrow space and residual faces detection rule. The narrow space and residual faces are tiny parts generated by overcut or undercut during modeling, and there exist tiny faces and concave edge faces in narrow space or residual faces, thus the corresponding rule isRule 1+Rule 2:=Narrow space/Residual facesFillet errors detection rule. Fillet errors in a CAD model mainly appear in the base face loop FL(f) (FL(fi)=fi∪AF), and actually there are seldom more than three types of errors in one FL(fi). Since each fillet error in FL(fi) is only single CAD model error or the combination of multiple CAD model errors, the corresponding detection rule is one rule or the combination of multiple rules.Fig. 4 illustrates the detection rules for fillet errors.Faces clustering based on reference direction is to explore the associated fillets and corners for a base face. In this paper, it can be described by the fillet association level graph (FALG). Through the analysis of node and edge attribute of FALGs, we can find out the corresponding hints of the CAD model errors. Therefore, the construction of FALG is crucial to efficiently detecting all fillet errors. The FALG construction algorithm is as follows:Input: AAG of CAD model (G), and reference direction set OR={ni}, 1≤i≤mOutput: FALG set GS={G(fj)}, 1≤j≤nStep1.Traverse OR. According to the reference directionni, find out all base faces, and then add them to the base face list BL.Sort the base faces in BL from bottom to up based on the reference directions;Select fi(fi∈BL) as the seed face, and then search all connected nodes from G, denoted as V(fi)={vi}, 1≤i≤p.Traverse V(fi):1)If∀vi∈V(fi)|vi∉EAF(fi), there exists missing fillet between viand fi, and viis not the node of the first association level.If ∃vi∈V(fi)|vi∈EAF(fi), and the common edge e between viand fiis not convex, denoted as θ(vi)≠−1, then viis stored as the node of the first association level, where if e is smooth, denoted as θ(vi)=0, viis a base corner, else if e is concave, denoted as θ(vi)=1, viis a side corner.Set the traversing node vias true, denoted as s(vi)=true.Select one node vjin the first association level as the seed face, and then search all connected nodes vk(vk∈EAF(fk)∧s(vk)≠true) to construct the second association level. Repeat Step5 until all nodes are traversed, and then one FALG is constructed.Select the next base face, and repeat Steps 3–5 to construct the FALGs until all base faces are traversed.Fig. 5 shows an example of FALG construction. First, sort all base faces of CAD model from bottom to up according to the reference direction (Fig. 5a): f1 and f9 (z=2mm), f2 and f8 (z=4mm), f3 and f6 (z=5mm), f4 (z=7mm), f7 (z=35mm), and f5 (z=45mm). Then, select a base face as the seed face to search all connected fillets. Since base face f9 (Fig. 5b) is lower than base face f8, f9 is priority to f8. The association nodes in the first level of f8 are v7, v8, v9, v10, v11 in all connected nodes, and then select v8 and v10 as the seed face to search out v12 and v13 as the nodes of the second association level. Since there exists no node met the conditions to be extended in the third association level, the search process is terminated. Fig. 5c illustrates the association levels of base face f8 and f9.The CAD model errors type evaluation plays a significant role in identifying the CAD model errors. For the ease of classification and future work of repairing the CAD model errors, the fillet errors are detected first, and then the other errors. The detailed steps are as follows (Fig. 6):Input: GS={Gj(fi)}(j=1, 2,3…n) and Gm=G/GsOutput: CAD model errorsStep 1. Select a FALG Gkin GS, and delete it from GS.Step 2. Call cEval(Gk).procedure cEval (Gk)Case 1. If f(Gk)↦Rule 2 thenstore the error as missing filletCase 2. Else if f(Gk)↦Rule 3∧Rule 7 thenstore the error as discontinuityCase 3. Else if f(Gk)↦Rule 4 thenstore the error as inconsistent radiusCase 4. Else if f(Gk)↦Rule 6 thenstore the error as local variationStep 3. If GS≠Ø thengo to step1.Else if GS=Ø thengo to step4.Step4. Traverse GmCase 1. If f(Gm)↦Rule 1∧Rule 2 thenstore the error as narrow space or residual facesCase 2. Else if f(Gm)↦Rule 2 thenstore the error as sharp cornerStep5. Output the CAD model errors.where f(Gi) is a function calculating the attributes of the nodes and edges of Gi, and↦is a function which means that the attributes match the rules.In order to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of our proposed approach in this paper, we have developed a prototype system for CAD model errors detection of aircraft structural parts automatically on the platforms of Microsoft Visual Studio 2005 and CATIA V5R19 component application architecture (CAA).Fig. 7a shows the prototype system of CAD model errors detection, the using steps are as follows: (1) select the reference faces interactively to compute the reference directions, (2) detect the CAD model errors based on the reference directions, and (3) record the detection results and generate a report in the form of a HTML file.Fig. 7c shows a complex aircraft structural part Model_1 from an aviation manufacturing enterprise, composed of 3590 faces. According to the detection results, there exist various kinds of CAD model errors: 1 narrow space error, 2 residual faces errors, 126 missing fillets errors, 2 inconsistent radius errors, 5 discontinuity errors, 37 local variation errors and 6 sharp corner errors. Some of the CAD model errors are illustrated in Fig. 7d–m. Faces of the CAD model errors are highlighted in the detection results. Specially, for the cases of missing fillet errors, discontinuity and inconsistent radius errors, their corresponding faces are colored. The red faces are the base faces and the yellow faces are the AF. After the detection, a HTML file is generated as a report which records the details of the detection results, as shown in Fig. 7b.Another sample with complex topological and shape characteristics is used to illustrate the CAD model errors detection inFig. 8a. In this example, the part is composed of 3510 faces and the detection result indicates that there exist 1 narrow space error, 1 residual faces errors, 91 missing fillets errors, 21 inconsistent radius errors, 6 discontinuity errors, 3 local variation errors and 8 sharp corner errors. Some of these errors are illustrated in Fig. 8b–k in the same way as Model_1.The computation time for Model_1 and Model_2 is about 5min. By statistics analysis, the user takes nearly 5h to check these errors manually. Therefore, it is obvious that the user can find CAD model errors much faster and more accurately by using our proposed approach, and thus the proposed approach is helpful to effectively speed up the NC programming process.In this paper, we propose a novel CAD model errors detection approach of aircraft structural part for NC programming. First, the base faces are identified according to the reference directions. Based on the base faces, the AAG of the 3D CAD model is partitioned into two kinds of sub-graphs: one includes the base faces and their AFs or EAFs, and the other is the graph of the remaining faces. Then, the CAD model errors are detected based on the heuristic rules. Finally, the experiments with a prototype system indicate our approach can effectively detect the CAD model errors of aircraft structural part.In the near future, several issues are worth to be further explored to improve the practicability of our approach: (1) extend the application domain by accumulating more kinds of CAD model errors from more cases and (2) repair the CAD model errors automatically to decrease the user interactions for feature-based NC programming system.The authors declare no conflict of interest associated with this manuscript.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
