@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Steel nitriding optimization through multi-objective and FEM analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper shows the development of a model based on very broad experimental activity.The data were employed to provide a provisional tool for nitrided steel mechanical and microstructural behavior.A very good experimental–numerical correlation was found.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nitriding,Mechanical properties,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Steel nitriding is a thermo-chemical process leading to surface hardening and improvement in fatigue properties. The process is strongly influenced by many different variables such as steel composition, nitrogen potential, temperature, time, and quenching media. In the present study, the influence of such parameters affecting physic-chemical and mechanical properties of nitride steels was evaluated. The aim was to streamline the process by numerical–experimental analysis allowing defining the optimal conditions for the success of the process. Input parameters–output results correlations were calculated through the employment of a multi-objective optimization software, modeFRONTIER (Esteco). The mechanical and microstructural results belonging to the nitriding process, performed with different processing conditions for various steels, are presented. The data were employed to obtain the analytical equations describing nitriding behavior as a function of nitriding parameters and steel composition. The obtained model was validated, through control designs, and optimized by taking into account physical and processing conditions.heat treatment temperaturenitrogen potentialnitriding temperaturenitriding timenitrogen concentration at xxx μm from the surfacedistance from the surface of the starting point of ε phasedistance from the surface of the ending point of ε phasedistance from the surface of the starting point of γ′ phasedistance from the surface of the ending point of γ′ phasemicrohardness at xxx μm from the surfaceresidual stresses at xxx μm from the surface

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The deep analysis of industrial processes necessitates the employment of computational multiobjective optimization tools. Optimization instruments allow integration with multiple calculation tools and post-processing tools. modeFRONTIER platform allows the organization of a wide range of software and an easy management of the entire product development process. The role of the optimization algorithm is to identify the solutions which lie on the trade-off curve, known as the Pareto Frontier. These solutions have the characteristic that none of the objectives can be improved without prejudicing another. Here, Design of Experiment (DoE) technique is used to perform a reduced number of calculations. After that, these well-distributed results can be used to create an interpolating surface. This surface represents a meta-model of the original problem and can be used to perform the optimization without computing any further analyses.Once data has been obtained, the user can turn to the extensive post-processing features in modeFRONTIER to analyze the results.Not so many papers are available in literature on the analysis on thermo-mechanical diffusion processes of nitriding based on Fick׳s laws model. In the present paper the behavior of nitriding process, performed on different steels (40 different materials) in a broad range of processing parameters (600 experimental conditions), is analyzed. The study leads to the description of the nitriding effect on the steel structures and mechanical properties. In [1] the authors give a mathematical description to predict the nitrogen contents as well as residual stresses and distortions after nitride quenching. The model was implemented in finite element calculations in order to identify the concentration profiles. They concluded that the interactions between diffusion of nitrogen also need to be established. In general, the hardening of steels during nitriding process is due to the N-based compounds precipitation [2]. The precipitation sequence is also strongly influenced by the compounds time formation. Several nitrogen mass transfer mechanisms have been proposed to describe the nitrides precipitation process. In [3], the authors analyzed the nitriding process by employing the Mullins–Sekerka equations on the interface separating a growing nitride layer in pure iron. They showed that a plane interface is unconditionally stable due to the favorable combination of the Gibbs–Thomson effect, and of the concentration fields. This result is specific to the nitriding configuration where the net flux of nitrogen is in the growth direction. The influence of compositional and misfit generated stresses on the morphological stability has been discussed qualitatively. For these reasons, in the present paper, a large attention vas devoted to the measurement and the control of compound layers and on their effect on mechanical properties. Other authors described results of simulations of diffusional process of nitrogen on pure iron. They underline the effect of nitriding potential of NH3–H2 atmosphere on microstructural constitution and growth kinetics of nitride layers. They demonstrate that both microstructural nature and thicknesses of nitrided layers as well as the nitrogen profile within the formed phases during gas nitriding can be predicted [4,5]. In [6], a generalized Wagner diffusion model was used to analyze the layer formation and growth in definite experiments on plasma nitriding of pure iron. The model is able to predict the compound layer composition. It can be used as a method for calculation of the effective diffusion coefficients in the first sublayer of the compound zone. The thickness of the compound layer and the diffusion zone as well as their phase composition and the consequent mechanical properties depends on the nitriding temperature and time. It also depends on the nitrogen activity of the medium in which the nitriding process is taking place. In addition such chemical–physical processes depend on the state of the material before nitriding [7]. For this reason, in the present multi-objective optimization analysis the state of the material (in particular the heat treatment temperature) before nitriding was taken into account. In [8] the authors modeled the nitrogen decomposition on the steel surface as a consequence of processing parameters. In [9] the authors evidence the nitride layers formation in high temperature gas nitriding of stainless steel. In [10,11] other authors underline the nitriding properties of steel after treatment at high temperatures up to 1050°C. In [12] the authors model the process through finite element analyses by employing microstructural data obtained from X-rays diffraction measurements. The same methods for microstructural evolution monitoring are described in [13]. The method is largely described in [14,15] with many experimental evidences. In [16–18] the authors analyze the microstructural evolution of nitride layers through X-ray diffraction and model the nitriding behavior of H13 tool steel through finite method. In [19,20] the authors modeled the nitriding behavior through the analyses of compound layers thickness. The aim of the present paper is the complete experimental–numerical analyses of nitriding process. The model is developed to design a platform capable of analyzing the best conditions to reach high performances of nitride components. In addition, it can be used to design a specific steel capable to be nitride in order to reach specific performances under fixed processing conditions. The strength of the analyses is due to the large quantity of data employed to develop the proposed model.Steel cylindrical samples of 100mm in diameter were nitrided by varying the nitrogen potential, nitriding temperature and time. Nitriding process was performed in a laboratory furnace equipped with a sensor capable to perform measurements of nitrogen potential in the furnace atmosphere. The sensor is sensible to hydrogen concentration that varies with ammonia dissociation. In this way it is possible to control the ammonia flux in order to fix the nitrogen potential. Compositional measurements were performed through EDX microanalyses in a Zeiss EVO40 SEM. Residual stresses and nitrides thickness layers measurements were performed through X-ray diffraction by using a Rigaku Ultima+diffractometer by employing Hall–Williamson plotting. Hall–Williamson method [21] is based on the principle that the lattice size broadening and strain broadening vary quite differently with respect to Bragg angle. By scannning a surface with X-rays and measuring the peaks shift of the spectrum, residual strains (and residual stresses) can be measured. Samples were cut along the center section, grinded and polished, then the residual stresses were measured from the surface to the bulk. Microhardness was measured by employing a Vickers indenter with a 1000gf load for 15s.The employed multidisciplinary and multi-objective software is written to allow easy coupling to any computer aided engineering (CAE) tool. It enables the pursuit of the so-called “Pareto Frontier”: it is the best trade-off between all the objective functions. The advanced algorithms within can spot the optimal results, even conflicting each other or belonging to different fields. The more accurate the analysis is, the more the complexity of the design process increases. modeFRONTIER® platform allows the managing of a wide range of software and an easy overview of the entire product development process. modeFRONTIER׳s optimization algorithms identify the solutions which lie on the trade-off Pareto Frontier: none of them can be improved without prejudicing another. In other words the best possible solutions are the optimal solutions. An attempt to optimize a design or system where there is only one objective usually entails the use of gradient methods where the algorithms search for either the minimum or the maximum of an objective function, depending on the goal. One way of handling multi-objective optimization is to incorporate all the objectives (suitably weighted) in a single function, thereby reducing the problem to one of single objective optimization again. This technique has the disadvantage, however, that these weights must be provided a priori, which can influence the solution to a large degree. Moreover, if the goals are very different in substance (for example cost and efficiency) it can be difficult, or even meaningless, to try to produce a single all-inclusive objective function.True multi-objective optimization techniques overcome these problems by keeping the objectives separate during the optimization process. It should be kept in mind that in cases with opposing objectives (an example would be to minimize a beam׳s weight, and also its deformation under load) there will frequently be no single optimum, since any solution will be a compromise. The role of the optimization algorithm is then to identify the solutions which lie on the trade-off Pareto Frontier. These solutions all have the characteristic that none of the objectives can be improved without prejudicing another.The progresses of high performance computing offer the availability of accurate and reliable virtual environments to explore several possible configurations. In real case applications, it is not always possible to reduce the complexity of the problem and obtain a model that can be solved quickly. Usually every single simulation can take hours or even days. In these cases, the time to run a single analysis makes running more than a few simulations prohibitive and some other smart approaches are needed. These factors lead to a Design of Experiment (DOE) technique to perform a reduced number of calculations. After that, these well-distributed results can be used to create an interpolating surface. This surface represents a meta-model of the original problem and can be used to perform the optimization without computing any further analyses.Once data have been obtained, whether from an optimization or DOE, or from data importation, the user can turn to the extensive post-processing features in modeFRONTIER to analyze the results. The software offers wide-ranging toolbox, allowing the user to perform sophisticated statistical analysis and data visualization. It provides a strong tool to design and to analyze experiments, it eliminates redundant observations and reduces the time and the resources to make experiments. Design of Experiments (DOE) is a methodology that maximizes the knowledge gained from an experimental campaign. Design of Experiments (DOE) is generally used in two ways. First of all, the use of DOE is extremely important in experimental settings to identify which input variables most affect the experiment being run. Since it is frequently not feasible in a multi-variable problem to test all combinations of input parameters, DOE techniques allow the user to extract as much information as possible from a limited number of test runs. However, if the engineer׳s aim is to optimize his design, he will need to provide the optimization algorithm with an initial population of designs from which the algorithm can “learn”. In this setting, the DOE is used to provide the initial data points.Exploration DOEs are useful for getting information about the problem and about the design space. They can serve as the starting point for a subsequent optimization process, or as a database for response surface (RS) training, or for checking the response sensitivity of a candidate solution.Starting from a database built with experimental results, computational models were developed (virtual n-dimensional surfaces) able to reproduce at best the actual process. Through such analysis it was possible to optimize the output variables (% N, residual stress, beginning and end nidrides ε, beginning and end nidrides γ′). The method used for the creation of meta-models to simulate the actual process through the use of physical laws with appropriate coefficients to be calibrated was that of the response surfaces (RS). This method consists of creating n-dimensional surfaces that are “trained” on the basis of actual input and output. These surfaces trained on a large experimental data can give the output numbers that reflect the real process of nitriding. The experimental design consists of 600 input and output obtained from experimental data. To train the virtual surface in the training phase they included 580 experimental design inputs and outputs. We used he remaining 20 in the design validation phase.The computational details were largely described by the authors in [22].The nitriding process through the analysis performed by Mode FRONTIER is summarized in the Workflow ofFig. 1.The workflow is divided into data flow (solid lines) and logic flow (dashed lines) that have the computer node as their common node. Here physical and mathematical functions representing the nitriding process are introduced. In the data flow all input parameters optimized in the numerical simulations are included:•steel composition,nitrogen potential,nitriding temperature,nitriding time,tempering time,And those output:•% nitrogen hardened layer between 5µm and 600µm of distance from the surface of the sample.Residual stress between 5µm and 600µm of distance from the surface of the sample.Hardeness stress profile between 5µm and 600µm of distance from the surface of the sample.Beginning and end nidrides ε.Beginning and end nidrides γ′.The output variables define a multi-goal analysis and have been minimized taking into account some constraints or limitations typical of the actual process. At this stage the nodes that make up the logic flow of numerical analysis are defined. The first node is the DoE, which is the set of different designs reproducing different possible working conditions. It means creating a set number of designs that will be used by the scheduler (the node where the best algorithm is introduced) for the optimization. Depending on how this space is filled, the designs, defined by the scheduler, are more or less truthful. Therefore the choice of the DoE is to be assessed correctly.Generally, in this kind of analysis, the heart of the optimization is represented by a series of equations of chemical and physical nature of a given resolution to get the desired output. In the present case, all this information is not clear, due to the complexity of the process and so it was chosen to employ the methodology of response surfaces. Optimization software allows the following of different kinds of RS. For each output variable to be minimized it is necessary to create a response surface. The analysis starts from a database built with data of operating conditions of the sintering plants obtained from experimental measurements. The database is built by introducing the input parameters, the corresponding output for each working condition and the physical correlations between the different conditions (Tables 1 and 2).The steel compositions and the nitriding input parameters examples, performed on the cyclindrical samples, are summarized in the following tables.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper experimental data, finite element calculations, and multi-objective optimization were integrated in order to develop a model capable of predicting mechanical properties, microstructural evolution and phase transformations during steel nitriding as a function of chemical compositions of steel and processing parameters. From the experimental results the mapping of nitrogen concentration, microhardness, residual stresses, and precipitate distribution as a function of different processing parameters for various steels was obtained. The results were summarized in a database useful for the further analyses, in particular to obtain the data to be compared with the numerical ones. From the analyses of the correlation matrixes it was calculated that nitrogen concentration on the surface is strongly dependent on nitrogen potential and on nitriding time then on nitriding temperature with different weights; surface hardness is dependent strongly on nitriding temperature then on nitrogen potential with different weights; residual stresses on the surface are dependent on the nitrogen potential while the residual stresses in the inner layers are dependent on nitriding temperature; residual stresses are strongly function of the compound layers formed during diffusion. A deep local analyses allowed to calculate the dependence of mechanical and microstructural behavior, at fixed distances from the surface, on all the employed experimental processing parameters. All the data were employed for the calculation and optimization through modeFRONTIER and ANSYS in order to develop an analytical instrument capable of predicting the microstructure and mechanical properties of steels during nitriding in a broad range of conditions. In particular, a generalized solution of Fick׳s law was obtained and the equations relating microstructural and mechanical properties (nitrogen concentration, nitrides layers, microhardness and residual stresses) of different steels as a function of nitriding parameters were calculated. The calculations led to the definition of the independent coefficients solved by ANSYS through modeFRONTIER my matching in closed loops the solutions with the experimental data. In the validation phase, the correlation between experimental and numerical results (obtained by the previous described procedure) was analyzed for selected control design belonging to AISI1020, 15CrMoV5-9, 31CrMo12, 34CrAlNi7, 39MoAlCr15, AISI304, AISI420, M2, V2, 18HGT steel. At the end of the study different designs were identified optimized to achieve the maximization of surface and bulk hardness of the nitrided steel.The authors do not have any conflict of interests.