@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel approach to predict surface roughness in machining operations using fuzzy set theory

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This work uses innovative methods in process prediction with the application of FST.Many potential benefits of fuzzy set theory have been presented and instantiated.The fuzzy set equations are built on the data obtained from the experiments.A detailed analysis is presented using experimental case study.The results indicate the good accuracy of proposed method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Design of experiments,Fuzzy logic,Surface roughness,End milling,Process control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The increase of consumer needs for quality metal cutting related products with more precise tolerances and better product surface roughness has driven the metal cutting industry to continuously improve quality control of metal cutting processes. In this paper, two different approaches are discussed. First, design of experiments (DOE) is used to determine the significant factors and then fuzzy logic approach is presented for the prediction of surface roughness. The data used for the training and checking the fuzzy logic performance is derived from the experiments conducted on a CNC milling machine. In order to obtain better surface roughness, the proper sets of cutting parameters are determined before the process takes place. The factors considered for DOE in the experiment were the depth of cut, feed rate per tooth, cutting speed, tool nose radius, the use of cutting fluid and the three components of the cutting force. Finally the significant factors were used as input factors for fuzzy logic mechanism and surface roughness is predicted with empirical formula developed. Test results show good agreement between the actual process output and the predicted surface roughness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Manufacturing has played an ever-increasing role in our lives. Not only are we concerned with how products are produced and delivered to us, but we are also concerned with how well the products are built. Manufacturers around the world continuously seek new and improved methods of product manufacturing to meet the expectations of the consumer. There are many aspects of manufacturing that can be considered when looking for new and improved methods of production. Efforts can be focused on manufacturing systems, manufacturing processes, or manufacturing materials. All of these efforts together transform raw materials into end products. Within the area of manufacturing processes, different processes can be evaluated for their impact on processing time, efficiency of production methods, and quality of finished products.The quality of finished products is defined by how closely the finished product adheres to the specifications. Surface roughness (Ra) is the most commonly used index to determine surface quality. It is a measure of smoothness for a machined surface. Surface quality is defined and identified by the combination of surface finish, surface texture, and surface roughness. Surface finish and surface roughness express and represent the same characteristic. Surface roughness is defined as the fine irregularities produced on a workpiece by a cutting tool. Surface texture relates to deviations from a nominal surface that forms the pattern of the surface. The terms surface texture, surface finish, and surface roughness are used interchangeably in industry as well as in this paper [1]. Many lifelong attributes of a product are determined by how well the integrity of the surface finish is maintained. Painting or coating adherence, surface reflectivity, and frictional requirements are examples for which the surface roughness may be specified. Defects occur when the surface roughness requirement is not met. Applied surfaces may fail to adhere properly and parts may not assemble properly due to excessive frictional components exhibited through poorly machined surfaces.Numerous factors affect surface roughness in the machining process. While some factors are difficult or impossible to control, some controllable process parameters include feed, cutting speed, tool geometry, and tool setup. Other factors that are harder to control include tool vibration, work-piece and machine vibration, tool wear and degradation, and workpiece and tool material variability [2]. These factors interact to influence the quality of the surface finish produced. When the surface does not meet the specifications, parameters are adjusted and the original or a new workpiece is inserted into the machining center for machining [3]. Depending on the materials, the effect of major variables on the surface roughness changes significantly. For instance, highly ductile materials tend to induce a built-up edge on the tool nose, hence creating degraded surface in terms of roughness. Very brittle materials such as cast iron also create challenging machining conditions due to fractures, which worsens the surface roughness. In the case of aluminum alloys, as the hardness of material increases, the surface roughness tends to improve. However, very hard materials induce vibration during the machining that generates the rough surface finish. Therefore, some widely machined common materials such as medium carbon alloy steel contain the elements that help improve the machinability. Moderately ductile yet hard materials fixed on a rigid machine tool tend to manifest the desirable machining condition, if the cutting tool materials, coolants, chip breakers and major variables are correctly applied. The major variables can be independently controlled to attain the desired surface roughness. For instance, the feed rate is usually set at a slow level to improve the surface roughness. The cutting speed is set at a rather higher level to prevent the built-up edge from occurring on the tool nose. Cutting depth is usually set to be small in order to reduce the machining vibration as well as the resistance or opposing cutting force from the materials. Overall, a combination of slow feed rate, higher cutting speed, and small depth of cut is employed to generate the smooth surface.In this context, the main idea behind this research is that one should develop techniques to predict the surface roughness of a product before milling to evaluate the robustness of machining parameters for keeping a desired surface roughness and increasing product quality for a given set of cutting conditions, work material, tool insert type and tool geometry. It is also important that the prediction technique be accurate and reliable [4]. This can be achieved with the help of Fuzzy logic and fuzzy inference systems which are proven to be effective techniques for the identification, prediction and control of complex, nonlinear, and vague systems. Fuzzy logic is particularly attractive due to its ability to solve problems in the absence of accurate mathematical models [5]. The overall objective of this research was to develop an algorithm for milling operation that predicts surface roughness with designed set of conditions. Two approaches DOE and Fuzzy Logic were used where the design of experiments (DOE) is an effective approach to optimize the throughput in various manufacturing-related processes. The fractional factorial DOE and statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) will be used to represent, infer, and screen the milling parameters in order to generate appropriate training data for the fuzzy logic. Furthermore, ANOVA will be used to check the statistical significance of individual milling parameters on the value of the surface roughness. Once the significant factors are determined, these factors will be used as input parameters for Fuzzy Logic and with the help of Fuzzy inference system. IF-THEN rules are framed depending on the operator׳s experience and knowledge which employs a mode of approximate reasoning that resembles the decision-making process of humans. The behavior of a fuzzy system is easily understood by a human expert as knowledge is expressed by means of intuitive, linguistic rules [6]. A fuzzy system is usually designed by interviewing an expert and formulating their implicit knowledge of the underlying process into a set of linguistic variables and fuzzy rules. For complex control tasks, obtaining the fuzzy knowledge base from an expert often requires a tedious and unreliable trial and error approach. Unlike neural networks, generic fuzzy systems do not require training data as part of their development process. However, several techniques have been proposed to extract fuzzy rules from training data gathered from observations of the operator control strategy [5]. Fuzzy rules and membership functions are build using fuzzyTECH 5.5i software from which fuzzy output (surface roughness) is derived. Surface finish of the machined part is the output of the process which is then compared with the experimental data. Minimum error is obtained through numerous experiments or data points. The fuzzy logic model built is capable of predicting the surface finish for a given set of inputs (cutting speed, feed rate, and depth of cut). As such, the machinist may predict the quality of the surface for a given set of working parameters and may also set the process parameters to achieve a certain surface finish. The model is verified experimentally by employing different sets of inputs. This study deals with the experimental results obtained during end milling on 6061 T6 Al.Fuzzy logic is a basic concept which refers to all theories and technologies that employ fuzzy set. It is basically a multi-valued logic that allows intermediate values to be defined between conventional evaluations like yes/no, true/false, black/white etc. to degrees of truth between 0 and 1 [7]. Fuzzy logic was invented by Professor Zadeh in 1964. The concept of fuzzy logic came from the idea of grade of membership, which became the backbone of fuzzy set theory. Fuzzy logic is the logic of approximate reasoning with traditional precise reasoning as the limiting case [8]. What zadeh means by “the logic of approximate reasoning” is that in many cases “4th digit” accuracy is not crucial to system performance, but rather, what is important is quick approximate judgments, much like how a human would perform. For example, Zadeh wrote that a set of speed measurements grouped around a point on a speed continuum would be lumped together and called “slow” by fuzzy logic. By eliminating these precise measurements, computations would be simplified and executed more rapidly [9]. Fuzzy logic core technique is based on four basic concepts. (1) Fuzzy sets: sets with smooth boundaries; (2) linguistic variables whose values are both qualitatively and quantitatively described by a fuzzy set; (3) possibility distributions which constraints on the value of a linguistic variable imposed by assigning it a fuzzy set and (4) fuzzy if-then rules: a knowledge scheme for describing a functional mapping or a logic formula that generalizes an implication in tow valued logic. [8].A fuzzy set is a generalization to classical set to allow objects to take partial membership in vague concepts (i.e., fuzzy sets) [10]. The Best way to introduce fuzzy sets is to start with a limitation of classical sets. A set in classical set theory always has a sharp boundary because membership in a set is black and white concept—an object either completely belongs to the set or does not belong to the set at all. [8]. The degree an object belongs to a fuzzy set, which is a real number between 0 and 1, is called the membership value in the set. The meaning of a fuzzy set is thus characterized by a membership function that maps elements of a universe of discourse to their corresponding membership values. The membership function of a fuzzy set “A” is denoted as µA. In addition to membership functions, a fuzzy set is also associated with a linguistically meaningful term (e.g., “healthy” family). Associating a fuzzy set to a linguistic term offers two important benefits [11].A Fuzzy set can be defined in two ways: (1) by enumerating membership values of those elements in the set (completely or partially), or (2) by defining the membership function mathematically. The first approach is possible only if the set is discrete, because a continuous fuzzy set has an infinite number of elements. Generally, a fuzzy set A can be defined through enumeration using expression(1)A=∑iμA(xi)/xiwhere the summation and addition operators refer to the union operation and the notation μA(xi)/xirefers to a fuzzy set containing exactly one(partial) element x with a membership degree μA(xi).A membership function (MF) is a curve that defines how each point in the input space is mapped to a membership value (or degree of membership) between 0 and 1. The input space is sometimes referred to as the universe of discourse, a fancy name for a simple concept. It characterizes the fuzziness in a fuzzy set-whether the elements in the set are discrete or continuous- in a graphical form for eventual use in the mathematical formalisms of fuzzy set theory [12]. There exits numerous types of membership functions, the most commonly used in practice are triangles, trapezoids, bell curves, Gaussian, and sigmoidal functions. All of them are parameterized functions commonly used to define one dimensional MFs with a single input. Most of the membership functions can be described with a few parameters (e.g. three in the case of a triangle: endpoints and apex), which makes it very easy to calculate the degree of membership of a specific value.Linguistic variables play an essential role in fuzzy logic, artificial intelligence and decision making systems. Basically, they are words or expressions that describe the inputs and outputs of a system. For example, consider the amount of traffic on I-10 East. When it is said, “Traffic Flow is Low,” the expression “Low” is the name of a fuzzy set that describes the amount of traffic, while the linguistic variable is “Traffic Flow.” A linguistic variable is a variable whose value can be described: 1) qualitatively using an expression involving linguistic terms, and 2) quantitatively using a corresponding membership function [13]. The linguistic term is useful for communicating concepts and knowledge with human beings; whereas membership function is useful for processing numeric input data. A linguistic variable is like a composition of a symbolic variable in AI (a variable whose value is a symbol) and a numeric variable (a variable whose value is a number) in science and engineering. In general, the value of a linguistic variable can be a linguistic expression involving a set of linguistic terms, modifiers such as “very,” “more or less” (called hedges), and connectives (e.g., “and,” “or”) [11].Among all the techniques developed using fuzzy sets, fuzzy if-then rules are by far the most visible due to their wide range of successful industrial applications ranging from consumer products, robotics, manufacturing, process control, automotive control, medical imaging, to financial trading. A fuzzy if-then rule associates a condition about linguistic variables to a conclusion. From a knowledge representation viewpoint, a fuzzy if-then rule is a scheme for capturing knowledge that involves imprecision. The main feature of reasoning using these rules (i.e., fuzzy rule-based reasoning) is its partial matching capability, which enables an inference to be made from a fuzzy rule even when the rule׳s condition is only partially satisfied [8]. That is, it computes the degree the input data matches the condition of a rule.Fig. 1 illustrates one way to calculate the matching degree between fuzzy input A′ and a fuzzy condition A. Matching degree (A, A′)=supxmin (μA(x), μA′(x))The degree of the input data matches the condition of a rule is combined with the consequent (i.e., “then” part) of the rule to form a conclusion inferred by the fuzzy rule. The higher is the matching degree; the closer is the inferred conclusion to the rule׳s consequence. There are two different types of fuzzy rules: 1) fuzzy mapping rules, and 2) fuzzy implication rules (seeTable 1). A fuzzy mapping rule describes a functional mapping relationship between inputs and an output using linguistic terms, while a fuzzy implication rule describes a generalized logic implication relationship between two logic formula involving linguistic variables. The foundation of fuzzy mapping rule is fuzzy graph, while the foundation of fuzzy implication rule is a generalization to two-valued logic or narrow sense of fuzzy logic. The inference of fuzzy mapping rules involves a set of rules whose antecedent conditions form a fuzzy partition of the input space. Such a collection of fuzzy mapping rules is called a fuzzy model. The inference of fuzzy implication rules are performed individually. Even though the inference results of these rules can be combined, the desired properties of their inference are described in terms of the behavior of individual rules (e.g., generalized modus ponens and modus tollens involving hedges). Consequently, fuzzy mapping rules are designed as a group, whereas fuzzy implication rules are designed individually [8,11]. In general, the distinctions between fuzzy implication rules and fuzzy mapping rules are subtle, yet important.The algorithm of fuzzy rule-based inference consists of three basic steps and an additional optional step: fuzzy matching, fuzzy inference, fuzzy combination and defuzzification [14];a.Fuzzy matching: it is a process to calculate the degree to which the input data match the condition of the fuzzy rules.Inference: it is a process to calculate the rule׳s conclusion based on its matching degree. After the fuzzy matching step, a fuzzy inference step is invoked for each of the relevant rules to produce a conclusion based on their matching degree. There are two methods: (1) the clipping method and (2) the scaling method.Combining fuzzy conclusions: the two steps in fuzzy inference described so far enable each fuzzy rule to infer a fuzzy statement about the value of the consequent variable. Because a fuzzy rule-based system consists of a set of fuzzy rules with partially overlapping conditions, a particular input to the system often “triggers” multiple fuzzy rules (i.e., more than one rule will match the input to a nonzero degree). Therefore, a third step is needed to combine the inference results of these rules.Defuzzification: for a fuzzy system whose final output needs to be in a crisp (non-fuzzy) form, a fourth step is needed to convert the final combined fuzzy conclusions into a crisp one. This step is called defuzzification which gives a quantitative summary and is more commonly used in fuzzy logic control and many other industrial applications. There are two common defuzzification techniques: mean of maximum and center of area.i)Mean of Maximum (MOM)The Mean of Maximum (MOM) defuzzification method calculates the average of those output values that have the highest possibility degrees. Suppose “y is A” is a fuzzy conclusion to be defuzzified. We can express the MOM defuzzification method using the following formula:(2)MOM(A)=∑y⁎∈Py⁎|P|where P is the set of output values y with highest possibility degree in A, i.e., an example of MOM.A major limitation of MOM defuzzification is that it does not take in to account the overall shape of the possibility distribution. Two fuzzy conclusions with the same peak points, but otherwise different shapes, will yield the same defuzzified result using the MOM method. The above example depicts of such results.Center of Area (COA)The Center-of-Area (COA) method (also referred to as the center-of-gravity, or centroid method in the literature) is the most popular defuzzification technique. Unlike MOM, the COA method takes into account the entire possibility distribution in calculating its representative point. The defuzzification method is similar to the formula for calculating the center of gravity in physics, if we view µA(x) as the density of mass at x. Alternatively, we can view the COA method as calculating a weighted average, where µA(x) serves weight for value x. If x is discrete, the defuzzification result of A is(3)COA(A)=∑xμA(x)×x∑xμA(x)Similarly, if x is continuous, the result is(4)COA(A)=∫μA(x)xdx∫μA(x)dxAn example of COA defuzzification is shown in aboveFig. 2. The main disadvantage of the COA method is its high computational cost but the calculation can be simplified for some fuzzy models. Even though this is the case for most fuzzy rule-based systems, there are situations in which defuzzification cannot be completely separated from the fusion step [8] (Fig. 3).The terms surface finish and surface roughness are used widely in industry and are generally used to quantify the smoothness of a surface finish. In 1947, the American Standard B46.1-1947 “Surface texture” defined many of the concepts of surface metrology and terminology which overshadowed previous standards. A few concepts are discussed and shown as follows [15,16]:Surface texture: surface texture is the pattern of the surface which deviates from a nominal surface. The deviations may be repetitive or random and may result from roughness, waviness, lay, and flaws [17].Real surface: the real surface of an object is the peripheral skin which separates it from the surrounding medium. This surface invariably assimilates structural deviations which are classified as form errors, waviness, and surface roughness.Roughness: roughness consists of the finer irregularities of the surface texture usually including those irregularities that result from the inherent action of the production process. These are considered to include traverse feed marks and other irregularities within the limits of the roughness sampling length. Profiles of roughness and waviness are shown inFig. 4[17,24].Roughness width: roughness width is the distance parallel to the nominal surface between successive peaks or ridges which constitute the predominant pattern of the roughness.Roughness width cutoff: roughness width cutoff is included in the measurement of average roughness height which denotes the greatest spacing of repetitive surface irregularities. It is rated in thousandths of an inch. Standard tables list roughness width cutoff values of 0.003, 0.10, 0.030, 0.100, 0.300 and 1.000 in. If no value is specified, a rating of 0.030″ is assumed.Waviness: waviness is the more widely spaced component of surface texture. Unless otherwise noted, waviness should include all irregularities whose spacing is greater than the roughness sampling length and less than the waviness sampling length. Waviness may result from such factors as machine or work deflections, vibration chatter, heat treatment, or warping strains. Roughness may be considered as superimposed on a wavy surface as shown in Fig. 4[17,18,24].Waviness height: waviness height is the peak-to-valley distance which is rated in inches.Waviness width: waviness width is the spacing of successive wave peaks or successive wave valleys which is rated in inches.Lay: lay is the direction of the predominant surface pattern, ordinarily determined by the production method used.Flaws: flaws are unintentional, unexpected and unwanted interruptions in the topography typical of a part surface.Peak: a peak is the point of maximum height on that portion of a profile that lies above the center line and between two intersections of the profile with the center line.Valley: a valley is the point of maximum depth on that portion of a profile that lies below the center line and between two intersections of the profile with the center line.Roughness sampling length: the roughness sampling length is the sampling length within which the roughness average is determined. This length is chosen, or specified, to separate the profile irregularities which are designated as roughness from those irregularities designated as waviness.Surface finish could be specified in many different parameters. A large number of newly developed surface roughness parameters were conceived and the instruments to measure them were developed, due to the need for different parameters in a wide variety of machining operations. Some of the popular parameters of surface finish specification are described as follows:Roughness average, Ra: this parameter is also known as the arithmetic mean roughness value, (arithmetic average) AA or (center line average) CLA. Rais universally recognized and the most used international parameter of roughness. Therefore,(5)Ra=1L∫0l|Y(x)|dxwhere Rais the arithmetic average deviation from the mean line, L is the sampling length and y is the ordinate of the curve of the profile. It is the arithmetic mean of the deviation of the roughness profile [24], from the mean line. An example of the surface profile is as shown inFig. 5[24]. An approximation of the average roughness Ramay be obtained by adding the Y increments, without regard to sign and dividing the sum by the number of incrementsTherefore(6)Ra=(y1+y2+y3+y4+⋯yn)nRoot-mean-square (rms) roughness, Rq: Rqis the root-mean-square parameter corresponding to q [24],(7)Rq=[1L]∫01(Y(x))2dxOr approximately(8)Ra=(y12+y22+y32+y42+y52+⋯yn2)/nMaximum peak-to-valley roughness height, Ryor Rmax: this is the distance between two lines parallel to the mean line that contacts the extreme upper and lower points on the profile within the roughness sampling length.Ten-point height, Rz: Rzis also known as the IS0 10-point height parameter and is measured on the unfiltered profile only. It is numerically the average height difference between the five highest peaks and the five lowest valleys within the sampling length.Skewness, Rsk: Rskis the measure of the symmetry of the profile about the mean line. It will distinguish between asymmetrical profiles of the same Rsor Rqbecause it is sensitive to occasional deep valleys or high peaks. A negative skewness would represent profiles with deep scratches. A surface profile with valleys filled in or high peaks have positive skewness.Fig. 6 illustrates these two cases.(9)Rsk=1nRq3∑1nyt3where n=number of data points in the profile.Kurtosis, Rku: Rkuis a measure of the sharpness of the surface profile. If Rku<3, then distribution has relatively few high peaks and low valleys. If Rku>3, the surface has relatively many high peaks and low valleys. Therefore(10)Rku=1nRq4∑1nyt4where n=the number of data points in the profile.The basic geometry of the end milling is shown inFig. 7, where Vcis the cutting speed (rpm), D is the diameter of the cutter (mm), Nsis the rotational speed of the cutter (rpm), ftis feed per tooth (mm/tooth), fr(f, n,) is the feed per revolution (mm/rev), ntis the number of teeth on the cutter, fm(f, N,) is the feed per minute (mm/min), aais the axial depth (mm) and aris the radial depth (width) of cut (mm). In end-milling operations, the theoretical surface roughness is generally dependent on the cutting tool geometry, the tool material, the workpiece geometry, the workpiece material, the cutting conditions, the cutter run-out, the mode of milling, the machine-tool rigidity, etc. However, the theoretical surface roughness, Rafor end milling can be estimated using the following equation [19–21]:(11)Ra=ft2/(32(R±ftnt/Π))where R, is the surface roughness CLA (μm), n, is the number of teeth on the cuter, R is the radius of the cutter, and the +ve sign refers to up milling and the −ve sign to down milling. The surface finish produced in the face-milling operating by an end-mill insert can be expressed as [22,23]:(12)Ra=ft2/32rwhere r is the nose radius of the end-mill insert. The actual surface roughness is usually greater than the theoretical roughness values given by the Eq. 11 and Eq. 12 because of the above expressions do not take into account vibration, deflection of the work–tool system, chatter, and the built-up-edge embedded machined.Among several CNC industrial machining processes, milling is a fundamental machining operation. The quality of the surface plays a very important role in the performance of milling as a good-quality milled surface significantly improves fatigue strength, corrosion resistance, or creep life. Surface roughness also affects several functional attributes of parts, such as contact causing surface friction, wearing, light reflection, heat transmission, ability of distributing and holding a lubricant, coating, or resisting fatigue. Therefore, the desired finish surface is usually specified and the appropriate processes are selected to reach the required quality. Several factors will influence the final surface roughness in a CNC milling operation. The final surface roughness might be considered as the sum of two independent effects: 1) the ideal surface roughness is a result of the geometry of tool and feed rate and 2) the natural surface roughness is a result of the irregularities in the cutting operation [24]. Factors such as spindle speed, feed rate, and depth of cut that control the cutting operation can be setup in advance. However, factors such as tool geometry, tool wear, chip loads and chip formations, or the material properties of both tool and workpiece are uncontrolled [25]. Even in the occurrence of chatter or vibrations of the machine tool, defects in the structure of the work material, wear of tool, or irregularities of chip formation contribute to the surface damage in practice during machining [26]. One should develop techniques to predict the surface roughness of a product before milling in order to evaluate the fitness of machining parameters such as feed rate or spindle speed for keeping a desired surface roughness and increasing product quality. It is also important that the prediction technique should be accurate, reliable, low-cost, and non-destructive. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to develop one surface prediction technique which is termed the multiple regression prediction model and then evaluate its prediction ability.Important factors which have impact on surface roughness are feed rate, depth of cut, cutting speed, tool angle and cooling fluid. Apart from these, factors such as tool material, nose radius, cutting forces and vibrations will also have an affect on surface roughness. Fishbone diagram below gives us clear notion of the factors responsible for surface roughness (Fig. 8).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The purpose of this research was to develop a prediction model for surface roughness. This system is designed to provide the real-time surface roughness values need for decision-making in a more realistic industrial environment. The purpose of proposing the fuzzy model was to develop a leading to a more timely tuned prediction model. A fuzzy model of 63 rules was developed for predicting the surface roughness for a given set of inputs cutting speed, feed rate, and depth of cut. The obtained fuzzy model is capable of predicting the surface roughness for a given set of inputs (cutting speed, feed rate, and depth of cut). Therefore, the operator can predict the quality of the surface for a given set of working parameters and will be able to set the machining parameters to achieve a certain surface quality. The model is verified by comparing the fuzzy output with the experimental data used to build the empirical model. The results of these experiments are in a good agreement with those predicted using the fuzzy model. The accuracy of the obtained model is a function of the number of the rules and depends on the clustering parameters. Changing these parameters may increase the numbers of the rule that in turn affect the accuracy of the obtained model. The model resulting in the Ravalue deviating the least from the actual Ravalue and is regarded as the most robust surface roughness prediction model. Percentage deviation was the criterion to judge the prediction efficiency of the fuzzy model and multiple regression equation. The most important conclusion to be reported is that the developed system for the prediction and control of surface roughness as applied to the milling of aluminum block works. The accuracy of the system is 95%, as tested experimentally under realistic operating conditions. However, it is also worthwhile to comment on the degree of development effort and time. The process of generating the data and to achieve the best input to output mapping was very time consuming.