@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design optimization of precision casting for residual stress reduction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper focus on analytical, numerical and experimental design optimization of shifter.Performed design optimization by finite element analysis and experimental of live industrial problem.The results can applicable as a basis of design and optimization of new type of the automotive parts.The results of the current work present the actual behavior of induced stresses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Casting,Finite element analysis (FEA),Optimization,Residual stresses,Crack compliance method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Residual stresses are developed during the solidification process due to the temperature gradients between different parts of casting or due to the mechanical constraints imposed by the mold during shrinkage of the cast metal and volumetric change and transformation plasticity associated with the solid state phase transformation according to Chandra [1]. A complex geometry means more internal sections which take longer to cool. Therefore, initially these sections are loaded compressively. This change to tensile loading as it contract within the already cold outer part. This increases the magnitude of tensile residual stresses produced on cooling of the cast.Since the residual stresses can increase or decrease the fatigue life of a component [2], an interest on its consideration during the design process has grown in the foundry industry. This paper presents a comparison of residual stress development between parts that has not undergone topology optimization processes.The magnitude and distribution of residual stresses in a component or structure is a significant source of uncertainty in mechanical engineering design as it affects subsequent machining, life prediction and assessment of structural reliability. Residual stresses are generated due to almost all manufacturing and fabrication processes and can also arise during service; they will occur under any set of circumstances that leads to differential expansion or contraction between adjacent parts of a body so that the local yield strength exceeds the material value. Their influence depends on the magnitude, sign and extent relative to the controlling geometry. It is also associated with a particular mode of failure. Interpretation and optimization of residual stresses in terms of manufacturing history and service performance would mean better materials fabrication, processing and usage.This work deals extensively with the simulation of residual stresses. Hence a lot of literature has been studied to model the optimum finite element (FE) problem. Liu et al. [3] have studied the development of thermal stresses and predicted the hot tearing and residual stresses in shaped casting. Ragab et al. [4] have used a coupled thermo-mechanical finite element model to simulate the die casting process. The simulation models show the effect of thermal and mechanical interaction between the casting and the die. It also includes the temperature dependent material properties of the casting. Metzget et al. [5] have studied a method to efficiently predict residual stresses in foundry product by FEM. Vijayaram et al. [6] have studied casting solidification simulation process which was used to identify the defective locations in the castings from the generated time–temperature contours. Afazov et al. [7] studied FE prediction of residual stresses of investment casting in a bottom core vane under equiaxed cooling and presented an investment casting simulation of the same to find the residual stresses. Xue et al. [8] did the numerical simulation of casting thermal stresses based on finite difference method using a three-dimensional code which was developed for solving thermal-elastoplastic stress problems during solidification process. Koric et al. [9] applied a three-dimensional transient explicit finite-element method to simulate the coupled and highly-nonlinear thermo-mechanical phenomenon that occurs during steel solidification in continuous casting of thin slabs in a funnel mold. Afazov et al. [10] presented a finite element simulation of an investment casting of a high pressure turbine blade under directional cooling.In this work a shifter, as shown inFig. 1, is taken as component of interest as it is a precision cast part. It is a component of four wheeler transmission system. This part seems to develop cracks during its service which has been credited to fatigue. Since residual stresses cause these crack formation under fatigue, the component is studied and analyzed for residual stresses.The objective of this work is to simulate the formation of residual stresses during casting of a shifter and to identify the areas of maximum impact. The second objective was to modify the shape of the shifter so that lesser residual stresses may be developed during casting without affecting the functional integrity of the component.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a numerical approach is presented to simulate the development of residual stresses in precision casting. An explicit finite element model is developed and applied to simulate the heat transfer and stress development during the solidification of cast steel in a sand mold. The finite element analysis showed the areas of maximum residual stresses. The maximum value was 7.015 E+9N/m2. The shape optimization is done to minimize the residual stress subjected to constraints of functionality and formability, and showed a decrease in the values of residual stresses. The maximum value for residual stress in the modified geometry is obtained as 6.352E+9N/m2. The experimental testing on the modified shifter gives the values of residual stresses as 6.839E+9N/m2. This value is closer to the numerical results. All these values are lower than the yield stress of the material 28E+9N/m2. Thus the finite element model used for simulating the residual stresses is proved correct. This model can be used independently in future to predict residual stresses in precision casting and also to reduce their magnitude by proper shape optimization, as all the simulation results are in good accordance with the accepted facts. The accuracy of the numerical method can be further increased by taking smaller time increments.The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this paper.