@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sketch-based 3D modeling by aligning outlines of an image

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an efficient technique for sketch-based 3D modeling using automatically extracted image features. An automatic and real-time method is proposed to align a user's hand-drawn sketch line to the contour lines of an image, facilitating a considerable level of ease for 3D modeling.We use a geometric method to align a sketch line to the outlines of an image using the features of the sketch line and contour lines of an image, and some operations are proposed to refine the result of alignment.In the sketch-based 3D modeling method, the sketch line is represented by a editable spline, therefore, the aligned sketch line can be further adjusted interactively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sketch-based modeling,CAD,Image edge extraction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sketching in 2D is much easier than that in 3D since most designers are capable of sketching but unfamiliar with 3D modeling tools. It is common to build a 3D model based on an object which already exists. But it requires professional skills and experience to develop an irregular shape. Even if we have those skills and experience, it still takes a long time and great efforts to draw and adjust the special shape to meet our requirements. Therefore, it will be much more convenient if we can use an existing 2D shape directly from an image especially when the object is in an irregular shape. The image of the object can be a cartoon picture or a sketched image.Extracting a 2D shape from an image is still a difficult task because of the countless possibilities of the input sketch lines owing to different design techniques. Sometimes we need to segment the special shapes into several smaller parts which facilitate model-building, but sometimes we need the shape as a whole for the same purpose. So it is better to snap the sketch lines to the image contour, rather than merely show the shape extracted from the image according to the sketch lines. The precision of the results lies in the correspondence between the hand-drawn sketch lines and extracted contour lines. To obtain the correspondence as precise as possible, not only need we interpret the purpose of sketching, but we also need to understand the meaning of the contour lines extracted from the image. Both of tasks are difficult for a machine to achieve.In this paper, we consider the image features as a useful clue to comprehend the meaning of the sketch lines so that the two of the tasks turn to an alignment of hand-drawn sketch lines to the contours of an image. We believe that there must be a set of rules for alignment. This allows the user to carelessly continue sketching while the system intelligently snaps the sketch lines to the image contours, no longer requiring the strenuous effort and stress of trying to make a perfect line during the modeling task.We come up with an algorithm to align the input sketch lines to the contour lines extracted from a background image. The user first inputs an image with the target object, such as a cartoon picture or a sketched image. Then, the user draws a closed sketch line around the shape which he/she is interested in. The system will automatically choose the contour lines which the user is interested in and adjust the sketch line to fit the target shape in the image, and finally a 3D model is generated based on the sketch line. We demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of the algorithm by running experiments with several example cases in Section 7.The contributions of our method are as follows:(1)We propose an automatic alignment method for sketch-based 3D modeling to reflect the user׳s original intention. Therefore, the efficiency of 3D modeling is improved.A geometric approach is employed to align a sketch line to the outlines of an image by using their features. A sketch line can be aligned to several discontinuous contour lines of an image so that complex 3D objects can be modeled.We use an editable curve to represent the aligned sketch line so that its shape can be further adjusted interactively to create a 3D model with high accuracy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We present an efficient outline alignment technique for sketch-based 3D modeling using automatically extracted image features. It is an extremely useful tool especially when we intend to design a 3D model with an irregular shape. The technique combines the efficiency of the computer and the intelligence of the human. Experiments have been done to demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of our method. We also develop a CAD system with the method which can help the designers to a great extent when they want to extract a 3D model from an image.The sketch-based modeling method is realized by aligning the outlines of an image. What we should notice is that the aligning result is dependent on the quality of the user׳s input sketch lines. If the user sketches intangibly and far away from the contours, it is impossible to align the sketch lines to the contour lines. Although the method improves the intelligence of the application, the alignment still needs the user to draw an appropriate sketch line to obtain a good result.There are still many aspects of work left for further development. It should be deliberate to add the sketched samples in the result because any mistake in the progress will accumulate and affect the ultimate outcomes. Moreover, the time complexity is in proportion to the number of initial points and sketched-samples (O(n2)). Although the run-time of the method is acceptable, we still need to improve the algorithm for less time complexity for the fluency and stability of the application. In addition, the result of the contour extraction of the image is of vital importance to the final result. The integrity of the contours extracted from the image can influence the alignment to a great extent. Our method works well for cartoon pictures or sketched images, but for the photo taken from the real world, the result is not good enough since the contour lines of the image cannot be detected clearly. Therefore, an improved contour extraction method is necessary.We plan to develop a method to make the outcome corresponding to the side view of the model. We adopt the idea presented in [3] that designs the model in one view because the users cannot match the input sketches to the image contours when the view changes. So, once the user finishes sketching, inflation of the 2D model will be modulated and the 3D model will be displayed. As a result, the side of the model can only be deformed in limited ways [9]. With the proposed method, we can align the sketch lines for both front view and side view respectively, but the two results might not match in the size and shape. If we can match them accurately, the model could be built much more easily.