@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Characterization, quantum, antibacterial, antifungal and antioxidant studies on Hg(II) and Cd(II) complexes of allyl and ethyl thiosemicarbazides derived from 2-aminothiazole-4-yl acetohydrazide

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Preparation of Cd(II) and Hg(II) complexes of the new thiosemicarbazide.Elemental analysis, spectral characterization of the ligands and their Cd(II) and Hg(II) complexes.Thermal behaviour of the solid metal complexes was studied using TGA technique.The compounds were screened for antibacterial, antifungal, antioxidant and antitumor activity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thiosemicarbazide complex,Spectral characterization,Thermal degradation,Biological activity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Two thiosemicarbazide ligands were derived from the addition of 2-(2-aminothiazol-4-yl) acetohydrazide to both ethyl isothiocyanate (H2TAET) and allyl isothiocyanate (H2TAAT) where their Cd (II) and Hg (II) complexes were synthesized and characterized by traditional techniques. The complexes were assigned the formulas [Cd(HTAET)(H2O)Cl](H2O)2, [Hg(TAET)(H2O)2]2, [Cd(HTAAT)(H2O)Cl]H2O and [Hg(H2TAAT)(H2O)Cl2], respectively. In Cd (II) complexes, the IR spectra show that the ligands behave as monobasic bidentate through (CN) thiazole ring and deprotonated enolized (CO). In Hg (II) complexes, H2TAET acts as dibasic tridentate (NSO) via thiol (CS), enolized (CO) and new azomethine (NC)* groups, while H2TAAT acts as neutral tridentate (NNO) through (CN) of thiazole ring, (CO) and new (CN) due to SH formation. A tetrahedral geometry for Cd (II) complexes, square pyramidal geometry for [Hg(TAET)(H2O)2]2 and octahedral geometry for [Hg(H2TAAT)(H2O)Cl2] were proposed. The data of theoretical and experimental vibrational frequencies of ligands are comparable. The calculated HOMO-LUMO energies gap data decided the possibility of charge transfer within the molecule. The binding energies calculations showed that the stability of complexes is higher than that of ligands. The kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of the Cd (II) complexes have been calculated by Coats–Redfern and Horowitz–Metzger methods. Moreover, the antimicrobial activities of the compounds have been discussed using a wide spectrum of bacterial and fungal strains. Representatives of the synthesized compounds were tested and evaluated for anti-oxidant and antitumour activities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thiazole and its derivatives have shown a wide range of biological significance, for example vitamin B1 and the coenzyme cocarboxylase with a thiazole ring [1]. It is known that 2-aminothiazole is an effective compound with a broad range of biological activity; also, it is an intermediate in the preparation of antibiotics and dyes [2] according to more than one type of donor atoms in thiosemicarbazide derivatives and their pronounced microbial activities [3–5]. Their metal complexes have attracted considerable attention which can introduce novel reactivity and frequently stabilize the metal cluster framework [6–9]. As an extension of our study on thiosemicarbazide moiety [10–13], we report herein the preparation of Cd (II) and Hg (II) complexes derived from a new thiosemicarbazide, namely 2-amino-4-yl acetothiosemicarbazide ending by ethyl (H2TAET) and allyl (H2TAAT) groups. The study determined the structure of ligands and complexes by traditional techniques and conceded by molecular modelling, DFT calculations and their thermal degradation kinetics using Coats–Redfern and Horowitz–Metzger techniques. Also, the microbial activities of the prepared compounds have been studied using a wide spectrum of bacterial and fungal strains.All the chemicals used were from Aldrich and Fluka without further purification. Elemental analyses (C, H, N) have been determined with a Perkin-Elmer 2400 series II analyzer. The Molar conductance values (10−3 mol L−1) of the complexes in DMF were measured using a Tacussel conductivity bridge model CD6NG. The IR spectra were shown at a Mattson 5000 FTIR spectrophotometer with KBr discs within the range of IR spectra 4000–400 cm−1. Electronic spectra have been recorded on a Unicam UV–Vis spectrophotometer UV2. 1H NMR and 13C NMR were measured in d6-DMSO at room temperature on Bruker Bio Spin GmbH 400 MHz spectrometer. Thermogravimetric measurements (TGA, DTG and 20–800 °C) have been recorded on a DTG-50 Shimadzu thermo gravimetric analyzer with a heating rate of 10 °C/min and nitrogen flow rate of 15 ml/min.H2TAET and H2TAAT have been synthesized by heating 1 mmol of 2-(2-aminothiazol-4-yl) acetohydrazide with 1 mmol ethyl and allyl isothiocyanate under reflux for 2 h. The resulting precipitate that formed for each has been filtered, washed more than once with ethanol and dried under vacuum over anhydrous CaCl2.Dissolved Cd and Hg chloride (1.0 mmol) has been added to ethanolic solution of H2TAET (0.259 g, 1.0 mmol) and H2TAAT (0.271 g, 1.0 mmol). The mixture was refluxed for 2–3 h and the precipitates formed were filtered, washed and dried in a vacuum desiccator over anhydrous CaCl2. The complexes are stable in air and insoluble in most organic solvents but soluble in both dimethyl formamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO). The molar conductivity values of all complexes were determined in DMF at the range 1–18 ohm−1 cm2 mol−1 of non-electrolytes. Unfortunately, we could not get single crystals from the solid metal complexes.Chemical compounds have been tested against gram positive Staphylococcus aureus and gram negative Escherichia coli bacteria. Each of the compounds dissolved in DMSO, this solution with concentration (1 mg /ml) were made ready by separately paper discs of Whatman filter paper which were prepared with standard size (5 cm) and cut with sterilized in an autoclave. The paper discs were soaked in the desired concentration of the complex solution and put in the Petri dishes containing nutrient agar media (agar 20 g + beef extract 3 g + peptone 5 g) seeded with S. aureus and E. coli. The Petri dishes have been incubated at 36 °C and the inhibition zones were recorded after 24 h of incubation. Each treatment was done three times. The antimicrobial activity of a standard antibiotic ampicillin was also recorded using the same concentration and solvents. The % activity index for the complex was determined by the following formula:%Activity Index=Zone of inhibition by test compound(diametre)Zone of inhibition by standard(diametre)×100Antifungal activity, depend on the growth inhibition rates of the mycelia of Candida albicans in Potato Dextrose Broth medium (PDB) to determine growth inhibition rates. It was detected from the infected organs on potato dextrose agar (potato 250 g + dextrose 20 g + agar 20 g) medium of the host plants. The cultures of the fungi were filtered by single spore isolation technique. The solution with the concentration 1 mg/ml for all compounds in DMSO has been synthesized for testing against spore germination. A drop of the solution of each concentration was kept separately on glass slides. The conidia and fungal reproducing spores hoisted up with the help of an inoculating needle, which mixed in every drop for all compounds separately. Each treatment was repeated three times and a parallel DMSO solvent control set was done concurrently on separate glass slides. All the slides have been incubated in humid chambers at 25 ± 2 °C for 24 h. Each slide was observed under the microscope for spore germination and finally per cent germination was determined. A zone of inhibition of growth referred to an indication of antifungal activity. The results have been also compared with a blank antifungal drug Clotrimazole at the same concentration.The antioxidant activity [14] employed a technique depending on measuring the reducing of stable free radicals. The methodology explains that the consumption of the stable free radical (X') will be calculated by reactions as follows:X′+YH→XH+Y′The rate or the extent of the process measured in terms of the decrease in X' concentration would be related to the ability of the added compounds to trap free radicals. The colour intensity of the solution will decrease due to scavenging of the free radical by the antioxidant material and this can be measured colorimetry at a specific wavelength. The assay employs the radical cation derived from 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) (ABTS) or diphenyl picryl hydrazyl (DPPH) as stable free radical to be antioxidant and extracts. Inhibition per cent of free radical DPPH or ABTS has been determined owing to the equation:I%=(Ablank−Asample)/(Ablank)×100where Ablank is the absorbance of the control reaction (containing all reagents except the test compound), and Asample is the absorbance of the test sample.All different concentrations of the tested chemical compounds under study have been dissolved in methanol to obtain final concentration ranging from 6.25 to 200 mg/ml to show IC50 (concentration makes 50% inhibition of DPPH colour). Fifty microlitres of different sample concentrations was added to 5 ml of 0.004% methanolic solution of DPPH. We let the solution dry for 60 min in the dark then the absorbance was recorded vs a blank at 517 nm.For 3 ml of MnO2 solution (25 mg/ml), we added the solution containing both the investigated compounds and 2 ml of ABTS solution (60 mM). All were synthesized in 5 ml aqueous phosphate buffer solution (pH 7, 0.1 M). The solution was shaken, centrifuged, filtered and the absorbance of the resulting green–blue solution (ABTS radical solution) at λ734 nm was referred to approx. 0.5. Then, 50 ml of (2 mM) mixture of the tested compound in spectroscopic grade MeOH/phosphate buffer (1:1) was added. The absorbance was calculated, and the reduction in colour intensity was referred to inhibition percentage. l-ascorbic acid was used as a blank antioxidant (positive control). Blank was run without ABTS and using MeOH/phosphate buffer (1:1) instead of tested compounds.Negative control was run with ABTS and MeOH/phosphate buffer (1:1) only [15,16].In vitro cytotoxicity was done at a range of concentrations 500, 200, 100, 50, 10 and 1 µg/ml against mammary gland (Breast) MCF7 with a standard MTT assay as shown by Mosmann [17] with minor modifications [18]. The cell line made from ATCC through holding company for biological products and vaccines, Cairo, Egypt and cultured in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% foetal bovine serum. Antibiotics added were 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. The reagents RPMI-1640 medium, MTT and DMSO and 5-fluorouracil (Sigma Co., St. Louis, MO, USA), Foetal Bovine serum (GIBCO, UK) and the cell line MCF7 (obtained from ATCC) have been used. MTT was based on the reduction of the yellow tetrazolium dye MTT to a violet formazan product through the mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase in viable cells. MTT was poured at 5 mg/ml in PBS and filtered to remove a small amount of insoluble residue in some batches of MTT. The cells harvested from exponential phase have been plated in 96-well plates (104 cells/well in 100 µl of medium) and incubated for 24 h for attachment. Test compounds have been synthesized prior to the experiment by dissolving in 0.1% DMSO and diluting with medium. Considering the cytotoxicity effect of DMSO, the concentration of DMSO in the medium was set below 1%; under this condition, DMSO did not affect the growth and viability of the cell [19].The cells have been then exposed to various concentrations of the compounds in the volume of 100 µl/well. Control wells have been synthesized by addition of an equal volume of the culture medium having 0.1% DMSO. Wells having culture medium without cells have been used as standard. 5-Fluorouracil was used as a blank anticancer drug for comparison. After 24 h, the medium was rinsed and cell cultures have been incubated by 100 µl MTT reagent (5 mg/ml MTT stock in PBS diluted to 1 mg/ml with 10% RPMI-1640 medium) for 4 h at 37 °C. The formazan produced by the viable cells was solubilized by using 100 µl DMSO. Then, the absorbances have been calculated at 570 nm using a plate reader (EXL 800) and the cytotoxic midpoint value, the concentration of chemical agent needed to reduce the spectrophotometric absorbance to 50% (IC50), was shown by linear regression analysis with 95% of confidence limits. The IC50 was defined as the medium of two independent experiments through the equation of graphic line obtained. The experiment was performed in triplicate to get the mean values. The percentage viability was calculated using the formulaThe relative cell viability%=A570of treated samplesA570of untreated sample×100We performed cluster calculations by DMOL3 program [20] in Materials Studio program [21], which was designed for large scale density functional theory (DFT) calculations. DFT semi-core pseudo pods determinations (dspp) have been shown with the double numerical basis sets plus polarization (DNP) functional. The DNP basis sets are of comparable quality to 6-31G Gaussian basis sets [22]. Kessi and Delley assumed that the DNP basis sets are highly more accurate than Gaussian basis sets of the same size [23]. The RPBE functional [24] is so far the best exchange-correlation functional [25], based on the generalized gradient approximation (GGA), employed to take account of the exchange and correlation effects of electrons. The geometric optimization was shown without any symmetry restriction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
