@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Phytotoxicity of three Plantago species on germination and seedling growth of hairy beggarticks (Bidens pilosa L.)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Plantago major expressed the highest values of phenolics, tannins and flavonoids.P. lagopus contained high content of alkaloids.P. lagopus showed strong inhibition on the Bidens pilosa weed.P. lagopus could be valorized in managing this noxious weed as an ecofriendly method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Allelopathy,Bioactive compounds,Bidens pilosa,Plantago spp,Weeds,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Plantago genus has a wide geographical distribution all over the world. It has been widely used in folk medicine for various purposes, where it is used as anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial and antitumor agent. In this research, total phenols, tannins, saponins, flavonoids and alkaloids were determined in Plantago lagopus, Plantago major and Plantago squarrosa. Furthermore, concentrations of 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mg ml−1 of both alcoholic and aqueous extracts were prepared to study their phytotoxic effect on the germination and seedling growth of the noxious weed Bidens pilosa. P. major expressed the highest values of total phenolics, tannins and flavonoids. However, P. lagopus has the highest content of alkaloids. The germination of B. pilosa was completely inhibited under treatment of P. lagopus and P. major methanolic extracts at 7.5 mg ml−1 and 10 mg ml−1, respectively. However, the allelopathic effect of P. lagopus aqueous extract showed a complete inhibition of B. pilosa germination followed by P. major. The germination inhibition of B. pilosa increased with the increase in the extracts concentration. In addition, both radicle and plumule were strongly inhibited under the same treatment. Our results showed a potent allelopathic effect on B. pilosa that could be valorized in managing this noxious weed as an ecofriendly bio-control method. However, other studies are needed for the identification, characterization of the responsible allelochemicals and for the demonstration of their modes of action.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the high food requirement of the ever-growing population of the world and the oriented productivity of agriculture, the introduction of synthetic herbicides to control noxious weeds was a favorable way below the threshold limit to reduce the yield loss. Besides improving the crop production, a predatory impact on the environment quality and on human health was generated and increased the number of herbicide resistant weeds [1,2]. The weed science society of America defines a weed as any plant that is objectionable or interferes with the activities and welfare of humans [3]. Weed species might vary in their response to the phytotoxicity, it has received attention in numerous publications [4,5]. Weed management research should find out some natural ways of minimizing the dependency on synthetic herbicides which is still in need of an effective and affordable technological solution. Allelopathy represented aproper solution for this problem.Allelopathy represents a natural phenomenon of a plant emancipation of inhibitory substances that interfere with other plants sharing the same environment. Allelopathy is well-defined as both the plant's inhibitory and stimulatory effects upon the other plant including microorganisms [6]. A simpler meaning of allelopathy is that it is the inhibitory effect of one plant on another due to the release of chemical substances. This meaning is compatible with the famous phrase of Paracelsus “All things are poison and are not poison; only the dose makes a thing not a poison” [7]. Allelochemicals (inhibitors) are defined as plant secondary metabolites that are released into the environment through volatilization, root exudation, leaching from plants or plant residues, and decay of residues. Also, they can be present in various parts of a plant, ranging from the root to stem or seeds [8]. Although we cannot discard the use of synthetic herbicides completely at the present situation, their use can be reduced up to a certain extent by utilizing allelopathic potentiality as an alternative weed management strategy for crop production as well as environmental profits [2].Bidens pilosa L. (Asteraceae) is a noxious annual weed native to tropical America. In Africa B. pilosa is recorded in many countries and it is likely to occur in all countries. This genus contains about 280 species worldwide and it is widespread in both field crops and wild areas because of its fast growth, strong invasive nature and its easy adaptation [9]. The enormous genus Plantago of family Plantaginaceae comprises 483 perennial and annual species distributed throughout the world. They have wide ecological amplitude. They are weeds of both arable lands and grasslands [10,11]. The highly diverse genus Plantago has been used as traditional medicinal plant for centuries. It was reported to have biological activities including anti-inflammatory, analgesic, anti-tumoral, anti-spasmodic, hepatoprotective, antiviral, antibacterial, antifungal and anti-ulcerogenic [12,13]. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the allelopathic potential of Plantago lagopus, Plantago major and Plantago squarrosa extracts on the germination and early seedling growth of the noxious weed B. pilosa.P. lagopus, P. major and P. squarrosa aerial parts were harvested at a vegetative stage. The plant tissues were clipped 1 cm above the soil, washed with distilled water and left to dry in room temperature (25 °C) in a shaded place for several days until completely dried. The dried samples were ground to pass a 1 mm screen, packed in a polyethylene bag and stored in a refrigerator until use.Total phenolics, tannins, alkaloids, flavonoids and saponins of P. lagopus, P. major and P. squarrosa samples were determined spectrophotometrically [14–17].The seeds of B. pilosa were collected from the orchards habitat in El-Sharkia Governorate in Egypt, sterilized by 0.3% sodium hypochlorite, rinsed by distilled water, dried on the filter paper in the laboratory at room temperature for 7 days and packed in a paper bag until use [18,19].For bioassay tests, aqueous and methanolic stock extracts (10% w/v) were diluted with distilled water to obtain concentrations of 7.5%, 5% and 2.5% (v/v) test extracts. All osmotic concentrations of bioassay solutions were less than 0.1 Mpa and hence not considered a factor affecting germination. The solutions were filtered through double layers of muslin cloth followed by a Whatman No.1 filter paper, the pH values were adjusted to 7 and these were kept in the refrigerator at 4 °C until further use [20].Two layers of Whatman No. 1 filter paper were placed in 90 mm diameter glass Petri dishes. In each dish, 25 seeds were placed and 10 ml of each plant extract were added in concentrations of 10, 7.5, 5 and 2.5% (v/v). In case of methanolic extract, seeds were placed after alcohol evaporation and then 10 ml of distilled water were added. A check treatment was assigned with distilled water and left at room temperature. Starting from the first day of the experiment, germinated seeds were counted and removed daily. A seed with 2 mm of radicle was considered germinated. Experiment designed was randomized complete block with three replicates and the experiment was repeated twice. The inhibition percentage was calculated.The seeds of B. pilosa were germinated on filter paper in the dark at room temperature for 2 days. Twenty five germinated seeds were transferred to Petri dishes lined with two layers of Whatman No. 1 filter paper and 10 ml of different extracts were added in concentrations of 10, 7.5, 5 and 2.5% (v/v). In addition a check treatment was assigned with distilled water and left at room temperature. Experiment designed was randomized complete block with three replicates and the experiment was repeated twice. The shoot and root lengths of seedlings were measured on the tenth day and growth inhibition for radicle and plumule lengths was calculated.All values of phytochemistry and allelopathy experiments are the mean of three replicates ± standard error. Data were subjected to ANOVA and the mean values were separated based on Duncan's test at 0.05 probability level using COSTAT 6.3 program.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
