@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ultrastructural studies on the nuclear elements in differentiating and degenerative ciliated olfactory neuron of Pseudapocryptes lanceolatus (Gobiidae: Oxudercinae)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Neurogenesis and degeneration of ciliated olfactory sensory receptor neuron in Pseudapocryptes lanceolatus has been studied.The progenitor basal cell proliferates to form electron lucent basal cell which differentiates into ciliated sensory receptor neuron.The nuclear elements show notable features of gradual condensation in various differentiating, mature and degenerating stages.Condensation of chromatin granules (10 nm–20 nm to 15 nm–30 nm) in differentiating, mature and degenerating sensory neurons are marked under EM.We strongly recommend that the chromatin condensation is a prime subcellular indicator of neural aging of olfactory sensory receptor cell.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
P. lanceolatus,Olfactory,Neurogenesis,Sensory,Chromatin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The cellular event of neurogenesis and neural degeneration of ciliated sensory receptor neuron within the adult olfactory neuroepithelial system has been studied in Pseudapocryptes lanceolatus (Bloch and Schneider, 1801) under light microscope (LM), fluorescence microscope and transmission electron microscope (TEM: Morgagni 268D) respectively. The unilamellar olfactory apparatuses of P. lanceolatus were dissected and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.2–7.4) at 4 °C for microscopical studies. The LM study indicates that the progenitor basal cell proliferates to form electron lucent basal cell which differentiates into ciliated sensory receptor neuron within the olfactory neuroepithelium. Investigation under fluorescence microscope using Acridine Orange revealed that the nuclear elements in differentiating stages of electron lucent basal cell, mature and degenerating sensory receptor cell show notable features of gradual condensation. TEM study indicates the subsequent condensation of chromatin granules (diameter ranging from 10 nm–20 nm to 15 nm–30 nm) in various differentiating stages of electron lucent basal cell. The mature ciliated sensory receptor cell possesses chromatinized nucleus with large accumulation of chromatin granules (diameter: 20 nm–30 nm) at the peripheral nucleoplasm whereas degenerating sensory receptor cell possesses fragmented chromatin fibers. Therefore, these distinctive features of chromatin condensation are assumed to be a prime subcellular indicator of neural aging of olfactory sensory receptor cell.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Olfaction is a primitive type of chemosensory modality that is involved in the detection and discrimination of various chemical cues from the external environment through sensory receptor cells [1,2]. The ciliated sensory receptor cell (a bipolar neuron) is regarded as the primary neuron and predominantly found within the olfactory neuroepithelium [3]. This type of cell is specialized for the recognition of various chemical stimuli from the external environment and evolutionarily conserved across the vertebrate phyla [4–7]. The neurogenesis of olfactory sensory neuron in both postnatal development and adult stage is a very unique phenomenon in vertebrate olfactory neuroepithelium (including teleosts) [8]. The primary olfactory sensory receptor cell has a definite life span and successively shows neural apoptosis at the end [9,10]. The basal cell may proliferate and differentiate into new primary sensory neurons within the olfactory neuroepithelium [11,12]. This cellular event is also regarded as cellular dynamics in adult olfactory neuroepithelium [13]. A diagrammatic model of this cellular event was proposed by Sulz and Bacigalupo [14] but the subcellular organelle based cytological details of neurogenesis, neural differentiation, neural degeneration, etc. are still not characterized. Recently, Armelin-Correa et al. [15] have described the subdivision of nucleus in lieu of gene expression of odorant receptors (OR) in olfactory sensory receptor cell. The structural changes in nuclear elements are responsible for variable rate of transcription in various stages of differentiation during olfactory neurogenesis and neural degeneration [16,17]. Therefore, it would be more worthwhile to explore the cytological details as well as possible qualitative variation in nuclear elements within the various differentiating stages of olfactory neurogenesis and neural degeneration. Pseudapocryptes lanceolatus (Bloch and Schneider, 1801) is a teleostean: gobiid. This species possesses unilamellar olfactory apparatuses externally lined by olfactory neuroepithelium and populated with sensory receptor cell, supporting cell and basal cell [18–20]. The functional proliferation of basal cell within the olfactory neuroepithelium is evident in different age groups of P. lanceolatus[21]. The present study is focused on the unexplored fine structural characterization of nuclear elements at different stages of neural differentiation and degeneration within the adult olfactory neuroepithelium of P. lanceolatus to correlate the subcellular aspect of neurogenesis and neural degeneration.P. lanceolatus is a common mudskipper of Gangetic Bengal. There are no known threats recorded in the IUCN Red List Category P. lanceolatus (i.e., ‘Least Concern’) [website: http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/169496/0]. For electron microscopical study, the fresh, adult (having total body length of 150 mm to 200 mm) specimens of P. lanceolatus were directly collected from the clear stretches of Hooghly River at Barrackpore (North 24 Parganas, West Bengal, India, 22° 46 N, 88°20 E) and Tribeni (Hooghly, West Bengal, India, 22°59 N, 88°23 E) during the breeding season (i.e., June 2012–August 2012); brought to the laboratory for acclimatization with the physical conditions [temperature: 20 °C–25 °C, humidity: >40%, time: 24 hours, etc.]. The specimens were anesthetized by using MS – 222 (dose: 100 mg/L–200 mg/L) for microscopical studies. The olfactory apparatuses of P. lanceolatus were dissected out from the anterodorsal side of the head and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.2–7.4) at 4 °C for 2 hours. After primary fixation, the olfactory tissues were rinsed in the same buffer and then fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.2–7.4) for 1 hour at 27 °C. The olfactory tissues were then rinsed in the same buffer and dehydrated in chilled acetone. The tissues were embedded in Araldite CY212 (TAAB, UK) and resin polymerized for 48 hours at 60 °C. Transverse sections of the olfactory lamella (thickness: 1 µm) were cut with ultramicrotome (Leica ultracut UC6), stained with 1% toluidine blue and examined under light microscope (Leitz DM RBE). For fluorescence microscopical study, the olfactory apparatuses of P. lanceolatus were separately fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 (M) phosphate buffer (pH 7.3) at 4 °C for 2 hours. The fixed tissues were then washed in the same buffer (3 changes at 30 minutes of interval) and cryoprotected in 15%–30% sucrose solution in 0.1 (M) phosphate buffer for 24 hours at 4 °C. The frozen sections (thickness: 15–20 µm) were cut by using a cryostat (Leica CM 1850; Leica Biosystems Nussloch GmbH, Germany) and carefully placed on gelatin coated slides. The sections were incubated with Acridine Orange (AO) solution (6 µg/mL) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.3) at 4 °C for 15 minutes to 30 minutes and subsequently washed in the same buffer (3 changes), mounted on glass slides (equal volume of glycerol and buffer is used as mounting medium) and examined under fluorescence microscope [Leica DM 3000; Leica Microsystems] at an excitement of 460 nm to 580 nm. The acquired images were analyzed by Microscope Imaging Software [Leica Application Suite Advanced Fluorescence (LAS AF)]. For transmission electron microscopical (TEM) studies, the resin polymerized olfactory lamellae of P. lanceolatus were cut (thickness: 70 nm–80 nm) by using ultramicrotome (Leica Ultracut – UCT), collected on copper grids and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate respectively. The sections were examined under Morgagni 268D transmission electron microscope (Fei Electron Optics, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) operated at 80 kV. Digital images were analyzed at by using iTEM software (soft imaging system, Münster, Germany) attached to the microscope.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
