@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Microstructural evolution and characterization of super-induced MgO composite on zinc-rich coatings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The structure and thermal treatment properties of Zn-MgO are discussed.Thermal evaluation for 4 h at 200 °C.The coatings were evaluated using AFM, OPM, the hardness and wear.The best alloy value was obtained at Zn-20MgO at 0.5A/cm2system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thermal performance,Zn-MgO,Ceramic film,Corrosion,Microstructure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The effect of Zn-MgO deposition prepared through direct electrolytic co-deposition on mild steel was studied. The experiment was conducted at current density between 0.5 and 1 A/cm−2. The morphologies of the coated surfaces were characterized using Atomic Force Microscope (AFM), high resolution Nikon Optical Microscope (OPM) and Scanning Electron Microscopy attached with Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (SEM/EDX). The corrosion behavior was studied using linear potentiodynamic polarization method in 3.5% simulated environment. The phase change was evaluated using X-ray Diffractogram (XRD). The microhardness characteristics of the obtained deposits were analyzed with dura scan hardness tester. The stability of the ceramic composite was determined using heat-treatment processes at 200 oC for 4 h. The results show that the structural behavior and corrosion resistance of the coating is dependent on the composite induced particulate and applied current density. It is found that increasing MgO contents beyond optimum level does not cause increase in microhardness progression. A decrease in applied current maximally influences the deposit adhesion characteristics. The enhanced thermal stability of 236.4 HVN for Zn-20MgO at 0.5 A/cm2 alloy and increase corrosion behavior was thus attributed to its chemical composition, phase content and the synergistic effect of Zn and MgO on the carbon steel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Co-deposition with the help of composite coating is a straightforward and cost-effective method of preventing corrosion and mechanical failure. The presence of certain alloying elements in the bath considerably affects the morphology, growth and kinetics of coating. However, with the choice of proper plating parameters, electrodeposition can still give better coatings with fine surface finish that will exhibit high degree of corrosion resistance and mechanical properties such as micro-hardness, wear resistance, ductility, strength and decorative properties [1–6]. Research has shown that the characteristics of deposited coatings depend on several factors which include pH, current density, applied voltage, bath composition temperature and additives [6–16].The use of Zn metal for composite coatings is finding increased interest in surface technology and corrosion protection, owing to its superior corrosion and wear resistance in addition to extended lifetime. However, the use of Zn matrix in the generation of composite coatings is scanty compared to Cu, Ni and other alloys [17–20]. Thin films of Ti-Si-N by physical vapor deposition (PVD) were prepared with the intention to improve the wear resistance of TiN coatings [18–23]. The influence of Zn-TiO2 deposits on the surface morphology of a metal was studied [14–19] and it was concluded that the nanoparticles have a strong influence on the deposit surface morphology. Several studies [24–29] among others have revealed that the corrosion resistant properties of Zn coatings can be significantly improved upon by alloying with other transition metals and oxides such as Ni, Co, Cr, Sn, and TiO. In contrast to these alloying metals, information about the effect of varying additions of MgO to Zn coatings is sparse in the literature. In the present study, effects of the bath composition and deposition potentials on the physical and electrochemical properties of Zn-MgO coatings are discussed. Corrosion protection properties were analyzed using linear polarization, Tafel analysis and corrosion rate in 3.65% sodium chloride solution at 40 °C.The aim of this work is to investigate the influence of MgO in zinc rich concentrations with consideration of their structural, corrosion resistance properties, hardness and thermal studies.The formulated deposition bath was composed of 150 gL−1 ZnCl, 70 gL−1 KCl, 20–40 gL−1 MgO, 10 gL−1 H3BO3, 5 gL−1glycine, and 5 gL−1 thiourea. Analytical reagents and deionized water were used to prepare the plating solution. Before co-deposition, the MgO particulates of 20 ηm were incorporated into the bath electrolyte in the presence of other additives. The deposition setup tests were achieved on a setup vessel connected to a laboratory rectifier. The bath was stirred by a magnetic stirrer consistently with about 100 rpm at 40 °C. The experiments were conducted at current density between 0.5 and 1 Acm−2 and applied potential of 0.3–0.6 volts. A carbon steel sheet of 20 mm × 40 mm × 2 mm was used as the cathode. A sectioned rectangular zinc plate of a size 25 mm × 50 mm × 3 mm with a well prepared surface was used as the cathode substrate to be plated. The chemical composition of the substrate is described in Table 1and the varied deposited parameters are illustrated in Table 2.Prior to deposition, the working substrates were polished mechanically, degreased and rinsed with water. The surface preparation was carried out using a polishing machine with emery papers in the order of 60 µm, 120 µm, 400 µm, 800 µm and 1600 µm grades. The substrates were sequentially cleaned in ethanol and distilled water for 10 minutes, rinsed with 5 % H2SO4, washed in distilled water, and then dipped instantaneously in the bath formulated to allow the deposition of the target ceramic composite coatings.The microhardness along the surface of the coated sample was measured with a high Dura Diamond based Vickers' microhardness tester. An indention load of 50 g and loading time of 10 s were used in this study. The average equal distance of indent was made and average mean value was obtained.Chemical composition of the Zn/MgO MMC coatings produced by the electrolytic deposition method was investigated using the scanning electron microscope(SEM) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). Phase identification was carried out with a PANalytical EMPYREAN X-ray diffractometer using the CuKα radiation and operating at 45 kVand40mA and 25 °C.The electrochemical studies were performed with Auto lab PGSTAT 101 Metrohm Potentiostat using a three-electrode cell assembly in a 3.65% NaCl static solution at 40 °C. The developed composite was the working electrode, platinum electrode was used as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl was used as the reference electrode. The anodic and cathodic polarization curves were recorded by a constant scan rate of 0.012 V/s which was fixed between ±1.5 mV. From the Tafel corrosion analysis, the corrosion rate, potential and linear polarization resistance was obtained.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
