@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cardioameliorative effect of punicalagin against streptozotocin-induced apoptosis, redox imbalance, metabolic changes and inflammation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Punicalagin ameliorates hyperglycemia and metabolic risk factors.Punicalagin ameliorates proinflammatory cytokines, oxidative stress and protected DNA integrity.It modulates apoptotic proteins to protect heart against diabetes-induced apoptosis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Polyphenols,Cardiomyopathy,Lipids,Streptozotocin,Heart,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The effect of punicalagin on metabolic risks, oxidative stress, inflammation, cardiac apoptosis and histopathological alterations in experimentally induced diabetes was addressed. Diabetes was induced in male rats by a single injection of streptozotocin (STZ; 40 mg/kg, i.p.), and then punicalagin (1 mg/kg) was i.p. administered every other day for 15 days. The diabetic rats treated with punicalagin exhibited ameliorated hyperglycemia and HbA1c; improved insulin levels, HOMA-IR levels and lipid profiles; and normalized levels of IL-1b, IL-6 and TNF-α. Punicalagin also reduced the increase in the MDA and H2O2 levels; normalized the levels of GSH, SOD and CAT in the heart; and improved serum markers of heart function including the levels of troponin T level and CK-MB and LDH activities. Histopathological examinations of heart sections match these results, confirming the beneficial effect of punicalagin. It also modulated cardiomyocyte apoptosis via enhanced Bcl-2 expression; blocked the increases in P53, Bax and caspases-3, 8 and 9; and ameliorated DNA damage in the heart. The current results suggest that punicalagin protected the heart against apoptosis, necrosis, inflammation and DNA damage by improving the redox state, suppressing caspases and P53 and increasing Bcl-2. In conclusion, punicalagin possesses strong therapeutic potential in treating and regulating diabetes and attenuating its associated complications in the heart.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The prevalence of the diabetic heart has markedly increased in the past few years and is now considered the main cause of sickness and death among the diabetic and obese population. Diabetic cardiomyopathy is associated with increased oxidative stress that stimulates cellular injury and contributes to the development and progression of complications associated with diabetes [1]. Apoptosis is a key process in diabetic cardiac diseases derived from poor glycemic control. A number of studies have documented an increased occurrence of apoptosis in the cardiomyocytes of diabetic patients and experimentally induced diabetic animals [2,3]. It is mediated, at least in part, by the activation of the mitochondrial pathway, which is often triggered by reactive oxygen species (ROS).There is evidence from experimental and clinical settings on the benefits of antioxidant therapies in the prevention and management of diabetic complications [4–6]. Pomegranate (Punica granatum L. Punicaceae) juice has been shown to contain the highest antioxidant capacity compared to other polyphenol-rich beverages [7,8]. Clinical studies showed positive effects of pomegranate juice consumption on diabetic patients' blood diabetic and oxidative stress parameters [9]. Furthermore, it is documented that pomegranate juice supplementation showed a protective effect against isoperiotinaol-induced cardiac necrosis in rats [10]. The efficient antioxidant potential of the pomegranate is attributed to its major antioxidant polyphenol, punicalagin [11]. A primary mechanism by which pomegranate fractions exert their beneficial effects on the disease condition is by reducing oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation. This reduction may occur by directly neutralizing the generated ROS, enhancing the activities of specific antioxidant enzymes, prompting metal chelation activity, and inhibiting or activating certain transcriptional factors, such as nuclear factor kappaB and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma [12].Punicalagin is a bioactive ellagitannin, a type of phenolic compound isolated from pomegranate and exhibits high antioxidant and free radical scavenging activities [13], with several health benefits [14]. It demonstrated a marked outcome in patients with metabolic syndromes, such as hyperlipidemia, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and coronary heart disease [12,15–17]. Punicalagin inhibits the formation of advanced glycation end-products [18] and fructose-mediated non-enzymatic protein glycation by scavenging reactive carbonyl species [19]. Good results in terms of fat loss [20] and inhibition of oxidized LDL uptake in macrophages [21] have been demonstrated using punicalagin. In addition to its antioxidant, anti-diabetic and anti-atherosclerotic actions [12,14], punicalagin also exhibited anti-inflammatory activity in cell culture and animal studies [22,23]. It is worth mentioning that repeated oral administration with punicalagin for five weeks is not toxic to rats [24].Because diabetes is associated with high frequency of heart failure, a better understanding of its pathophysiology is essential for testing of new bioactive compounds and the development of treatment strategies for diabetes-associated cardiac dysfunction. To date, no studies regarding the effect of punicalagin on diabetic cardiac apoptosis and injury have been conducted. The present study hypothesized that punicalagin can counteract oxidative stress and, in turn, ameliorate cellular damage and reduce the development and progression of diabetic complications. Therefore, the current study was designed to investigate the potential beneficial effect of punicalagin against diabetes-induced cardiac injury and apoptosis in connection with its anti-lipid peroxidation and anti-hyperlipidemic actions.Streptozotocin (STZ) and punicalagin (PU) were purchased from Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, MO). All other chemicals were of the highest grade.Diabetes was induced in rats by single intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of freshly prepared STZ (40 mg/kg body weight) in 0.01 M citrate buffer, pH 4.5 [25]. The blood glucose level was assayed 48 h after STZ injection using a glucose monitor set (Elegance, CT-X10, Convergent Technologies GmbH & Co. KG, Marburg, Germany). The rats with a blood glucose level above 250 mg/dl were considered diabetic and were used for the experiments.Punicalagin is supplied in water soluble dark-yellow powder. Applied dose of 1 mg/kg dissolved in 0.2 ml saline solution was daily i.p. administered for 15 days [26].Male Wister rats weighing 280–300 g were provided by the Biological Products & Vaccines (VACSERA) of Cairo, Egypt, and were housed in cages with free access to food and drinking water. The animals were acclimated to laboratory conditions of 22–24 °C with a 12-h light/dark cycle for two weeks before experimentation. The current study was approved by Mansoura University, and all experiments were performed in accordance with the standards accepted by the regional experimental animal ethics panel. The rats were divided randomly into four groups of seven rats each. The first group served as a control, the second group received a daily dose of punicalagin (1 mg/kg, i.p.) for 15 days, the third group received a single i.p. injection of 40 mg/kg STZ, and the fourth group received a single injection of STZ (40 mg/kg, i.p.) followed by punicalagin (1 mg/kg, i.p.) every other day for two weeks. After 15 days of treatment, blood was obtained by cardiac puncture after overnight fasting. Serum and heart ventricle were kept in refrigerator for the following investigations.The glucose and insulin levels in serum and the HbA1c levels in blood were determined using kits supplied by Spinreact (St. Esteve d'en Bas Girona, Spain), Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA) and BioSystems (Barcelona, Spain), respectively. The lipid profiles in serum, including total lipids, triglyceride, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), were assayed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Spinreact, St. Esteve d'en Bas Girona, Spain). Interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 1 beta (IL-1b), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and troponin T in serum were assessed using kits provided by R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA) and Bioscience (San Diego, CA, USA). Creatine kinase (CK-MB) and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) activities in the serum were determined using kits purchased from Elitech (Puteaux, France). Lipid peroxidation was assessed by determining the amount of malondialdehyde (MDA). The hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) concentrations were estimated according to the manufacturer's instructions (Dokki-Giza, Egypt). The superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) activities and the glutathione (GSH) concentration were assayed using kits provided by Biodiagnostic (Dokki-Giza, Egypt). The protein concentrations were assayed as previously described [27].For flow cytometry, samples from the heart were prepared as previously described [28]. The cells were suspended in PBS with BSA, divided into aliquots and stored at 4 °C for analysis. The flow cytometry analyses were performed on a FACSCalibur™ cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) using CellQuest Pro software (Becton Dickinson) for data acquisition and analysis [29].Apoptosis was assessed using the fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated annexin V/PI, ApoAlert kit from Clontech (Palo Alto, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.The cell suspensions were prepared in a PBS/BSA buffer and were then incubated for 30 min with anti-Bcl-2 [100/D5] antibody (ab692) and anti-Bax [6A7] antibody (ab5714) for flow cytometry analysis of Bcl-2 and Bax, respectively. A mouse anti-P53 “aa20-25” FITC, Clone: DO-1, was used for P53 analysis by flow cytometry. A monoclonal anti-Fas (CD95/Apo-1) antibody was used for CD95 determination. After 30-min incubation at room temperature, the cells were washed with PBA/BSA, centrifuged at 400 × g for 5 min, re-suspended in 0.5% paraformaldehyde in PBS/BSA and analyzed using flow cytometry.In case of caspases-3, -8 and - 9: FITC rabbit anti-active caspase-3 (CPP32; Yama; Apopain, BD Bioscience), anti-caspase-8 (E6) antibody (Abcam) or rabbit monoclonal anti-caspase-9 (E23) antibody (ab32539) were used respectively.DNA damage in the heart samples was assessed using the single-cell gel electrophoresis (comet assay) method, a well-validated technique developed for measuring DNA strand breaks in individual cells, as described previously [30,31]. The quantification of the DNA strand breaks in the obtained images was performed with CASP software to directly obtain the percent of DNA in the tail, the tail length and the tail moment.The ventricle was excised and fixed in 4% buffered paraformaldehyde, dehydrated in ascending grades of ethyl alcohol, cleared in xylene and mounted in molten paraplast 58–62C. Four micron histological section were cut, stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined under bright field light microscopy and photographed.The data were presented as the mean ± SEM. The statistical analyses were performed by one-way ANOVA followed by Students Newman–Keul's post hoc test.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
