@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
TP53 polymorphism as a risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma in hepatitis C virus-infected Egyptian patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The association between the TP53 Arg72Pro polymorphism and the risk of HCC in HCV patients was studied.The relation between the TP53 Arg72Pro polymorphism and the plasma TP53 levels was also studied.The Pro/Pro genotype and the Pro allele of TP53 codon 72 are associated with increased risk of HCC.The plasma TP53 level is downregulated in HCC.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
TP53 polymorphism,Chronic hepatitis C,Hepatocellular carcinoma,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and aimsHuman hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. Polymorphisms of the TP53 gene are known to play an important role in HCC. It is aimed to investigate the impact of the Arg72Pro polymorphism of TP53 in the development of HCC among chronic hepatitis C patients with different stages of liver disease.Subjects & methodsThis study included 69 HCC patients, 101 liver cirrhosis (LC) patients and 46 healthy, unrelated, age-matched volunteers as controls, from the same locality of Egypt. The HCC and LC patients were suffering from HCV infection. The Arg72Pro polymorphism of codon 72 was tested by PCR, followed by restriction enzyme digestion (PCR-RFLP).ResultsThe results showed that the Proline allele significantly increases the risk of HCC development (OR 2.461, 95% CI 1.391–4.3558, P = 0.002, Z* = 3.094), compared with the development of LC. The variant genotypes were also associated with the risk of HCC (Pro/Pro: OR 3.7956, 95% CI 1.9228–7.4923, P = 0.0001; Arg/Pro: OR 2.099, 95% CI 1.0911–4.0383, P = 0.0263; Arg/Arg: OR 1.9594, 95% CI 1.0023–3.8306, P = 0.0492). There was a significant decrease in the plasma TP53 level in the HCC group when compared with the LC group or with the control group (P = 0.000).ConclusionThis case–control analysis confirmed that the Pro/Pro (C/C) genotype and the Pro (C) allele of TP53 codon 72 are associated with increased risk of HCC in HCV-infected patients. Additionally, the data suggest that the plasma TP53 level is downregulated in HCC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide and the third leading cause of cancer death, exceeded only by cancers of the lung and stomach [1]. Because of its high fatality rates, the prevalence and mortality rates are approximately equal [2]; however, these values vary among different countries. Most cases of HCC occur in Asia [3]. The development of HCC is multifactorial, resulting from the interaction of environmental factors (possibly hepatitis viruses) and host factors (genetic factors) [4]. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is an important global health problem, as well as the major cause of end-stage liver disease such as liver cirrhosis (LC) and HCC. Most HCV-infected patients become chronic hepatitis sufferers; some of them may develop liver cirrhosis after years of follow-up, which will be followed by HCC [5]. Among the genetic factors, polymorphisms of the TP53 gene have been associated with HCC; however, their impacts on the progression of liver disease remain controversial [6].TP53 is a tumor suppressor gene (OMIM no. 191170) located on chromosome 17p13.1, and it encodes a 53-kDa nuclear phosphoprotein, which plays a central role in safeguarding the integrity of the human genome [7]. In the cell, the TP53 protein binds to the DNA, stimulating the production of a protein, p21. P21 interacts with a cell division-stimulating protein (cdk2), which acts as a tumor suppressor protein. P53 gene mutations and polymorphisms have been widely associated with cancer [8]. Because the loss of TP53 function has been suggested to be the most important step in multistage hepatocarcinogenesis, TP53 is a potential candidate to decrease the risk of HCC [9]. The codon 72 polymorphism is located in exon 4 of the TP53 gene, a region containing very few mutations. The TP53 protein exhibits a common polymorphism at amino acid 72, resulting in the substitution of an Arginine (Arg) residue (CGC) with Proline (Pro) residue (CCC), designated as TP53 Arg72Pro (ace no dbSNP ID: rs1042522) [10].The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the TP53 Arg72Pro polymorphism and the risk of HCC in HCV-infected patients. Additionally, we investigated the relation between the TP53 Arg72Pro polymorphism and the plasma TP53 levels in HCC patients.This is a hospital-based case–control study that included 69 HCC patients, 101 LC patients and 46 healthy volunteers as controls. The HCC and LC patients were suffering from HCV infection. All of the patients were recruited from the Clinics of Tropical Medicine Department, Mansoura University during the period from January 2012 to March 2013. An informed consent was taken from all of the participants before the study. In addition, an approval was obtained from the ethical and scientific committees of the local health authorities.All of the 69 HCC patients were diagnosed with HCC, based on either triphasic CT scans, positive histologic findings of focal lesions or an elevated α-fetoprotein (AFP) level (≥400 ng/ml), combined with at least one positive image on angiography, sonography and/or high-resolution contrast computed tomography. Furthermore, ultrasound-guided liver biopsy was performed, and at least two strips of liver tissue measuring 2 cm in length were obtained. Liver specimens were prepared with the hematoxylin and eosin stains and the Mason trichrome stain for histological evaluation. All of the patients were newly diagnosed, previously untreated (neither chemotherapy nor radiotherapy) and free from any other cancer. The selection criteria for the 101 LC patients with no evidence of HCC were defined either by histology or using the combination of clinical, laboratory and endoscopic tests. The absence of HCC was established by the absence of focal lesions on the triphasic CT scan and by an AFP level (<400 ng/ml). The LC patients included in the study had no previous histories of cancer and frequency matching to the cases on sex and age. Both the HCC and LC patients were positive to the anti-HCV Ab (3rd generation) test. Additionally, the HCV RNA was extracted from their serum and amplified using molecular methods. Furthermore, lab investigations were performed on all serum samples, for bilirubin (Total & Direct), aspartate aminotransferase (AST/GOT), alanine aminotransferase (ALT/GPT), albumin (Alb), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and α-feto protein.The exclusion criteria included autoimmune hepatitis, HBV, dietary aflatoxin, alcohol, fatty liver disease, obesity and diabetes. This study was performed with the approval of the Ethical Committee of the faculties of Science and Medicine, Mansoura University.All of the subjects were instructed to fast for at least 12 h. A 10-ml blood sample was drawn. Five ml of this sample was delivered to centrifuge tubes containing k2EDTA. One ml of this EDTA anti-coagulated blood sample was stored at −30 °C for DNA extraction, whereas the remaining 4 ml was used to obtain plasma for measuring plasma TP53 levels. The remaining 5 ml from the withdrawn blood sample was allowed to clot for 15 min and centrifuged at 7000 rpm for 10 min to achieve serum separation and the subsequent determination of: activities of liver enzymes (GPT, GOT and alkaline phosphatase) and serum levels of total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, albumin and α-fetoprotein.Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral whole blood using a DNA extraction kit (AxyPrep Blood Genomic DNA Miniprep Kit) in accordance with the manufacturer's protocol. The extracted DNA was stored at −20 °C until further use. The genotypes of TP53 were determined using PCR-based restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) method.Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed in a DNA thermal cycler (TECHEN TC-312, Model FTC3102D, Barloworld Scientific Ltd., Stone, Stafford Shire, st 150 SA, UK), using the Taq-PCR reaction mix purchased from Fermentas International Inc., Canada. The PCR mixture was prepared for each sample containing approximately 2× of the ready master mix, 25 pmol of forward primer 5′-TGAGGACCTGGTCCTCTGACT-3′, 25 pmol of reverse primer 5′-AAGAGGAATCCCAAAGTTCCA-3′ and 100 ng of template DNA. The thermal cycling conditions were initial denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 60 s and 72 °C for 30 s, with a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. The PCR product was subjected to electrophoresis using a 1.5% ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel.The PCR product was then digested overnight at 37 °C with the BstUI restriction enzyme (Fermentas, Canada). The digested products were then electrophoresed on a 2% agarose gel and visualized in UV light after ethidium bromide staining. Genotyping was performed using a gel documentation system (Chemi XRS Gel Documentation System) as follows: Pro/Pro gives a single band of 416 bp and Arg/Arg gives two bands, 161 bp and 263 bp. All of the samples were genotyped twice in two different PCR and digestion sets. Twenty samples from each group with different genotypes were re-genotyped using an ABI Prism® BigDye Terminator version 3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer's standard protocol.The quantitative determination of TP53 levels was performed using Human TP53 ELISA kits (Immuno-Biological laboratories, Inc., 8201 Central Ave NE, Suite P, Minneapolis, MN 55432). This assay employs the quantitative sandwich ELISA technique, which measures TP53 in the plasma. It was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. The absorbance of each sample was read on a plate ELISA reader (Tecan, Sunrise Absorbance reader) at 450 nm wave length.The statistical analysis of the data was performed using the Excel program and the statistical package for social science (SPSS) program version 10. The data were reported as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) for the quantitative data and as frequency and proportion for the qualitative data. The data were analyzed to test for statistically significant differences between the groups. For the quantitative data, the Student unpaired t-test was used to compare two groups. The one-way ANOVA test was used to compare more than two groups. The Chi-square test was used to compare qualitative data. P is significant if <0.05 at a confidence interval of 95%.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
