@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Biofabrication and its in vitro toxicity mechanism of silver nanoparticles using Bruguiera cylindrica leaf extract

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
AgNPs were synthesized using Bruguiera cylindrica extract as reducing agent.Green synthesis of AgNPs is a simple, economic and by eco-friendly approach.Hexagonal AgNPs were derived.AgNPs shows good cytotoxic effect against MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Green synthesis,Bruguiera cylindrica,Surface plasmon resonance,Cell line culture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) were synthesized using Bruguiera cylindrica (B. cylindrica) leaf extract, the extract was acted as a reducing and stabilizing agent. The formation of AgNPs was observed by UV–vis spectroscopy and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) occurred at 450 nm. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis shows that the particles are face centered cubic (fcc) structure and average size of AgNPs was found at 16 nm. Fourier transmission infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) suggests that the presence of thirteen functional groups in capping with AgNPs. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image shows the well dispersed particles with size of 9–24 nm. Furthermore, the biosynthesized AgNPs were exhibited an excellent cytotoxic effect against MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nanotechnology is the engineering of functional systems at the nano scale level with multi-disciplinary areas of applied science and engineering. It deals with the design, manufacture and characterization of extremely small components and systems [1–4]. Nanometals are more reactive because of their small size and greater surface area [5]. Synthesis of nanoparticles is done by various methods. But they are having some limitations in their synthesis and application aspects [6,7]. Bio synthesis of nanoparticle provides the advisable applications like eco-friendly, cost effective and the minimum time consuming method [8–12]. Abou El-nour et al. [13], reported the various phytochemicals present in plant will act as a reducing and capping agent for synthesis of AgNPs. Bruguiera cylindrica is an important medicinal mangrove tree, belongs Rhizophoraceae with diverse of phyto-constituents. It is in medicinal practice against to malignant ulcers, hepatitis, diarrhea and malaria [14,15]. Bio-synthesized AgNPs was performed to analyze the cytotoxic effect against MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines [16–18]. The present study has aimed to synthesis, characterization and cytotoxic effect of green AgNPs using B. cylindrica leaf extract.Matured fresh leaves of B. cylindrica were collected from Pichavaram Mangrove forest, Tamil Nadu, India. B. cylindrica was confirmed by Department of Botany, Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar, Tamilnadu, India.The collected leaves were washed in running water followed by rinsed with double distilled water and shade-dried at room temperature for 10 days. The fully dried leaves were powdered with a sterile electric blender. The powdered samples were preserved in an airtight container and away from the sunlight for further use. Two grams of powder leaf was mixed with 100 ml of de-ionized sterile water, heat up to 100 °C for 30 min and filtered by Whatman No.1 filter paper, finally the residue was re-extracted using vacuum pumps.Qualitative phytochemical screening of B. cylindrica aqueous leaf extracts was performed [13].Silver Nitrate (AgNO3) stock solution was prepared by dissolving 6.299 g of AgNO3 in 100 ml of de-ionized water. 2 ml of B. cylindrica leaf extract was added to 20 ml of AgNO3 solution and kept at room temperature [17].The absorption spectrum of the reaction mixture was recorded at room temperature using UV–vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi-U-2001) from 300 to 800  nm at 1 nm resolution for detection of AgNPs formation. The residue containing silver nanoparticles solution was dispersed in sterile de-ionized water to remove the biological impurities. The pure residue was dried in oven at 70 °C overnight. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) studies, dry powder of the nanoparticles was prepared by centrifuge at 10,000 rpm for 15 min by Perkin–Elmer spectrum instrument resolution at 4 cm−1 in the transmission mode of 4000–400 cm−1 in KBR pellets. XRD measurement, the silver nanoparticles solution was drop-coated on glass on XPERT-PRO, D-8, with 30kv, 40 mA with Cu kα radians at 2θ angle. X-ray powder diffraction is a rapid analysis for phase identification of a crystalline material and can provide information on unit-cell dimensions. The crystallite size was calculated by width of the XRD peaks using the Scherrer's formula, D = Kλ/βcosθ. The size distribution and shape of NPs were estimated on the basis of TEM micrographs. The sample was placed over a carbon tape and dried. A pinch of dried sample was coated with a thin layer of platinum in an auto fine coater. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed the synthesized AgNPs using JEM 1011, JEOL, Japan.MCF-7 cells were collected from National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, India. The cell viability was estimated using the MTT calorimetric technique. Cells were cultured in 96 well plate for 6 h at 37 °C and kept in CO2 incubator. 100 μL of MTT solution (3-(4,5-dimethlthiazoyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide, a yellow tetrazole) without phenol red (5 mg/mL) in phosphate buffer solution was added to each well and incubated for 5 h at 37 °C, for the reduction of MTT by metabolically active cells, in part by the action of dehydrogenase enzymes to generate reducing equivalents. Purple color formazone crystals formed and then dissolved with 100 μL of isopropanol or dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO). After the treatment, these crystals were observed at 540 nm absorbance which is directly proportional to the number of living cells in culture. The percentage of viability was calculated by using the following formula,Percentageofviability=Sampleabsorbance(AgNPs)Controlabsorbance(untreated)×100

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
