@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Plant-mediated biosynthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles by leaf extracts of Tragia involucrata, Cymbopogon citronella, Solanum verbascifolium and Tylophora ovata

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To reduce the agglomeration, we trailed the special ultra-sonication technique.Powder diffraction analysis (XRD) confirmed the crystalline nature of silver nanoparticles.The feasible mechanism of action of AgNPs was analysed by using FTIR patterns.FTIR pattern revealed the presence of Silver bonding and the functional groups responsible for reduction of Ag nanoparticles.Structural morphology of Silver nanoparticles was studied by FESEM analysis.Biomolecules of the leaf extract play dual role as both reducing and capping agents.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bioreduction,Color change,Green synthesis,Plant extracts,Silver nanoparticles,UV analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, noble metal nanoparticles have been the subject of focused research due to their unique optical, electronic, mechanical, magnetic and chemical properties that are significantly different from those of bulk materials [1]. These special and unique properties could be attributed to their small sizes and large surface areas. For these reasons, metal nanoparticles have found many applications in different areas such as catalysis, photonics and electronics [2–4]. Among noble metal nanoparticles, silver nanoparticles have wide area of interest as they have large number of applications in such as non-linear optics, spectrally selective coating for solar energy absorption, biolabelling, intercalation materials for electrical batteries as optical receptors, catalyst in chemical reactions and as antibacterial capacities [5–7].The field of nanotechnology is one of the most attractive areas of research in modern material science [8,9]. Their unique size-dependent properties make these materials superior and indispensable in many areas of human activity [10]. Although chemical and physical methods may successfully produce pure and well-defined nanoparticles, these methods were quite expensive and potentially dangerous to the environment [11]. Use of biological organisms such as microorganisms, plant extract or plant biomass could be an alternative to chemical and physical methods for the production of nanoparticles in an eco-friendly manner. Biosynthesis of nanoparticles is a sort of bottom-up approach, where the main reaction occurring is reduction [12–15]. Bio-nanotechnology combines biological principles with physical and chemical approaches to produce nano-sized particles with specific functions. It also represents an economic substitute for chemical and physical methods of nanoparticles formation [16]. Synthesizing silver nanoparticles by medicinal plants is eco-friendly and good antimicrobial efficiency against bacteria, viruses and other microorganisms [17].Silver nanoparticles is a nontoxic, safe inorganic antibacterial agent used for centuries and is capable of killing more than 500 types of diseases causing microorganisms. It has a significant potential for a wide range of biological applications such as preventing infections, healing wounds, anti-inflammatory and use as an antibacterial agent for antibiotic resistant bacteria [18].Hence the aim of present study is to develop a novel approach for the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Indian herbal plants Tragia involucrata, Cymbopogon citronella, Solanum verbascifolium and Tylophora ovata extracts as a reducing and stabilizing agent. We have carried out a unique protocol for synthesizing of Ag nanoparticles (temperature, time, extract preparation method and storage). Many researchers faced difficulty to collect the fine nanoparticles from plant liquids. In order to overcome this problem, we have formulated two type centrifugation technique. To reduce the agglomeration, we trailed the special ultra-sonication technique. This exclusive protocol could be used for large scale industrial productions. Bioreduction mechanism of these extracts for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles was investigated trough visual examination (color change), UV–vis absorption, FTIR, XRD and FESEM techniques.For the synthesis of silver nanoparticles T. involucrata, C. citronella, S. verbascifolium and T. ovata were collected from the forest near Kallanai (South India), India with voucher number Tra 401, Cym 320, Sol 1201 and Tyl 842. They have been botanically identified in the Rapinat Herbarium (SHC- International Agenda Registration), Trichy. INDIA. A photograph of plants is shown in Fig. 1. The extract is used for reducing and capping agent. Silver nitrate and ethanol were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Germany.These species are used in Siddha medicine, which is practised by Tamil people in Tamilnadu. This plant is used as a medicinal plant to treat the disease such as constipation, hemorrhoids, diabetes, skin disease, vomiting, giddiness and headache fevers [19–21].The leaves and the oil of C. citronella are used to make medicine. It is used both as a medical herb and as a perfume. It is used for treating digestive tract spasms, stomach ache, high blood pressure, convulsions, pain, vomiting, cough, fever, the common cold and exhaustion [22].The leaves of S. verbascifolium are heated and applied as emollient on the forehead for headaches [23,24].The leaves and roots of T. ovata are used medicinally. It is said to have laxative, expectorant, diaphoretic and purgative properties. It has also been used for the treatment of allergies, cold, dysentery, hay fever and arthritis [25].The leaves were washed with fast flowing water and then separated from its stem. Again it was washed by using deionized water and the water is removed. The sample is kept for drying. The fresh leaves then were cut into small pieces and were taken a quantity of 25 g by the help of electronic balancing scale [26,27].The plant extract sample was then added into 125 ml of boiling deionized water, and left to boil for 5 min. The sample was taken out of the oven and kept in a place to get reduced to the room temperature. Then this sample was filtered successively through filter paper (Wattman filter paper) [28,29]. The plant extract was collected and stored at 5 °C. Finally, the extract was used for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles.Three milliliters of plant leaves extract were added to 60 ml of 10−3 M AgNO3 solution and the reaction was left to take place at ambient conditions. A schematic of the AgNO3 preparation is shown in Fig. 2. When the reaction started, we could observe a change from its colorless to transparent yellow at different intervals and then finally to a dark brown [30,31].The dark brown color indicates the formation of silver nanoparticles. Reduction of the Ag+ ions was monitored with respect to time using UV–visible spectral analysis [32–34]. Once the reaction mixture had reached a dark brown color, then centrifuged technique was used to separate the nanoparticles from the solution (AgNO3 + Plant Extract). The solution was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min. The centrifuged supernatant liquid was collected and then centrifuged twice at 15,000 rpm for 30 min. The suspended pellet was purified by using ethanol. The purified pellets were then dried and the powder was taken and then kept inside the special automated ultra-sonicator for 30 min. The final product of silver nanoparticles was kept inside the oven at a temperature of 400 °C for 3 h prior to characterization.The aqueous leaf extract holds main metabolites along with flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins, phytosterols, etc. In specific, flavonoids are strong reducing agents and are contributed to the reduction of Ag+ ions to nanoparticles. As flavonoids are powerful reducing agents and they may also directly scavenge molecular species of active oxygen, this antioxidant activity of flavonoids emanates from their ability to donate electrons or hydrogen atoms. The reasonable mechanism of AgNPs formation may be suggested as the flavonoids are oxidized during the reduction of Ag+ to AgNPs.All the constituents of leaf extract are not only cogently reducing silver salt but also exhibit outstanding tenacity against agglomeration. In difference, proteins and enzymes present in the leaf extract are maybe facilitating the formation of pure AgNPs through reduction of Ag+ ions and their stabilization.Chemistry behind the nanoparticles formation is signified in Equation 1, which states that flavonoids are responsible for the reduction of Ag+ ions and AgNPs are stabilized through negatively charged carboxylate groups of proteins. Therefore, reduction and capping processes by the biomolecules present in the leaf extract could be accountable for the lengthy stability.Equ. 1Shows the possible silver nanoparticles formation mechanism.Ultraviolet spectra analysis was performed for all samples and the absorption maxima were analyzed at a wavelength of 350–700 nm using on a PerkinElmer Lambda-35 UV spectrometer. Deionized water was used for background correction in UV–visible absorption spectra. The characterization of functional groups on the surface of AgNPs was performed by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) (Perkin–Elmer, Germany), and the spectra were scanned in the 500–4000 cm−1 range at a resolution of 4 cm−1. XRD analysis was carried out on an X-ray diffractometer (X'Pert-PRO). The high resolution on XRD patterns was measured at 3 KW with Cu target using a scintillation counter (k = 1.5406 Å) at 40 kV and 40 mA. The size of the nanoparticles was calculated through the Scherrer's equation. The morphology of silver nanoparticles was examined using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM JSM 6701F-6701, JPEG, INDIA).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
