I can still remember the precise moment when I finally realized what a chronic control freak I am . 
It was a Wednesday , and I was calmly designing the uniforms for my proposed global Reich on a computer , but the mouse would n't work properly , so I stood up and repeatedly smacked it against the wall like a tiny plastic coconut , screaming insults at God , decrying his intolerable insubordination and telling him he was fired . 
And a shard of shattered mouse hit me in the eye and set me blinking uncontrollably . 
I did n't like that . 
I do n't like `` uncontrollably '' . 
Lack of control is the core unifying characteristic of all the things I 'm afraid of . 
Air travel spooks me . 
Because I 'm not in control of the aircraft . 
Yes , cars are more dangerous , but if I imagine a car crash , at the back of my mind I can also picture myself opening the passenger door and leaping out , or grabbing the wheel at the last minute . 
It may be unrealistic , but it 's not entirely outside the realms of possibility . 
What can I do on a stalling plane ? 
Wish all the atoms in the ground away ? 
My long-standing phobias stem from a lack of control . 
My jitter-inducing emetophobia - fear of vomiting , thanks - stems from a terror of the stomach suddenly going freelance and ejecting its contents while I 'm trying to impress someone over dinner . 
Arachnophobia - well , spiders run in crazy patterns , do n't they ? 
And you ca n't tell what they 're thinking because their faces are so small . 
Thus they 're unpredictable . 
Thus , to my mind , dangerous . 
I have a niggling fear of heights , or more specifically , a niggling fear of hurling myself off one . 
A paranoid voice whispers that , hey , you might inexplicably go crazy and lob yourself over the ledge for a short-lived maniacal chuckle . 
Lack of control , once again , is the bogeyman . 
Recently I 've been away from this column because my arm started doing things beyond my control . 
It tingled up and down , as though de-materialising in an old episode of Star Trek . 
Some of its fingers went numb . 
Naturally I Googled these symptoms and discovered that , as far as Doctor Internet was concerned , I was nine seconds from death . 
I grew dizzy with fear . 
No control over my fate , see . 
Turns out it 's a herniated disc in my neck pressing against a nerve . 
It 'll heal slowly but surely . 
And if it gets worse , well , there 's stuff they can do . 
The continual discomfort is infuriating , but not the end of the world . 
Anyway , as part of the diagnostic process , I underwent several exotic tests - partly to rule out more sinister conditions , but mainly to gather more info on what was happening . 
One was a nerve conduction study , which basically involves passing an electric current through sections of your arm , hands , and wrist to measure what happens . 
It does n't hurt , but it 's super-creepy , because your fingers start doing things beyond your control . 
As a sort of finale , the doctor made my entire arm jump around of its own accord , like a wet fish flapping on a deck . 
No pain at all , but boy did it give me an existential shudder . 
Because I , like every one of us , in this push-button , automated world of instant results and comfort , have grown accustomed to the illusion of total control . 
And here was that control stripped clean away from me . 
Sadly , our magic controllable world is an illusion bearing little relation to the one we actually inhabit , where bad things sometimes occur for no reason . 
But rather than come to terms with it , we stubbornly refuse to accept the entire concept of risk , hence our neurotic hunt for the nearest scapegoat the moment anything goes wrong - or even looks as if it might . 
Having just finished a TV series that spent most of its time debunking news broadcasts , I 've been swamped with emails and Tweets saying , `` Ha ha - the news is really overdoing it on this whole swine flu thing , eh ? '' 
There 's a slightly hopeful tone to the queries , as though I 'm going to tell them everything 's going to be OK . 
But it 's not that simple . 
Yes , we 've seen bold headlines and chest-thumping graphics , but pandemic flu could turn out to be a serious threat , even if the symptoms seem mild at the time of writing . 
Sars and bird flu may have failed -LRB- so far -RRB- to become pandemics , but only because health professionals took the threat seriously . 
This here swine flu might mutate . 
It might grow fangs for all I know . 
It 's beyond our control . 
Blind fear is counter-productive , but so is blind denial . 
As with anything potentially risky , it 's best to know what to do in advance , in case swine flu turns nasty - just as it 's prudent to memorise the number 999 in case someone breaks into your house in the dead of night . 
There are aspects of any outbreak we can influence , if not entirely control . 
Chortle about growing trotters and a curly tail all you like , Captain Irony , but it might be a good idea to , y ' know , actually follow the medical advice by carrying tissues and developing a fairly studious hand-washing routine . 
Oh , and that 's proper 20-second hot-water-and-soap hand-washing , not that feeble imitation 99 % of people in public toilets perform , where they run a tap and waggle their hands vaguely near it for three seconds . 
You can catch this virus by touching , say , an infected doorhandle , then absent-mindedly wiping your eye five minutes later . 
Did you get the puking bug last year ? 
That 's probably how you caught that too . 
An inch more vigilance would n't hurt , Bobby Chuckles . 
That 's all for today . 
Now wash your hands . 
cents This week Charlie enjoyed some daylight for the first time in six weeks : `` I 'd rather taken daylight for granted . 
It 's a free resource - a jolly good thing . '' 
He also washed his hands five times in as many minutes as it took you to read these words . 
Time for a ban . 
