cents All but two of latest batch caught virus in Britain Monday 4 May 2009 10.22 BST Hotel staff and guests wave from inside the Hong Kong Metropark hotel , which is under swine flu quarantine . 
Photograph : AP Nine new cases of swine flu were confirmed in the UK today , leading to the closure of another London school . 
All but two had caught the infection in this country . 
Apart from one adult in the West Midlands , the other sufferers are all from London . 
The update brings the overall tally of confirmed cases in the UK to 27 , with more than 1,000 people infected worldwide . 
The latest school to be shut down is Alleyn 's , in Dulwich . 
A pupil at the fee-paying school who visited the US during the Easter holidays had already been diagnosed with swine flu . 
Now five more pupils , off sick on Friday , have been confirmed as having contracted the virus . 
The Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- said the school would be closed for at least seven days . 
`` Those who are still unwell are receiving antiviral treatment and are recovering at home , '' a spokesman said . 
The school has arranged for all pupils and staff to be offered antiviral treatment tonight or tomorrow morning . 
A statement posted today on the school 's website by the headmaster , Colin Diggory , said he was aware the closure would cause `` particular concern '' to students due to take exams this week . 
Some of the tests may be rescheduled . 
Alleyn 's is the fourth UK school to be closed as a result of swine flu . 
Yesterday health officials announced that South Hampstead high school would be closed until Thursday on advice from the HPA . 
The infected pupil , a 14-year-old from Barnet , had come into contact with someone recently returned from Mexico . 
North of the border , the Scottish health secretary , Nicola Sturgeon , said that another `` probable '' swine flu case had emerged . 
A woman from Fife is thought to have contracted the H1N1 virus in Las Vegas before flying home on 30 April , and is now under voluntary quarantine and taking antiviral drugs . 
A close relative of the first Britons to catch the virus has been flown home from a North Sea oil rig as a precaution . 
The oil industry is distributing treatment kits , including antiviral drugs , to North Sea installations in case of an outbreak on a platform . 
In New York the UN secretary general , Ban Ki-moon , insisted that the World Health Organisation did not plan to raise its pandemic alert to the highest level , six , if the current outbreak of a deadly new strain of flu continued at its present level . 
Addressing an informal session of the UN General Assembly , Ban said the World Health Organisation chief , Margaret Chan , had told him that `` if the situation remains as it is , WHO has no plan to raise the alert level to six at this moment '' . 
Chan , addressing the conference by videolink from Geneva , said the number of confirmed cases of H1N1 influenza reported to the WHO had risen to 1,003 from 20 countries . 
But she said there was `` no indication that we are facing a situation similar to that in 1918 '' , when a flu pandemic killed tens of millions . 
Six is the highest level on the WHO 's scale for the spread of a pandemic . 
Earlier the environment secretary , Hilary Benn , had said that swine flu appears to be `` relatively small and relatively mild '' and responds well to treatment . 
Urging the health authorities to remain vigilant , he remarked : `` It 's best to play safe . 
We are still not absolutely sure what it is that we are dealing with . '' 
The biggest worry was that the H1N1 virus could mutate , Benn said , and that a second wave of infections in the autumn could be more severe . 
Alan Johnson , the health secretary , said the spread of the H1N1 virus had largely been contained in the UK , though this might only last until the autumn . 
`` Our evidence from all previous pandemics is that you get two phases , '' he said . 
`` You get a first wave that is often very mild and then you get a much more serious wave that comes along in the autumn and the winter . '' 
There are 331 people currently undergoing tests for the virus across the UK . 
The officially confirmed global death toll deaths remain low at 26 . 
It includes include 25 in Mexico and one , a 21-month-old boy , in Texas . 
Hong Kong , criticised for delaying quarantine measures during the outbreak of Sars in 2003 , has sealed the central Metropark hotel , quarantining 350 guests and employees , after a Mexican tourist fell ill . 
The 25-year-old man had arrived in the territory on Thursday afternoon after a stopover in Shanghai and was said to be in a stable condition yesterday . 
Staff inside hung pieces of cloth in lobby windows , covering the pieces of paper reporters had stuck to the glass outside urging those inside to call them . 
Thomas Tsang , controller of Hong Kong 's center for health protection , said all those at the hotel were healthy . 
A British couple , Eddie and Terry Sweeney , who are quarantined inside the building , had only planned to stay in Hong Kong for two nights on the return journey from a visit to see their daughter , Sharon , who is a teacher in New Zealand . 
The couple , who have been married for 38 years , are stuck in their room for most of the day although they are allowed downstairs to collect meals . 
`` It could be a test of the marriage , '' joked Mr Sweeney , 62 , a retired Metropolitan Police officer from Hazlemere , Buckinghamshire . 
`` When you look out of the window and see the weather which is fantastic you think you should be on a beach . '' 
