OCEAN SPRINGS , Miss. -- The law firm of Kenneth Feinberg , the man in charge of BP 's $ 20 billion compensation fund for Gulf oil spill victims , has so far been paid about $ 3.35 million from BP PLC to dole out the money , the program said Thursday . 
The BP payments go to a number of lawyers working on the claims process and are not necessarily exorbitant given the workload . 
But Gulf coast residents who have been demanding transparency in the claims process have been eager to know how much Feinberg is earning , For some , the revelation of significant fees from BP are undermining Feinberg 's claims that he is operating independently of the oil giant . 
`` There 's no doubt in my mind that he 's working for BP , '' said Louisiana shrimp processor Dean Blanchard . 
`` He can say he 's independent , but he 's working for BP and he 's low-balling all of us , the people affected the most . '' 
BP PLC agreed to pay Kenneth Feinberg 's firm , Feinberg Rozen LLP , $ 850,000 a month starting in mid-June , according to the Gulf Coast Claims Facility , which has been set up to compensate fishermen , business owners , residents and other Gulf Coast victims of the April 20 well blowout that killed 11 rig workers and spewed more than 170 million gallons of oil into the sea . 
The claims facility on Thursday told The Associated Press the bill for the firm 's services is now up to about $ 3.35 million , and Feinberg 's firm will continue to receive $ 850,000 a month from BP through the end of the year , after which the contract will be reviewed . 
Claims spokeswoman Amy Weiss declined comment on the payment details , referring AP to an Oct. 8 report from former U.S. Attorney General Michael Mukasey , whose own firm , Debevoise & Plimpton LLP , was hired by Feinberg 's office to review the deal . 
`` The firm 's work on the -LRB- Gulf Coast Claims Facility -RRB- is largely unprecedented , '' Mukasey wrote in his report . 
`` The assignment is to allocate the largest claims fund in American history and to do so under both intense time pressure and public scrutiny . '' 
Mukasey wrote that the fees being charged to BP by Feinberg 's firm are warranted given the enormous task . 
`` The engagement commands a substantial commitment of the firm 's personnel and resources , '' he wrote . 
As of Nov. 3 , the claims fund had paid victims about $ 1.7 billion , though many across the coast are still awaiting checks or say they have been paid too little and are struggling to keep up with bills after a summer of lost revenue . 
The facility has received about 337,000 claims for compensation . 
About 97,000 have been paid or approved for payment . 
Another 97,000 claimants have filed requests for money but have provided no documentation to back up their losses , according to Feinberg . 
The claims fund is denying many of those filings outright . 
To date , about 32,000 claimants have been denied . 
Victims have until Nov. 23 to file for emergency payments to help keep them afloat . 
After that , they must submit a claim for a final settlement from BP . 
By doing that , they must give up their right to ever sue BP . 
President Barack Obama tapped Feinberg , who previously oversaw money doled out to 9\/11 victims , to run the BP claims fund , which the London-based company created under government pressure to ensure that it paid those hurt by the spill . 
Feinberg is paid by BP , but he insists he is operating the fund independently and remains an advocate for Gulf Coast residents and is n't influenced at all by the oil giant in the process . 
The claims facility said Thursday the firm 's fees are being paid directly by BP and are not coming from the compensation fund . 
The program declined to say how much Feinberg is making personally , just that the fee is being paid to his firm . 
Feinberg took over the claims process from BP in August . 
