HOUSTON\/GALLIANO , Louisiana | Sun May 16 , 2010 7:59 pm EDT HOUSTON\/GALLIANO , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Energy giant BP marked a limited success at containing the oil that is gushing unabated into the Gulf of Mexico on Sunday and said it may be able to stop the flow permanently in about a week . 
But reports of huge oil plumes in the Gulf -- including one as large as 10 miles long , three miles wide and 300 feet thick -- underscored the spill 's environmental impact as the crisis moved into its 24th day . 
Crude oil has been gushing unchecked from a ruptured well about a mile under the ocean 's surface , threatening an ecological and economic calamity along the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
After other attempts to contain the spill failed , BP Plc succeeded in inserting a tube into the leaking well and capturing some oil and gas . 
The underwater operation used guided robots to insert a small tube into a 21-inch -LRB- 53-cm -RRB- pipe , known as a riser , to funnel the oil to a ship at the surface . 
`` It 's working as planned and we are very slowly increasing the rate that is coming from the riser tool up to the surface , '' BP senior executive vice president Kent Wells told reporters at BP 's U.S. headquarters in Houston . 
`` So we do have oil and gas coming to the ship now . '' 
Not all of the oil was being trapped , however . 
Wells said it was too early to say how much had been siphoned . 
`` This is a good step forward , '' said Satish Nagarajaiah , professor in civil and mechanical engineering at Rice University in Houston , but he said the siphon tool is unlikely to capture more than 15-20 percent of the oil . 
The Obama administration downplayed the significance of BP 's latest breakthrough . 
`` This technique is not a solution to the problem , and it is not yet clear how successful it may be , '' Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano and Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar said in a joint statement . 
Preparations for a maneuver to inject mud into the well to stop the leak for good were ongoing and would be completed in seven to 10 days , Wells said . 
Undersea robots are preparing pipes and hoses around the well to pump up to 40 barrels -LRB- 1,680 gallons -RRB- per minute of mud into the well . 
BP 's best near-term hope of stopping oil from pouring from the well is `` kill mud , '' a heavy mixture of synthetic materials that technicians will attempt to shoot into the well to form a barrier to prevent oil and gas from escaping . 
`` Ultimately it is a winning game that we outpump the well , '' Wells said . 
If the mud fails to seal the well , BP will attempt to inject golf balls , tire fragments and other materials into the well to clog it up , known in the industry as a `` junk shot . '' 
The success on Sunday followed a previous setback , when a cord taking the oil to the surface became entangled . 
BP 's earlier attempts to contain the leaking well have been stymied by the technical difficulties of working in the sea floor 's cold , dark conditions . 
On May 7 , BP tried to lower a containment dome over the leak , but the 100-tonne device was rendered useless by a slush of frozen hydrocarbons that clogged it . 
The spill began after an April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig that killed 11 workers . 
It threatens to eclipse the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill off Alaska as the worst U.S. ecological disaster . 
POTENTIAL RISK TO THE EAST , FLORIDA KEYS So far , winds have pushed the giant slick westward and toward shore . 
But according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , the southern edge of the spill could make its way into a powerful ocean current that could carry oil eastward toward the Florida Keys and up the U.S. Eastern Seaboard . 
`` The southern edge of the plume could begin moving more to the southwest and potentially into the Loop Current , '' NOAA said on its website , referring to the deep ocean stream that transfers heat from the tropics to higher latitudes and becomes the Gulf Stream . 
Officials have stressed the spill has had minimal impact on the shoreline and wildlife , but oil debris and tar balls were washing up on barrier islands and outlying beaches in at least a dozen places in Louisiana , Alabama and Mississippi . 
`` As nasty as they are , they are more manageable than a slick . 
They can be collected . 
They can be cleaned and we have crews doing that , '' said Coast Guard Petty Officer Luke Pinneo , referring to the tar balls found on Grand Isle , Louisiana . 
Scientists and residents of the Gulf Coast say a greater concern is the anticipated encroachment of oil into the environmentally fragile bayous and marshes teeming with shrimp , oysters , crabs , fish , birds and other wildlife . 
The New York Times and other media reported scientists had detected huge oil plumes -- large columns of concentrated oil moving beneath the ocean surface -- in the Gulf , indicating the leak could be worse than estimates by BP and the government . 
Estimates of the rate of escaping oil range widely from the official BP figure of 5,000 barrels per day -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- , adopted by the government , to 100,000 barrels -LRB- 4.2 million gallons\/15 .9 million liters -RRB- per day . 
BP said it had no confirmation of such undersea oil plumes and its spokesman , Andrew Gowers , appeared to dismiss the reports as scientifically unlikely . 
`` It is my observation as a layman that oil is lighter than water and tends to go up , '' Gowers told reporters . 
BP is facing growing political pressure to prove it will pay for all of the costs related to the spill . 
Salazar and Napolitano demanded in a letter to BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward that the company make clear its commitment to `` redress all of the damage that has occurred or that will occur in the future as a result of the oil spill . '' 
The letter was released on Saturday and amid concerns about the implications of a U.S. law that limits energy companies ' liability for lost business and local tax revenues from oil spills to $ 75 million . 
BP spokesman David Nicholas said : `` What they are requesting in the letter is absolutely consistent with all our public statements on the matter . 
President Barack Obama 's administration wants to raise the liability limit retroactively . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
To all the morons yelling `` drill baby drill '' now is the time for you idiots to all move down to the gulf coast and buy some real estate . 
Now is the time put your money where your mouth is and demonstrate to the nation what `` patriots '' you really are . 
Afterall , this is the price we must all pay so we can continue to drive gas guzzling SUVs , right ? 
It 's just to much of a sacrifice to do the right thing for our planet and all those -LRB- fisherman , local businesses , and really everybody living on the coast -RRB- living in gulf coast communities . 
This country has become a nation full of spoiled , destructive children . 
Go see the world now folks , there is n't going to much left in 20 years . 
Well , if they do n't drill , are you prepared to pay $ 7 gallon of gas or 3-5x more for your `` green '' energy ? 
Or see costs for everything from tires to toothpaste go up 10-30 % ? 
If so , then let 's stop drilling today . 
Beware what you wish for ... . 
sabotage !!!!!!!! sabotage !!!! SUV 'S RULE -- climate crisis is false . 
You are so stupid . 
I will make a travel plan for 2030 with confidence . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
