A BP petrol station is reflected in a car , in London April 28 , 2009 . 
LONDON | Sun Jul 25 , 2010 12:55 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- will give an estimate for the total cost of its Gulf of Mexico oil spill next Tuesday when it unveils second-quarter profits that , were it not for the spill , would likely have risen 77 percent to $ 5 billion -LRB- 3.2 billion pounds -RRB- . 
Accounting rules force BP to make a provision for the likely costs related to its leaking Macondo well , which spewed up to 60,000 barrels of crude a day for three months until it was capped last week . 
Analysts are predicting BP will face a final bill of between $ 15 billion and $ 60 billion . 
The wide range reflects uncertainties over the cost of the clean up and compensating those effected , the level of fines and whether BP 's partners in the well will share the burden . 
`` With so many unknowns , BP has quite rightly dodged the question as to the total cost up until now . 
People will be very interested to see if the provision is more than the $ 30 billion figure that a lot of analysts are converging on , '' said Will Riley co-manager of the Guinness Global Energy Fund , which holds BP shares . 
BP spent around $ 3 billion in the second quarter on the containment and clean up operation . 
This should be more than covered by its earnings . 
`` Whether balance sheet gearing rises or falls will probably depend on the scale of provisioning rather than cash effects , '' Gordon Gray , oil analyst at Collins Stewart , said in a note . 
However , BP 's provision will likely only be a fraction of the total bill it will potentially face . 
For one , the estimate of fines included in the provision is likely to be below the maximum possible in law . 
Under the Clean Water Act , a polluter faces fines of $ 1,100 per barrel for a spillage , although this can be increased to $ 4,300 if the spill is deemed to be due to gross negligence . 
BP is expected to assume it will not be found guilty of gross negligence in setting its estimate of likely fines . 
This also implies BP 's provision assumes its partners will contribute , as proving gross negligence is the only basis on which Anadarko Petroleum -LRB- APC . 
N -RRB- and Mitsui -LRB- 8031 . 
T -RRB- will not be liable for their share -- 35 percent -- of the total bill . 
Consequently , the charge taken next week is unlikely to be the last . 
`` It will be a permanent feature in the results for some time , '' Tony Shepard at Charles Stanley said . 
Investors will also be looking for reassurance BP has the firepower to deal with the longer-term liabilities . 
The group , which agreed a $ 7 billion asset sale on Tuesday , said last month it had $ 5 billion in cash on hand and $ 10 billion in bank lending facilities , while banking sources said the group was also lining up more debt facilities . 
The company could further bolster its position next week by outlining plans to raise another $ 5 billion to $ 10 billion by securitising cash flows from its assets , one industry banker said . 
`` We believe BP is able to fund up to $ 34 billion of costs and liabilities pretax -LRB- $ 29 billion post-tax -RRB- over the next 18 months , '' analysts at Credit Suisse said in a research note . 
Questions about the future of Chief Executive Tony Hayward are expected to resurface , but investors and analysts do not expect him to step down in the near future , although , longer term , Hayward 's position is appearing increasingly untenable . 
`` Providing the cap and relief wells work , we imagine he 'll be there for the clean up and will almost certainly then be on his way , '' a top-10 shareholder said on condition of anonymity . 
`` The whole operation post explosion has not been managed that well , so somebody has to pay and the CEO and Chairman seem obvious -LRB- targets -RRB- . '' 
Yet sources close to the company said if BP ditched Hayward before the well was capped and significant progress made on the cleanup , his successor could also tarred by the spill fallout . 
Apart from the oil spill , BP 's core business is booming . 
Last month , refining boss Iain Conn , who was effectively running BP while Hayward was overseeing the oil spill response , said core operations were running `` very effectively . '' 
It was a typically understated comment from the Scotsman and a Reuters poll of 11 analysts gave an average forecast of $ 4.98 billion for BP 's underlying net profits , a 77 percent rise on the same period last year . 
Higher oil and gas prices and stronger refining margins are expected to boost all the big oil companies , but analysts at Citigroup said BP 's predicted result `` represents the strongest momentum in the peer group . '' 
The London-based company is also expected to brave a another potential public relations quagmire by revealing it will offset its spill-related costs against tax . 
`` If you make lower profits , you should pay lower taxes , '' one source said close to the company said . 
