White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel , -LRB- l -RRB- , and Sen. Richard Shelby , R-Ala . 
, -LRB- r -RRB- , ripped BP chief executive Tony Hayward for taking time off Saturday to attend a glitzy yacht race around England 's Isle of Wight . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- President Obama 's chief of staff and a Gulf state senator ripped BP chief executive Tony Hayward for taking time off Saturday to attend a glitzy yacht race around England 's Isle of Wight as oil spewing into the Gulf continues to wreak havoc on the environment and wildlife . 
Rahm Emanuel , the White House chief of staff , said Hayward has committed yet another in a `` long line of PR gaffes '' while Sen. Richard Shelby , R-Ala . 
, called it the `` height of arrogance . '' 
`` He is the CEO of BP and he testified in Washington before a congressional committee the other day . 
Now he 's gone over to be on his yacht over in England , '' Shelby told Fox News on Saturday . 
`` I can tell you that yacht ought to be here skimming and cleaning up a lot of the oil . 
He ought to be down here seeing what is really going on . 
Not in a cocoon somewhere . '' 
Emanuel mocked Hayward 's infamous statement that he wishes the crisis were over so he could have his life back . 
Referring to the yachting , Emanuel told ABC 's `` This Week , '' `` He 's got his life back , as he would say . '' 
BP spokespeople rushed to defend Hayward , who has drawn withering criticism as the public face of BP 's halting efforts to stop the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
Spokeswoman Sheila Williams said Hayward took a break from overseeing BP efforts to stem the undersea gusher in Gulf of Mexico so he could watch his boat `` Bob '' participate in the J.P. Morgan Asset Management Round the Island Race . 
The 52-foot yacht is made by the Annapolis , Maryland-based boat builder Farr Yacht Design . 
The annual one-day race is one of the world 's largest , attracting more than 1,700 boats and 16,000 sailors as world-renown yachtsmen compete with wealthy amateurs in the 50-nautical mile course around the island . 
Robert Wine , a BP spokesman at the company 's Houston headquarters , said it was the first break that Hayward has had since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers and setting off the undersea oil gusher . 
`` He 's spending a few hours with his family at a weekend . 
I 'm sure that everyone would understand that , '' Wine said Saturday . 
`` He will be back to deal with the response . 
It does n't detract from that at all . '' 
Wine described the race as `` one of the biggest sailing events in the world and he 's well known to have a keen interest in it . '' 
He said Hayward will be returning to the United States , though it 's unclear when . 
Hayward 's boat finished fourth in its class . 
Still , hobnobbing with millionaires and their yachts is likely to be a hard sell in the Gulf , which is struggling to deal with up to 120 million gallons of oil that have escaped from the blown-out well . 
Oil has been washing up along the Gulf Coast from Louisiana to Florida , killing birds and fish , coating delicate marshes and wetlands and covering pristine beaches with tar balls . 
Hayward already angered many in the U.S. when he was quoted in the Times of London as suggesting that Americans were particularly likely to file bogus claims . 
He later shocked residents in Louisiana by telling them that no one wanted to resolve the crisis as badly as he did because `` I 'd like my life back . '' 
A pair of relief wells that wo n't be done until August is the best bet to stop the massive spill . 
By late June , the oil giant hopes it can keep nearly 90 percent of the flow from the broken pipe from hitting the ocean . 
Just minutes after reports about Hayward emerged Saturday , the issue became a hot topic on social networking sites , with people on Twitter passing along the news and reacting to it every few seconds . 
Some comments called the move `` mindboggling '' while others noted he had gotten his life back -- while Gulf residents had not . 
British environmental groups immediately slammed Hayward 's outing . 
Charlie Kronick of Greenpeace said Hayward was `` rubbing salt into the wounds '' of Gulf residents whose livelihoods have been wrecked by the disaster . 
`` Clearly it is incredibly insulting for him to be sailing in the Isle of Wight , '' he said . 
Hugh Walding of Friends of the Earth said Hayward 's choice of venue was sure to arouse anger . 
`` I 'm sure that this will be seen as yet another public relations disaster , '' Walding said . 
On Thursday , Hayward told lawmakers on a U.S. House investigations panel that he was out of the loop on decisions surrounding the blown well . 
Both Democrats and Republicans were infuriated when he asserted , `` I 'm not stonewalling . '' 
The next day , BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg seemed to suggest that Hayward was being withdrawn from the front line of the oil spill response , although his comments were later qualified . 
`` It is clear that Tony has made remarks that have upset people , '' Svanberg told Sky News television , adding that Hayward was `` now handing over '' daily operations to BP Managing Director Bob Dudley . 
Williams said Svanberg was misunderstood and that only a transition to Dudley , an American with 30 years in the oil business , had begun . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
