BP says it wo n't fight cap waiver on spill damages NEW YORK | Fri Nov 19 , 2010 6:26 pm EST NEW YORK Nov 19 -LRB- Reuters Legal -RRB- - BP Plc wo n't object to a court order legally binding the company to waive a $ 75 million statutory cap on damages for the largest oil spill in U.S. history , the company said on Friday . 
Earlier on Friday , the company was prepared to oppose a plaintiffs ' motion before U.S. District Judge Carl Barbier , who is overseeing the oil-spill litigation in New Orleans , seeking a ruling that the liability cap is inapplicable in this case . 
Noting that BP itself had told the court it would waive the cap , the plaintiffs ' lawyers asked Barbier to rule on the matter to preclude BP from `` re-urging this defense '' in the future . 
In a response filed on Wednesday , BP called the plaintiffs ' motion `` unnecessary '' and `` premature . '' 
But on Friday , the company said in a statement to Reuters Legal that if Barbier issues a court order making the cap waiver legally binding , `` BP will not object . '' 
On November 2 , BP raised its estimated cost of cleaning up the Macondo disaster by $ 7.7 billion to $ 40 billion . 
BP will likely try to recoup some of these costs from its Macondo partners , Anadarko Petroleum Corp and MOEX Offshore 2007 LLC , as well as such contractors as Halliburton but the resolution could take years of court battles . 
BP has already paid out hundreds of millions of dollars to fishermen , retailers , charter boat captains and property owners who suffered from the spill . 
Under heavy pressure from the Obama administration , in June the company also established a $ 20 billion compensation fund for those damaged by the spill . 
Soon after BP 's Deepwater Horizon well began spewing oil into the Gulf of Mexico in April , the company said that it would pay all legitimate claims , even though the Oil Pollution Act -LRB- OPA -RRB- could have limited BP 's liability for the disaster to $ 75 million , plus clean-up costs . 
But it was never clear whether BP 's pledge was legally binding , and signals from the company were mixed . 
During a court hearing last month , BP 's lawyers did not commit to waiving the OPA cap , which they called `` not relevant . '' 
After Barbier asked the company to clarify , it filed a statement with the court saying it was committed to waiving the cap . 
The BP statement said that the company 's opposition to the plaintiffs ' motion `` was not an indication that BP was wavering at all on its previous promises and commitments , '' but rather , was `` simply based on the legal deficiencies '' in the motion . 
Howard M. Erichson , a professor at Fordham University School of Law and an expert in mass torts , said plaintiffs ' lawyers were engaging in `` a bit of litigation gamesmanship . '' 
From the company 's perspective , he said , `` there is no upside having the waiver locked in , '' but opposing such a move could present a publicity problem . 
`` The extraordinary thing , '' he said , `` is the backdrop to this motion -- the fact that BP faced such an enormous public-relations crisis that it was willing to abandon some of its potential legal defenses early in the litigation . '' 
The case is In re Oil Spill , U.S. District Court , Eastern District of Louisiana , No. 10-MDL-2179 . 
The plaintiffs ' motion was filed on behalf of the plaintiffs ' steering committee by Stephen J. Herman of Herman Herman Katz & Cotlar and James Parkerson Roy of Domengeaux Wright Roy & Edwards . 
BP 's submission was filed by Don Haycraft and R. Keith Jarrett of Liskow & Lewis in New Orleans and Richard Godfrey and J. Andrew Langan of Kirkland & Ellis in Chicago . 
-LRB- Editing by Eric Effron and Howard Goller -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
