President Obama is set to defend U.S. military involvement in Libya to Congress as soon as today , according to the White House . 
Congressional sources are expecting a written report answering a number of questions the House of Representatives posed in a resolution passed with bipartisan support over a week ago , including inquiries about the president s goal in Libya , how he hopes to achieve that goal , why he has not sought congressional authorization for involving U.S. troops abroad and how much the conflict will ultimately cost . 
White House spokesman Tommy Vietor said the report will address a whole host of issues about our ongoing efforts in Libya , including those raised in the House resolution as well as our legal analysis with regard to the War Powers Resolution . 
Many members of congress Democrats and Republicans accuse the president of flouting the War Powers Resolution , which says the president can involve U.S. troops abroad for 60 days without congressional authorization but must withdraw them within another 30 days without a congressional okay . 
The White House maintains it is acting in accordance with the law . 
The report to congress follows a letter Speaker John Boehner sent to President Obama Tuesday warning him that he will be in violation of the War Powers resolution come Friday , 90 days after U.S. involvement in the Libya conflict began , though Vietor says the response was already in the works ahead of Boehner s letter to the president . 
Barry is a warmonger , he sent 100,000 + troops to Afghanistan looking for OBL . 
Two copters and a couple of seals is all we needed . 
Let me make a suggestion , impeach . 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:16 am | Reply Let me make a statement and a fact ... you are an IDIOT !! June 15 , 2011 at 11:12 am | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 11:14 am | June 15 , 2011 at 11:17 am | Wait ... You mean that all I have to do to convince everyone of my opinion is to call any dissenter an idiot ? 
Wow , I never knew it was so easy . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:22 am | @John -- Well , now that you brought it up , if the shoe fits ... @Angus001 -- Yes , it 's that easy . 
But only when it 's a fact . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:40 am | No you need to learn terms like Neo-Con and repugs and rethuglicans ... that is what the benevolent party that embraces all points of vies does ... You have to learn how to blame the previous administration and supprt spending more money than the government makes ... to get Cina to believe that you have already defaulted and to get moodys to threaten to downgrade this countrys credit rating . . 
thus affecting the intrest rate we pay on all that borrowed money . 
June 15 , 2011 at 9:37 pm | Derreck you are quick ... Jay in NC goes to each site posting the same moronic drivel . 
He has been corrected several times , but he keeps posting that 100,000 number like it is gospel ; when in truth only 1\/3 that number is the correct answer . 
Sixty thousand of those troops were sent by Bush . 
June 16 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | Did you also call for George W. Bush 's impeachment for similar behavior -LRB- some would say worse -RRB- ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:29 am | Reply Obama did so bad that he made even GEORGE W BUSH look GOOD ! 
Way to go obama ! 
Good job !!! Vivat GWB !!! June 15 , 2011 at 11:44 am | Bush obtained permission from Congress BEFORE he went to war ... BOTH times . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:34 pm | at least GWB cot congresses approval ... Barry . . 
well not so much June 15 , 2011 at 9:38 pm | agreed fully , but why protect someone who is clearly breaking the law . 
its not about party anymore , start removing all corrupt . 
hate towards a side is as useless as arguing religion at the federal level . 
June 16 , 2011 at 11:58 am | Ronald Reagan worst president of my 76 years , George W Bush is a close second and in time could overtake Reagan . 
June 16 , 2011 at 1:09 pm | Poor you , please come back to Earth . 
It was the warmonger BUSH that sent troops into Afghanistan and then he left his mess for Obama to clean up . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:31 am | Reply Yeah !!!! I 've heard Obama is from HAWAI , KENYA , a city located somewhere on NEPTUN or PLUTO !!! June 15 , 2011 at 11:42 am | Bush may have left Obama to clean up a mess , but he 's the one who has made the mess worse . 
We 're still nation building in Iraq and Afghanistan and now Libya . 
He 's deployed more troops than Bush ever had . 
He 's also breaking the War Powers Act and should be impeached . 
We have a fourteen trillion dollar debt while we 're wasting money on a foreign policy that just attracts more terrorists to want to harm the US . 
Ron Paul 2012 June 15 , 2011 at 2:22 pm | As far as I am concerned , every President and every Congress since Eisenhower are guilty of violating the Constitution . 
I grew up thinking it took an act of Congress to declare war , and a military incursion into sovereign countries without first declaring war is in itself an act justifying the declaration of war . 
What we have had all along are a bunch of chickenhawks pandering to the military industrial complex but terrified to actually declare war . 
What justification would we have needed to invade Vietnam , Grenada , Iraq , Afghanistan , and others ? 
Were the USA to actually declare war , we 'd have to gain the support of Americans first . 
This bunch of spineless cowards know nothing but sleazy politics and would never risk anything by committing to a real war . 
It breaks my heart to see Americans volunteer to act like lawless marauders under the guise of `` saving the world and the USA . '' 
But in the end , it 's not the military men and women who committed the crimes , it 's the so-called leadership that will do anything to avoid personal responsibility . 
The Vietnam-era vets have every right to storm and take out our central government for the crimes they 've committed against Americans . 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:51 pm | @ lauradet -- It could also be said that President Bush had to send the troops into Afghanistan and Iraq because it was President Clinton who failed to take out Osama bin Ladin back in the 1990s after the original World Trade Center bombing and the bombings of the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:10 pm | Your logic is flawed . 
Because even if Clinton did fail to get Osama Bin Laden , Bush as President and Commander-in-Chief had a choice about how to respond to 9-11 . 
He CHOSE to declare war and sent troops into Afghanistan . 
He had other choices , like do nothing , a more limited response , use covert\/special ops and air power only , etc. . 
As for IRAQ , that had absolutely nothing to do with 9-11 and took much needed resources AWAY from Afghanistan . 
Iraq could have totally been avoided . 
Both of those wars were already in play when Pres. Obama took office . 
June 15 , 2011 at 5:17 pm | That 's right he is cleaning up George Bush 's mess by adding up one more mess to heritage ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 7:09 pm | And your logic is flawed there xwing ... the president ca n't declare war ... only congress can ... and they at least voted to support the action initially ... as for the teleprompter ... who knows ... I would like to think that he can speak with out some one else writting his words ... An you are right he is a lawer and a professor ... all good qualifications for knowing what will inspire the private sector growth we need to create jobs and als to understand how the minds of divierse cultures work ... Yep ... Good points all ! 
lol June 15 , 2011 at 9:42 pm | how is everyone in america still this ignorant . 
its not about policy , its about the facts , ignore political factions . 
Policy wise , they are the exact same politician . 
You 'll sit and argue to protect a side , either one will win the election , and you 'll sit back and squable over name calling as they rob you blind . 
wake up June 16 , 2011 at 12:00 pm | President Obama is Commander and Cheif . 
He can do exactly as he did for the people of Libya . 
-LRB- Someone had to . -RRB- . 
In the world he has done more for this country , overnight in 2008 when he was elected President . 
A lot of other Countries cheered , maybe because he 's part black . 
I do n't know . 
HE WAS THE BEST HUMAN BEING FOR THE JOB . 
He was elected not because of his race , but because he was the brightess and just plain best man for the job . . 
Because he will WIN again ... The power of the computer was his best bet . 
It Connected to millions of us who wanted a better world . 
We need hope for a better tomorrow . . 
June 16 , 2011 at 7:41 pm | June 15 , 2011 at 11:35 am | Reply I think that the intelligence was not there at the time so you need to dull that roar that you are having . 
I believe that any Commander and Chief would have made the call with good intelligence . 
As for the war , I think that I was there for several years before Obama go in office . 
Now if you are talking about the economy ... Obama surely made a bad situation worse with his ideas of getting it back on track . . 
but I am not going to blame him for something that he did not do . . 
even if I am a Republican and not liking him very much at this time . 
I 'm still waiting on some HONORABLE action from this black like giving back the Nobel Peace Prize ... do u think that will ever happen ? 
Not on this skinny chig 's watch ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:45 am | Reply You are 100 % correct . 
Too bad this man still has blind followers who defend his ignorance so wholeheartedly . 
I find this very disturbing . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:45 am | Reply He also cares more for the Libyan people than he cares about the Americans ! 
Let him run for office in Libya next election ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:46 am | Reply The Party whose negligence resulted in 9\/11 happening under its watch , and who then got us stuck in Iraq when terrorists were hiding in AfPak , has absolutely no right whatsoever to lecture a President who finally delivered justice to Osama bin Laden . 
The Republican Party of empty suits would do better to take a lesson from a President who is strong on national security , protects US interests , and earns the respect of the world at the same time . 
Right now , not a single member of the GOP is worthy of polishing President Obama 's shoes . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:11 pm | Reply So Bush is reposnsible for 9\/11 8 momnths into his Presidency , but Obama is not responsible for the economy in about twice the amount of time ? 
Face facts , we are worse off now than we were when Obama took office . 
You can blame Bush all you want , but there is only one President and he needs to own up to the fact that his policies are hurting America . 
Are n't you sick of him feigning no knowledge or influence on things like this NLRB\/Boeing travesty or the brillianceof sending weapons to Mexican drug cartels to track them . 
losing track of them and getting an American killed in the process ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | Your ability to draw an analogy is severely lacking . 
9\/11 is a concrete , single event whereas the economy is a chronic trend . 
Any constituent with a basic degree of insight knows that economic trends lag by several years beyond legislative intervention -LRB- that is assuming there are no significant filibusters inhibiting said intervention -RRB- . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:48 pm | Gosh , have you lost all sense of fairness ! 
Do you want to support him just becos some people are vehemently opposed to him on everything . 
everyone understands obama inherited a big problem , thats why he was elected -- he made big promises that he will solve these issues . 
& he has not done that !! . 
Many neutral experts have confirmed that he has made the situation worse specially on the economy ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:28 pm | I am sick of your ignorance . 
Why ca n't you just live in the real world ? 
Seriously , where are you from ? 
It must be a small town where religion rules all ... June 15 , 2011 at 1:35 pm | Umm ... the Dem party would be the primary party whose negligence allowed 9\/11 to happen . 
All of those involved were in the U.S. 2 years before it happened with visas that were expired for at least 11\/2 years of that . 
When their visas expired , the Clinton administration failed to deport them , just like Democrats have stood in the way of deporting the other ~ 10 million people who are in this country illegally . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:20 pm | Now ADOC a direct question ... How did the Republicans in congress and the presidency on 9\/11\/2001 after having 8 months in office result in the culmination of a plot that started dduring the reign of W. J. Clinton ? 
He was the guy that blew up the asprin factory and turned down the offer to be handed OBL on a platter . 
June 15 , 2011 at 9:47 pm | Bush 's response to 9\/11 was his problem . 
He did n't plan 9\/11 but his response leaves much to be desired . 
Instead of going for OBL where he was known to be and sticking to it , he diverted his attention to Iraq because he knew Afghanistan was going to be one long hard haul . 
He did n't care about catching OBL just whipping someone 's fanny and saying `` Mission Accomplished '' . 
From a salesman 's point of view it is called bait and switch . 
As we all know Iraq did n't turn out as easy as he thought it would either . 
It is one thing to destroy a country 's infrastructure , but not a easy to rebuild a nation with a working government . 
June 16 , 2011 at 1:25 pm | Jean when Barry establishes his version of Pravada , I am sure you will be offered a job ... You are very creative with history and the facts June 16 , 2011 at 7:31 pm | Do you think Seal Team 6 is going to do all the recon and intelligence gathering ? 
Use your head , you have no idea what it takes to run a military . 
So anything you say is n't credible at all . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:28 pm | Reply I get what ` Derrick ' means when referring to ` Jay in NC ' . 
The term idiot does not have to do with dissent , but rather the stupidity of the dissent . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:42 pm | Reply You should ... your picture is by the definition in Websters June 15 , 2011 at 9:48 pm | It saddens me to hail from a state where people like you exist . 
Your presidential name calling is beyond arrogant . 
People like you have more in common with terrorists than any sort of patriot . 
It 's as transparent as glass . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:45 pm | Reply Smart ass Bush sent 100 ' s of thousand to Iraq for someone in Pakistan . 
Think before your ass speak . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:00 pm | Reply Iwould suggest the same to you as Afghanistan was on the platter before Iraq and somehow it seems that Afghanistan is far closer to Iraq June 15 , 2011 at 9:50 pm | The Simple fact you used the name Barry is evidence that you still believe the birther thing . 
That negate any point you are trying to make . 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:03 pm | Reply And the simple fact that liberals used names like Shrub and thief proves what ? 
You live in a glass house ... be carefull of the rocks you throw June 15 , 2011 at 9:52 pm | Jay , you actually have to have a valid reason to impeach . 
You tea nutters -- he wants to raise the mielage standards on cars , impeach ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:28 pm | Reply Again ... another fine example of the Democrativ Socialist Party in America ... You do n't think like I do so STFU ... right ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 9:53 pm | Bill in STL ... our founding fathers were socialist . 
I am proudly one too . 
The government is authorized by the constitution to levy taxes to pay for programs the government sees as benefiting the citizens welfare and provide for their security . 
These programs do not benefit just certain members of society , but the majority of citizens . 
Our tax system was set up to be a socialist system that what we contribute is for the benefit of all citizens . 
The founding fathers designed programs such as public roads , bridges , libraries , postal system , and fire stations these were designed by the founding fathers to benefit all citizens . 
Taxes were collected to make these public works the property of all our citizens ... therefore yes we are both a socialist and capitalistic society . 
Furthermore , there is nothing in the constitution that would stop future presidents or congress from expanding and creating new socialist or capitalist programs that would benefit the welfare of our citizens . 
June 16 , 2011 at 4:44 pm | How can it be ... Obama takes us into a war with Libya on ` humanitarian reasons ' yet he can not protect our own borders from those who kill our own people ... someone explain ... June 15 , 2011 at 3:51 pm | Reply Obama sent 30,000 troops to build up to 100,000 but you have your numbers a little confused . 
And if two helicopters and a seal team were all that it was going to take to bring OBL down , then why did n't W do it ? 
Oh that 's right ! 
How silly of me to forget that W was n't looking for OBL . 
He was too busy focusing on Iraq , who had nothing to do with 9\/11 . 
In my opinion that whole administration should be tried for war crimes . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:35 pm | Reply I never agreed with us going to Afghanistan . 
Barry is the guy that called it a ` just war . ' 
32,000 is the number of US forces when Barry took office . 
There have been multiple surges , the facts are there for who ever wants to see the truth . 
Here is another fact that Liberals do not want to face . 
We have lost more troops under Barry 's command 1451 in only 2.5 years , compare that to 1049 in President Bush 's 7 years . 
Barry is the warmonger . 
Liberals are hypocrites , you opposed the war under Bush but give Barry a free ride . 
June 16 , 2011 at 4:02 pm | Jay no one asked you to agree ... Oh Hey , before we move on this we had better call Jay . 
June 16 , 2011 at 4:48 pm | You 're so wrong . 
Obama did not want Bin Laden caught or shot . 
He said no on the raid three times in 48 hours . 
Panetta , Cates , Clinton and Petraues went over his head and ordered the strike . 
Obama went ballistic over it but was nothing he could do because the Democrats have too much graft on him . 
They will ot release any of it because they accepted two billion dollars from George Soros to have Obama elected . 
June 15 , 2011 at 7:24 pm | Reply In his campaign speech on October 7 , 2008 : `` What I have said is were going to encourage democracy in Pakistan , expand our non-military aid to Pakistan so that they have more of a stake in working with us , but insisting that they go after these militants . 
And if we have Osama bin Laden in our sights and the Pakistani government is unable or unwilling to take them out , then I think we have to act , and we will take them out . 
We will kill bin Laden . 
We will crush al-Qaida . 
That has to be our biggest national security priority . '' 
Regardless of what you want to believe , I do not think the president has ever deviated from that goal , or he would not have re-opened , and intensified , the CIA search for bin Laden that Bush had closed down in 2005 . 
June 16 , 2011 at 5:08 pm | Yep another raciest southern boy response expect nothing less from someone from NC June 15 , 2011 at 10:38 am | Reply Maybe Jay is black but one thing is quit obvious you are probably a left wing democrat thats all you ever do is name call and label people . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:13 am | Reply BOTH sides name call and label people . 
Go check out an Anne Coulter personal appearance if you do n't believe me ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:31 am | Anne Coulture ... heck try everyone on Fox News where they labeled Michelle Obama as being `` Obama 's baby 's Mama . '' 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:39 am | What is wrong with you people !!! He is not black : HE IS IRISH !!! Did n't you hear his statement when he was in Irland recently ? 
HE TOLD EVERYBODY HE WAS IRISH !!!! June 15 , 2011 at 11:47 am | Look in the mirror . 
Dems call everything racist . 
How did I know you were a dem ? 
Because you make a racist comment and call other people racists . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:18 am | Reply And all you do is call people Socialists and Libertards . 
I 'm rubber , you 're glue , etc. , etc. . 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:33 pm | and with comments like that you will achieve the meaning of the name you have chosen ... Your statements are those of an individual with very little to lose or invested in the country June 15 , 2011 at 9:55 pm | Reply Honestly , Jay besides being a bundle of misinformation , you do need to get a life , and a job . 
At least looking for OBL in Afghanistan , than George Bush looking for him in Iraq , was a lot closer to where he was found . 
After 2 years , he found OBL which the previous President did not do in 71\/2 years . 
There is your waste . 
As for your incorrect figures , President Obama has sent approximately 30,000 of the 100,000 + American and foreign troops in Afghanistan , the remainder were sent by President Bush , and other countries . 
President Obama may have sent more troops than were originally there , which may have aided in bagging OBL , and I bet he will be the one bringing those troops home . 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:47 am | Reply Actually he is making moves right now to keep them there past 2014 , and has already secured 50,000 `` non-combat '' troops indefinitely in Iraq . 
You would know this if you knew how to look at news sources other than CNN . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:17 am | Reply So let me get this right -- you people are not defending what BO is actually doing you are just putting down the people who do not agree w\/BO . 
The ones you feel are racists because they do n't agree with everything he does . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:22 am | Reply You missed the part where they crticize Bush as a response to Obama 's bad decisions . 
I have never understood this as a reply but for some reason they think it is highly effective ... June 15 , 2011 at 11:27 am | So , jean2009 lists a few facts , presents no opinions other than `` there is your waste '' and `` I bet he will be the one bringing those troops home '' , and you come up with `` putting down people '' , `` racist '' , and whatever ... I ca n't even think of a proper response , other than try being a little more objective ... June 15 , 2011 at 12:50 pm | No , just the ones that disagree with everything he does because he 's black , and they 're racists . 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:34 pm | Atleast someone is using facts . 
Lawmakers cant seem to make up their mind . 
First they are angry because we are not taking the lead and not involved enough . 
On the other hand , since our involvement is minimal , they are complaining that we are involved at all . 
It is a fact that very few Presidents on both sides have ever followed the WPA . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:50 am | Reply Jean , there were about 32,000 troops in Afghanistan when President Bush left office . 
Liberals can try and spin in all you want but the truth is there . 
Barry is responsible for the two surges and additional NATO forces . 
More of our solders have died under Barry 's leadership , more kids have been killed , nothing gained . 
In his Nobel Prize acceptance speech , he said that Afghanistan was a ` just war . ' 
Well , history is proving him wrong . 
Maybe its time to melt down the gold . 
He will need it to live of off when he is out of office . 
BTW , President Bush did not look for OBL in Iraq , just another Liberal lie , not willing to face the facts . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:57 am | Reply You 're right . 
George W Bush stopped looking for OBL altogether . 
And then convinced the ignorant masses , of which you are part , that Saddam Hussein had something to do with 9\/11 . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:27 pm | Jay-I 'm really ashamed you are from my state . 
But you need to remember Bush did n't look for OBL AT ALL ! 
As I recall , W said he was n't worried about him , and did n't believe he was relevant . 
I still do n't understand why the person at the head of the organization that attacked us on 9\/11 was n't worth worring about . 
Bush 's zeal to go after Saddam and his sad lack of knowledge of how that would go is what got us into the problem Obama now has to deal with . 
Bush did n't go into Afghanistan like he should have to find OBL , he split our forces to go into Iraq when they had nothing to do with 9\/11 -LRB- and no , there were no WMD either -RRB- and has put us into a decade of war that has helped to wreck many lives but also our economy . 
Obama is doing a much better job than W could have hoped to in his wildest dreams . 
It refreshing to have a president that thinks before he acts . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:30 pm | The Taliban of Afghanistan were providing cover for Osama who knocked down the World Trade Centers . 
Its the same as if Korea had provided cover for the Japanese ruler whats his name after Pearl Harbor . 
Sometimes you have to fight more than you want to . 
The countries that can need to stand up for themselves . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:46 pm | Let 's not forget that OBL was found based on intelligience acquired from Guantonamo while Bush was in office . 
Had Obama had his way long ago and Guantonamo shut down much sooner , that lead would have never been found and OBL would be enjoying his villa still . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:40 pm | Reply Jay , you 're right . 
Bush did n't look for OBL in Iraq . 
That 's because he DID N'T LOOK FOR HIM ! 
His own words : bin Laden is not a priority . 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:31 pm | Reply I thought Obama campaigned AGAINST war , excuse me , I think he 's leading the pack June 15 , 2011 at 3:54 pm | Reply Were you asleep during that time Jean ... No one ever said he was in IRAQ ... they were after Saddam however and no matter how I try I ca n't make Saddam sound like Osama June 15 , 2011 at 9:59 pm | Reply For those who forget , Qaddafi financed the Lockerbie terrorist attack . 
As an American , that 's enough reason for me to support the US Air Force helping take him out . 
Once Qaddafi is done , we will have taken out two of the biggest terrorist leaders of the past 30 years . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:01 am | Reply What about Syria ? 
Why is the US government ignoring the Syrian people wanting democracy ... June 15 , 2011 at 11:07 am | Reply Amateur hour at The White House . 
Call in the teleprompters ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:11 am | Reply So what is with reptard obsession with the Telepromter ? 
You do realize that Ronald Raygun and both George Shrubs used Telepromters , right ? 
Just because President Obama is a more dynamic speaker than the reptards does n't give you a reason to criticize him . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:20 am | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 11:34 am | Reply I ca n't understand why people keep parroting the same , tired lines . 
I will say it for the 75th time : Every President since Ike used a teleprompter . 
Obama does not use one any more than GW Bush used one . 
But that wo n't stop you from just playing your pre-recorded `` teleprompter '' tape back over and over and over , will it ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:34 am | Reply There is a big difference from using one and not being able to speak without one ... June 15 , 2011 at 11:39 am | hey dummy ... go black jackballs or jackstraws . . 
u r not fit to be posting on this billboard . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:40 am | I 've seen Barry speak without a teleprompter . 
I went to the law school he taught . 
He did it all the time . 
So every class day he taught based on his notes . 
Do you think he taught classes with a teleprompter ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:15 pm | Yeah let 's talk about who needs a teleprompter after you wipe that ink off of Sarah Palin 's HAND , teatard . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:32 pm | I think John is trying to say ... well , actually I have no clue what John is trying to say ... apparently believes someone ca n't speak without a teleprompter , but did n't bother to mention any names ... not that it matters , given the relevance of the issue ... June 15 , 2011 at 12:55 pm | Try paying a little more attention . 
He quite often speaks well without one . 
Example : The final debate against McCain . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:15 pm | Agreeing with ADOC ... The reason that they do n't see it because they do n't show these things on FOX News . 
They only show any mistakes he might make or show him with a teleprompter . 
They do n't show the myriad town halls , interviews , other public events where he does n't use a teleprompter . 
Nevermind that the man is a LAWYER and PROFESSOR . 
I doubt that he could have worked as a civil rights attorney and as a constitutional law professor if he was n't able to speak in front of people You kinda have to be able to do that to work in those professions . 
June 15 , 2011 at 5:46 pm | So there you have it ... ADOC and XWING ageee ... therefore it is true and woe unto you that would disagree with them June 15 , 2011 at 10:01 pm | ADOC -- you do n't think it is telling that you needed to go back 3 year for an example ? 
June 16 , 2011 at 8:39 am | Georg W Bush should be prosecuted for Iraq . 
Did we really need to go in there . 
Republicans you are really dumb on this one . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:38 am | Reply The War Powers Act is unconstitutional . 
Any 8th grader can read the document and know that . 
Congress has once again abrogated is responsibilities . 
Our troops should be withdrawn immediately or the president impeached for the high crime of deploying our troops on a foreign land with a directive -LRB- not just implicit approval -RRB- from the Congress . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:13 am | Reply It would be nice to have `` ALL '' of our troops home . 
That includes troops from Korea , Japan , Germany , the middle east etc. . 
Put them on our borders and then sweep for illegals ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:16 am | Reply Oh for crying out loud you three -- take a moment and be SMARTER than your Rep\/Dem N\/S Black\/White prejudices . 
This issue spans all races and both parties and will continue to do so . 
He presentation today will focus on liberty and protecting the innocent , etc. . 
There is an old saying in my world -- follow the money -- and you are not . 
You are just playing right into their hands with your blame game and bipartisan BS . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:17 am | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 11:17 am | Reply That 's the difference between Republicans and Dems . 
Republicans just push on and do n't give a crap about what anyone says . 
He just sicked Cheney on the American public by having him declare that it 's unpatriotic for citizens to criticize the president during a time of war . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:19 am | Reply Obama does n't seem to care what others think either . 
He says they are acting in accordance with the law in Libya . 
Anyone with half a brain can read the War Powers Act and determine the President must get Congressional approval for this action since 60 days have passed . 
Oh , I 'm sorry , maybe the requirement to have half a brain to understand the law is Obama 's problem . 
If Bush had taken this same action , the Dems would be calling for impeachment . 
June 16 , 2011 at 11:09 am | Reply Funny how Obama is now a big fan of torture and killing . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:20 am | Reply Anus ... you are funny . 
That was a comical statement . 
I laughed so hard I peed my pants . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:24 am | Reply You just do n't understand . 
Obama never saids what he really believes -- just what he believes you want to hear . 
If you did n't figure that out by now -- well then you never will . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:30 am | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 2:03 pm | Reply Forget the War Powers Act . 
8 of the Constitution says that `` Congress shall have the power ... to declare War . '' 
That means the president has authority to decide exactly how we fight after Congress decides who and when . 
Madison , Hamilton and Jay in the Federalist Papers explained that this division of power is one of the main things distinguishing our president from a king . 
Even Senator Obama , just a few years ago , said he agreed that the president may not legally get us into war without Congress . 
The current president , unlike even Bush , is claiming that he does n't need Congress ' permission to send US troops into danger . 
If we tolerate that stance , we 've destroyed another part of the Constitution in direct defiance of something our Founders specifically warned us not to do . 
So , if the president refuses to withdraw our troops and does n't get authorization , we need to either immediately force withdrawal or begin impeachment . 
Do n't accept any explanation about how this is n't a `` real '' war , if it includes US troops risking their lives and shooting at people . 
The Constitution offers no such excuse . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:21 am | Reply I want to know how the logic '' We need to protect civilians from mass reprisals in -LRB- whatever city that was -RRB- '' is going to fly when , in a revolutionary conflict , the primary combatants are civilians . 
Are we now going to have to provide protection to every city in Lybia ? 
While I understand the intent of bombing Khadafi -LRB- Quadaffi , Quadafi . . 
etc -RRB- 's residences and military headquarters , I 'm seeing this as NATO 's -LRB- aka the liberal US establishment 's -RRB- siding with the rebels in support of a civil war they -LRB- read as `` we '' -RRB- had no business getting involved in in the firts place . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:23 am | Reply Congress is representing US citizens and our interests . 
The President should be made to explain ALL altercations we are now involved in . 
It 's out of control and something has to be done to restrain the military . 
I voted for the President and a good part of the reason was to avoid war mongers in office . 
Our military activity and situation around the globe has become disturbing , to say the least . 
Not what I expected when I last voted . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:24 am | Reply It will be interesting to see Obama explain how being a memeber of NATO forces us to act when NATO decides to act . 
This is diifficult to explain since the only purpose of NATO is to defend NATO members if they are attacked by a non-NATO country . 
Libya is not a member of NATO and did not attack a NATO country -LRB- it was a civil war -RRB- . 
There is no way to justify NATO doing anything against Libya . 
Just because the U.N. gave the O.K. to NATO does not justify NATO going against its charter and getting involved in Libya . 
It is even worse when Congress did not give the O.K. because this is not a justifiable NATO action . 
Obama will give a song and a dance -LRB- what he is good at -RRB- but will not be able to justify going into Libya as a NATO action . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:26 am | Reply obama back on vacation again ! 
its at the point where if you want to read about obama you have to look in the travel section ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:28 am | Reply No men on the ground , bombs everywhere , jets , expenses , intel ... A war for those who want you to believe were not at war June 15 , 2011 at 11:29 am | Reply Hey rethuglicans this fight started with Ronald Regan where was your objection then ?????? Oh I forgot he was a white republican . 
My bad carry on you irrational arguments rethuglicans June 15 , 2011 at 11:30 am | Reply The village called , they want you to return ... they are sad to not have their idiot , especially when you make all the other idiots look brilliant each time you open your mouth . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:38 pm | Reply I am sure it can go farther back ... BUT seems that Carter screwed up a rescue of Americans in Iraq and that country became fundamental Isamic country from then on >> -RRB- . 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:04 pm | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 12:32 pm | Reply Arabs throw acid on womens faces for not wearing a veil . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:35 am | Reply This is one black dufus that needs to be waiting on tables at the local country club ... he is not fit to be a president much less a dayum dishwasher . 
And he is blowing every cent in this dumb fukin country 's coffers while idiots sit by and let him do it and watch and play with their coks , etc. . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:38 am | Reply Bush was a crappy Prez . 
Obama is a worse Prez and a crappy person . 
Note to liberal excuse makers : race was never mentioned until the crybaby left wing whackos mentioned it . 
The only racism here is the assumption of racism where none exists . 
I hate Whoopie too , not because she 's black , because she 's a piece of crap . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:38 am | Reply Actually , I totally disagree with BO 's politics and the policies he puts forth and what he has done to this country , but , that being said , he seems like a good guy and a good husband and a good parent . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:44 am | Reply and u use that to justify his running the supposedly strongest country in the world ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:48 am | Wow you are a hard core racist , but hates looking in the mirror , whoopie helped a lot of poor people and unfortunate people thru charity , and encouraging others to help , if that makes you a bad person then I will be glad to be a bad person , so pop , besides spending right wing rush feed racist hate how many people you helped and encouraged charity event . 
Never mind dumb question rethuglicans help others Lmao what a oxymoron June 15 , 2011 at 11:46 am | Reply If you do not vote for Michele Bachmann are you sexist ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:01 pm | So Alan ... you are not racist ... right ... you just hate conservatives ... Right ... and they are all white ... Right ... . 
and that makes you a ????? June 15 , 2011 at 10:07 pm | Hey Obama , Explain it , dice it , slice it , mold it , bake it , and toss it !! Your reasons are still mute !! You 're a clueless man with clueless Military leaders , and advisers surrounding you !! Call Mayflower Movers now , you 'll be leaving office in a year ! 
Then , after the White House is disinfected , a new Rebublican Administration can take up residence in the Country 's House and get us back on track !! June 15 , 2011 at 11:42 am | Reply The near-silence on this issue for the last 3 months has been deafening . 
A liberal mainstream media has finally realized they can no longer cover for thier guy . 
I ca n't even imagine the scrutiny Bush would have received for this -- at least when he led us into war -LRB- right or wrong -RRB- he was transparent about the thought process behind the decision . 
What is going there , why are we there , what is the point , what would be considered success etc ? 
And please , before you all freak out and call me a rightwing nut or something , think about how partisan you must be to stand beside Obama . 
Based on just what record of success actually ? 
Three years in ... time to really see him for what he is . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:42 am | Reply How many of you have served your country ? 
Why do n't you ask them and see what they have to say ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:43 am | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 11:45 am | Reply Obama please make a case for working and funding Al-Qaeda rebels in Lybia . 
Obama please make a case for bombing innocent Lybia civilians for a group of Non -- Elected Lybia rebels -LRB- a la Chalabi of Iraq -RRB- Obama please make a case as to why the french president Sarkozy dragged us into this . 
Obama please make a case as to why we need another war to secure the Homeland . 
Obama please make a case as to why we support the CNT -LRB- Counsil of National Transition -RRB- - as know as the Cyr na que . 
The Cyr na que also a region in East Lybia -LRB- a section of the arab world that has sent the most fighters to kill American soldiers in Iraq -RRB- . 
Obama please make a case as to why you are getting strong armed by Hillary and manipulated by french president Sarkozy on this policy issue . 
Obama please make a case as to why you are hell bent on colonizing Africa to circumvent China in Africa . 
Obama please make a case as to why the Chinese will take the rug from under the US economy because of the old thinking people around you who ca n't seem to get away from a confrontation disposition -LRB- cold war era individuals -- what change -RRB- Obama please make a case as to why we should re-elect you . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:46 am | Reply Funny , FDR did not need the War Powers Act , he followed the Constitution . 
Every President since has violated that document with lies , deceit , and fraud . 
From the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution to the current abuse of the War Powers Act . 
Congress needs to rescind that fraud piece of paper and get its power back into the hands of the Congress to Declare War and to authorize the money and resources to wage War . 
With that said , we are now using American resources in Libya , Yemen , Eygpt , Iraq , Afgan , Pakistan , along with massive expenses in Kosova , Korea , and who knows what in other places in Africa and South America . 
Its time to stop playing `` police '' to the world , I ca n't afford it !! June 15 , 2011 at 11:46 am | Reply Dont agree with everything BO does ? 
they dont agree with anything he does . 
since he took office republicans have done nothing but try to discredit him and find fault with any solution he puts foward for our country 's problems . 
problems created time and again by republicans . 
they blame obama for our current economic situation , conveniently forgetting a republican president put us in a decade long war that cost us billions per year . 
republicans arent morons because they are rascist and inbred . 
they are morons because they are rascist , inbred , and most importantly , christian . 
blind faith is their bread and butter . 
and without them , we wouldnt be in this mess June 15 , 2011 at 11:51 am | Reply Funny thing , on June 1st Boehner said the President was in complaince with the WPA . 
What happened in those 2 weeks ? 
Oh , and Republicans . 
where are the jobs you promised ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:58 am | Reply The President has n't violated the War Powers Act and the Republicans know this because they do n't believe Americans have taken the time to read and understand the War Powers Act , but I have . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:11 pm | Reply So , Claudia which part is it ... Notification within 48 hours or the 60 days ... and if he is not potentially in violation why is he saying that it does not apply to Libya ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:10 pm | Reply no jay , if you do n't vote for Bachmann , it just proves you are sane June 15 , 2011 at 12:12 pm | Reply Let me guess he is going to repeat the SAME LIES about protecting Civilians , oops OIL . 
just like BUSH did with Iraq keep repeating the Same Lies and IDIOT Americans will believe it . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:13 pm | Reply A lawyer that could not maie it private practice due to poor spelling ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:11 pm | Reply Let 's get this straight . 
When the Libyan conflict began many politicians , mostly Republicans , called President Obama out for not being fast enough and not jumping right in unilaterally and bombing Libya . 
McCain and many others were on the air calling for the US to create the no-fly space on its own . 
All of this would have been very expensive but more important it would have put the US in another war like Afghanistan and Iraq . 
So , the President uses good judgement and goes into this conflict sharing the responsibility with NATO . 
Now the congress is complaining again and trying to put a political spin on it . 
Making points with national security is pretty low . 
Do they want the US to withdraw their support from NATO in Libya ? 
That would make America look weak , like flip-floppers and lose a lot of respect around the world . . 
What do these congressmen really hope to gain from this embarassing law suit ? . 
Do n't they know that these things are watched by many people around the world ? 
Sometimes we just shake our head at some of the things your politicians say and do . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:17 pm | Reply It 's not about what the president does\/doesn ' t do . 
It 's not about what 's right for the people or the world . 
It 's about what did that political party do and what can we do as the opposing political party to make them look bad ? 
The great thing about that is , no matter what you do there 's always a way to put a negative spin on it . 
And you think people pay attention , but it does n't matter . 
The people hear a negative spin on what one political party is doing and they 'll vote the other party in . 
-LRB- Thus why Democrats won after Bush and why Republicans won in Congress after Obama was voted in . -RRB- 
How a story can be spun to inflict the American collective emotion is what counts ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:37 pm | Reply Geez , Joan , you are being way too factual and logical for this crowd ... do you really expect to convince anyone of anything by trying to ground the discussion in reality ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:11 pm | Reply Sounds pretty familiar ... Oh I voted for the involvement under president Bush ... but now I telll you I did not mean it June 15 , 2011 at 10:12 pm | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 12:20 pm | Reply Really ? 
The Republicans are going to waster time and money on this ? 
They are transparent in their dog and pony show . 
How about getting us some jobs as promised ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:23 pm | Reply Well let 's just setup another flipping committee to talk about Libya and let 's not figure out how to create jobs ... get our soldiers home . 
Let 's just site a sue , sue , sue ... Let 's not discuss how we can make a car or truck get more than 30\/20 mpg . 
Let 's not actually talk about issue 's that affect everybody ... Yes we can talk about Libya ... but hmmm . . 
Let 's see ... 1 . 
Iraq\/Afghan War is first ... which works right into the Car thing ... 2 . 
JOBS JOBS JOBS JOBS JOBS 3 . 
After the government is all talked out on that ... than let 's discuss Libya ... until than ... Bring our kids home ! 
Give us a car that does n't cost us $ 400.00 a month to fill up . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:24 pm | Reply The economy is in the toilets and they would like to waste taxpayers money on frivolous lawsuits ... Please excuse me if I skip this freak show ... While I appreciate all laws must be enforced and I do n't recall the president ever declaring war . . 
but hey what do I know . . 
We can flake out on NATO and prove ourselves unreliable because of temper tantrums and huge egos being crushed on capital hill or they can focus on more important things such as the economy and the health care system ... June 15 , 2011 at 12:25 pm | Reply The Gaddafi family are psychos that are slaughtering our fellow human beings in Libya . 
Let whoever can stop them do it . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:30 pm | Reply First of all , president Obama sent 50,000 US troops to Afghanistan to complete the Afghan war that the GOP abandoned to start their illegitimate Iraqi war . 
Secondly , president Obama completed what we supposedly went into Afghanistan to do 10 years ago and that was to kill OBL . 
And I may add that this delicate mission was completed successfully without the lost of lives amongst US troops and Pakistan civilians . 
Secondly , president Obama set a deadline to start the withdrawal of our troops from the GOP 's illegitimate Iraqi war and he has followed through on his pledged promise as US troop withdrawal from Iraq began several months ago . 
When congress voted for the war powers act in 2003 , it did so in accordance with United Nations mandate for Iraq to disarm and give up its war arsenal . 
However what that war powers act did not authorize was for George W. Bush , John Boehner and the Republican Party to create a scheme and lie and mislead the American people , the UN and the world community about bogus and non existent weapons of mass destruction in Iraq , dragging us into a bloody and senseless war that may last for decades to come . 
And what the 2003 war powers act did not authorize was for George W. Bush and the Republican Party to prematurely withdraw UN inspectors from Iraq by force to start their illegitimate Iraqi war . 
During this UN mission , both long and short range Iraqi missiles were being destroyed before the world eyes each and every day by UN inspectors and the Iraqi war arsenal was being made inefficient and obselete without bloodshed and lost of life . 
Subsequently , Iraq was no longer a threat to its neighbors and neither was it an immenent threat to the United States . 
However , the dictator and war criminal George W. Bush , John Boehner and his Republican Party violated American and international law by prematurely removing UN inspectors from Iraq by force to start their illegitimate Iraqi war . 
The result is 4,000 plus dead US troops and half a million Iraqi civilians dead to date . 
But ten years later , no one is yet to call for the impeachment and imprisonment of George W. Bush , John Boehner and the Republican party . 
And what has president Obama done wrong in his handling of the Libyan crisis ? 
Has any American lives been lost in the Libyan conflict ? 
Have we committed ground troops to the Libyan conflict ? 
Are we actually involved in the conflict at this moment or just proving logistic support to NATO ? 
and is president Obama hurting our economy by supporting the UN mandated Libyan Mission ? 
I may add that today we are spending 11 billion US dollars a month in the Afghan war the GOP abandoned to start their illegitimate Iraqi war and so far we have spent 1 trillion US dollars in Iraq . 
So who is really to be blamed here ? 
And today we are still suffering casualties in Afghanistan because George W. Bush , John Boehner and the GOP abandoned and prolonged the Afghan war to wage their senseless and illegitimate Iraqi war . 
So far Mladic has been arrested and taken to the ICC in the Hague for war crimes against humanity but ten years later , George W. Bush is showing up at NBA finals and Superbowls , living it up while American sons and daughters are dead as a result of his insidious war atrocities and he is yet to be tried for war crimes . 
So why the double standard ? 
And is there preferencial treatment when the war criminal in question is white and American ? 
At the onset of the Libyan crisis , John McCain , John Boehner and the Republican Party rediculied president Obama and accused him of dragging his feet and not rushing to intervene militarily in Libya because in their words , Libyan civilians were being slaughtered by the Libyan government . 
But as soon as president Obama with support of the world community followed through on a UN mandated mission to protect the Libyan people , the GOP decided to flip flopped on the issue , making a 360 and accusing the president of rushing to war . 
My message to the GOP is you 've got to be kidding right ? 
But perhaps the reason why the GOP is upping its stance and criticism on the president for our involvement in Libya is probably because they sense that the Libyan government is about to collapse any day now and they just want to score political points by trying to prevent president Obama from getting credit should Moammar Ghadaffi fall . 
But what is amasing is that everytime the GOP tries to set up roadblocks for the Obama administration , at the end of the day this administration prevails and so do the American people . 
Remember Obama got Osama ? 
Yea , and it sure was nice to see Americas celebrate all across the country , waving the American flag once more on that faithful night and remembering what it is like to feel patriotic and be American once again . 
And yes , we will wave ole glory once aagain in 2012 for OBAMA\/BIDEN . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:34 pm | Reply I am lost . 
I thought it was the Navy Seals that got Osama and Obama was no doubt on golf course . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:44 pm | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 2:17 pm | Reply Where did all the intelligent people go ?? Nice job Joe ... good answer !!! June 15 , 2011 at 3:31 pm | Reply To make it short . 
Impeach Obama for meddling with Libyan internal affairs of slaughtering its own rebel rats . 
Salute Mr. Boehner , and Mr. Kucinich in their bipartisan effort to support dictators , when even Russia and China had turned their back on Gahdafi in UN meeting . 
June 15 , 2011 at 11:39 pm | Reply Thank you . 
I could n't have said that as well . 
Congress has only approved 5 wars in this nations history before the fact , and the last one they approved was WW11 . 
GW Bush did not get approval prior to Iraq . 
Reagan did not get approval prior to Grenada . 
George H W Bush did not get approval prior to Panama ... where there was no unrest . 
What 's so different now compared to Vietnam , Somalia , Grenada , Iraq , and etc. . 
Simply the reason is a Republican congress that does n't want to address real issues , they want to drag their feet on jobs , and rather spend their time on this idiocy . 
We do n't even have boots on the ground , not one American life has been lost . 
This is just their moronic stall tactics ... and they are afraid beside bin Laden , Obama could take credit for helping remove Gaddafi . 
June 16 , 2011 at 5:39 pm | Reply Obama does n't have to defend anything about Lybia . 
Gaddaffi declared he was going to destroy villages & civilians , he threatened & began a march towards a hollocust . 
No way on my watch -LRB- or Obamas -RRB- are we going to stand by & debate over lattes ' whether or not to intervene to prevent the wholesale murder of any people . 
So go ahead & sue . 
The entire Congress is a waste of time & a waste of money . 
Disband the whole thing now & have elections in a Palimentary style of representation . 
At least then you stand a chance of being represented . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:34 pm | Reply This whole thing is political and ignorant all Presidents have done the same thing and were not called out it is because of who this President is and he still can not be accepted by a certain segment of the society . 
He has done his homework and knows his constitutional rights and gets advice from his National Secuirty Team before making tough decisions . 
If I recall the republicans were complaining because he did n't act fast enough so he is damned by these people no matter what . 
There are more pertinent things to worry about in the US as far as jobs and the economy is concerned . 
Remember , Libya was about huminitarian and stopping the killing of its people by a regime and the other wars are about keeping the nuclear weapons out of the hands of terrorist . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | Reply Interesting how when some one calls out racism that you get `` liberal playin the race card '' or `` just because I do n't agree , I 'm a racist '' . 
Probably are , but more importantly , folks act like Racism just dried up and blew away . 
Seems to have gotten worse actually . 
Do n't act as if it does n't manifest in blogs and `` recent politics '' because it does . 
Stop being such disenginuous liars using Limpballs tactics . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:42 pm | Reply Obama has ties to muslims leader and their connection . 
Like Tony Rezko and Bill Ayers and Jeremiah Wright . 
These Muslims want Gaddafi out because he embraces the Great Satan which is United States . 
Obama is a muslim in his heart and can not convert out of islam or otherwise they will kill him . 
Getting rid of Gaddafi in Libya is his way to help the muslim brotherhood to take over and usher in the mahdi . 
So really IMO has no cause to put troops in Libya . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:46 pm | Reply he can defend his actions but can he defend tornadoes , fires , floods and soon coming the great earthquake June 15 , 2011 at 12:53 pm | Reply and a hole in the floorof the Gulf ... Do n'tforget that ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:14 pm | Reply I think its funny how all the liberals in these comments are blaming the republicans for this when it was a bipartisan group that is sueing the president . 
Did you not read the article or do you need to look up what bipartisan means ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:53 pm | Reply `` The President does not have power under the Constitution to unilaterally authorize a military attack in a situation that does not involve stopping an actual or imminent threat to the nation . '' 
-- Senator Barack Obama , Dec. 20 , 2007 . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:56 pm | Reply Did n't John , who is anti Pres. Obama , start the racism talk ? 
So who is playing the race card ? 
or was John actually playing the racism card just to get people stirred up . 
Our country is in trouble . 
Refuse to be distracted by non issues or non solutions . 
June 15 , 2011 at 12:59 pm | Reply Here 's what you need to know , and what CNN is n't telling you -LRB- Headline\/Source -RRB- : LIBYA : HABESHIA , ETHNIC CLEANSING RISK FOR BLACK LIBYANS , ANSAmed Libya ripe for jihad 's rallying cries , The Australian Mounting Evidence of Rebel Atrocities in Libya , Pajamas Media Libya Rebels Raise Concern About Islamic Extremism , AP Libyan Rebel Commander : Cut Gaddafi s Throat , Then Establish an Islamic State , Pajamas Media Libya chaos ` allows al-Qaida to grab surface-to-air missiles ' , Reuters Libya : Former Guant namo detainee is training rebels , The Telegraph Ex-Mujahedeen Help Lead Libyan Rebels , Wall Street Journal In Libya , the jihadists go up to the front , JDD Libyan rebel commander admits his fighters have al-Qaeda links , The Telegraph Muslim Brotherhood Behind Syria s New Day of Rage , AP Brotherhood leader : Next govt to be Islamist , Al Masri Al Youm In Egypt , Muslim Brotherhood becomes legitimate party , Reuters Protesters demand Sharia Law implementation , tourism that respects Islam , Al Masri Al Youm Egyptian Shaykh : Jihad Is Solution to Muslims ' Financial Problems , Translating Jihad Brotherhood sheikh to run for president , Al Masri Al Youm At a Protest In Cairo , One Group Is Missing , Ocala Egyptian Military Court Prosecutes Only Christians in Muslim Church Attacks , AINA Christians worry Egypt being hijacked by Islamists , Reuters Egyptian Cleric Muhammad Hussein Yaaqub : Results of Egyptian Referendum Were in Favor of Islam , and Whoever Is Unhappy about It Is Free to Leave to Canada or the US , MEMRI Islamist Candidate for Egyptian Presidency : Israel 's End Is Near , MEMRI Thousands attend joint Brotherhood-Salafi rally , Al Masri Al Youm Post-revolution Egypt backs Syrian regime , says rights advocate , Hurriyet Daily Egypt Muslim Brotherhood condemns Bin Laden death , AP Egypt revolt gave us back our lives : Hamas chief , AFP Panic in Egypt over Muslim Brotherhood 's call for Islamic rule , Asharq Al-Awsat Islamist fears permeate Tunisian politics , Magharebia Islamist party wants to establish Shariah law in Tunisia , AFP Tunisia legalises Islamist group Ennahda , BBC Tunisian prostitutes terrorized by Islamists , ennehar Polish priest killed by Tunisian extremists-media , Reuters Thousands greet Tunisian Islamist leader 's return , AFP Fall of secular regime paves the way for the rise of Islamic influence , Reuters Women keep wary eye on Tunisian revolt , AFP Leader 's Aide Underlines Islamic Identity of Regional Uprisings , FNA Islamist extremists ` elated ' over Arab unrest , The New York Times Latest al-Qaida Magazine Praises Arab Revolutions , Family Security Matters Tehran 's interim Friday Prayer Leader : Regional popular uprisings signal return to Islamic values , ABNA Russian rebel calls for jihad , praises Arab unrest , Reuters Saudi Arabia : Saudi scholars support Libyan uprising , Arab News Al-Qaida 's No. 2 Urges Tunisians , Egyptians to Create Islamic States , AP Muslim Brotherhood Urges Support for Libyan Protesters , Voice of America Muslim preachers laude revolution , slam democracy , AlArabiya.net June 15 , 2011 at 1:03 pm | Reply Seems like our purely `` academic '' and `` political '' administration is a bit over its head with regard to the economy , military operations , foreign policy , border security , immigration , healthcare , business , etc. . 
I guess that there were n't any courses at Harvard on these subjects . 
It is also quite apparent that `` Community Organizing '' does n't help out in these areas either . 
The world needs to bear with the USA as we do a lot of On The Job Training . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:05 pm | Reply Any President in Barry 's place would have caught OBL by now ! 
it is 10yrs and high time ! 
Nothing Great ... All intel came from time of President Bush in 2007 . 
Get your facts straight . 
Barry is one time President . 
By the way I have a Great Job and not Jobless , with America 's sinking and stinking job market -- you too must be worried !! Now , do n't tell me this is Bush problem too because in 2007 the jobless rate was approximately 7 % . . 
not 9 + ... what ` Change ' have Barry brought over , did he bring the solders home ? 
NO , instead sent more troops !???? Cut on deficit ? 
No , instead increased it by loaning money left right and center to terrorist nations around the world like Pakistan , Afghanistan and Iraq -- He is a JOKE ! 
LOL !! worst president of all times Mr. Barry -- Must Go ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:09 pm | Reply further proof that our biggest threat to our country is the nincompoops in congress . 
think they must have jarred their cajones out in the luxury gym that we are paying for but cant see . 
as my dear departed pappy would say `` they got their brains in their butt '' . 
Obama should go after the real enemy the GOP congress and their suckies . 
Watta bunch of candy @sses . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:13 pm | Reply Right on Joan . 
the only reason that the republicans are drumming up this is because they are hoping to win the White House in 2012 and they figure the more they can harass the President the better . 
They should be ashamed of themselves trying to distract our president at a time like this for their own stupid political reasons . 
They are fooling no one . 
OBAMA 2012 June 15 , 2011 at 1:13 pm | Reply I also think that Joe is right that it seems that Qaddafi is closer to being toppled now and they do n't want Pres. Obama to get any credit for it . 
If Qaddafi does go , Republicans will flip back to `` Obama took to long in helping the Libyans\/setting up a no fly zone , and as a result more Libyans dies than should have . 
Its all Obama 's fault '' June 15 , 2011 at 5:24 pm | Reply Okay this is something I would like for you to think about ... IF this Arab Spring is real and the imppetoues for that spring is our community organizing president ... How can he sleep with that many dead freedom fighters , slaughtered for his beliefs ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:16 pm | Reply We are living in bad times and these idiots want tottalk about everything but the economy . 
I can not wait until the elections . 
I think a real change is coming and those trying to help the rich get richer are in for a rude awaekning . 
I think we all need to get all these iron gray old men out of all of the congress and senate . 
They want to return to the Bush years . 
Anyone stupid enough to want to go back through the worst 8 years of Presidency is semi-retarded . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:16 pm | Reply Never in my life seen so much hatred for a sitting President . 
Call it what you want but i know what this is . 
It ' Racism and it 's alive and well for those who do n't believe it . 
OBAMA 2012 June 15 , 2011 at 1:16 pm | Reply You need look no farther that the GWB years ... How many conservatives lined BO inaugural parade route with signs that said Hail to the Thief ... or sang that song ... and all the other swipes taken in congress and by liberals on the blogs ... you have a very short memory June 15 , 2011 at 10:19 pm | Reply Racism is alive and well in America . 
More and more bigots are showing their true colors each and every day June 15 , 2011 at 1:18 pm | Reply Thanks Joe , How soon people forget . 
Congress is drumming this up because they feel slighted that they did n't get to make the decision that Obama did . 
It was the right decision and they are angry because they were not a part of it and they ca n't take credit . 
No matter what President Obama does , they would condemn him for it . 
He 's damn if he does and damn if he does n't . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:26 pm | Reply but back to the article , Obammy is the Pres , he 's got the right to do what he did , just as other Presidents have done . 
The only difference is his color , not his attitude or his methods or his results . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:52 pm | Reply and all the liberals lived happily ever after ... The end Well . . 
well if the president were trying to flot the law all he had to do pull ` troop ' out for twenty four hours and put them back thereby be within the law . 
What some people go to get media attendtion for themself . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:33 pm | Reply Obama has it : '' it `` s my economy now . 
Give it to me '' . 
You see this on TV . 
So , where the Bush again . 
It 's Obama now . 
And he does VERY BAD JOB . 
We are worse than 3 years ago . 
Let 's be frankly it worse . 
I want my vote back -LRB- i vote for Obama in 2008 -RRB- Sorry and I ask America for forgiveness . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:38 pm | Reply First , I would like to say that criticizing the current President does not mean a person is racist . 
I believe it is extremely important to look at the facts and argue based on those -- not just feelings or arguments that `` hit below the belt '' in order to try to discredit another 's point of view . 
It is a good sign that Congress is ensuring President Obama does not abuse his War Powers . 
This is a good demonstration of the balance of powers , which makes our country great . 
If Congress recognizes -- and they do -- that President Obama has not properly requested authorization to continue U.S. troop involvement in Libya than President Obama should be wise enough to ensure that Congress has sufficient evidence . 
Instead by combating the War Powers Resolution he is challenging Congress ' power to `` Declare war , raise and support the armies '' of the Constitution - Article I , Section 8 . 
I heard an argument here stating that former President W. Bush did not receive congressional authorization to enter Iraq . 
October 11 , 2002 Congress -LRB- both House , 296 to 133 , and the Senate , 77 to 33 -RRB- passed H.J. Res 114 `` Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 . 
With congressional authorization , President W. Bush approved an air strike on March 19 , 2003 , with an invasion on March 20 , 2003 . 
On the same token , President Obama needs to adhere to the Constitution by supporting an action to have Congress vote on allowing the U.S. troops to remain in Libya . 
This article is correct -- the War Powers Resolution does allow the President as Commander in Chief -LRB- Constitution , Article II , Sec 2 -RRB- to deploy troops for 60 days without approval from Congress , but must receive approval after that time . 
This argument may appear to be critical of President Obama , but really it is just a case of looking at the facts . 
I believe in the past , the Congress has not utilized the Constitution as they should -- this is a good step in the write direction . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:41 pm | Reply You Obama haters are just as crazy as your republican\/tea party candidates . 
Congress signed off on the bill and now they want to sue the president over it . 
What a waste of taxpayers money and time . 
If this is not the pot calling the kettle black . 
This president has tried his best to meet you idiots half way , but you want no parts of it . 
If it does not involve guns , abortion and religion you want no parts of it . 
Please quit trying to include state and religion as one . 
This is the only thing that you nuts cry about . 
The only thing you fools seem to agree on is to get the black man out of the white house . 
Your kind are nothing but disgusting , shameful , hateful and full of bull . 
Look at how your party is treating MItt Romney , because he is not of your religion and to think that anyone would want to live in your world with all of your rules for only one tribe of people . 
The rules should be for all people . 
Your people -LRB- yes I said it -RRB- are just sickening . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:41 pm | Reply Sir , I against Obama not because he is black . 
It 's absolutely crazy think like that . 
You try to use very chip approach = if anybody critic of Obama it 's mean this person racist . 
I have many black friend who agree with me that Obama did not full fill his promises -- Yes we can and change . 
Tell we Obama did that he deserve to be president again . 
Just , please do n't again just bla bla bla . 
I got a lot from Obama during last 2.5 y. June 15 , 2011 at 2:03 pm | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 2:06 pm | Why would you try convincing a nut anything . 
You just let them talk and watch the results . 
Your friends are laughing at you behind your back . 
Dummy June 15 , 2011 at 2:08 pm | Well said Jindal ... you are a shinning star of the tolerant liberal party ... LMAO ... even people that do n't liek you are laughing at you ... Dummy June 15 , 2011 at 10:23 pm | President Bush was blamed for going into Iraq -- -LRB- Though entire world knows how dangerous Saddam was to his own people and the region -RRB- . . 
Thank you Mr. Bush for getting rid of the sick man . 
Barry is bombing Libya and Yemen and trying to kill Gaddafi -- how is that OK ???????? Economy at the bottom of Barry 's Agenda ! 
Did he not promise in presidential campaign he will bring troops home as soon as possible in 2011 ??? sending more troops is exact opposite of that promise ! 
do n't tell me it took 50,000 more solders to catch OBL -- LOL ??? while Intel was there since 2007 ! 
Did he shut Gitmo yet ??? that is another promise not kept ! 
He was going to reduce deficit -- Economy is stinking right now -- Another promise not kept ! 
3 strikes and out !! So he should be out in 2012 ! 
THE worst president ever !! -- Just to make one thing very clear -- I am person of color and have a Job of past 20 yrs -- so not racist and not jobless either !! Just a observer ... ! 
will not vote him in 2012 -- I PROMISE ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:42 pm | Reply The Other Michael in Houston Maiki are you serious ? 
Heck no we are not worse than 3 years ago , we are far better off . 
President Obama acted in ordinace with the law as stated . 
As stated before , you Republicans have tried everything to derail our President . 
Too bad we 80 million will be there again in 2012 to give you sore losers more to cry about ! 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:49 pm | Reply Really ???? the deficit is $ 1.645 trillion this year . 
2007 s deficit was just $ 160 billion altogether . 
-LRB- Washington Post -RRB- You may be right in saying he has n't made it worse -- but he has n't made it better either . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:57 pm | Reply I do n't care about politics . 
Republican or democrat , I now gas price up , many w\/out job , 3 wars , food price to the roof , housing slum . 
This what I care . 
My friend lost house . 
What better than 3 y. ago . ? 
Come on , let be frankly . 
Obama better - play golf , travel for people expense and vacation after vacation . 
Where is the change . ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:15 pm | Reply Well let 's just setup another flipping committee to talk about Libya and let 's not figure out how to create jobs ... get our soldiers home . 
Let 's just site a sue , sue , sue ... Let 's not discuss how we can make a car or truck get more than 30\/20 mpg . 
Let 's not actually talk about issue 's that affect everybody ... Yes we can talk about Libya ... but hmmm . . 
Let 's see ... 1 . 
Iraq\/Afghan War is first ... which works right into the Car thing ... 2 . 
JOBS JOBS JOBS JOBS JOBS 3 . 
After the government is all talked out on that ... than let 's discuss Libya ... until than ... Bring our kids home ! 
Give us a car that does n't cost us $ 400.00 a month to fill up . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:22 pm | yes maikl blame the president for your short comings and your ignorance . 
very smart of you . 
food price to the roof ? 
are u serious June 15 , 2011 at 3:31 pm | First , I would like to say that criticizing the current President does not mean a person is racist . 
I believe it is extremely important to look at the facts and argue based on those not just feelings or arguments that `` hit below the belt '' in order to try to discredit another 's point of view . 
It is a good sign that Congress is ensuring President Obama does not abuse his War Powers . 
This is not a cause of Republican vs Democrat -- both sides are displeased with the lack of authorization . 
In order to continue U.S. troop involvement in Libya , President Obama should support Congress in authorization . 
Former President W. Bush did receive congressional authorization to enter Iraq . 
October 11 , 2002 Congress -LRB- House voted 296 to 133 , and Senate voted 77 to 33 -RRB- passed H.J. Res 114 `` Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 . 
With congressional authorization , President W. Bush approved an air strike on March 19 , 2003 , with an invasion on March 20 , 2003 . 
On the same token , President Obama needs to adhere to the Constitution by supporting an action to have Congress vote on allowing the U.S. troops to remain in Libya . 
This article is correct the War Powers Resolution does allow the President as Commander in Chief -LRB- Constitution , Article II , Sec 2 -RRB- to deploy troops for 60 days without approval from Congress , but Congress has the power under the Constitution - Article I , Section 8 to approve the action after 60 days . 
I believe in the past , the Congress has not utilized the Constitution as they should this is a good step in the right direction . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:23 pm | Reply After the president announced to Detroint that we are winning this war ... the numbers came out and they were worse ... So how are be better : ????? June 15 , 2011 at 10:25 pm | Reply Another thing , all the promises the republicans touted to get your vote have not happened yet . 
What 's up with that ? 
Too busy telling lies to the country and abroad to get their way ? 
Oh no I get it now , so long as the white man says it out of their mouths it is okay and true . ? 
If only you would tell the people that you are just racist we would have more respect for the republican\/tea party , but they will not confess the truth , because it would mean losing everything . 
Do not fret because Americans and people abroad see this for themselves , that all is a lie . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:49 pm | Reply So would upi be insulted if I told you that I find your comment here extremely insulting and very racist : ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:26 pm | Reply You kids in your partisan politics . . 
Who really gives a damn who does it . 
Do you all honestly think it matters who is in office ? 
Are you really gullible enough to think the gov ' t is responsible enough to govern itself ? 
Who hold the gov ' t to the fire ? 
Who makes them tow the line ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:50 pm | Reply The fact that boner and the gop would criticize Obama for his handling of Libya while totally ignoring bush 's mishandling of Iraq clearly demonstrates just how pathetic and desperate their inexcusable behavior really is . 
And the fact that boner and the gop would criticize Obama for his handling of the economy while totally ignoring bush 's mishandling of economy clearly demonstrates just how pathetic and desperate their inexcusable behavior really is . 
And the fact that boner and the gop 's number one issue above all else is tax cuts for the wealthiest few percent of the population clearly demonstrates just how morally and ethically depraved they really are . 
boner and the gop : US politics for sale to the highest bidder . 
boner and the gop clearly believe they are entitled to get rich at the expense of the poor and middle class , which they view as little more than a grossly inferior class of people and nothing more than cattle and sheep to be herded and fleeced by the entitled wealthy and corrupt politicians . 
They have no shame , only arrogance . 
What 's it going to take to get boner and the gop to man up and accept some responsibility for the condition of our country after eight years of gop control instead of pretending that it 's all Obama 's fault ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:51 pm | Reply Why do n't they do their job and stop all of this foolishness like birth certificates and now Libya . 
As long as he is president they will always look for something . 
Why do n't they concentrate on things the American people need and stop wasting time and money on crap . 
June 15 , 2011 at 1:56 pm | Reply some do n't know the difference between confidence and arrogance . 
That 's all it takes for a black man or woman to be confident and they run scared . 
That 's why they want to walk around with guns . 
Come to a real neighborhood and you will still get jacked with you own gun . 
I bet you like Palin and Bachmann too . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:04 pm | Reply @jindal -- You sound very racist , much like the Black Panther party of the 1960s and on . 
They believed in black supremecy as well . 
As a Republican , on the other hand , we believe in equality . 
Maybe you 've forgotten , but it was a Republican president who wrote the Emancipation Proclomation and fought the bloodiest war in American history against the Democratic South who wanted to keep their black slaves at any cost . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:17 pm | Reply Really he , Jindal , sounds more like the New Black Panthers ... Did you loiter outside a polling place shouting insults ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 10:28 pm | Reply This man in the white house is surely going to make a bigger mess in middle east region before he departs office in 2012 ! 
and America thought Mr. Bush was a warmonger ? 
Look at Mr. Barry now ... ! 
Libya , Yemen -- what a mess ! 
millions of $ $ $ wasted for what really ??? No , I am not a Republican , Not a racist since I am person of color myself and not jobless either ! 
He has failed Americans on all his pre-election promises ! 
believe it or not time will tell how much damage this guy has already done to America ! 
The truth the world really is watching is how lame this president has become ! 
Sad ... Me not voting for him in 2012 . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:12 pm | Reply Did I just see our brilliant president place some blame for unemployment on ATM machines . 
I suppose some of that is true , except that ATM machines have been around for something like 30 years . 
Why not goiall the way back and blame Henry Ford , robots and the internet as well ? 
Obama thinks we are all idiots and those who blindly follow him probably are . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:20 pm | Reply He is a lawyer ... so a masterfull summation is in order ... . 
LOL June 15 , 2011 at 10:29 pm | Reply Iraq 's war , Afghan 's war , and UN action in Libya . 
they are 3 completely different things . 
You can not use the mistake on going to one to say the other 2 are wrong . 
each has it 's own justification . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:27 pm | Reply First of all , Obama did not complete the 10 year search for Bin Laden . 
He just happen to be president when the military completed the action . 
And he has no military experience whatsoever . 
All he did was give the OK for what the military wanted to do . 
Now , look at his record since taking office : refusing to present a valid birth certificate -LRB- Last one a forgery -RRB- ; raised the national debt in just two years more than any other president in their 4 -8 year term ; pushed for Obamacare which includes the unconstitutional mandate that all Americans buy health insurance ; had done nothing to control or lower the cost of health care -LRB- which is actually the real problem -RRB- has allowed federal tax dollars to be used for abortions -LRB- even though the signed a useless exec order to the contrary -RRB- . 
In summation -- he set out to ruin the American economy and unfortunately congress has allowed him to do it . 
Time for Congress to step up to the plate and impeach him before more damage is done . 
Based on the facts , it will be an open and shut case . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:31 pm | Reply Funny how everyone always wants to criticize the president and call him an idiot , war-monger , criminal , etc. . 
Does n't seem to matter if it is a republican or a democrat in office . 
Well have any of you people ever been president ? 
Until you 've sat in the oval office and had to make hard decisions , decisions that will be scrutinized much more in depth than any decision an average person has to make , until you 've done that ... I suggest keeping your mouth shut . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:38 pm | Reply This is pretty funny since when the Libya story first broke you had politicians all over the networks voicing their indignation at the actions occurring in the country wanting war , sactions , bla bla bla . 
This suite is just to cover up the fact that they wanted to make the decision to go to war and cover their asses in case public outrage occurs after everything involving libya is finished . 
Politics is always the same , such a sad thing for this to reported as a top story . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:41 pm | Reply Although there are Dem who are backing this lawsuit , in truth it is nothing more than another Republican distraction , aimed at hiding the fact that they have no solutions for our economic woes other than transferring more of our nations wealth to the rich . 
That said , I disapprove of our involvement in Libya . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:50 pm | Reply For you right wing aholes who say that the economy is worse off than it was when president Obama took office , let me make it clear that first of all , president Obama inherited the worst economic crisis in America since the Great Depression from the GOP . 
Furthermore , when president obama took office and implemented the Economic Stimulus package , the goal of this was to prevent the American economy from slipping into a catastrophic depression . 
But the GOP said , no that is wasteful spending and they urged to let the economy slip into a depression and then the GOP said some ten years down the road , the American economy will bounce back on its own . 
Yet they kept asking where are the jobs ? 
And how do you create the basis for American jobs if you do n't first of all , stabilize the broken American economy ? 
However , from day one the Federal Reserve which has no party affiliation , said that job growth will be gradual and will fluctuate from time to time because some manufactures would be slow in hiring because of uncertainty over the job market . 
When president Obama took office in 2008 , 23 million Americans had already lost their jobs to the recession caused by the failed and misguided economic policies of the Republican Party . 
Let 's face it , in the history of America even during good times , 5 million jobs were never created in two years , let alone 23 million jobs , especially with the deliberate policy delaying tactics and roadblocks by the GOP . 
That brings me to my next point . 
When president Obama took office , the GOP said let the BIG THREE , Ford , GM and Chrysler crumble to the ground . 
But waht is aamazing about the GOP is how they lack a sense of American history because during World War II , it was the Big Three that was responsible for mobilizing our military and helping America to defeat Fascism in Europe and Imperialism in the Pacific . 
And while for two years the GOP has been sarcastically asking where are the jobs , a few months ago Florida Republican Governor purposely turned down a multibillion dollar rail project funded by the government , arguing that he was concerned that the project may have exceeded the available funding . 
Here 's a governor who declined the opportunity to improve his state 's infastructure and America 's infastructure and the opportunity to create thousands of American jobs . 
Then a year ago , Kentucky senator Jim Bunning blocked a very important highway construction project for the south eastern corridor , arguing that the funding was inflating the national deficit and he and his Republican Party called president Obama fiscally irresponsible . 
But when Jim Bunning voted against this bill , his vote alone haulted this project as many workers were told to back their bags and go home . 
Wanna know where the jobs are ? 
The Party of No. . 
They 're JUST a bunch of aholes . 
June 15 , 2011 at 2:51 pm | Reply @Joe -- Sounds like a lot of far-left propganda hot air leaking out of an empty headed ninny who will believe anything the media feeds him . 
Try doing some actual research and you will find that , while Obama did indeed inherit a falling economy , he and you left-wingnuts have made it much , much worse . 
You do n't even have the collective brains amongst your congressman to come up with a budget , an act of stupidity not yet seen in the history of this country ! 
Congressman Ryan may not have the best plan , but at least we 're trying rather than sitting back blasting our colleagues -LRB- though we still have some time for that -RRB- , shooting naked photos of ourselves , and playing golf . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:49 pm | Reply Yeah , it probably does sounds like liberal propaganda to you because all you listen to is FOX news and Rush Limbaugh . 
But actually , everything that he said is true . 
But you would n't believe it if an angel came down and told it to you . 
June 15 , 2011 at 5:32 pm | A very profound insult there xwing ... but that is all you do ... Insult June 15 , 2011 at 10:30 pm | Joe , You 've been reading the Democratic talking pioints again have n't you ? 
This admiistrations anti business , anti production -LRB- see oil and gas -RRB- and regeressive tax ideas are creating all of the uncertainty . 
You can not cntinue to stick it to the people who can actually do some hiring and then ask them for a favor -LRB- hire some people -RRB- This President is in way over his head and he is discovering every day that talking -LRB- reading -RRB- pretty is n't enough . 
You need to actually do something besides throw money that we do n't have at the problem . 
Oh , by the way , all of that money keeps devaluing the dollar , making everything more expensive . 
June 15 , 2011 at 6:04 pm | Reply and obciously he has not gotten the liberal update about the possible double dip ... LOL June 15 , 2011 at 10:31 pm | Reply All i can say for people like you is . 
Look at every campaign promise he made , and within a month how he not only did n't keep it , he voted the exact opposite . 
He not only did n't halt the bush agenda , he continued it . 
Troops are now over for extension rather than withdrawl , patriot act has been re en-stated , The bail out bill passed was passed in 2 hours -LRB- having promised to give congress a minimum of five days to ensure everyone was allowed to read anything he wanted past -RRB- . 
How can people sit back and just ignore this . 
Its not about party , bush was a failure , obama is bush with a democratic sticker . 
Wake up and save your country before they take it away from you June 16 , 2011 at 12:12 pm | Reply Presidents do n't vote on issues , the house and senate vote . 
June 16 , 2011 at 5:43 pm | Maybe Gadaffi will send the US congress another Thank you letter . 
I will always support the President ; however , we need to stop wasting our money on Libya , iraq and Afghanistan . 
None of these countries are worth it . 
If they shield terrorists -- then attack . 
Otherwise stay out and let them fight it out by themselves . 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:04 pm | Reply ca n't we just move on with the economy and stop being so litigious ... . 
are n't the republicans against all these frivolous lawsuits anyway ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:18 pm | Reply Has everyone forgotten the u.s. if a leading MEMBER of the U.N. ?? Originally this was an action taken under the authority of the u.n. ! 
ALL members are under obligation to support or abstain its decisions !! Did the u.n. get the majority support needed ? 
ABSOLUTELY !!! shame on supporters of dictators that slaughter women & children so they can live in shameless luxury !!! June 15 , 2011 at 3:21 pm | Reply hey washington , yall keep screwing up and the u.s.a. will be the next libya June 15 , 2011 at 3:45 pm | Reply obama can explain all he wants . 
he has two days to get congressional approval before he is in violation of the war powers act . 
June 15 , 2011 at 3:49 pm | Reply It will be a tight race , but you guys can bash the President all you want with none sense . 
This man has acted as he should have and no matter what he does the right will say he should not have done it that way . 
And if you do n't think its better than 3 years ago , you are a fool . 
Last time I checked , although prices are in deed going up forclosures have gone down and about 3 million workers have gotten jobs . 
That 's a hell of a lot better than 800,000 jobs lost . 
I did n't support this President the first time , but I sure as hell will this time . 
I know who screwed things up and when people keep telling me they want to take back thier country , I want to know who took it . 
I do n't care what fool the GOP sends out , cutting taxes even more will not help the economy . 
We went down that road and look at where we are now . 
The only thing I have disagreed with the President on is that he should have let the Bush tax cuts expire . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:10 pm | Reply No ... sorry the bottom fell out agian and foreclosures are on the rise again June 15 , 2011 at 10:34 pm | Reply Tax cuts for the wealthiest 2 % need to end . 
How can these people cry about a deficit when those tax cuts cost us $ 2.5 trillion over the last 10 years , and will cost use another $ 3.7 trillion if they are extended for everyone at the current rate . 
Just go back to the Clinton era tax level . 
June 16 , 2011 at 1:46 pm | Reply Within sixty calendar days after a report is submitted or is required to be submitted pursuant to section 1543 -LRB- a -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- of this title , whichever is earlier , the President shall terminate any use of United States Armed Forces with respect to which such report was submitted -LRB- or required to be submitted -RRB- , unless the Congress -LRB- 1 -RRB- has declared war or has enacted a specific authorization for such use of United States Armed Forces , -LRB- 2 -RRB- has extended by law such sixty-day period , or -LRB- 3 -RRB- is physically unable to meet as a result of an armed attack upon the United States . 
Such sixty-day period shall be extended for not more than an additional thirty days if the President determines and certifies to the Congress in writing that unavoidable military necessity respecting the safety of United States Armed Forces requires the continued use of such armed forces in the course of bringing about a prompt removal of such forces . 
Above is an excerpt from the War Powers Act . 
Which part of this does Obama think he is satisfying by providing reports on what they are doing in Libya ? 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:25 pm | Reply Obama 's approach to Libya is shaping up to be the most cost-effective , quickest , and safest -LRB- to US troops -RRB- removal of a murdering , tryant in the history of the modern world . 
His ability to get the Canadians , Europeans & Arabs to do the heavy lifting , while the Americans hold the door open , is exactly what the American people should want when they are as cash strapped and militarily-extended as they are . 
It shows effective leadership in my opinion . 
June 15 , 2011 at 4:36 pm | Reply the audacity of the GOP , all were silent on the Iraq invasion to date , what a bunch slackers June 15 , 2011 at 5:55 pm | Reply where the hell was he when bush was given unlimited powers lol o wait he voted for bushs destruction reign as well !!!! PompASS 2year games June 15 , 2011 at 10:04 pm | Reply June 15 , 2011 at 10:57 pm | Reply Impeach Obama for meddling with Libyan internal affairs of slaughtering its own rebel rats . 
Good to see Mr. Boehner , and Mr. Kucinich in their bipartisan effort to support dictators , when even Russia and China had turned their back on Gahdafi June 15 , 2011 at 11:37 pm | Reply Obama , the worse president ever . 
I vote my vote back . 
June 16 , 2011 at 12:14 am | Reply June 16 , 2011 at 11:27 am | Reply June 16 , 2011 at 1:34 pm | Reply Only want to safe saudi -LRB- KSA -RRB- royals . . 
and thier oil factroies June 16 , 2011 at 6:16 am | Reply Funny how the same things obama campaigned on , no favors , no special interests , he is handing out like , , , well paybacks . 
He is going around our constitution in fighting a war in Libya , and all americans should know this . 
He is making our congress obsolete , intentionally . 
He is also working towards our `` one world government '' , like he said he always wanted . 
I dont think we want to live under laws made by N. Korea , Iraq , France , Iran , or any other nation . 
It sounds to `` hippy '' to say what borders , what country , lets just share our world , until you find you what that really means . 
June 16 , 2011 at 8:07 am | Reply Americans need to stop arguing over party . 
party is an evil entity used to pit the population against each other to think things change with new terms . 
Look at Obama 's and Bush 's political agenda , and what they both actually passed . 
The fact of the matter is we are not the world police , we are not meant to tackle every civil war or foreign country that have issues . 
1.9 million Americans are currently unemployed . 
We need to fix ourselves , and stop imposing on everyone else . 
June 16 , 2011 at 12:06 pm | Reply @beefromng , Well spoken . 
Keep up the good fight ! 
These snakes have been sliding around hiding under OBAMAS ` politics ' since forever . 
That 's because they 're coward , undercover racists ! 
They 're liars who think that we are fools and just believe it 's all about the political beauracracy that they spew . 
I 've been on this hateful , racist battlefield since DAY ONE ! 
They turn right around and call me a racist for daring to even point that ` TRUTH ' out ! 
That does n't bother , nor scare me though . 
It IS pure racism ! 
June 16 , 2011 at 1:49 pm | Reply beefromng ; you notice that this BLACK PRESIDENT is hated , belittled and begrudged for participating in fundraisers , hosting state dinners , meeting with heads of state , using Airforce One , Marine One , having handlers and limousines , going to Camp David , taking breaks , going on vacation , hosting people at the Whitehouse , being invited to other nations events ; whether they are working and\/or relaxing , even making use of his VP and other ` deciders ' of his administration ! 
Things the other 43 enjoyed in peace ! 
June 16 , 2011 at 2:14 pm | Reply @raleighgirl ; I do n't blame you for being ashamed of Jay in NC . 
That man and I have been at it for a long time . 
I believe he 's a racists in denial , who likes to flip the script back on whomever points it out . 
He along with many have decided that I was racist for doing so and even going so far as giving VERY GOOD examples of it 's continous underlining , underming existance . 
Obama 's being kicked and beat-down systemicly for waaay more than his political views and decisions . 
They 're afraid he MIGHT just fix it June 16 , 2011 at 2:40 pm | Reply The very idea and thought of a Black Man stepping up and actually revamping , restructuring , rejuvenating and reviving this SICK nation of the side effects of years and years of failed policies , is a no-no PERIOD ! 
That is why the GOP\/TEAPARTYERS\/HATERS continue to dig like the rats they are to nibble away at any and every idea the Democrats come up with , and I know had HILLARY won the presidency and was doing exactly what OBAMAS been doing , she would n't have caught none of this hate flack and lies ! 
June 16 , 2011 at 2:58 pm | Reply They 'd rather see the nation just slide right on down into the ocean , first , than for a black president to go down in the AMERICAN HISTORY as actually bringing us back to good standing in the world and lifting us back up out of the dirt , economically , lawfully , even spiritually and socially ! 
They do n't want that . 
This nation 's always hated black heroes , even in the military . 
That black man ca n't be praised as braver , stronger or smarter than a white man , and that 's period . 
If that makes me racist , so be it ! 
June 16 , 2011 at 3:12 pm | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
Go inside the White House and on the road with CNN 's reporters , producers , and photojournalists . 
1600 provides you with an ALL ACCESS PASS inside the gates and behind the scenes . 
CNN 's White House team is unmatched in the news we break , the content we generate , and the sheer size of the team . 
But do n't let this be a one-way conversation , send us news tips and feedback ! 
Some presidential movements are OTR , or off-the-record , to the public and press until the president 's motorcade arrives at the previously undisclosed location . 
