OCEAN SPRINGS , Miss. -- BP 's compensation fund for Gulf oil spill victims has issued a final settlement payment to just one of the thousands of people and businesses waiting for checks , records show , and that $ 10 million payout went to a company after the oil giant intervened on its behalf . 
BP wo n't identify the business , citing confidentiality , but acknowledges it lobbied for the settlement . 
The amount far exceeds smaller stop-gap payments that some individuals and businesses have received while they wait for their own final settlements . 
The Gulf Coast Claims Facility was set up in August to independently administer BP 's $ 20 billion compensation fund in the aftermath of its April 20 oil well blowout off Louisiana . 
As of this weekend , roughly 91,000 people and businesses had filed for final settlements , but the fund 's administrator , Washington lawyer Kenneth Feinberg , has said those checks wo n't start rolling out until February at the earliest . 
Thousands of people have received some money to tide them over until a final settlement amount is offered , but only that one listed as paid on the facility 's web site has so far received a check . 
A BP spokesman called it `` a unique situation in which an existing BP business partner and BP submitted a view on a specific claim '' to the facility . 
The facility `` reviewed our positions and made an independent decision regarding the outcome of the claim , '' BP spokeswoman Hejdi Feick said in an e-mail Sunday night to The Associated Press . 
Feick did not immediately return a telephone message on Monday seeking additional details . 
Feinberg said Monday the facility never reviewed that claim for merit . 
He said BP struck an outside deal with the business and told the fund to make the payment . 
`` At the request of the parties , the settlement reached between BP and the other party was paid out of the GCCF fund , '' Feinberg told the AP . 
`` It was a private settlement and we paid it , but we were not privy to the settlement negotiations between BP and that party . 
`` We never reviewed the claim , '' Feinberg added . 
`` We honored the request of the parties to fund the claim . '' 
Rudy Toler , 30 , a shrimper and oysterman from Gulfport , Miss. , called the payment disgusting . 
`` It makes me sick , '' said Toler , a married father of four who has n't received a dime from the fund . 
`` It 's just criminal . '' 
Early on , he filed a claim for losses of about $ 140,000 for the six months he could n't work through the summer . 
The claims facility tells him his paperwork is under review again , but in the meantime , Toler is struggling to pay his bills and feed his family . 
`` I 'm doing the best I can , '' he said Monday . 
`` Every day is a struggle . '' 
Mayor Tony Kennon of Orange Beach , Ala. , a tourist town hit particularly hard by the oil spill , said the early settlement payment `` reeks of favoritism . '' 
`` It stinks , '' Kennon said Monday . 
`` It 's exactly what we 've been screaming about . 
There 's not an independent entity . 
There 's no oversight . '' 
Feinberg has faced repeated criticism from lawmakers , plaintiffs attorneys and claimants who complain about a lack of transparency and independence from BP , as well as claims being shortchanged and paid too slowly , or not at all . 
His law firm had been receiving $ 850,000 a month from BP for its work . 
Feinberg is currently negotiating with BP over a new payment structure to run the fund through August 2013 . 
Any money left over from the $ 20 billion is expected to be returned to BP . 
Feinberg has repeatedly promised fairness and transparency . 
He calls the program a success and notes it has already paid out more than $ 3.3 billion to some 251,000 claimants . 
However , roughly half of the 484,000 claims filed have been denied because of ineligibility or lack of documentation , meaning they got nothing , like Toler . 
And while there is an appeals process through the U.S. Coast Guard for disgruntled claimants , the agency has consistently sided with the facility . 
Feinberg told AP that the Coast Guard had processed 264 out of 507 appeals filed and in every case has agreed with the decisions by the claims fund . 
The program first allowed claimants to file for emergency six-month payments to keep them afloat , but many of those claims were denied . 
Those that were n't often were paid fractions of what they claimed they lost . 
The process now allows for three options . 
Spill victims can file for a quick cash one-time payment of $ 5,000 for individuals and $ 25,000 for businesses . 
More than 80,000 claimants have filed and been paid in that category , giving up their right to anymore money or to sue BP or any other responsible company . 
Claimants may also opt for a final settlement , but also would have to give up the right to sue . 
Residents and business owners who are n't ready to make that decision could instead file for interim quarterly payments through August 2013 , provided they can show proof of continued losses . 
