ATLANTA -- ATLANTA -LRB- AP -RRB- -- When an Associated Press reporter went scuba diving in the oil-streaked Gulf of Mexico this month , people commenting on websites worried about his health . 
But at the same time , the oil sure did n't bother some beachgoers in Alabama . 
`` I was in the water two hours yesterday , '' said Robert Theil , a French visitor to Orange Beach , as his sister acted as translator . 
`` I 'm not worried . 
It would take a lot before it could hurt you . '' 
Health officials say there seems to be little reason to worry at this point . 
But some note that health effects months or years from now remain a question mark , particularly for the workers who are in the thick of it , cleaning up oil from the BP spill in the Gulf . 
Public health officials and scientists will take up the topic at a two-day meeting beginning Tuesday in New Orleans , organized by the Institute of Medicine at the request of the Department of Health and Human Services . 
The group will also talk about how best to watch for any potential problems . 
HHS has already set aside $ 10 million to study cleanup workers and Gulf residents over time . 
In the meantime , some questions and answers : Q : Has anyone gotten sick from the oil spilled in the Gulf ? 
A : Yes , there have been reports of illnesses , but relatively few among people not involved in the spill cleanup . 
Most of the reported illnesses were related to odors or fumes . 
Almost all were mild and temporary , and many were in early May , within the first few weeks of the April 20 explosion . 
The reports are based on a doctor 's assessment , not on lab testing . 
All but 35 of the 109 spill-related illnesses in Louisiana have been workers . 
Alabama has 29 reports of illnesses that might be related to the spill , and Florida and Mississippi have had none . 
Q : So , what about the air ? 
It safe to breathe ? 
A : For those along the coast , for the most part , yes . 
The Environmental Protection Agency has been monitoring the air since shortly after the spill ; readings posted Friday show mostly good air quality . 
Some earlier results have found low levels of pollutants that can cause temporary problems like headaches , nausea or irritation of the eyes , nose and throat . 
The pollutants have periodically pushed an industrial smell onshore in some place -- one beachgoer compared it to a machine shop . 
But an oily odor does not necessarily mean it 's harmful , said LuAnn White , director of Tulane University 's Center for Applied Environmental Public Health . 
Officials continue to test . 
`` We are still concerned , '' said John Howard , director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health . 
And out on the water , tests have detected vapors from benzene , one of the chemicals in the oil that scientists say can cause cancer . 
The good news is that benzene can evaporate or burn off quickly , so the concentrations are much lower toward land . 
Q : What about all those tar balls and splotches of oil on some beaches ? 
A : It 's best to avoid them . 
Oil on bare skin should be washed off as soon as possible , health officials say . 
Soap and water , baby oil or petroleum jelly are the best way to remove it . 
Longer contact can cause skin to redden , swell and burn . 
The problem can get worse if the skin is exposed to the sun . 
White compared it to spilling motor oil on your hands . 
`` Are you going to get sick ? 
But do you want to do it ? 
I do n't think so , '' she said . 
But another expert cautioned that some chemicals in the oil and dispersants used in the cleanup can be easily absorbed through the skin . 
`` People are n't paying close attention like they should , '' said Robert Herrick , an industrial hygiene expert at the Harvard School of Public Health . 
Q : Can I swim in it ? 
A : Better not . 
You could get oil on your skin , and there 's the added possibility of accidentally swallowing whatever 's in the water . 
Louisiana beaches have been closed in Grande Isle and Fourchon , but because of cleanup efforts , not for health reasons . 
Alabama late last week lifted swimming advisories for beaches in Mobile County , but they remain in place for Baldwin County , near Florida . 
Q : Are people along the Gulf coast worried they 'll get sick ? 
A : Some are . 
There apparently have n't been any surveys asking Gulf residents if they 're concerned about their health . 
But calls to poison control centers have been lower than expected , and officials in some Gulf states say they 've heard more angst over the impacts on the environment and local business than about health . 
`` I look at it this way : It 's from the Earth . 
If you drank it in your drinking water every day it would hurt you . 
But spend a week in the water on vacation and it 's not going to , '' said Elaine Fox , who visited Orange Beach , Ala. , with a group from Family Church in West Monroe , La. . 
She spent time photographing her pregnant daughter-in-law Christi Fox , 25 , who lounged in the surf draped in a white cloth covering a white bikini . 
A few tar balls stuck to her bathing suit as she walked back to their condominium . 
Q : How about the seafood ? 
Is it safe to eat ? 
A : The president thinks so . 
Barack Obama ate Gulf seafood during his last visit to Mississippi . 
He declared that seafood from the region is safe , and also announced stepped-up inspections . 
Parts of the Gulf with oil have been closed for fishing . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Food and Drug Administration are sampling fish from the Gulf and are to begin checking fish that come in to docks . 
However , inspectors have yet to make an appearance at docksides , and some restaurants have been putting up signs saying they do not sell Gulf seafood . 
Some critics say testing needs to improve . 
Q : Will there be long-term health effects ? 
A : They do n't know . 
Some health officials say they do n't think long-term illnesses are likely . 
But they 've never seen pollution of this scale , and there are just too many unknowns to say for sure . 
`` It 's theoretically possible , but at this point of time not something people are predicting will happen , '' said Dr. Thomas Miller , an assistant state health officer with Alabama 's health department . 
Some chemicals in the oil are associated with a cancer risk . 
But it can take decades for an environmental trigger to result in cancer . 
And when cancers do occur , it 's difficult to sort out the real cause -- for example , whether oil fumes inhaled over two months played a greater role than cigarette smoke inhaled in bars over the course of a lifetime . 
