Wednesday : BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg -LRB- left -RRB- , CEO Tony Hayward and Managing Director Bob Dudley leave the White House after their meeting with President Obama . 
-LRB- Reuters -RRB- BP Chief Tony Hayward may have been yachting around England over the weekend because his duties at the oil giant are being handed over to the company 's managing director . 
BP spokeswoman Sheila Williams confirmed to Fox News on Monday that Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg has decided to sideline Hayward . 
`` The transition of day-to-day handling by BP Managing Director Robert Dudley of the oil spill cleanup has started , '' Williams said . 
On Friday , Svanberg told Fox News sister network Sky News in the United Kingdom that Hayward would remain in charge of the oil spill response until the leak is stopped -- which could be August or later -- but Dudley will take over in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Svanberg said comments by Hayward have had a detrimental effect on the company as it seeks to control the fallout from the April 20 explosion that caused a massive gusher that 's now in its 63rd day . 
`` It is clear Tony has made remarks that have upset people , '' he told Sky News . 
Hayward has repeatedly put his foot in his mouth since the Deepwater Horizon spill began , most notably for saying shortly after the explosion that killed 11 people that he 'd like his life back Hayward caused an additional uproar over the weekend by participating in a yachting race around England 's Isle of Wight . 
Hayward entered his 52-foot yacht named `` Bob '' into The JP Morgan-sponsored race . 
It finished fourth in its class . 
Williams had little to say about the sailing race or the appearance it created . 
`` It was a rare private time for Mr. Hayward to share with his son and that is all we are going to say about this , '' she said . 
But Hayward 's announcement that he had canceled a scheduled appearance at a London oil conference on Tuesday to focus on the Gulf suggested fallout from the yacht race had not ended . 
BP spokesman Jon Pack said Monday that Hayward 's `` very heavy schedule of commitments to the Gulf of Mexico '' had led him to cancel his appearance at the World National Oil Companies Congress . 
Hayward had been due to give the keynote speech about the global responsibilities of international oil companies . 
BP is trying to shake off a series of PR blunders that have made the oil giant appear out of touch with the human victims of the oil spill -- primarily Gulf Coast fishers , trawlers and tourism operators . 
BP last week agreed to create a $ 20 billion escrow account to pay for claims from thousands of workers whose businesses are collapsing as a result of the spill . 
Dudley told Bloomberg News on Monday that BP is reviewing assets for potential sale to cover the expected costs . 
Williams would not comment about any decisions made Sunday by the BP board of directors about whether to sell assets to bolster cash flow . 
BP 's troubles continue to grow after Anadarko , the co-owner of BP 's rig , said the oil firm 's actions before the accident at the Deepwater Horizon site were `` reckless . '' 
On top of that , BBC is airing a documentary Monday night featuring allegations by one Deepwater Horizon rig worker who said he spotted a leak in the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- two weeks prior to the explosion . 
Tyrone Benton , a robot operator , said one of the robot 's cameras spotted a leak on a control pod of the BOP , which is an emergency shutoff valve fixed to the wellhead on the seafloor . 
Benton told BBC that supervisors shut down the one BOP and turned on another so that work would n't stop . 
`` They have a control room where they could turn off that pod and turn on the other one , so that they do n't have to stop production , '' Benton said . 
`` We are aware of the allegation , '' Williams said of Benton 's claims , adding that the details that led to the explosions and fire are still under investigation and BP has not spoken with every witness yet . 
`` The -LRB- blowout preventer -RRB- was part of the Deepwater Horizon equipment which was owned and operated by Transocean . 
Transocean was responsible for both the operation and maintenance of the BOP on the drilling rig , '' she added . 
Fox News ' Greg Palkot and The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
