Massive Oil Spill Washes Ashore in the Gulf Millions of gallons of oil have leaked into the Gulf of Mexico from a blown-out well at the site of the Deepwater Horizon , which exploded on April 20 and sank two days later . 
NEW ORLEANS -- Out-of-work Gulf Coast shrimper Todd Pellegal spent his first $ 2,500 check from BP quickly , paying off bills and buying groceries for his family . 
He never even considered putting some of it away for taxes . 
Now he 's among the people up and down the Gulf Coast reeling from the oil spill disaster who are surprised -- and frustrated -- to find out the Internal Revenue Service may take a chunk of the payments BP PLC is providing to help them stay afloat . 
Many were already angry about how long the oil giant took to cut the checks . 
So when they got the money -- generally about a few thousand dollars each so far -- they spent it fast . 
`` If they 're going to pay you a lump sum , like for a year , then bam , take the taxes out of the check , '' said Pellegal , of Boothville , La. `` But a little bit at a time , they should n't . '' 
Accountants have been trying to nail down the implications for thousands of taxpayers after President Barack Obama said BP would create a $ 20 billion disaster fund and provide another $ 100 million for oil workers who lose their jobs because of the six-month moratorium on deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Oil has been gushing into the sea since the rig Deepwater Horizon exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers and triggering the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
Tax experts said generally all income is taxable under federal law unless specific exemptions are approved by Congress or the Treasury Department -- and neither has acted yet on oil spill damage claims . 
The IRS would not comment on whether exemptions would be made , citing a policy of not answering questions on specific tax issues . 
Adding to the confusion , Kenneth Feinberg , who was chosen by President Barack Obama and BP to oversee the Independent Claims Facility , said Friday it has n't been determined if the payouts will be considered taxable income . 
Some tax experts said they expected federal action soon to clarify the situation for Gulf Coast residents and business owners . 
`` With the experience we 've had with tornadoes and hurricanes , they know they need to address this , '' said John Ams , executive vice president of the Alexandria , Va.-based National Society of Accountants . 
It 's not the first time the region has dealt with whether disaster money should be taxed . 
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina , Louisiana and Mississippi residents received federal money to rebuild their homes after many claimed a casualty loss for the damage on the 2005 tax returns . 
The IRS initially required people who received the money and took the deduction to add the value of the deduction to their 2007 returns as taxable income . 
That decision angered many residents , including some who were pushed into a higher tax bracket as a result . 
After residents and local leaders protested , Congress in 2008 voted to negate the IRS decision . 
Without any such decision yet from federal authorities , tax experts are advising people getting BP payments to do a bit of advance planning and set aside some money . 
`` They should do a projection of their taxable income and determine if there is going to be a tax liability and have enough to cover that , '' said Crystal Faulkner , a partner in the Cincinnati-based accounting firm of Cooney Faulkner & Stevens LLC . 
That does n't sit well with Cherie Edwards , who is now only working one day a week at her job booking charter fishing trips at Zeke 's Landing in Orange Beach , Ala. . 
The lost hours due to the oil spill are costing her about $ 270 week . 
She said she got her claim number from BP on Thursday and plans to file an application in the coming day . 
So far , she said , no one has mentioned to her about a potential tax liability . 
Associated Press writers Jay Reeves in Alabama and Shelia Byrd in Mississippi contributed to this report . 
