Friday 7 October 2005 09.49 BST A senior White House official has denied that the US president , George Bush , said God ordered him to invade Afghanistan and Iraq . 
A spokesman for Mr Bush , Scott McClellan , said the claims , to be broadcast in a TV documentary later this month , were `` absurd '' . 
In the BBC film , a former Palestinian foreign minister , Nabil Shaath , says that Mr Bush told a Palestinian delegation in 2003 that God spoke to him and said : `` George , go and fight these terrorists in Afghanistan '' and also `` George , go and end the tyranny in Iraq '' . 
During a White House press briefing , Mr McClellan said : `` No , that 's absurd . 
He 's never made such comments . '' 
Mr McClellan admitted he was not at the Israeli-Palestinian summit at the Egyptian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh in June 2003 when Mr Bush supposedly revealed the extent of his religious fervor . 
However , he said he had checked into the claims and `` I stand by what I just said '' . 
Asked if Mr Bush had ever mentioned that God had ordered him into Afghanistan and Iraq , Mr McClellan said : `` No , and I 've been in many meetings with him and never heard such a thing . '' 
The claims are due to be broadcast in a three-part BBC documentary which analyses attempts to bring peace to the Middle East . 
Mr Shaath , the Palestinian foreign minister in 2003 , claims Mr Bush told him and other delegates that he was spoken to by God over his plans for war . 
He told the film-makers : `` President Bush said to all of us : ` I 'm driven with a mission from God . 
God would tell me , George , go and fight those terrorists in Afghanistan . 
And I did , and then God would tell me , George , go and end the tyranny in Iraq ... And I did . '' 
` And now , again , I feel God 's words coming to me , Go get the Palestinians their state and get the Israelis their security , and get peace in the Middle East . 
And by God I 'm gonna do it . ' '' 
The Palestinian leader , Mahmoud Abbas , who attended the June 2003 meeting as well , also appears on the documentary series to recount how Mr Bush told him : `` I have a moral and religious obligation . 
So I will get you a Palestinian state . '' 
Mr Bush , who became a born-again Christian at 40 , is one of the most overtly religious leaders to occupy the White House , a fact that brings him much support in middle America . 
`` History is littered with examples of people doing the most bizarre and sometimes wicked things on this basis , '' said Andrew Blackstock , director of the British-based Christian Socialist Movement . 
`` If Bush really wants to obey God during his time as president he should start with what is blindingly obvious from the Bible rather than perceived supernatural messages . 
`` That would lead him to the rather less glamorous business of prioritising the needs of the poor , the downtrodden and the marginalised in his own country and abroad . 
`` When we see more policies reflecting that , it might be easier to believe he has God on his side . 
And more likely that God might speak to him . '' 
The TV series , which starts on Monday , charts recent attempts to bring peace to the Middle East , from the former US president Bill Clinton 's peace talks in 1999-2000 , to Israel 's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip this year . 
It seeks to uncover what happened behind closed doors by speaking to presidents and prime ministers , along with their generals and ministers , the BBC said . 
