George Bush : ` God told me to end the tyranny in Iraq ' President told Palestinians God also talked to him about Middle East peace George Bush believes he is on a mission from God , according to the politician Nabil Shaath . 
Photograph : Charles Dharapak\/AP George Bush has claimed he was on a mission from God when he launched the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq , according to a senior Palestinian politician in an interview to be broadcast by the BBC later this month . 
Mr Bush revealed the extent of his religious fervor when he met a Palestinian delegation during the Israeli-Palestinian summit at the Egpytian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh , four months after the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 . 
One of the delegates , Nabil Shaath , who was Palestinian foreign minister at the time , said : `` President Bush said to all of us : ' I am driven with a mission from God ' . 
God would tell me , ` George go and fight these terrorists in Afghanistan ' . 
And then God would tell me ` George , go and end the tyranny in Iraq ' . 
And I did . '' 
Mr Bush went on : `` And now , again , I feel God 's words coming to me , ` Go get the Palestinians their state and get the Israelis their security , and get peace in the Middle East ' . 
And , by God , I 'm gonna do it . '' 
Mr Bush , who became a born-again Christian at 40 , is one of the most overtly religious leaders to occupy the White House , a fact which brings him much support in middle America . 
Soon after , the Israeli daily newspaper Haaretz carried a Palestinian transcript of the meeting , containing a version of Mr Bush 's remarks . 
But the Palestinian delegation was reluctant publicly to acknowledge its authenticity . 
The BBC persuaded Mr Shaath to go on the record for the first time for a three-part series on Israeli-Palestinian diplomacy : Elusive Peace , which begins on Monday . 
Religion also surfaced as an issue when Mr Bush and Tony Blair were reported to have prayed together in 2002 at his ranch at Crawford , Texas - the summit at which the invasion of Iraq was agreed in principle . 
Mr Blair has consistently refused to admit or deny the claim . 
Mahmoud Abbas , the Palestinian prime minister , who was also part of the delegation at Sharm el-Sheikh , told the BBC program that Mr Bush had said : `` I have a moral and religious obligation . 
I must get you a Palestinian state . 
And I will . '' 
Mr Shaath 's comments came as Mr Bush delivered a speech yesterday aimed at bolstering US support for the Iraq war . 
He revealed that the US and its partners had disrupted at least 10 serious al-Qaida plots since September 11 , including three planned attacks in the US . 
`` Because of this steady progress , the enemy is wounded - but the enemy is still capable of global operations , '' he said . 
He added that Islamic radicals had used a series of excuses to justify their attacks , from conflict with the Israelis to the Crusades 1,000 years ago . 
`` We 're facing a radical ideology with unalterable objectives : to enslave whole nations and intimidate the world , '' he said . 
He conceded that al-Qaida , led in Iraq by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi , and other insurgents had gained ground in Iraq but the US would not leave until security had been established . 
`` Some observers also claim that America would be better off by cutting our losses and leaving Iraq now . 
This is a dangerous illusion , refuted with a simple question : Would the United States and other free nations be more safe , or less safe , with Zarqawi and Bin Laden in control of Iraq , its people , and its resources ? '' 
