He had me at the title . 
Dave Kansas has written `` The Wall Street Journal Guide to the End of Wall Street as We Know It : What You Need to Know About the Greatest Financial Crisis of Our Time -- And How to Survive It '' -LRB- Collins Business -RRB- . 
For the Color of Money Book Club selection for March , I recommend you read Kansas 's book , which at $ 15.99 is a bargain look at how we came to be in what I call the Millennium Meltdown . 
Kansas is an experienced financial journalist who has covered the good , bad and ugly of the financial markets . 
He 's editor-at-large for FiLife , an online personal finance Web site . 
He spent four years as editor of the Wall Street Journal 's Money & Investing section and was once editor-in-chief of TheStreet.com . 
`` We 're experiencing a moment when nothing and no one feels safe , '' Kansas summarizes in the book 's introduction . 
`` People are understandably frustrated and angry ... It is a time of high anxiety with moments of panic arguably not seen in this nation since the Great Depression , even if the present circumstances do n't exactly mirror the calamity of that age . '' 
Part of the reason we 're fuming about our financial state is that we were hoodwinked . 
We were told not to worry because Wall Street wanted us to win . 
So , in good faith , we invested . 
We invested our money in retirement plans or college funds hoping not necessarily to become Rockefeller rich but to earn a decent return . 
What Wall Street did n't tell us was that some executives were taking unconscionable risks to become Rockefeller rich themselves . 
Now many people are left weeping on the poorer side of the wall . 
The rule that you should invest for the long term is hard to follow when your portfolio has tanked 30 percent -LRB- if you 're lucky -RRB- to more than 50 percent in the short term . 
For many investors , the Dow Jones industrial average -- known simply as the Dow -- has come to mean `` decimation of wealth . '' 
Should we put our money under the mattress or still take a chance with the market ? 
Kansas 's answer takes you on a historical journey . 
`` The financial crisis of 2008 , like many panics before it , actually started well before it dominated the headlines , '' he writes . 
`` Seeds sowed more than a decade beforehand and the steady rise of irrational confidence in complex market mechanisms eventually ended in cataclysmic fashion . '' 
The story Kansas tells is familiar , yet it 's important to read about it again . 
