EU to look at using frozen Libyan funds for rebels LUXEMBOURG | Mon Jun 20 , 2011 2:05 pm EDT LUXEMBOURG -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - EU foreign ministers agreed on Monday to look into using frozen Libyan funds to assist rebels opposing Muammar Gaddafi , with Italy saying funds frozen under sanctions could be used as collateral for loans . 
Rebels have long complained that they are short of cash and have sought access to Libyan money in foreign accounts so they can pay salaries and buy supplies . 
But allowing them direct access to frozen funds could run afoul of U.N. sanctions . 
A statement agreed at a meeting in Luxembourg said the European Union acknowledged the urgent financial needs of the rebel transitional council in Libya . 
`` The mobilization of international resources , including where possible through the use of Libyan frozen funds , in compliance with the provisions of the relevant UNSCRs -LRB- United Nations Security Council Resolutions -RRB- , is key to support the inclusive transition process aimed at fostering national reconciliation , '' the statement said . 
The statement added that `` measures in this regard will respect the rule of law . '' 
Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini said the EU was looking at using frozen assets as collateral to raise funds for the rebels , as only the U.N. Security Council could decide to unfreeze assets . 
`` We are looking into using frozen assets as guarantees to give loans in advance , '' to the Libyan rebels , '' he told reporters . 
`` We are not looking into unfreezing frozen assets . '' 
Libya 's cash-strapped rebel authority said on Sunday it expected to start replenishing its empty coffers this week with the first batch of money promised by its foreign allies . 
The rebels say they need more than $ 3 billion to cover salaries and other needs in the next six months and have won promises of financial assistance from Western and Arab supporters . 
Libya 's economy relies on oil exports and the rebels have struggled to make ends meet as damage to energy infrastructure caused by the civil war has brought production to a halt in what used to be a major OPEC oil producer in North Africa . 
The European Union has imposed sanctions , including asset freezes , on dozens of Libyan individuals and companies seen as supporters of Gaddafi in an effort to persuade him to give up power . 
They include firms in the oil sector . 
A bill that would allow President Barack Obama to use up to $ 10 billion in frozen Libyan government assets for humanitarian aid to Libyans caught in the civil war has stalled in the Senate . 
The United States is holding more than $ 34 billion as part of sanctions imposed in late February against Gaddafi and his top officials . 
Under the measure , none of the assets could be used to buy weapons or military equipment . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
