U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Libya civilian deaths sap NATO credibility - Italy TRIPOLI | Mon Jun 20 , 2011 8:22 pm IST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The NATO military alliance has endangered its credibility with a bomb that destroyed a house in the Libyan capital , killing several residents , Italy 's foreign minister said on Monday . 
It was the first time NATO had acknowledged causing multiple civilian casualties in Libya and came as the alliance feels the strain of a campaign taking more time and resources than expected . 
NATO said the intended target was a missile site . 
The head of its Libya operations said he regretted the loss of life and that a system failure may have knocked the weapon off course . 
Libyan officials accused NATO of deliberately targeting the population and blamed the alliance for further civilian deaths in the southern town of Sebha and in Surman west of Tripoli . 
`` NATO is endangering its credibility ; we can not risk killing civilians , '' Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini told reporters before an EU foreign ministers ' meeting in Luxembourg to discuss ways to aid rebels trying to oust Muammar Gaddafi . 
Frattini expressed concern that NATO was losing the propaganda war to Gaddafi and that Western media reports did not emphasise enough the good work done by the alliance every day to protect Libyan civilians . 
`` We can not continue our shortcomings in the way we communicate with the public , which does n't keep up with the daily propaganda of Gaddafi , '' he said . 
NATO was continuing with its three-month campaign of air strikes on Monday . 
A Reuters reporter in central Tripoli said he heard jets overhead around midday , then a distant explosion . 
There were no details immediately available on what the strike had hit . 
Libyan official news agency JANA said air strikes killed four civil defense staff and wounded 10 others on Sunday when they rushed to provide first aid for people at civilian sites hit by the coalition in Sebha . 
Government officials took reporters to Surman , 70km -LRB- 45 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , to the site of what they said was a NATO strike targeting the home of Khouildi Hamidi , a member of the 12-member Revolutionary Command Council that Gaddafi set up after seizing control of Libya in 1969 . 
The government said 15 civilians were killed , including three children . 
Government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim called the attack a `` cowardly terrorist act which can not be justified . '' 
NATO has been pounding targets in Libya since March 19 in what it says is an operation to protect civilians in a rebellion against Gaddafi 's 41-year rule . 
The Libyan leader says it is an act of colonial aggression designed to steal Libya 's oil . 
Strains are appearing within NATO member states as the campaign drags on for longer than its backers expected and Gaddafi remains in power -- even making a show of defiance last week by playing chess with a visiting official . 
Reporters taken to the residential area in Tripoli 's Souq al-Juma district by Libyan officials early on Sunday saw several bodies being pulled out of the rubble of a destroyed building . 
Later , in a hospital , they were shown the bodies of two children and three adults who , officials said , were among nine civilians killed in the strike . 
`` NATO regrets the loss of innocent civilian lives and takes great care in conducting strikes against a regime determined to use violence against its own citizens , '' said Lieutenant-General Charles Bouchard , commander of NATO 's operations over Libya . 
Libyan Foreign Minister Abdelati Obeidi said the NATO strike was a `` pathetic attempt ... to break the spirit of the people of Tripoli and allow small numbers of terrorists to cause instability and disorder in the peaceful city '' . 
A spokesman for the rebels fighting to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule said the Libyan leader was to blame . 
`` We are sorry for the loss of civilian life that was caused by air strikes carried out by NATO , '' said Abdel Hafiz Ghoga , vice chairman of the rebel National Transitional Council . 
`` We hold the Gaddafi regime responsible for having placed its military -LRB- installations -RRB- near civilian areas , '' he said . 
`` So these losses are to be expected . '' 
The rebel leadership based in the eastern city of Benghazi was banking on a quick overthrow of Gaddafi but his better-equipped militias have weathered intense NATO bombing to stop the rebels pushing west to Tripoli . 
Rebel diplomatic chief Mahmoud Jibril was due on Tuesday to travel to China , which has not taken a firm side in Libya 's civil war but has tried to expand ties with the opposition . 
The rebel oil and finance minister accused the West on Saturday of failing to keep promises of vital financial aid , leaving the rebels without any money to continue their four-month campaign to unseat Gaddafi . 
`` All of these countries , at all these conferences , with their great grand speeches -- we appreciate -LRB- them -RRB- from the political side , but in terms of finances they are a complete failure . 
Our people are dying , '' Ali Tarhouni told Reuters . 
