SURMAN , Libya | Mon Jun 20 , 2011 7:56 pm EDT SURMAN , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Libyan government said on Monday 19 civilians were killed in a NATO air strike on the home of one of Muammar Gaddafi 's top officials , a day after NATO admitted killing civilians in a separate aerial attack . 
Libyan officials took reporters to Surman , 70 km -LRB- 45 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , to the site of what they said was a NATO air strike on the home of Khouildi Hamidi , a member of Libya 's 12-strong Revolutionary Command Council , led by Gaddafi . 
Rescue teams were looking for survivors while reporters visited the site . 
Reporters were then taken to a hospital in nearby Sabrata where they were shown nine bodies , including those of two children , plus some body parts , which the Libyan government said were all of people killed in the attack . 
The state-run Jana news agency later reported on its website that eight children were among 19 people killed in the attack . 
The dead included members of Hamidi 's family , it said . 
The government said Hamidi himself was not hurt . 
NATO said it had bombed a `` legitimate military target -- a command and control node '' in the area , and it could not confirm whether civilians had been hurt . 
It said NATO does not target specific individuals . 
`` This strike will greatly degrade the Gaddafi regime forces ' ability to carry on their barbaric assault against the Libyan people , '' Lieutenant-General Charles Bouchard , the Canadian commander of NATO 's Libya operation , said in a statement . 
If the Libyan government 's account of civilian deaths is confirmed , the incident could further complicate operations of the NATO-led military alliance , starting to feel the strain of a campaign that is taking longer and costing more than planned . 
NATO acknowledged on Sunday for the first time that it had killed multiple civilians in Libya , when a strike intended to hit a missile site erred and destroyed a house in Tripoli . 
Bouchard said he regretted the loss of life in that incident , and a system failure may have knocked the weapon off course . 
Libyan officials say NATO forces have killed more than 700 civilians , although they have not presented evidence of such large numbers of civilian deaths and NATO denies them . 
Libya says one of Gaddafi 's sons and three of his grandchildren were killed six weeks ago when Gaddafi 's Tripoli compound was hit . 
Italy 's Foreign Minister Franco Frattini said on Monday civilian deaths pose a risk to the NATO-led military alliance . 
NATO states have been hitting targets in Libya since March 19 in what they say is an operation to protect civilians . 
`` NATO is endangering its credibility ; we can not risk killing civilians , '' Frattini told reporters before an EU foreign ministers ' meeting in Luxembourg to discuss ways to aid rebels . 
The Arab League , which in March asked the United Nations Security Council to impose a no-fly zone over Libya to protect civilians , condemned the loss of life in Sunday 's incident . 
`` When the Arab League agreed on the idea of having a no-fly zone over Libya it was to protect civilians but when civilians get killed this has to be condemned with the harshest of statements , '' said Deputy Secretary-General Ahmed Ben Helli . 
The Libyan leader says the Western-led military campaign is an act of colonial aggression designed to steal Libya 's oil . 
Libyan officials accused NATO of deliberately targeting the population . 
Government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim called Monday 's strike on Hamidi 's house `` a cowardly terrorist act . '' 
Frattini expressed concern that NATO was losing the propaganda war : `` We can not continue our shortcomings in the way we communicate with the public , which does n't keep up with the daily propaganda of Gaddafi . '' 
State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said the United States joined NATO in regretting loss of civilian life . 
`` These missions are extremely difficult . 
They are extremely dangerous . 
We faced this situation in Afghanistan , we faced it in the past in Kosovo , '' she said . 
`` It 's always an issue in any NATO mission to maintain popular support , to maintain public understanding for why we are there ... '' Ashour Shamis , a UK-based Libyan opposition activist , said Hamidi played a key role in Gaddafi 's war against the rebels . 
`` He is very much there , controlling the army and supervising military activities , '' he said . 
NATO continued its three-month campaign of air strikes on Monday . 
A Reuters reporter in central Tripoli said he heard jets overhead around midday , then a distant explosion . 
There were no details immediately available on what was hit . 
The rebels have made slow progress since NATO countries joined the fight three months ago , but are now advancing toward Tripoli from a bastion in Misrata east of the capital and from the Western Mountains region to its southwest . 
Shelling attacks by loyalist forces positioned outside Misrata killed 11 civilians in the rebel-held coastal city on Monday , a doctor at the main hospital there said by phone . 
Those included a child who was killed when a salvo of three rockets fired by Gaddafi forces hit a built-up area near the port , a Reuters reporter said . 
Two more children were wounded . 
A rebel at the scene named Hassan Douwa said : `` Is NATO waiting for Gaddafi to kill us all before it does its job ? 
Give us the planes and we will do it ourselves . '' 
Rebel spokesman Ahmed Hassan in Misrata said Gaddafi 's forces intensified their shelling of Misrata on Monday , with at least 20 rockets landing in the city center . 
Rebels in the Western Mountains said they had shut off a pipeline that supplies crude from an oilfield in the south to the Zawiyah refinery near the capital Tripoli . 
The refinery is one of the few sources of fuel for Gaddafi-held areas . 
`` This is an attempt by the rebels to stifle the Gaddafi regime in Tripoli , '' rebel spokesman Juma Ibrahim said by phone from the Western Mountains town of Zintan . 
Rebels have been boosted by defections of Gaddafi loyalists . 
They said on Monday 22 soldiers had defected from a unit in the south . 
Gaddafi officials say defections have not made a significant dent in government forces . 
Rebel diplomatic chief Mahmoud Jibril is due on Tuesday to travel to China , which has not taken a firm side in Libya 's civil war but has tried to expand ties with the opposition . 
EU foreign ministers agreed at their meeting in Luxembourg on Monday to look into the possibility of using frozen Libyan funds to assist the rebels . 
The rebel oil and finance minister accused the West on Saturday of failing to keep promises of vital financial aid , leaving the rebels without any money to continue their four-month campaign to unseat Gaddafi . 
In a joint statement they said the European Union acknowledged the urgent financial needs of the rebel transitional council , which requires more than $ 3 billion to cover salaries and other needs in the next six months . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Accidents happen everyday in all areas , but especially , when a CRAZY man tries to hang on to Power for the sake of Power , but hides behind his people using them as human shields . 
`` They -LRB- local people -RRB- do n't like this ... But they do n't like the regime either . '' 
by `` Tony '' was the accurate lead sub-headline . 
What should `` sow ... doubts '' was the length of time it took a -RRB- the World to come to the aid of Ben Ghazi , and b -RRB- NATO to decide helicopter gunships were the only logical defense . 
How many hundreds or thousands of lives were lost by such dawdling ? 
Why ca n't they take out Gaddafi in the same way we took out Osama bin Laden ? 
It seems to me that we need a much larger NATO military force to take care of these so-called world leaders that are nothing more than dictators . 
I would think it would be much cheaper and much more efficient in the long run . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
