Prime Minister David Cameron makes closing remarks at the G8 summit in Deauville May 27 , 2011 . 
UNITED NATIONS | Wed Jun 8 , 2011 11:47 pm BST UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Britain , France , Germany and Portugal handed the U.N. Security Council a draft resolution on Wednesday condemning Syria 's crackdown on protesters , despite the risk of a Russian veto . 
The U.N. ambassadors of the four European Union countries told reporters they presented the draft at a council meeting at which the 15-nation body was briefed by a senior U.N. official on the unrest in Syria . 
There was no vote on the latest draft resolution , which may be amended further . 
British Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant said the text had been revised to respond to developments in Syria and concerns raised by some council members . 
`` We hope that all members of the Security Council will be able to rally to it , '' Lyall Grant said . 
`` We hope that it will get overwhelming support and that we will be able to go to the vote in the next few days . '' 
Three months of popular unrest in Syria has cost more than 1,000 lives , according to human rights groups . 
French Ambassador Gerard Araud said the worsening situation made it necessary for the council to take a stand on the issue . 
`` Our concern is that the country could fall into a civil war , '' he said . 
`` The council has to act . '' 
Lyall Grant said negotiators would meet again to discuss the draft on Thursday morning . 
Several diplomats said there could be a vote on Friday . 
The United States , which diplomats say has been reluctant to risk a Russian veto of a U.N. condemnation that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad will almost certainly ignore , is not a sponsor of the resolution . 
However , U.S. Ambassador Susan Rice said Washington had offered its `` strong support for that text . '' 
Russia and China , which both hold vetoes , have made clear they dislike the idea of council involvement , which they say could help to destabilize a strategic Middle Eastern country . 
Several diplomats told Reuters they expected Russia to veto the draft resolution , though others said they thought Moscow could be persuaded to abstain , in which case China would likely follow suit . 
`` I hear that the veto is inevitable , '' one diplomat said . 
Resolutions need nine votes in favor and no vetoes to pass . 
If Russia and China abstained , the draft would be adopted , even if Lebanon , South Africa , India and Brazil voted against it . 
While Russia has long been an ally and key arms supplier to Syria , diplomats said the Russians made clear they did not want a repeat of the NATO intervention in Libya , which Moscow believes has spun out of control beyond the original U.N. mandate to protect civilians . 
Without mentioning Russia , China and India by name , Rice dismissed the comparisons with Libya . 
`` We heard several council members , in some instances ... disingenuously , use Libya as an excuse , as a ploy to avoid the real issues that we are facing in Syria , '' Rice said . 
In a challenge to Russia and Beijing , British Prime Minister David Cameron told parliament in London , `` If anyone votes against that resolution or tries to veto it , that should be on their conscience . '' 
Like an earlier draft first circulated to council members last month , the latest text urges countries not to supply weapons to Damascus but does not provide for an actual arms embargo or other specific punitive measures . 
The draft , a copy of which was obtained by Reuters , condemns `` systematic '' human rights violations by Syrian authorities and says they may amount to crimes against humanity . 
But it also denounces violence against security forces . 
One diplomat said the new amendments attempted to make the resolution look less like a prelude to further action such as the military intervention that NATO has conducted in Libya . 
In particular , a new clause says that `` the only solution to the current crisis in Syria is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political process . '' 
Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin gave no hints as to whether or not he planned to veto the draft resolution . 
`` Things are being crossed out -LRB- in the text -RRB- , '' he said as he entered the council chambers . 
`` I need to see a clean copy . '' 
