People wait to cross into Turkey in a rural area on the Syrian side of the border zone between the two countries in this handout picture taken near the Turkish village of Guvecci , 50 kilometres -LRB- 31 miles -RRB- away from Hatay city center June 8 , 2011 . 
BEIRUT | Wed Jun 8 , 2011 7:15 pm EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey threw open its borders to anxious Syrian refugees on Wednesday and urged their government to curb violence against civilians after thousands abandoned a town near the Turkish frontier in fear of a military assault . 
With Western public opinion startled by the bloodshed that has met Syrians ' efforts to emulate other Arabs in casting off autocratic rule , Britain and France asked the U.N. Security Council to condemn President Bashar al-Assad -- though there seemed to be no appetite for Libya-style military intervention . 
Assad 's government has accused armed bands of killing scores of its security men in the northwestern town of Jisr al-Shughour and vowed to send in the army to carry out their `` national duty to restore security '' there . 
Troops with tanks have deployed near the town , prompting many of its 50,000 people to flee . 
`` We are monitoring developments in Syria with concern , '' said Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan , who has long sought warm relations with Assad . 
`` Syria should change its attitude toward civilians and should take its attitude to a more tolerant level . 
`` It is out of the question for Turkey to close its doors to refugees coming from Syria . '' 
The troop movements , after the government reported the loss of over 120 men in what anti-Assad activists said was fighting among soldiers , has raised fears violence could move to a new level . 
Rights groups say over 1,100 civilians have been killed since March in protests against 41 years of Assad family rule . 
In Jisr al-Shughour , people have long memories of a mass killing in 1980 , under Assad 's father . 
That proved a precursor to the suppression of an armed Islamist revolt in the city of Hama , in which many thousands were killed in 1982 . 
A total of 448 people crossed into Turkey on Wednesday and were being housed in tents , state-run Anatolian news agency reported . 
Some 100 tents were set up in a camp near the border where 666 people are now receiving food and medical attention . 
Some wounded were taken to hospitals . 
Syrian residents have said most who fled the town remained in villages inside Syria . 
Reuters journalists in Turkey saw tents on the Syrian side of the border . 
Turkish villagers said they saw Turkish troops and ambulances pick up Syrians who crossed earlier in the day . 
Adding the new arrivals to earlier figures from the Turkish Foreign Ministry , some 750 Syrians have entered since March . 
A 16-year-old boy who fled across the border said soldiers entered Jisr al-Shughour from Friday . 
`` They shut the bakeries and cut the water to the town , '' said the boy who declined to give his name . 
`` Soldiers attacked houses and men , women and children regardless , '' he said . 
France and Britain , allies in the war against Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , handed the U.N. Security Council a draft resolution on condemning Syria 's crackdown on protesters , despite the risk of a Russian veto . 
`` And if anyone votes against that resolution or tries to veto it , that should be on their conscience , '' British Prime Minister David Cameron said , in a pointed reference to efforts to secure Russian backing for it . 
The draft resolution condemns the repression and demands humanitarian access , Cameron said in London . 
But it was unclear how Russia , which holds a veto , would vote . 
Citing NATO 's inconclusive bombing of Tripoli , Moscow says it will not back intervention against Syria in the Security Council . 
Western diplomats said they did not expect a vote on Wednesday but hoped it might come before the end of the week . 
The original draft resolution , which diplomats say has been amended only slightly since last month , urges countries not to supply weapons to Damascus but would not provide for an actual arms embargo or other specific punitive measures . 
One diplomat said the amendments attempted to make it look less like a prelude to further action like the military action that NATO has conducted in Libya , which Moscow has opposed . 
At the same time , a senior European diplomat told reporters in Washington that European Union nations are preparing a third round of sanctions against Syria that target Syrian companies . 
At Jisr al-Shughour , residents have said since Tuesday that they were taking cover and bracing for attacks . 
Rami Abdulrahman of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said a convoy of tank-carriers with 60 tanks and about a dozen trucks carrying troops were seen moving on the main Aleppo highway in the direction of Jisr al-Shughour . 
`` When they -LRB- troops -RRB- passed the town of Saraqeb , protesters threw stones , prompting troops to open fire , killing one person , '' Abdulrahman told Reuters . 
Earlier he said troops had deployed in neighboring villages , including Ariha to the east and on the main highway to the city of Latakia to the southwest . 
Residents said about 40 tanks and armored vehicles were about 7 km -LRB- 4 miles -RRB- from Jisr al-Shughour . 
Assad has expelled Reuters correspondents and barred most independent media , making it impossible to verify such accounts . 
A witness in Damascus told Reuters he saw 40 tanks and armored vehicles and trucks able to carry some 400 troops heading north on Tuesday toward the cities Homs and Hama . 
Despite enthusiasm for pro-democracy movements that have unseated presidents in Tunisia and Egypt , few Western leaders -- let alone their autocratic Arab partners -- have shown a will to intervene in Syria , an Iranian ally whose volatile mix of ethnic and religious groups sits astride a web of regional conflicts . 
`` Assad is finished , but we have to see how this regime will crumble , '' said Burhan Ghalyoun , a Syrian opposition and academic at the Sorbonne in Paris . 
Assad 's family and supporters from the minority Alawite sect have dominated Syria since his late father seized power 41 years ago . 
He has responded with promises of reform , and a crackdown on protesters in towns across the country . 
Jisr al-Shughour is home mainly to people from the Sunni Muslim majority . 
The security forces are mostly run by Alawites . 
Neighbouring countries , including Israel and Turkey , worry a collapse into chaos in Syria could set off sectarian conflict . 
Activists have reported incidents of soldiers who have defected from the army because they could no longer bear to open fire on protesters , but those accounts have been hard to verify . 
In the latest of several similar videos distributed over the Internet by anti-government activists , a man presented as a soldier from the province around Jisr al-Shughour said the protests were peaceful and called on fellow soldiers to quit . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
