' I feel I 'm carrying the world on my shoulders ' After Cindy Sheehan 's son died in Iraq , her protest outside Bush 's Texas ranch became a symbol of opposition to the war . 
Duncan Campbell joins her as she brings her campaign to Britain When Casey Sheehan joined the army in May 2000 , he was assured that he would never see combat . 
Four years later , he was killed in Iraq . 
Over the summer , his mother , Cindy , pitched a tent in front of George Bush 's Texas ranch . 
Others joined what was to become known as Camp Casey . 
Soon , Cindy Sheehan , a housewife and mature student , was the face of the opposition to the president 's Iraq policy - and a target of virulent abuse from right-wing commentators . 
Now she is in Britain for the first time , joining the anti-war movement here . 
`` This is the 21st century - killing is barbaric , '' she says on a taxi ride from Heathrow into central London , having just flown in from New York . 
`` I do n't buy into the fact that George Bush and Tony Blair ca n't be called terrorists because they are elected officials . 
This occupation of Iraq is killing innocent people by the thousand . '' 
Cindy , who has three surviving children , is weary . 
She 's had to cram her six-foot frame into economy class for the trip , and , besides , her life has become an exhausting series of meetings , rallies , interviews , speeches and anti-war campaigning . 
She has come a long way from her old life in Vacaville , California - not the sort of place normally associated with political activism . 
Camp Casey has closed down , at least for the winter , but Cindy remains a powerful symbol of the anti-war movement . 
Here is a mother who lost her eldest child in a war that was declared , she believes , on dubious grounds . 
She wants to make sure that the government is called to account . 
Her son Casey signed up in the final months of the Clinton era , at a time when there seemed to be little possibility of war in foreign fields . 
`` His recruiter told him that even if there was a war , he would never see combat because he had scored so high in the entrance exam - he 'd only be in a support role , '' says Cindy . 
`` He was a good soldier , he liked being in the army . 
He only went to Iraq because his buddies were going and they all feel a responsibility for each other . '' 
She has since met many of his fellow soldiers and the sergeant who tried to talk Casey out of going on the mission that killed him . 
`` Casey just said , ` ` Where my chief goes , I go ' , and he left and he was killed . 
I get feedback from the troops all the time and 99.9 % say , ` Keep on doing what you 're doing because it 's a nightmare here and we want to come home and it 's only people like you in the peace movement that give us hope ' . '' 
During this trip to Britain , she will address Saturday 's International Peace Conference -LRB- organised by the Stop the War Coalition -RRB- , and will also meet members of the Scottish parliament and fellow activists , including Britons who have lost their sons or brothers in the war . 
Then it will be back to her new home in Berkeley and on with the work for her new book - about how one person can have a political impact by just getting on with it . 
She is very unimpressed with Bush 's rationale for the war . 
`` He keeps coming up with the same inane speech as though that 's going to rally people back to support him . 
As for his ` national strategy for victory ' - would n't it have been nice if they had started to plan for that before they invaded in the first place and killed so many brave young Americans like Casey ? 
It 's gratifying that America is now opening its eyes and I 'm not so wacky and out there by myself any more . 
We are not the ` extreme ' people any more . 
Look at the polls , George Bush , you 're the one who 's at the extremes . '' 
The Democrats have also largely been a disappointment , she says , not least Hillary Clinton . 
`` She 's very wishy-washy , she 's playing the middle because she wants to be president and I look at all the politicians who want to be president and they are basically playing the middle , too , '' she says . 
`` It obviously did n't work for John Kerry , and I told him : ` If you had come out strongly against the war and said you would start bringing the troops home , you would have won in a landslide ' . 
But he has this memory that he did come out strongly against the war ! 
Howard Dean -LRB- the unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic Party nomination -RRB- told me the war is a hard issue . 
No , it 's not . 
Our kids are there being killed and they 're killing innocent Iraqis for lies . 
It 's not brain surgery . '' 
Cindy 's campaigning work leaves her no time for anything else , she says - something that her other children have had to adjust to . 
They have been very supportive , though , and recently went to dinner with her and Jane Fonda , another supporter , and Fonda 's daughter . 
Joan Baez has been a frequent and supportive visitor to the camp , as have a surprising array of Republicans , she says . 
She is not surprised to have been the target of the conservative Fox news channel and others on the right , but is gratified that the mainstream media have given the camp some coverage . 
`` They had been very creative in not covering the anti-war movement up until then . '' 
Cindy is 48 , too young to have been involved in the anti-Vietnam war movement . 
`` I remember there was a lot of violence on campuses , which was kind of frightening to me . '' 
She is hopeful that the current movement will continue beyond the end of the war in Iraq , and she has been in touch with Iraqis who have lost children fighting on the other side . 
`` I do n't blame the people who killed Casey but the people who brought us into this , who lied and deceived the world , '' she says . 
`` But the anti-war movement is growing at all levels . 
Congress is starting to talk about bringing the troops home and you never saw any of that before . '' 
The non-stop campaigning has taken its toll , she says , and Cindy feels in need of a good massage : `` I really feel I 'm carrying the whole world on my shoulders , '' she says . 
There has been talk of her entering politics herself , but at the moment it does not appeal . 
`` An illegal and immoral war is n't a political issue , it 's a matter of life and death , and everybody has to do the right thing no matter what party they are in . '' 
Then she is off for a couple of hours sleep in Muswell Hill , north London , before addressing yet another meeting , and shaking the hands of yet more politicians . 
Now she brings her campaign to Britain This article appeared on p18 of the G2 section of the Guardian on 01.37 GMT on Friday 9 December 2005 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off Busfield : `` Beagles come in 2 sizes 13 inch and 15 inch . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
