Libyans in the besieged city of Misrata walk past a tank that belong to the forces of Col. Moammar Gadhafi . 
The U.S. and its allies have imposed a no-fly zone over Libya . 
Critics ask why U.S. military power has been used in Libya but not Syria Violence in Libya broke out before violence in Syria , one analyst notes International consensus on military action exists in Libya , but not in Syria , analysts say Assad has more friends and allies than Gadhafi -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Two countries , two cases of extreme violence committed against citizens by their own government . 
In one case , the Obama administration responds with military force . 
In the other , it does n't . 
The question has been raised in response to the radically different U.S. reactions to the bloodshed in Libya and Syria . 
More than 400 people have been killed in Syria over the past several weeks as Damascus has cracked down on protesters seeking reform , according to the Syrian Human Rights Information Link , a prominent human rights group . 
The United Nations says it has information that 76 people were killed in that country last Friday alone , apparently during peaceful marches . 
President Bashar al-Assad 's regime has described the protesters as `` armed criminal groups , '' and shows no sign of letting up . 
President Barack Obama has condemned the violence `` in the strongest possible terms '' and is seeking ways to `` increase the pressure on the regime ... in a targeted way , '' according to White House Press Secretary Jay Carney . 
So far , however , the response has amounted to little more than talk . 
Over in Libya , however , the U.S. reaction was entirely different when strongman Moammar Gadhafi promised to show `` no mercy '' to residents of the rebel-held city of Benghazi . 
Washington worked furiously behind the scenes at the United Nations to win an international mandate for a naval blockade , a no-fly zone and a license to take military action to protect civilians . 
Obama promised no use of ground troops , but U.S. air power was used to devastating effect against elements of Gadhafi 's forces before control of the operation was handed over to NATO commanders . 
The White House says the two situations ca n't be compared . 
Why Syria different than Libya for U.S. Syrian protests spread despite violence Reporter in Misrata : ` We 're under siege ' Libya was `` a unique situation , '' Carney told reporters Monday . 
`` We had large portions of the country that were out of the control of Moammar Gadhafi -LRB- and -RRB- we had an international consensus to act . 
We had the support of the Arab League to act in a multilateral fashion . '' 
But Washington is `` pursuing a range of possible policy options '' in Syria , he stressed . 
The administration is looking at `` targeted sanctions to respond to the crackdown ... and to make clear that this behavior is unacceptable . '' 
American `` values and principles apply to all countries , '' Defense Secretary Robert Gates added Tuesday . 
`` Our response in each country will have to be tailored to that country , and the circumstances peculiar to that country . '' 
Part of the reason the Obama administration intervened militarily in Libya and not Syria is because `` Libya happened first , '' noted Danielle Pletka , vice president for foreign and defense policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute , a conservative Washington think tank . 
`` So the international community responded there first . '' 
Protests in Benghazi first broke out in mid-February . 
Protests in the Syrian city of Daraa started last month after a violent crackdown by security forces on peaceful demonstrators protesting the arrests of youths who scribbled anti-government graffiti . 
Second , there is `` nowhere near the consensus on Syria as there is on Libya , '' Pletka told CNN . 
Syria , as opposed to Libya , stands at the heart of the Arab world . 
Assad has more friends and allies to call on . 
`` Assad is a dictator , a sponsor of terrorism , -LRB- and -RRB- a thug , '' Pletka said . 
`` You could argue he 's worse than Gadhafi . '' 
But `` on Syria , the Arab League is not going to be nearly as forward-leaning . 
-LRB- They 're -RRB- much closer to Assad . '' 
Among other things , Gadhafi has been accused of trying to have then-Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah assassinated in 2003 . 
There 's a `` personal antipathy '' factor between Gadhafi and other Arab leaders , Pletka said . 
At the same time , Israel may have a hostile relationship with its neighbor , but the Israeli leadership is `` very comfortable with the devil it knows '' in Damascus . 
Obama , Pletka said , has shown an extreme reluctance to engage in unilateral military action . 
Ousting Assad would change the entire political dynamic in the Middle East to the benefit of the United States , she said , noting Syria 's close ties to Iran and organizations such as Hezbollah , Hamas and Islamic Jihad . 
But unless and until a firmer international consensus emerges , more concerted action is unlikely . 
Military action in Libya may also have became a priority partly due to fears of al Qaeda , according to Rick Nelson , a terrorism expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies , another Washington think tank . 
Al Qaeda is `` good at using countries in chaos to carve out safe havens , '' Nelson said , noting that the second-highest number of foreign fighters for al Qaeda in Iraq came from Libya . 
As Libya became more unstable , it may have become a priority for Western powers to ensure the country does n't become more of a home for al Qaeda leaders . 
Nelson echoed Pletka 's point about the lack of an international consensus on Syria . 
`` People do n't want to be on Assad 's bad side , '' he said . 
If you attack Syria , `` you 're crossing a line that is changing the whole strategic calculus in the region in one move , '' he said . 
`` The stakes are a lot higher . '' 
CNN 's Josh Levs and Joe Sterling contributed to this report . 
