Oil that leaked from a broken oil well following an explosion on a drilling rig swirls through the currents in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP Photo\/Dave Martin As much as 1 million times the normal level of methane gas has been found in some regions near the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , enough to potentially deplete oxygen and create a dead zone , U.S. scientists said on Tuesday . 
Texas A&M University oceanography professor John Kessler , just back from a 10-day research expedition near the BP Plc oil spill in the gulf , says methane gas levels in some areas are `` astonishingly high . '' 
Kessler 's crew took measurements of both surface and deep water within a 5-mile radius of BP 's broken wellhead . 
`` There is an incredible amount of methane in there , '' Kessler told reporters in a telephone briefing . 
In some areas , the crew of 12 scientists found concentrations that were 100,000 times higher than normal . 
`` We saw them approach a million times above background concentrations '' in some areas , Kessler said . 
The scientists were looking for signs that the methane gas had depleted levels of oxygen dissolved in the water needed to sustain marine life . 
`` At some locations , we saw depletions of up to 30 percent of oxygen based on its natural concentration in the waters . 
At other places , we saw no depletion of oxygen in the waters . 
We need to determine why that is , '' he told the briefing . 
Methane occurs naturally in sea water , but high concentrations can encourage the growth of microbes that gobble up oxygen needed by marine life . 
Kessler said oxygen depletions have not reached a critical level yet , but the oil is still spilling into the Gulf , now at a rate of as much as 60,000 barrels a day , according to U.S. government estimates . 
`` What is it going to look like two months down the road , six months down the road , two years down the road ? '' 
Methane , a natural gas , dissolves in seawater and some scientists think measuring methane could give a more accurate picture of the extent of the oil spill . 
Kessler said his team has taken those measurements , and is hoping to have an estimate soon . 
`` Give us about a week and we should have some preliminary numbers on that , '' he said . 
