Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
Well , no , it ca n't . 
The oil slick spreading from a damaged drilling rig off the coast of Louisiana is already too massive for any quick fix , no matter how well intended . 
But the environmental calamity has inspired a quirky grass-roots campaign that seeks to use donated hair and animal fur to create oil-absorbing booms . 
The idea , promoted by a San Francisco-based nonprofit group called Matter of Trust , is to collect tons of hair and fur to stuff into nylon pouches , in this case used or defective pantyhose . 
When strung together in sausage-like skeins , the hair booms could be set in the water to collect the encroaching oil . 
Hair , as anyone who has n't shampooed in a while knows , absorbs and holds oily materials well . 
Matter of Trust is coordinating the collection of hair and fur through thousands of salons , pet groomers and ranchers . 
It has collected more than 450,000 pounds of the stuff from people around the world . 
The organization is storing the raw material in warehouses throughout the Gulf region . 
Meanwhile , volunteers in the area have hosted 19 `` Boom-B-Qs '' during which participants stuff hair into the nylon casings . 
`` We 're all growing this natural resource , '' says Lisa Gautier , who co-founded Matter of Trust with her husband , Patrice , 12 years ago . 
`` It does n't get more renewable than this . 
We think it 's a safe , non-toxic way to do the clean-up . '' 
The movement has picked up corporate support , too . 
Hanes has donated 50,000 pairs of pantyhose , and Petco , the pet-supply and grooming chain , says it will donate as much as a ton of fur clippings per day . 
It 's not clear how much of a dent in the problem the hair booms can make . 
Lisa Gautier says it takes about 15 pounds of hair to create a 12-foot boom . 
If all 450,000 pounds of hair were stuffed and deployed , that would create 360,000 feet of barrier , or about 68 miles ' worth . 
The joint industry-government task force that is supervising the cleanup effort has more than 150 miles of industrial booms to block and absorb the oil in place around the Gulf . 
What 's more , Matter of Trust is n't authorized to place booms ; only government agencies and volunteers certified by the official joint command are legally permitted to do so . 
But there 's plenty of need : `` We 're finding that everyone wants to boom everything , '' says Mark Proegler , a spokesman for BP , the oil company that is legally responsible for the cleanup . 
`` There 's just not sufficient boom to do that . 
Every parish thinks it 's the most important . '' 
BP has had no contact with Matter of Trust , but it appreciates the effort : `` We certainly do n't want to discourage any of the people who 've expressed a willingness to help , '' Proegler says . 
The feel-good aspects of the project are n't lost on Washington salon owner Jacqui Davis , whose 15-store chain , PR at Partners , is participating in the effort . 
`` It 's another way to be green and recycle , '' Davis says . 
`` We 're happy to help out . 
We 're telling our clients who want to take just a couple of inches off to cut it shorter and pick up some more oil . 
It 's great to be able to say you contributed in some way . '' 
If everything goes as planned in the great hair boom deployment , it does raise another question : Who cleans up all of that hair ? 
The booms , Lisa Gautier says , would be BP 's responsibility . 
The company would likely incinerate the booms after picking them up , she says . '' 
