Tuesday , June 29 , 2010 ; 9:57 PM For the past two decades , companies that produce and transport oil have channeled tens of millions of dollars a year into an organization they set up to provide cleanup equipment and personnel if a catastrophic offshore spill were ever to hit the United States . 
But when that spill occurred two months ago , it soon swamped the Marine Spill Response Corp. . 
MSRC `` has never had to deal with anything even remotely this large and chaotic , '' said Kieran Suckling , executive director of the Center for Biological Diversity , which is suing BP for damages under the Clean Water Act . 
MSRC officials say they expect to be in the spotlight as Congress investigates whether the industry and the nation should have been better prepared for a disaster on the scale of the one playing out in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Congress also is likely to look into whether the tax-exempt company 's equipment -- much of it two decades old -- is up to the current challenge , as wells move farther out to sea and deeper below the ocean . 
`` Should the industry 's capacity have been greater than it is ? 
That 's a fair question , '' said Steve Benz , MSRC president and a former BP executive . 
He stressed that the U.S. Coast Guard set benchmarks for how much equipment and manpower large oil-recovery companies should have . 
Also , he said , any standing operation would have difficulty immediately capturing the volume of oil gushing from the Gulf well . 
`` If this happened again , should we already have in place 20,000 people and 1,000 boats ? '' 
`` You ca n't build a firehouse that big and have it make any reasonable economic sense . 
You need to prevent the fire in the first place . '' 
Congress has been here before . 
Twenty years ago , after the Exxon Valdez dumped millions of gallons of oil into Prince William Sound , lawmakers angrily reacted -- much as they have today -- by vowing to ensure that such devastation would never happen again . 
Congress passed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 , requiring companies transporting oil over water to have ready access to clean-up equipment adequate for the worst possible spill . 
Big oil companies banded together to form MSRC . 
Far from the coast , the nonprofit is run out of nondescript offices in Herndon , Va. , sharing a building with a credit union and a title company . 
The company , which calls itself the nation 's largest oil spill recovery organization , remained low-profile while growing to more than $ 100 million in assets . 
Its resources include 400 employees and 15 large oil-recovery ships dubbed `` Big Blues '' and positioned in the lower 48 states and Hawaii . 
It and its contractors have responded to 700 spills , none approaching the magnitude of the Deepwater Horizon blowout . 
State and regional officials familiar with MSRC 's past work say it does a good job handling more contained environmental challenges . 
But now MSRC finds itself leading the charge in a much different battle . 
`` There is no asset MSRC has that is designed to collect oil 5,000 feet under the seas , '' said Brett G. Drewry , chief executive of the industry-backed organization that funds MSRC . 
That fact did not stop BP and other companies from citing MSRC , alone or alongside for-profit cleanup companies , as their first responder for massive spills . 
Oil companies , Congress and regulators point to MSRC as evidence of lessons learned from Valdez . 
Suckling said safeguarding the coasts should not be left to private industry . 
`` It seems to me there is a real significant conflict of interest here , '' he said . 
`` When you are dealing with an issue that has such enormous stakes for public health and safety , it should be in the government 's hands . '' 
