Despite BP corporate code , firm has made political contributions Tuesday , June 29 , 2010 ; 3:29 PM BP , the global energy corporation whose massive oil spill is now fouling huge swaths of the Gulf of Mexico , proclaims in its corporate code of conduct that it will `` make no political contributions , whether in cash or in kind , anywhere in the world . '' 
But BP North America -- the energy giant 's U.S. subsidiary -- has donated at least $ 4.8 million in corporate contributions in the past seven years to political groups , partisan organizations and campaigns engaged in federal and state elections , an analysis of campaign and tax records shows . 
Its most generous corporate contributions -- totaling about $ 4 million -- have gone to two Republican-aligned political action groups working to defeat state ballot initiatives in California and Colorado that could have raised oil and gas industry taxes , according to an analysis of state campaign reports by the Center for Political Accountability . 
On the national scene , BP spent about $ 112,000 in corporate money to boost the coffers of Democratic and Republican party organizations seeking to elect candidates to higher office , primarily the Democratic Governors Association and the Republican State Leadership Committee . 
When asked about its political spending , the energy giant said there is no conflict between its ban on political contributions and its donations to political groups . 
A BP spokesman said its policy bans contributions only to individual candidates in state and federal races , and does not apply to contributions to political advocacy groups registered with the Internal Revenue Service , political party organizations that give money to individual candidates , arms of political parties or larger political campaigns . 
`` The types of spending that we reported here fits within our policy , '' said BP spokesman Scott Dean . 
`` Our policy on not making corporate political contributions relates to candidates for political office at the state and federal level . '' 
BP 's Dean said donations for ballot groups are to help educate the public about policies . 
He said the donations to partisan Republican and Democratic operations are for the groups ' education funds , and are not intended for partisan political electioneering . 
`` The California and Colorado ballot initiatives referred to are to support information campaigns concerning legislation or tax initiatives targeting our industry . 
This money did not go to a political party or candidate , so it is consistent with our guidelines , '' Dean said . 
`` As to the Republican and Democratic governors associations ... these contributions are to the educational arms so the money does not support political activity either at the state or federal level . '' 
Bruce Freed , executive director of the Center for Political Accountability , said the difference between the broad statement and the contributions suggests BP management is not being publicly transparent . 
He compared it to BP 's conduct in managing the geyserlike oil spill at BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig , which has called into question the company 's pronouncements about its commitment to safety . 
`` They both raise real questions about BP management and how they run things , '' Freed said . 
`` They said they were very thorough on safety , and it turns out they were n't . 
They said they were n't giving political contributions and it turns out they were ... It seems like this is part of the culture of BP . '' 
Meredith McGehee , a campaign finance expert at the watchdog Campaign Legal Center , said BP may have aimed for a good corporate image , and assumed that its broad statement would not be carefully examined . 
She said corporations often steer corporate money into state and local political organizations or to tax-exempt 527 political advocacy groups , where there is less disclosure and less press scrutiny . 
`` Anyone who believes these large corporations are n't deeply involved in political decisions at every level of government is kidding themselves , '' McGehee said . 
BP gave $ 75 , 000 to the Democratic Governors Association over the past two election cycles and $ 15,000 to the Republican State Leadership Committee . 
The Democratic Governors Association describes itself as `` a political organization ... dedicated to electing Democratic governors and candidates . '' 
The Republican State Leadership Committee 's reports that its purpose is to `` raise money for state political activity and organize meetings of state leaders and officeholders to promote Republican candidates and Republican issues . '' 
