By the CNN Wire Staff NEW : A U.S. charter aircraft lands in Istanbul , Turkey U.S.-chartered ferry with about 338 passengers arrives in Malta China has evacuated 12,000 Chinese nationals from Libya in the past few days Libya refused to let a Middle East Airlines plane land to pick up Lebanese nationals A U. S - chartered aircraft carrying American and other nations ' citizens left Libya and landed Friday night in Istanbul , Turkey . 
A U.S.-chartered ferry carrying about 338 passengers , including 183 Americans , also arrived Friday evening in Malta . 
Bad weather had delayed its departure from Tripoli . 
The State Department recommended Thursday that any U.S. citizens in Libya `` depart immediately due to the potential for ongoing unrest . '' 
The British Foreign Office said it has helped about 600 British nationals leave Libya . 
It has taken more than 1,000 calls since Thursday evening from British nationals wanting to leave Libya as well from their families and colleagues in Britain . 
A charter flight from Tripoli landed at London 's Gatwick Airport early Friday with 130 people aboard , including 53 Britons , the Foreign Office said . 
A second charter flight departed Tripoli for Gatwick on Friday afternoon with expatriates , including 34 British nationals . 
The HMS Cumberland departed Benghazi carrying 207 passengers , about 68 of them British , the Foreign Office said . 
The ship was scheduled to arrive Friday in Valletta , Malta . 
Another 49 British nationals were aboard the U.S. ferry that departed Tripoli , it said . 
Prime Minister Stephen Harper said about 200 Canadians have been flown or put on ships out of Libya . 
Efforts will continue Saturday , he said in a statement . 
`` A Canadian Armed Forces C-17 is standing by in Malta , ready to be deployed to Libya at a moment 's notice . 
Although our priority at this moment remains the evacuation , we are actively preparing to move to the next steps and to take other measures . '' 
He called the actions of the Libyan regime `` appalling . '' 
India plans to evacuate its citizens from Libya by air and sea . 
Government officials said they have chartered a ferry with the capacity to seat 1,200 people . 
The ship will reach Benghazi by Saturday and is expected to arrive in Egypt with the evacuees by Tuesday . 
China had evacuated 12,000 of its nationals from Libya as of Friday morning , according to the nation 's foreign affairs ministry . 
The state-run Xinhua news agency reported that more than 4,300 Chinese citizens left Benghazi on two large passengers liners rented by Beijing . 
Another 4,900 boarded ships in the eastern Libyan city , ready to set sail . 
About 3,000 more had gone to neighboring Tunisia and Egypt by land . 
Most of the evacuees are employees of Chinese companies with businesses in Libya . 
Many have gone to neighboring countries -- including Greece , Egypt and Tunisia -- via ocean liners , airplanes or coaches , according to China 's Foreign Ministry . 
Libya refused to let a Middle East Airlines plane land to pick up stranded Lebanese nationals , the official Lebanese news agency said Friday . 
Two days earlier , Lebanon refused landing rights to a Libyan plane that was `` said to be carrying members of -LRB- Libyan leader Moammar -RRB- Gadhafi 's family , '' said Ali Hamdan , foreign relations adviser to Lebanon 's parliamentary speaker , Nabih Berri . 
At least 8,360 Turkish citizens have been evacuated from Libya so far , the prime minister 's office said Friday . 
Turkey said it plans to send 12 planes to Libya on Friday . 
In addition , a Turkish navy ship with a 1,500-passenger capacity is expected to leave Benghazi on Friday . 
The Dutch government said a military plane and a Dutch frigate would help evacuate its nationals in Libya . 
A ferry carrying more than 300 people , including 200 employees of Schlumberger -LRB- prono : schlum bur ZHAY -RRB- and their families arrived Friday in Malta from Tripoli . 
A spokeswoman for the oil and gas technology company said the evacuees included an unspecified number of Americans and people of other nationalities . 
Schlumberger is headquartered in Paris with an additional corporate office in Texas . 
CNN 's Diana Magnay , Tim Lister , Jill Dougherty , Carol Jordan , Diana Magnay , Michael Zippori , Jonathan Wald , Alan Silverleib , Adam Levine , and journalists Ian Lee and Yesim Comert contributed to this report . 
