New York -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan President Moammar Gadhafi 's embattled regime ca n't survive , and the United States should call on him to resign , says analyst Fareed Zakaria . 
In the wake of an uprising that has put anti-Gadhafi forces in control of Benghazi and other Libyan territory , President Barack Obama spoke Thursday with the heads of other Western countries on a coordinated response to the crisis , according to the White House . 
The president has condemned the violence in Libya , and the United States is seeking to evacuate its citizens . 
American officials have said sanctions and a no-fly zone were among options being discussed to try to stop the Libyan government from attacking protesters . 
Zakaria said in an interview that he does n't believe sanctions would work . 
`` The one thing that would make a difference is if the president of the United States called for his ouster , '' Zakaria said . 
`` And it would make a difference mostly to the opposition , to the anti-Gadhafi forces , and I think they would be tremendously emboldened . '' 
The author and host of CNN 's `` Fareed Zakaria GPS '' spoke to CNN on Thursday . 
Here is an edited transcript : CNN : Where are events headed in Libya ? 
Zakaria : I think Gadhafi ca n't last . 
The unusual thing about Libya is that it 's a very large country with a very small population , but the population is actually concentrated very narrowly along the coast . 
So when you hear these stories about cities on the coast being moved over to the anti-Gadhafi forces , this is increasingly most of the country . 
I think Gadhafi is holed up in Tripoli asking to be treated like a constitutional monarch , so it feels as though these are the last days . 
Unless he really surrenders , it could be bloody but I think the end is preordained . 
CNN : Why do you think the Libyan military wo n't rally to his side ? 
Zakaria : That 's the real question , but I think the military wo n't rally to his side because they see the writing on the wall . 
They see that the only way to keep this regime in power would be a wholesale massacre of thousands or tens of thousands of Libyans . 
I ca n't believe they would do that or that ultimately the world would let it happen . 
At some point there is going to be a crack in the regime , at some point some general or the head of the intelligence service is going to turn and at that point , when the regime cracks , I think then it crumbles . 
CNN : What opportunities and difficulties does this present for the United States ? 
Zakaria : Well I 'm a bit puzzled by the Obama administration 's somewhat cautious approach here . 
I supported the way in which they handled Egypt and Bahrain . 
I think in both cases , they had longstanding allies that they had very good relations with . 
They were trying to make sure there was some stability and continuity . 
The Egyptians had been very good on most foreign policy issues the United States cared about , from fighting al Qaeda to making peace with Israel . 
In Bahrain , you had not only an important American ally but also a country that hosts a very important naval base and also a somewhat reformist policy . 
Gadhafi , for all his comical aspects , has been one of the most thuggish , brutal , repressive dictators in the world . 
But here you have an anti-American rogue state , the principal state sponsor of terrorism for decades , that was under sanctions and international isolation for years and with a dictator who ruled his people in the most brutal manner possible . 
Gadhafi , for all his comical aspects , has been one of the most thuggish , brutal , repressive dictators in the world . 
I do n't see why the administration ca n't push harder and be more forceful in its policy on Libya . 
CNN : The suggestion has been made that the reason is a fear that Americans trying to leave Libya would be taken hostage . 
Zakaria : If that 's the case perhaps it 's valid , but the truth of the matter is that they took a stronger line against Mubarak than they have taken against Gadhafi . 
They made clear they thought there needed to be a regime change in Egypt , there needed to be a political transition , a fundamental change , whereas in Libya all they have asked for is an end to the violence . 
If the president of the United States were to get to the podium and say we believe that the regime in Libya needs to change , that Gadhafi needs to resign , that would be a very important moral signal , and would , I think , give a huge boost to the anti-Gadhafi forces . 
All this talk about sanctions and international coordination is meaningless . 
Libya has been under sanctions most of the last 35 years . 
This is a regime that could n't care less about that . 
They get their money from oil revenues , they do n't trade much with the world . 
This is where Libya is different than Egypt and Tunisia . 
Zakaria : Both of them had active trading relations with the rest of the world , particularly Europe . 
In Egypt 's case , they are heavily dependent on tourism , so they cared about the international community . 
I do n't think Gadhafi does at all , he 's never seemed to care in the past when he was not even threatened . 
I do n't think he does now . 
CNN : In recent years , the west has agreed to improved relations with Libya in return for concessions by Gadhafi . 
How does that look in the light of the latest developments ? 
Zakaria : The way Gadhafi has been willing to slaughter his own people highlights what has always been a central feature of his reign which has been a completely callous attitude toward human life -- whether it was sponsoring terrorist attacks against Americans , or sponsoring terrorism in the region . 
CNN : So should the United States and the United Kingdom have reached an accommodation with him years ago -- or should they have been focused on regime change ? 
Zakaria : That 's a tough one . 
Look he was giving up his nuclear program . 
That was a very worthwhile diplomatic effort the United States was engaged in . 
Imagine if Gadhafi had nuclear weapons or even a nuclear program today how much greater the anxieties would be . 
In order to get him to give up his nuclear program , he wanted something in return . 
Now we can have a debate about the precise nature of those negotiations and whether he was given too much , but in general I think it was a good thing that we got him to abandon his nuclear program . 
Watch Fareed Zakaria GPS Sundays at 10am and 1pm ET . 
For the latest from Fareed Zakaria GPS click here . 
