The disappearance of their father 20 years ago has haunted brothers Ahmed , left , and Youcif Almegaryaf . 
Izzat Almegaryaf `` disappeared '' more than two decades ago He was an anti-Gadhafi activist imprisoned in Tripoli His sons received a handful of letters smuggled out of jail The three brothers do n't know if their father is still alive Atlanta -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- One afternoon this week , Ahmed Almegaryaf , a college student and part-time DJ in suburban Atlanta made the rounds to a local music joint in his gray Nissan Altima . 
Amid six lanes of traffic on the interstate , it was not difficult to see the oversize sticker plastered on his rear window : `` Where is my father ? '' 
It 's a question that has haunted Ahmed , 26 , and his two brothers all of their lives . 
Their father , a Libyan opposition activist , `` disappeared '' 20 years ago . 
The sons of Izzat Almegaryaf do n't know where he is -- or whether he is still alive . 
All that they know is derived from a handful of letters smuggled out of a Tripoli jail in the mid-1990s . 
For two decades , they 've been left to ponder the grim possibilities of what happens to a man who opposes a dictator as ruthless as Moammar Gadhafi . 
Now , a popular revolt in Libya has presented new hope for the Almegaryaf brothers . 
Gadhafi has vowed rivers of blood to preserve his power . 
But for the first time since he seized Libya 's helm in 1969 , his fate seems uncertain . 
As images and reports from Libya flooded the brothers ' television and computer screens this week , Ahmed , Youcif and Bashir could think of nothing except their father . 
And the possibility that at last , they might find answers to the question that has defined their lives . 
Youcif , 27 , remembers the day his father was taken away , and could hardly watch footage of Gadhafi 's crackdown on protesters . 
This was the man he believes is responsible for destroying his own family . 
How could he simply watch from afar ? 
He said his goodbyes to Ahmed and Bashir , busy studying economics and international relations at Emory University . 
Now 21 , Bashir has chosen to study subjects that were dear to the father he has never known . 
Youcif made his way to the Atlanta airport Tuesday evening to board a flight to Cairo , Egypt , compelled to help in any way he could . 
For now , he plans to shuttle medical aid into eastern Libya . 
The Almegaryaf family believes the Libyan people will prevail . 
They believe Gadhafi is in his last hours , desperation oozing from his words and actions . 
With that prospect , improbable for so long , the three brothers know only this : They are perhaps on the verge of finally knowing many truths about their nation -- and about their father . 
Libyan activist Izzat Almegaryaf , with sons Ahmed , left , and Youcif in the late '80s , was a target of Moammar Gadhafi 's . 
` Daddy , I want to go with you ' On a March evening 20 years ago , a man wearing a traditional Arab disdasha appeared at the apartment in Cairo that the three young Almegaryaf brothers shared with their parents . 
Izzat Almegaryaf had fled Gadhafi 's Libya several years earlier , but he had never surrendered his dreams of freedom . 
The man in the disdasha demanded that Izzat go with him . 
`` Daddy , I want to go with you , '' pleaded Youcif , then only 6 . 
His father did not turn back . 
Plucked from his home and blindfolded , Izzat was put on a jet to Tripoli , the capital of his homeland , and thrown behind bars in one of Gadhafi 's jails . 
No one informed his family of the charges against him . 
No one told them of his whereabouts . 
Gadhafi had called for a `` physical liquidation '' of his political opponents , many of whom were arrested and put to death in public executions , according to Amnesty International . 
Izzat Almegaryaf was one of Gadhafi 's targets . 
On that March evening , a family 's life was shattered . 
A husband , disappeared . 
A wife , Nora , suddenly alone . 
And three little boys left fatherless . 
Youcif and Ahmed , then 5 , yearned to go to the Cairo zoo again with their father so they could feed carrots to the giraffes . 
Or sit and watch their father play cards with his friends , trying to learn how to mimic his every move . 
They missed their father 's embrace . 
Bashir was -- blissfully perhaps -- only five weeks old when Izzat was taken and does not harbor the memories of his older brothers . 
He grew up constantly asking questions about their father : `` What was Baba like ? '' 
Three years later , the family settled in suburban Atlanta under the wing of Mohammed Almegaryaf , the boys ' uncle and once a high-ranking Libyan government official who founded the opposition National Front for the Salvation of Libya . 
They eked out a new life , becoming citizens of a place far from North Africa , always waiting for the day when Gadhafi would tumble and their father would be released . 
For two agonizing decades , they spent their days longing for one man and hating another . 
Over the years , people told Nora to forget the life she made with Izzat , a handsome former army officer and political activist who loved poetry and music . 
They told her she should remarry , find happiness again . 
Nora refused to abandon her husband . 
She believed in her heart he would return . 
And yet , the boys knew that they could not kid themselves . 
They were dealing with one of the most ruthless regimes in the world . 
They learned snippets of their father 's circumstances through his letters from Abu Salim prison . 
But the last was received in the mid 1990s . 
There has been no direct news of Izzat since then , though reliable witnesses working with human rights groups including Amnesty International and the United Nations Human Rights Council have reported sightings of him up until 1996 , the year Gadhafi squashed an uprising at Abu Salim with brutal force . 
Human Rights Watch says 1,200 prisoners were killed that day . 
It would be one thing to cope with a father 's detention . 
It is another to pass each waking hour not knowing . 
The boys recalled always being asked by strangers : `` Where is your father ? '' 
`` He 's away on a business trip , '' Youcif would reply , knowing the security risks for speaking the truth . 
The family had received anonymous telephone calls threatening them right after Izaat 's abduction . 
Another time , a suspicious phone call came to Youcif 's elementary school in Atlanta from a man who alleged he was Izzat and that the school should have the boy ready to be picked up . 
The family felt they were being watched ; that too many people knew too many things about them . 
That was the nature of Gadhafi 's security apparatus , they said . 
Sometimes , Youcif had nightmares of his father being pulled out of his cell and shot . 
Ahmed developed nonepileptic seizures -- sometimes up to seven an hour -- that his therapist concluded were trauma-induced . 
At first , Nora read out only parts of her husband 's letters that were addressed to the boys . 
She wanted to spare her tender children the harsh truth . 
She knew the letters were genuine -- they were written in her husband 's distinct Arabic calligraphy , often difficult to decipher by those unfamiliar with it . 
He told her he had not been the best husband and father and that it had been due to his `` preoccupation with the Libyan cause . '' 
To his sons , his `` three musketeers , his dear ones , the light of my eyes , '' he wrote : `` You are my dreams for a better future for all of us . 
I can not express to you how much I do miss you , for writing wo n't do it justice . 
You are always on my mind . 
Your greetings reach me with every breath of fresh air I get in the early morning . 
They reach me with the birds , which have made a nest on my pillow . 
Whenever the guards go to sleep , the birds come to me telling me stories about you . 
Your greetings reach me as the wind plays music on the walls of my cell . 
You come to me with the sunrise of every sun and fill my heart with love . 
You come to me at night with every moon . 
You are always with me . '' 
He told them to learn how to be strong , to learn to swim and ride a horse . 
To always be good Muslims . 
And that one day , he knew , they would be reunited in a free Libya . 
`` I taught you that our country does not become greater without us standing up to defend it . 
It only grows with our efforts , sweat and sacrifices , '' he wrote . 
`` When I was with you , I used to worry for your safety , show you endless love , and give you whatever you asked for , you can only imagine how I feel now as I am far away from you . '' 
The boys held on to every word . 
They tried to picture their father sitting in a dark cell . 
Where did he get the paper ? 
What was he wearing ? 
Was he in pain ? 
How was he treating his diabetes ? 
Later , they learned from the letters that their father was detained by a Col. Mohamed Hassan , an Egyptian security agent . 
He had `` disappeared '' along with Jabballah Hamed Matar , another leading Libyan opposition figure in Cairo . 
The two men were taken to the headquarters of the Egyptian military security for further interrogation and then transferred to Abu Salim prison in Tripoli . 
`` Your mother may have told you how I asked the butterflies , the flowers and birds to take care of you , '' he wrote to them . 
`` I asked the wind to gently play with locks of your hair and lessen the difficulties of your life . 
As for the clouds , I have asked them to rain candy on you , and give you shade when it gets hot , and the sky , I asked it to gently rain love and tenderness onto you . 
I wrote for you songs and stories about the homeland and made it into a necklace I placed on you when you were young . '' 
And he asked : `` Do you also think of me ? '' 
A third brother , Bashir Almegaryaf , 21 , protests this month against the Libyan regime in downtown Atlanta . 
One step closer to knowing Youcif , who began working at 16 to help support his family , has in many ways stepped into his father 's shoes . 
Of the three sons , he bears the closest resemblance to Izzat . 
He has been outspoken in denouncing Gadhafi . 
He has taken his family 's cause to the U.N. Human Rights Council and to the British Parliament , where he broke down while speaking about his brother 's seizures . 
He has written to U.S. congressmen and senators . 
Under international law , he tells them , forced disappearances qualify as torture for the victim and his family . 
He can not understand why America wo n't help its own citizens who are being tortured . 
Now , he has committed his strongest act to date , stepping aboard a plane that would carry him physically closer to that place that has fully occupied his heart . 
Before he left , he spoke of the unbridled violence unfolding in his country . 
`` It 's literally a genocide , '' he said . 
`` And we 're doing nothing about it . '' 
He contemplated the possibility that soon , he might set foot on the soil of his ancestors . 
It is a land of pristine beaches and majestic mountains , of people and traditions hidden from the world under Gadhafi 's black curtain . 
His father , like thousands of educated Libyans , knew his country was doomed when early in his rule , Gadhafi scrapped Libya 's constitution and implemented revolutionary law . 
`` I think the devils work for him , '' chimed in Youcif 's brother Ahmed , who has been compiling as much information as he can about the uprising and disseminating it on Twitter , YouTube and Facebook . 
`` It 's hard to explain how ruthless he is , '' Ahmed said . 
`` It 's frustrating to see what he 's done and for the world to shrug it off . '' 
Sometimes , he allows himself images in his head of his first meeting with his father . 
More than anything , he just wants to look at him , feel him . 
He wonders whether his father will be able to recognize his little boy . 
But the images from Libya on television quickly remind him of Gadhafi 's police state . 
And Ahmed returns to reality . 
`` What if he did pass ? '' 
What if , after all this time , the family is shattered all over again ? 
