By the CNN Wire Staff A picture taken on a Libyan government-guided tour on June 18 . 
Libyan authorities said buildings were damaged by NATO airstrikes on Tripoli 's residential district of Arada . 
Russia 's foreign minister says NATO is in a difficult situation , killing those it 's supposed to protect `` Libya has been bombed for more than three months now , and we see no end , '' Sergei Lavrov says Russia has been critical of France for arming the rebels Rebels claim they are advancing toward Tripoli Moscow -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- There can be `` no fast solution '' to the NATO campaign in Libya , the Russian foreign minister said Thursday , arguing that civilians are dying on both sides of the conflict because of foreign intervention . 
NATO members trying to implement the United Nations mandate to protect civilians from Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi `` are now in a difficult situation , '' Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said on Russia state television . 
`` Libya has been bombed for more than three months now , and we see no end of this process , '' he said . 
Western statements that the campaign will continue until Gadhafi no longer poses a threat to Libyans are having a high cost in human lives , he said . 
Clinton : Gadhafi should step down Daughter : Gadhafi is ` symbol , guide ' Donilon : No decision on arming Libya Russia has been sending humanitarian aid to both sides in Libya . 
A plane departed for the capital Tripoli on Thursday , a day after one left for the rebel stronghold of Benghazi , the Emergency Situations Ministry said . 
Rebels claimed advances on Wednesday , saying they captured a town southwest of Tripoli . 
Fighting also engulfed Misrata , east of Tripoli , where 14 rebels were killed and 42 others wounded , according to Mohamed Ibrahim , a rebel spokesman in the city . 
Three civilians also died in rocket attacks launched by Gadhafi 's men , Ibrahim said . 
CNN could not verify the information . 
Just west of Misrata , in Dafniya , 14 rebel fighters were killed and 42 were wounded Wednesday during a firefight with Gadhafi forces , said Ibrahim . 
The rebels ran over Al-Qawalish , a town of about 4,000 residents 50 kilometers -LRB- 31 miles -RRB- southwest of Tripoli , a stronghold for Gadhafi since the start of the uprising in February . 
Fighting has erupted in the western mountains in recent weeks as more than four months of battles have failed to yield a decisive victory for either side . 
The first United Nations joint mission to reach the devastated mountain region found many people in dire need of food . 
A World Food Programme statement said markets were not functioning due to limited fuel and cash , and basic services such as electricity and water were lacking in some areas . 
The rebels said they were moving northward , closer to the capital on the Mediterranean Sea . 
They intended to march to the city of Garyan , which sits on the main highway to Tripoli . 
Also Wednesday , NATO said its air forces targeted military re-fueling equipment in the Brega area southwest of the rebel stronghold of Benghazi . 
`` These precision strikes will limit the ability of pro-Gadhafi forces to threaten Libyan civilians and significantly degrade logistical support for Gadhafi 's campaign in eastern Libya , '' Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard , commander of Operation Unified Protector , said in a news release . 
France has acknowledged arming the rebels , saying the weapons were for self-defense . 
However , French Defense Minister Gerard Longuet said Tuesday the weapons were no longer necessary because the rebels were becoming `` more autonomous . '' 
But debate continued over France 's decisions . 
In a contentious closed-door U.N. Security Council meeting Tuesday , Russia argued that by sending weapons , France had violated the council 's resolution that authorized the use of NATO force in Libya . 
CNN 's Maxim Tkachenko , Kareem Khadder and Kathryn Tancos contributed to this report . 
