Scientists watch for environmental effects of Gulf of Mexico oil spill Workers secure containment booms that will be deployed to protect delicate ecosystems from oil spilling from a destroyed rig in the Gulf . 
-LRB- John Fitzhugh\/associated Press -RRB- View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
The cord-grass marshes of south Louisiana are nurseries for baby shrimp , stalking grounds for blue crabs , and barriers that slow down waves before they bite off more of the mainland . 
On Friday , they were becoming defenseless sponges for sticky , dark oil . 
The locals said the foul-smelling mass had the goopy look of chocolate mousse . 
The scientists said the enormous slick had the potential to bring environmental ruin to this treasured coastline . 
The oil is spilling out of the seafloor at 5,000 barrels a day -- the equivalent of 210,000 gallons -- maybe much more , from a well about 50 miles out in the Gulf of Mexico , and it could soon eclipse the volume of the infamous Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 . 
That disaster spilled oil onto rocky Alaskan beaches , but it is at least possible to wash oil off a rock . 
In the Gulf , the oil is floating into wetlands that could hold on to its toxins for years . 
And , scientists said , the spill 's damage could be magnified by its awful timing . 
Among the animals that live along the Gulf Coast , this is the time for hatching and rearing : Species as diverse as pelicans , shrimp and alligators are all reproducing , or preparing to . 
That could bring sensitive young animals in contact with toxic oil or cause their parents to plunge into oily waters looking for food . 
Already , rescuers from Delaware were using Dawn blue dish soap to clean the first bird found to be `` oiled '' in the disaster , the Associated Press reported . 
The bird , a young northern gannet , had been turned from white to black . 
`` I ca n't imagine we 're not going to have some mass casualties '' among these birds , said Michael Parr of the American Bird Conservancy . 
`` It 's got to be about the worst time right now '' for an oil spill to hit . 
One environmentalist said the scenario created `` a potential mega-disaster . '' 
Along the Gulf , they were waiting for it with a dread usually devoted to hurricanes . 
`` The magnitude and the potential for ecological damage is probably more great than anything we 've ever seen in the Gulf of Mexico , '' said Nancy Rabalais , a scientist who heads the Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium , a research center in Cocodrie , La. `` Once it hits the shoreline , it 'll get into everything . '' 
The oil has been flowing since April 22 , when a drilling rig called the Deepwater Horizon blew up and sank 50 miles out in the Gulf . 
By late Friday , federal officials estimated that the slick had reached land in Louisiana 's isolated southeast corner and was being pushed ashore by strong winds . 
It had already surrounded some of the Chandeleur Islands off Louisiana , where thousands of brown pelicans are roosting . 
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service , which oversees the islands , has protected them with a ring of floating booms . 
