HOUSTON | Thu Nov 4 , 2010 10:34 am EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc is headquartered at St. James 's Square in London , but the energy company 's fate lies in the deep waters of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Though the worst U.S. offshore oil spill has ravaged BP 's reputation and its stock price , BP will likely remain a top operator in the Gulf , a region which is key to future U.S. and global energy supplies . 
More than six months after BP 's Macondo well ruptured and caused more than 4 million barrels of oil to spew into the sea , BP 's attention turns to scouring the oil-soaked shoreline and salvaging an image that has taken a beating from furious Gulf Coast residents and politicians . 
BP faces a barrage of civil and likely criminal prosecution from the U.S. government and hundreds of injured rig workers , but is unlikely to abandon the Gulf . 
That 's because the U.S. government needs deep-pocketed energy companies like BP that can foot the soaring cost of drilling there , and BP needs access to the region 's reserves , which are some of the most profitable in its portfolio . 
BP 's new chief executive , American-born Bob Dudley , must defend his company 's turf in North America , home to nearly half of its global assets and its biggest earnings driver . 
`` I can promise you that I did not become chief executive of BP in order to walk away from the U.S. , '' Dudley said on October 25 in a defiant speech which criticized the media and industry rivals of stoking fears . 
`` BP will not be quitting America . '' 
In its quarterly earnings statement on November 2 , BP raised its estimated cleanup costs by $ 7.7 billion to $ 40 billion . 
`` The path to rehabilitation post Macondo and Bob Dudley 's new strategic direction are the key to performance rather than Q3 earnings , '' analysts at Citigroup Global Markets said . 
Institutional investors say BP can shoulder cleanup costs and the added expense of new offshore regulations . 
But BP must convince sometimes skeptical officials that disasters like Macondo are in the past . 
`` Bob Dudley 's first priority is reestablishing BP 's credibility with the U.S. government and with various regulators so that BP can continue to operate in the Gulf of Mexico , '' said Will Riley , co-manager of the Guinness Global Energy Fund , which includes BP . 
In the darkest days of the spill , U.S. politicians and even President Barack Obama referred to BP as `` British Petroleum , '' the now-defunct name the company carried from the 1950s until it merged with U.S.-based Amoco in 1998 to become BP Amoco , and then BP Plc in 2001 . 
But BP is as American as apple pie -- or almost . 
After striking a major find in Alaska 's Prudhoe Bay field in 1969 , BP grew its market share to be a top producer in the United States , for years the biggest global energy user until China supplanted it this year . 
Since the Amoco acquisition , `` BP is inextricably bound to the US energy industry , '' said Christopher Wheaton , portfolio manager at Allianz RCM Energy Fund , which owns BP shares . 
In an era when U.S. politicians demonize foreign oil and extol the virtues of energy independence , BP plays a vital role as one of the biggest producers of home-grown U.S. crude oil and natural gas . 
BP is the biggest Gulf producer , accounting for about a quarter of the oil and natural gas output from a region that generates about a third of total U.S. domestic production . 
`` It 's not oil that Obama can turn his back on , '' Riley said . 
It would also be hard for BP to walk away from the deepwater Gulf , which yields some of the most profitable barrels that it produces . 
As a whole , the United States accounts for about 25 percent of BP 's upstream production , and about a third of its upstream profits , according to Citigroup . 
As a result of several asset sales meant to generate cash to cover spill liabilities , BP 's reliance on Gulf operations will only rise . 
BP does n't have too many other expansion options apart from the Gulf , said Gary Adams , U.S. oil and gas leader at Deloitte , a consultancy . 
And major oil companies like BP , Exxon Mobil and Royal Dutch Shell will likely become more dominant in the deep waters of the Gulf . 
That 's because they will be the only ones with enough money to cover new liability rules for deepwater drilling , which are likely to require companies to put up billions of dollars of collateral to cover potential future spill costs . 
For a mid-sized independent like Apache Corp or Newfield Exploration Co , `` a $ 10 billion liability risk is a ` bet the company ' situation , and clearly that will discourage activity , '' Wheaton said . 
To be sure , BP faces a barrage of civil and likely criminal prosecution from the U.S. government and hundreds of injured rig workers , and accusations from Macondo well partner Anadarko Petroleum Corp. of gross negligence in drilling the well , a claim that BP protests . 
`` It would clear the air enormously if BP could reach some agreement on the issue of gross negligence , '' said Ivor Pether , fund manager for Royal London Asset Management , which owns BP stock . 
A gross negligence finding could carry a $ 17.5 billion fine . 
After the Macondo disaster wiped about $ 70 billion from BP 's market value and forced it to temporarily suspend dividend payments , BP 's institutional investors see the company as undervalued versus other big oil companies . 
`` We ultimately come back to the numbers , which point to the fact that BP is cheap , '' Riley said . 
And even environmentalists concede that BP is in the Gulf to stay . 
`` BP is not going to be hounded out of the Gulf , '' said Elgie Holstein , a senior director at the non-profit Environmental Defense Fund . 
`` The reserves are too important . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Chris Baltimore . 
Additional reporting by Tom Bergin in London , Anna Driver in Houston and Braden Reddall in San Francisco . 
Editing by Robert MacMillan -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Mitt Romney was the 70th Governor of Massachusetts from Jan 2,2003 to Jan 4,2007 . 
During his one term the Buzzards Bay oil spill happened during April 2003 . 
On April 27 , 2003 , eight years ago the Bouchard Barge B-120 hit an obstacle in Buzzards Bay , creating a 12-foot rupture in its hull and discharging an estimated 100,000 gallons of No. 6 oil . 
The oil is known to have affected an estimated 90 miles of shoreline , killed 450 numerous bird species , and recreational use of the bay , such as shell fishing and boating . 
Since the 2003 oil spill the US Coast Guard has appealed the 2004 Massachusetts Oil Spill Prevention Act and one Massachusetts property damage lawsuit has dragged on for eight years . 
Republican Mitt Romney is laying the groundwork for a possible White House campaign in 2012 , hiring a team of staff members and consultants . 
If this informed analysis , I recommend Old Moore 's Almanack . 
The Gulf may be critical the the USA , but it is far from critical to BP . 
An important area for exploration and extraction , certainly , but nowhere near a majority of BP 's global business . 
BP would thrive and make good money from its world-wide operations and proven reserves , without its Gulf fields , if necessary . 
All of which Obama would have done well to find out before he launched his anti-BP PR campaign while the company was struggling to shut off Macondo and could have done with some support . 
Especially as it had instantly publicly committed to doing right by the fishing industry and Gulfside communities . 
Some reward for being a good corporate citizen ! 
And what 's all this nonsense about `` hundreds of injured rig workers '' ? 
We have had the tragedy of eleven dead on Deepwater Horizon . 
I would not be surprised by a few more injuries and burns , but `` hundreds '' ? 
Not in any report I 've read . 
Trash reporting which gives the media the bad name they thoroughly deserve . 
And , by the way , even Exxon would have a job making an offer for BP now . 
As well as its profitable world-wide operations , BP owns over 18 billion barrels of proven reserves throughout the world . 
That 's worth a bit more than even Exxon 's ready to pay . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
