cents Mapping of genetic code will aid creation of vaccine cents Five new cases diagnosed in the UK today Friday 8 May 2009 16.29 BST The World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- today increased its global tally of confirmed swine flu cases to more than 2,300 , as British scientists announced they had worked out the full genetic code for the virus . 
Five new cases were diagnosed in the UK today four schoolchildren and an adult linked to Alleyn 's School in Dulwich , south London , which has been closed all week after six pupils were diagnosed with the illness . 
There are now 39 confirmed cases in the UK . 
Mexico remains the worst affected country , with more than 1,100 laboratory-confirmed human cases of H1N1 virus influenza , including 42 deaths . 
The United States has reported nearly 900 laboratory-confirmed human cases , including two deaths . 
Another 22 countries have confirmed cases but no deaths . 
The latest figures came as the health secretary , Alan Johnson , said the Health Protection Agency , which monitors infectious diseases , had fully mapped the genetic code of the virus . 
He said this would help scientists to understand how the virus operates and to identify the parts that can be used to manufacture a vaccine . 
On a visit to a laboratory in Hertfordshire , he was told that researchers hope European manufacturers will be able to take delivery of prototypes in the coming months to enable mass production of a vaccine to begin . 
Johnson said : `` A significant step towards protecting the world 's health against swine flu has been taken . 
We now look to the vaccine industry to produce the required quantities of vaccine as quickly as possible . '' 
The entire genetic fingerprint and sequence of the swine flu virus will now be analyzed to learn how the virus behaves as it infects individuals . 
At a meeting of Asian health ministers in Bangkok today , the WHO director general , Dr Margaret Chan , said the world was `` better prepared for an influenza pandemic than at any time in history '' , largely because of precautions taken over the threat of bird flu . 
She said : `` Years of alert and expectation mean that most countries now have preparedness plans . 
Vaccine manufacturing capacity has increased sharply . 
Large stocks of antiviral drugs have been produced and procured . 
`` Right now , treatment courses from the WHO stockpile are being shipped to more than 70 countries in the developing world . '' 
Mexico 's ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva said he would raise concerns at the WHO annual meeting later this month about `` discriminatory '' measures imposed against the country , its people , and its exports because of the flu . 
China has placed dozens of Mexicans in forced quarantine as a protective measure against the spread of the virus . 
Around the world , public opinion seems to be shifting from fear of a pandemic to scepticism as to whether the virus poses a significant threat . 
Half of 2,000 Britons surveyed yesterday said they believe the government over-hyped the threat of swine flu , and are now less worried about it spreading . 
The research by online polling center Toluna found two-thirds of respondents thought the government had coped well with the outbreak , while more than half -LRB- 54 % -RRB- thought the NHS was well prepared to cope with a possible pandemic . 
The report noted a decline in public worry about the virus spreading , with 40 % worried about the virus , compared with 50 % last week . 
Public health officials around the world acknowledge their worst fears about the new virus have yet to materialise . 
But many experts worry that people will become too complacent and fail to heed warnings if the virus returns in a more dangerous form in the autumn . 
`` People are taking a sigh of relief too soon , '' said Dr Richard Besser , acting director of the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention . 
`` The measures we 've been talking about the importance of hand-washing , the importance of covering coughs , the real responsibility for staying home when you 're sick and keeping your children home when you 're sick I 'm afraid that people are going to say , ` Ah , we 've dodged a bullet . 
We do n't need to do that , ' '' he said . 
