ABIDJAN | Wed Apr 6 , 2011 12:06 am BST ABIDJAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Ivory Coast 's Laurent Gbagbo was negotiating the terms of his departure on Tuesday following a fierce assault by forces loyal to his rival and backed by U.N. and French helicopter air strikes . 
A United Nations internal document seen by Reuters said Gbagbo had surrendered . 
A U.N. official , under condition of anonymity , said later that Gbagbo had not yet done so but had suggested he wanted to , and had requested U.N. protection . 
Gbagbo government spokesman Ahoua Don Mello , who was taking part in the negotiations , told Reuters by phone from Abidjan that the parties were still in talks . 
`` Some points are still being discussed . 
Nothing has been signed , Gbagbo has not signed anything , '' Don Mello said . 
The U.N. document said fighting in Abidjan and elsewhere in the country had stopped since midday local time , and that Ivory Coast 's generals had asked the U.N. peacekeeper force to protect pro-Gbagbo soldiers and take possession of all their weapons . 
France said it expected a swift exit by Gbagbo , who had clung to power since refusing to concede he lost last November 's presidential election to Alassane Ouattara , plunging the world 's top cocoa-growing nation into renewed civil war . 
`` We are on the brink of convincing him to leave power , '' French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe told parliament in Paris . 
Don Mello said the Gbagbo was negotiating the terms of his departure based on the recognition of Ouattara as president . 
The spokesman said the negotiations covered security guarantees for Gbagbo and his relatives . 
`` If everything goes well , we will have a declaration soon , '' Ahoua Don Mello told Reuters . 
Gbagbo was said to be in Abidjan , with some media reports saying he was in a bunker below his residence . 
Gbagbo 's forces called for a cease-fire after being comprehensively outgunned in the end , and French Defense Minister Gerard Longuet said the West African country 's crisis could soon be over . 
`` We are in a situation where everything could be resolved in the next few hours , '' Longuet told a news conference . 
U.S. President Barack Obama called on Gbagbo to stand down immediately and order his fighters to lay down their arms . 
Over the past week , forces loyal to Ouattara had launched a major assault on Gbagbo 's last strongholds in Abidjan , driving home their campaign to oust him . 
A Reuters eyewitness reported on Tuesday that calm had returned to the district surrounding the presidential palace after days of fierce machinegun and heavy weapons fire . 
French tanks and several armored personnel vehicles were seen crossing Abidjan bridges formerly held by forces loyal to Gbagbo . 
The U.N. peacekeeping force in Ivory Coast , supported by the French military , had targeted Gbagbo 's heavy weapons capabilities on Monday with attack helicopters after civilians were killed in shelling . 
Attacks centred on military bases in the city , but also on rocket launchers `` very close '' to Gbagbo 's Cocody district residence , U.N. peacekeeping chief Alain Le Roy said on Monday . 
`` It looks like Gbagbo is trying to negotiate his way out . 
What he can offer is another matter ... his negotiating position is much weaker than a couple of weeks ago , '' said Hannah Koep , Ivory Coast analyst at London-based consultancy Control Risks . 
The conflict drove cocoa prices lower on Tuesday as dealers bet on a swift end to Gbagbo 's rule and a resumption of exports . 
The country 's defaulted $ 2.3 billion Eurobond rose as the assault raised expectations for repayment . 
In the north of Abidjan , bullet-riddled bodies lay by the side of the main motorway near the largely pro-Gbagbo neighborhood of Yopougon , evidence of recent fighting between Ouattara and Gbagbo forces , a Reuters witness said . 
An armored personnel carrier straddled the roadway , still in flames , and residents who had emerged from their houses to find water said they had heard machinegun and heavy weapons rounds through the night . 
The United Nations human rights office in Geneva expressed concern on Tuesday over the killings of dozens of civilians in Abidjan , amid reports of heavy weapons used in populated areas . 
Gbagbo had defied international pressure to give up the presidency after an election last November that U.N.-certified results showed Ouattara won , rejecting the results as fraudulent and accusing the United Nations of bias . 
More than 1,500 people are reported to have died in the standoff that has rekindled the country 's 2002-03 civil war , though the real toll is likely to be much higher . 
Several thousand pro-Ouattara fighters entered Abidjan from the north on Monday in a convoy of transporters , pick-ups mounted with machineguns and 4x4s loaded with fighters bearing AK-47 assault rifles and rocket launchers -- a `` final assault '' . 
