AMMAN | Wed Apr 6 , 2011 5:01 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Senior Syrian army ranks are packed with loyal members of President Bashar al-Assad 's Alawite minority , reducing any prospect of military pressure on him to stand aside if protests grow , military experts say . 
Unlike the armies in Tunisia and Egypt , whose refusal to confront non-violent demonstrations spelt the demise of their autocratic rulers , the fate of many senior Syrian military officers is closely tied to that of Assad . 
Although some officers from the Sunni Muslim majority have been promoted to senior ranks , Sunni influence has been weakened and Assad 's brother Maher controls key military units packed with Alawite soldiers . 
`` It will take an extraordinary amount of people power to defeat a regime this deeply entrenched . 
This is not Tunisia , '' said W. Andrew Terrill , research professor of national security affairs at the U.S. Army War college . 
`` The regime has been careful about placing Alawite loyalists in all key positions within the military so that the regime can defeat any effort to overthrow it . 
Some Sunni officers have risen to very high ranks but have very little power to command troops , '' Terrill said from Carlisle Barracks , Pennsylvania . 
The Assad family which has ruled Syria for 41 years comes from the Alawite mountains overlooking the Mediterranean , a stronghold of the secretive sect with links to Shi'ite Islam . 
Assad , who faces the greatest threat to his rule from more than two weeks of protests calling for an end to emergency law and one-party rule , has responded with a blend of force -- his security forces have killed dozens of protesters -- and vague promises of reform . 
Residents of Deraa , cradle of the Syrian protests , say Alawite forces commanded by Assad 's younger brother Maher have taken up positions around the southern city . 
Maher controls the Presidential Guard , the Republican Guard , and the Fourth Armoured Division -- key units that form the security backbone of the state together with the Alawite-dominated secret police . 
`` Some observers consider Maher al-Assad to be excessively violent and emotionally volatile . 
It appears that President Assad views his brother as totally trustworthy , '' said Terrill , a specialist in Syrian military affairs . 
Although family ties ensure the loyalty of the top brass , Assad can not antagonize the army rank-and-file with a repeat of the 1982 crackdown on the city of Hama , when his father Hafez al-Assad sent commandos , paratroopers and Baath Party irregulars to put down an armed uprising by the Muslim Brotherhood . 
Hafez al-Assad 's brother Rifaat personally managed the Hama operation , in which tens of thousands were killed and parts of the city flattened . 
`` Syria 2011 is not Syria 1982 . 
You have hundreds of thousands of soldiers -- conscripts and professional soldiers -- who have seen only corruption and abuse of position by their Alawite commanders , '' said a former Syrian army member . 
`` It will be very dangerous for Bashar to play this game . 
`` The army will not ask Bashar to step down , as was the case in Egypt and Tunisia , but he can not easily ask the army to commit massacres either , '' the ex-soldier said . 
Assad would also be hesitant to use Maher 's Republican Guard to quell protest because it would increase resentment against Alawites , he said . . 
Another military expert working for a Western government said the Syrian army would fracture if the Alawite ruling hierarchy attempted a repeat of the Hama massacre , but the president could get away with smaller scale killings . 
`` It would also depend on how the killings are presented . 
There is a difference between shooting peaceful protesters and killing demonstrators who attack security forces , '' he said . 
Although Deraa residents say Maher al-Assad 's units are positioned around the city , Alawite secret police and special police units have deployed to confront demonstrators . 
More than 40 protesters have been killed in the clashes , witnesses said . 
Terrill said Alawite units would have no qualms suppressing dissent because they have been indoctrinated to believe their community would lose out if majority Sunnis attain power . 
`` It can be safely assumed that virtually all of the Alawites within the military will fight to defend the regime . '' 
Asked if Sunni soldiers could revolt if they saw more of their co-religionists killed , Terrill said : `` Syria 's security organs will move quickly and ruthlessly to suppress even the germs of revolt within the military . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
