A couple arrive at Shousha camp , which was constructed by the Tunisian army to house African refugees coming from Libya , at the Ras Jdir border crossing in Tunisia , June 2 , 2011 . 
RAS JIDR , Tunisia | Wed Aug 17 , 2011 2:57 am EDT RAS JIDR , Tunisia -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Five months after Sudanese worker Mohammed Hassan fled civil war in Libya he is still stranded in a tent city just across the border in Tunisia . 
`` In my own country there is a conflict and violence . 
I can not go there so where do I go now ? '' 
said Mohammed , who comes from Sudan 's troubled Darfur region . 
He left years ago for Libya to escape violence at home . 
The United Nations says almost 900,000 people , including 200,000 foreign workers , have fled Libya into Tunisia to escape fighting after rebels launched an uprising against the 41-year-rule of Muammar Gaddafi in February . 
African workers in particular were frequently targeted by Gaddafi 's opponents , who sometimes accused them of working for the government as mercenaries . 
Most of the Libyans have gone back home or have found new places to stay , and most of the foreigners have been sent home to their countries of origin . 
But around 4,000 of the foreigners , like Mohammed , can not go home because of war or danger in their own countries , and have remained for months in this camp near the border , stateless and unsure of their future . 
In March , Mohammed made his way to Ras Jidr , the main gateway between Libya and Tunisia . 
He has been staying in a tent city just behind the border post . 
`` I came with my family to Libya because life in Darfur was bad . 
It 's still bad there . 
There is no stability , '' he said , sitting on a mat with fellow Sudanese refugees . 
More than two million people have left their homes in Darfur after the government started a campaign against non-Arab rebels there . 
Fighting has ebbed from peak levels but there is no end to the conflict in the region , which borders eastern Libya . 
With the help of the U.N. refugee agency UNHCR , Mohammed has filed a request for asylum . 
So far few Western countries have signalled a willingness to accept stranded Africans from the border camps , U.N. officials say . 
`` We are conducting interviews on an individual case basis and trying to speed up the process but it takes time , '' said Rocco Nuri , a spokesman for UNHCR in Tunisia . 
Many others in the camp share the same fate , sitting in front of their white tents or under trees by the main road to the border . 
`` I came to Benghazi to study but I do n't know what to do now , '' said another young Sudanese man from South Kordofan , a region which has seen fighting recently between the army and fighters allied to newly-independent South Sudan . 
The early days of the conflict in Libya saw chaos at the border and a massive effort to prevent humanitarian disaster . 
The camps in Tunisia were overcrowded at the start , with fights breaking out between refugees waiting for hours for food or water . 
Tensions ran high between refugees from areas at conflict with each other , such as Sudanese from Darfur and the capital Khartoum . 
Some governments such as Egypt sent planes to fetch their stranded citizens . 
Half a million Libyans returned home , according to the UNHCR . 
The rest have largely scattered . 
The 4,000 Africans who remain , segregated by nationalities , live in tents exposed to the sun in the open plain . 
`` The location is unfortunate because it is close to the border and very hot , '' said Nuri . 
Most have applied for asylum in Western countries . 
Some have no money to go home or no plan of where to go . 
`` I came to Libya in 1990 to work first as a factory worker and have done several other jobs since then , '' said Omar from Ivory Coast . 
`` I do n't know what to do now , '' he said , before heading to his tent . 
While he enjoyed living and making good money in Libya , he said going back to Libya is not an option . 
`` It got impossible to stay in Libya , not just because of the security but the attacks against black people , '' he said . 
Abdulrahman , also from Darfur , said he had been accused by both Gaddafi supporters and rebels of fighting for the other side . 
`` We 're in the middle of accusations from both sides . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
