ISTANBUL | Wed Aug 17 , 2011 11:44 am EDT ISTANBUL -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey 's Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan likened the situation in neighboring Syria to Libya on Wednesday , keeping up the pressure on Damascus to end a violent crackdown on protests demanding the overthrow of President Bashar al-Assad . 
Turkish leaders , who once backed Assad , are sounding increasingly frustrated with the Syrian leader in the same way they became frustrated with Muammar Gaddafi after trying to mediate in the Libyan civil war . 
`` We have done our best on Libya , but have n't been able to generate any results . 
So it 's an international issue now . 
Gaddafi could not meet our expectations , and the outcome was obvious , '' Erdogan told reporters . 
`` Now the same situation is going on in Syria . 
I 've sent my foreign minister , and personally got in touch many times , the last of them three days ago on the phone . 
In spite of all this , civilians are still getting killed , '' he said . 
Erdogan repeatedly contacted Gaddafi after the Libyan uprising began in February , calling for a ceasefire and for Gaddafi to allow a transition of power . 
In June , Erdogan offered him an unspecified guarantee if he left Libya but received no answer . 
Since then Turkey has stepped up support for the Libyan rebels , increasing shipments of diesel to them . 
Syrian troops raided houses in a Sunni district of the besieged port of Latakia on Wednesday , residents said , arresting hundreds of people and taking them to a stadium after a four-day tank assault to crush protests against Assad . 
Rights organizations say at least 1,700 civilians have been killed by security forces since the protests erupted in March , while Syrian authorities say terrorist groups have killed 500 soldiers and police . 
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu also called again on Wednesday for Syria to end military operations but he has ruled out foreign intervention in Turkey 's southern neighbor . 
`` The bloodshed has to stop , first and foremost . 
The military operations have to stop , '' Davutoglu told a news conference with his Jordanian counterpart Nasser Judeh . 
`` If the operations continue in Syria and the operations become a regional problem Turkey can naturally not remain indifferent . '' 
Asked about a news report that Turkey might create a buffer zone along its border with Syria , Davutoglu said : `` We 're talking about a border that is 900 km long . 
We can not talk about such a development right now , '' he said . 
Turkish officials denied on Tuesday the report that Ankara was planning a buffer zone to prevent an influx of refugees . 
With Assad defying international pressure and Syrian refugees crossing over the border into Turkey , media have previously said that Turkish political and military leaders were considering setting up a buffer zone inside Syria . 
Relations between Syria and Turkey , its imperial ruler until World War One , have often been tense . 
The two countries almost went to war in the 1990s when Turkish forces were battling Kurdish rebels operating from bases inside Syria . 
-LRB- Reporting by Ibon Villelabeitia and Ece Toksabay ; writing by Daren Butler ; editing by David Stamp -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Moves on to Syria . 
meantime , things in Turkey look confused , to say the least . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
