ZAWIYAH , Libya | Wed Aug 17 , 2011 4:43 pm EDT ZAWIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels to the west and east of Libya 's increasingly isolated capital fought forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi Wednesday for control of oil facilities vital to winning the six-month-old civil war . 
In Zawiyah , 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , they assaulted a coastal oil refinery to try to drive the last Gaddafi forces out and tighten their noose around the capital . 
A rebel spokesman said a pipeline to Tripoli was cut . 
There was no word on the outcome of their assault after nightfall . 
In Brega , on the eastern front , rebel forces said they had suffered 18 killed and 33 wounded Tuesday and Wednesday in their battle to dislodge Gaddafi forces from the oil port and refinery , where they have been fighting for many days . 
Fifteen of the rebels were killed Tuesday and three on Wednesday , said spokesman Mohammad Zawawi . 
Libyan state television showed video of Gaddafi supporters at the Brega terminal Wednesday chanting the leader 's name . 
After 41 years of supreme power , 69-year-old Gaddafi seems isolated . 
Rebel forces are closing in from the west , south and east , cutting off his Tripoli stronghold on the Mediterranean shore . 
Gaddafi 's whereabouts are not known . 
Aided by NATO 's fighter-bombers , assault helicopters and naval blockade , the rebels have transformed the battle in the last few days after many weeks of stalemate . 
Zawiyah controls the western highway linking Tripoli to Tunisia . 
Gaddafi forces were holding the refinery there and harassing rebels in the city with shelling and sniper fire . 
`` There are some snipers inside the refinery facility . 
We control the gates of the refinery . 
We will be launching an operation to try to take control of it shortly , '' a rebel fighter , Abdulkarim Kashaba , said earlier Wednesday . 
A rebel spokesman from the opposition-held city of Misrata to the east of Tripoli said rebels had found the buried bodies of civilians they said had been slaughtered by Gaddafi forces . 
`` We discovered a mass grave containing 150 bodies in Tawargha . 
These are the corpses of civilians kidnapped from Misrata by Gaddafi 's loyalists , '' he said . 
Rebels found a video `` showing kidnappers cutting the throats of people , '' he said . 
The spokesman said rebel forces were now outside a place called Hisha about 100 km -LRB- 60 miles -RRB- west of Misrata on the road to Tripoli . 
`` They are now on the coastal road , '' he said . 
Zawiyah 's refinery is one of the few sources of fuel for Gaddafi 's troops and the people of Tripoli . 
A rebel commander said the pipeline linking it to Tripoli was severed Tuesday . 
Gaddafi 's green flags were still flying from a refinery building and an electrical pylon in Zawiyah . 
The rest of the city now flies the red , black and green flag of the rebels . 
Streets were largely deserted apart from clusters of fighters . 
Medical workers said three people were killed and 35 wounded Tuesday , mostly civilians . 
If the pipeline to Tripoli is indeed cut , `` that would imply dire consequences for the population in Tripoli in terms of fuel supplies needed for the city to keep operating , '' said Fernando Calado of the International Organization for Migration . 
Calado said there had been a sharp increase in the past week in the number of foreign nationals asking to be evacuated . 
He estimated that more than 300,000 foreigners remain in Tripoli , including many from the Philippines and Sri Lanka , as well as Libya 's neighbors Chad , Egypt and Tunisia . 
`` We have received 2,000 requests at this point . 
The potential caseload is huge . 
We 're exploring the possibility of land , sea and air evacuations , '' he told Reuters . 
Libya 's rebel National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- denies holding secret talks with Gaddafi to end the war . 
But suspicions persist that some form of end-game negotiation may be going on . 
The NTC , however , insists Gaddafi step down and leave Libya , saying talks ignoring this basic demand would be `` unthinkable . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Is that a joke ? 
The Libyan TV & The Libyan spokes man both proved to be a complete joke , doing worst than the Nazi SS propaganda , and more laughable than Mohammad Alsahaf used to declare in Iraq ! 
Here is the latest joke , The Government militias and brigades captured Musrata , and Elbrega is secured , plus the pushed the opposition back to eastern Ajdabiyah . . 
now , all of this in one night ? 
I remember when I was in Libya , 4 times or 3 they did this joke on TV , `` We liberated this city and that '' , the first time gun fire was echoing all night long , must have been a fight in the inside , but to cover up the gun fire , the TV comes up in the morning claiming to be in control of Benghazi , Derna & moving to Tubroq . . 
and within the hour , all proved to be a false claim , and we never heard any apologies from the Libyan TV . . 
So tell me again that over 6 months the only source of information reliable was the Libyan TV , in that case , why I watch Al-jazira , CNN , BBC , and in my browser I have Reuters , The Guardian , AFP , Daily Telegraph , basically every & Anything but the lies of my previous government -LRB- 42 yrs watching them , they Lie like they breathe -RRB- . . 
cris_PT ... how incredible is right ! 
You must be the ONLY person who believes the propaganda from Tripoli . 
This government has n't spoke the truth since its inception 41 years ago ! 
Reality check ... the regime must and will be defeated ! 
Wonder how much of his `` truth '' will be believed by the ICC ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
