Homs has suffered widespread devastation after weeks of bombardment Dozens of people have been killed in a suburb of Syria 's battle-scarred city of Homs , reports say , in what activists are describing as a `` new massacre '' . 
Forty-four of those killed came from just a handful of families , the Local Co-Ordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- said . 
The reported killings come a day after the UN 's humanitarian chief visited Homs , saying parts had been devastated . 
Meanwhile a Syrian deputy oil minister posted a message on YouTube saying he had defected to the rebels . 
Abdo Hussameddin is the highest level political figure to abandon the government of President Bashar al-Assad since the uprising erupted a year ago . 
According to the LCC , the latest concentration of killings by security forces happened in the Jobar district of Homs . 
The group said 20 of the dead belonged to a single family , and 16 to another . 
It said the deaths were reprisal killings , coming days after security forces retook Homs from rebels , having pounded the city for weeks . 
The claims can not be verified as international media inside Syria are heavily restricted . 
After visiting Homs , one of the first cities to join the uprising last March , the UN humanitarian chief Baroness Valerie Amos said the bombed-out Baba Amr district felt like it had been closed down . 
`` The devastation there is significant , that part of Homs is completely destroyed and I am concerned to know what has happened to the people who live in that part of the city , '' Baroness Amos told Reuters news agency . 
Activists said troops committed massacres after they went in to the district , but Damascus blamed the rebels for many deaths . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in neighbouring Lebanon says activist groups continue to report the summary execution of men from Baba Amr , the butchering of entire families , and the systematic mass rape of women . 
Our correspondent says opposition groups are urging Baroness Amos to go back and delve deeper . 
The UN says more than 7,500 people have died as a result of the violence in Syria over the past 12 months . 
Jon Leyne BBC News , Cairo This is potentially very significant . 
One of the key elements we have seen in Syria is that the regime itself - the inner core - has not cracked . 
If you look at what happened in Tunisia , in Egypt and in Libya , very quickly the regime broke apart and the leadership lost the support of key players . 
That has n't happened yet in Syria - this may be the first sign of it , or it may be just one isolated example . 
As the deputy minister intimated in his video , anybody trying to defect from that inner core faces enormous pressure . 
They fear their homes and families will be destroyed . 
In a YouTube message posted late on Wednesday , Mr Hussameddin , one of two deputy oil ministers , accused the government of `` barbarism '' . 
He read out a four-minute denunciation of the regime he said he had served for the past 33 years . 
`` I am joining the revolution of the people who reject injustice and the brutal campaign of the regime , '' he said . 
`` I tell the regime , which claims to own the country , you have nothing but the footprint of the tank driven by your barbarism to kill innocent people . '' 
He said he was stepping aside although he knew that his house would be burnt and his family persecuted by the regime . 
Worked initially as drilling engineer for state-owned Syrian Oil Company Rose to head various concerns in state oil and gas industry The Syrian government has not publicly commented on Mr Hussameddin 's announcement . 
Observers say public defections have been rare among civilian officials of the Syrian state , which is controlled by Mr Assad 's minority Alawite sect . 
However , there have been high-profile defections from the military , including Gen Mustapha al-Sheikh who fled to Turkey earlier this year . 
Also thousands of chiefly Sunni soldiers and conscripts are reported to have deserted since the start of the uprising . 
A spokeswoman from the opposition National Transitional Council of Syria said she believed many more cabinet members and their deputies were prepared to defect . 
In further diplomatic efforts to halt the violence , special envoy Kofi Annan is due to meet representatives of both sides in Damascus at the weekend . 
Speaking after talks in Cairo on Thursday , Mr Annan , joint envoy for the UN and Arab League , rejected military intervention in Syria . 
`` I hope no-one is thinking very seriously of using force in this situation . 
I believe further militarisation will make the situation worse , '' he said after meeting Arab League Secretary General Nabil al-Arabi . 
Separately , Beijing announced on Thursday that its envoy had talks in Syria this week with representatives of the government and the opposition . 
China 's foreign ministry said envoy Li Huaxin met Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Muallem and his deputy during a two-day visit . 
Observers say Mr Li 's visit is Beijing 's latest attempt to counter charges by Western and Arab leaders that by vetoing two previous UN resolutions , China and Russia have aided the growing violence by Syrian government forces . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
