His speech to the troops on the eve of the Iraq war made Colonel Tim Collins a national hero and media star . 
But his fame earned him enemies and accusations from both media and military . 
Now that he has cleared his name he is rebutting his critics and looking to a future outside the army The famous speech Colonel Tim Collins made on the eve of the second Gulf war still reads pretty well . 
`` We are going to Iraq to liberate and not to conquer . 
We will not fly our flags in their country ... The only flag that will be flown in that ancient land is their own ... Iraq is steeped in history ; it is the site of the Garden of Eden , of the Great Flood and the birthplace of Abraham . 
Tread lightly there . '' 
Two years on , however , the liberators\/conquerors -LRB- delete according to taste -RRB- are still treading far from lightly - and Collins ' distinguished army career is over , one of the more curious casualties of the war . 
Collins left the army in April 2004 , on the day he received an OBE for distinguished service . 
It was the end of a 22-year love affair , and he traces the waning of the romance to the speech a year earlier . 
`` The problems started at the point where newspapers began to portray me as a coming leader , '' he says . 
`` The army does n't like that . 
They decide who 's going to be in charge . 
I think it was a case of , ` He may do many things , but one thing he will never do is lead the army . 
He 's not even going to run a bath in future ' . '' 
The speech was made just before the 1st battalion of the Royal Irish Regiment , which Collins commanded , crossed into Iraq . 
It was extemporised and would have been lost in the sands but for the quick thinking -LRB- and even quicker shorthand -RRB- of Sarah Oliver , a Mail on Sunday journalist embedded with the unit . 
Her transcript went round the world , was supposedly pinned to the wall of the Oval Office and inspired a letter to the colonel from Prince Charles , who said how profoundly -LRB- the letter is in Collins ' study and the word has been underlined by the prince -RRB- moved he had been by the stirring , caring words . 
How did he produce so fluent an address , such Churchillian cadences , without notes ? 
`` Somehow it does just come to you , '' he says . 
`` Come the time , come the moment . 
How do Irish heroes find the words on the gallows steps ? 
They just come to you . '' 
He still gets requests for a recording or footage of the speech , but none exists , which must give the Sky team who were also embedded with the battalion pause for thought . 
Early in our conversation the colonel calls the speech `` ill-advised '' , but he is joking - he has a taste for irony . 
He is proud to have made it . 
`` The war had gone off ahead of time and everyone was wondering when the first scuds would start landing , '' he recalls . 
`` It was all very edgy . 
For the first time I was certain there was going to be a war , and I was conscious that I was going to be asking young men to take human life . 
That 's a big step and perhaps some of them had n't considered it . 
Having served in many conflicts , I also had no expectation , even with a miracle , of bringing everyone home alive . 
So I knew for a lot of these young people that this was the final chapter in their lives , and I wanted to explain to them why it was important , why they were there , why this was happening . '' 
In the event , there was a miracle - none of his battalion were killed . 
How did his men respond to his message ? 
`` They heard and understood exactly what I 'd said and behaved impeccably -LRB- during the war -RRB- . 
They made a huge contribution in the areas where they were and made it a better place . 
In the short time -LRB- less than two months -RRB- we were there , we made a difference . 
For instance , within a week of us arriving , the city of Al Amarah had water , light , the sewage was under control , there were policemen on the streets and the fire brigades were working . 
It 's now one of the most violent places in Iraq . '' 
Collins would defend his regiment 's role to the last ditch . 
But he makes no attempt to defend the war itself . 
`` I went with the Irish to Iraq with the intention of liberating the Iraqis , with the cry that ` small nations can be free ' . 
But what is happening there is much more reminiscent of American policy than British colonial policy . 
Love it or hate it , British colonial policy is about acting in partnership with the people you come across for mutual benefit . 
American policy is all about subjugation . 
My view is that we were sold a dummy . '' 
Alongside pictures of Collins in battle fatigues - steel-grey hair , shades , flash watch , huge cigar - the speech encapsulated how we , the media , the public , wanted to see our commanders : as larger-than-life heroes . 
While not averse to grandiloquent gestures - he is puffing on a vast cigar when we meet in the garden of his new detached house in Whitstable , Kent , and there is a Mercedes sports car with the roof down on the drive - he does not accept the hero tag . 
`` I 'm not a hero . 
If there are heroes it 's the collective men of the Royal Irish Regiment . 
They are the heroes because it was their actions and their proficiency , hard won on many operations , that made us a success . '' 
The army certainly did n't treat him as a hero . 
They disliked his public persona and vigorously pursued a series of war crimes allegations made against him by a US major with whom he had crossed swords in Iraq and even more serious allegations by the Sunday Express and Sunday Mirror , which accused his battalion of murdering Iraqis in cold blood and burying the bodies in shallow graves . 
A commission of inquiry eventually exonerated him on all charges , but in a memoir published today he is scathing about the way he was abandoned - worse , undermined - by the organization to which he had devoted his life . 
`` The army was attacking me with anonymous briefings , '' he alleges in the book . 
`` It had unwittingly made me the British Dreyfus . '' 
He is sure he knows who in the army high command was out to get him , but says he has insufficient evidence to name him . 
Collins was awarded damages against the Sunday Express and Sunday Mirror - he is building a gazebo in the garden with the proceeds - and has no intention of being on the losing side in the libel lottery . 
`` When the war crimes allegations were made , '' he says , `` for some in the high command they were like a gift from God and they pursued them with the utmost vigor . 
I know who was ultimately behind the whole thing , but I do n't have documentary proof . 
He is a general who has never even been in a fight in a playground and feels hugely threatened by combat soldiers . 
He moved heaven and earth to get me . '' 
I tell Collins that he reminds me of the late Colonel David Hackworth , the much-decorated Vietnam commander who was supposedly the model for Colonel Kilgore in Apocalypse Now . 
He says he is currently reading Hackworth 's autobiography , About Face , and admits to seeing parallels in their careers : battlefield heroes who then turned their fire on their deskbound superiors -LRB- Hackworth called them `` perfumed princes '' -RRB- . 
Can armies , underpinned by discipline , simply not accommodate mavericks in the long term ? 
`` I think the army will accommodate people like me , '' says Collins , `` but is n't able to just at the moment . 
What we have essentially is the army being led by people who were brought up in the cold war when the most important thing in their calendar was the Rhine army horse show . 
They 're now finding it very difficult to cope with the fact that the army is at war -LRB- with terrorism -RRB- . '' 
The key to understanding Collins may be that his attachment was to his beloved Royal Irish Regiment -LRB- formerly the Royal Irish Rangers -RRB- first ; the British army a distant second . 
His home is filled with regimental memorabilia - there is even a Rangers badge in the loo . 
Thin-lipped English officers who criticised him for putting himself in the frontline too much failed to understand his Irishness and the way it conditioned his passionate leadership . 
`` The Irish way is to be in the frontline , '' he says . 
`` Why have an Irish regiment if you do n't expect them to behave like paddies ? 
Our military culture in Ireland has n't changed in a thousand years . 
They still expect their chieftain to lead from the front . '' 
Attachment to the Royal Irish runs in Collins ' family : his grandfather and an uncle were both in the regiment and his grandfather 's first world war medals are proudly displayed in a case mounted on the wall . 
Collins himself was an army cadet at 11 , joined the Territorials at 17 and was commissioned into the army at 21 . 
His father , a Dubliner who set up a printer 's shop in Belfast , could n't join up because he was hard of hearing . 
His mother was a devout presbyterian , and from her perhaps Collins has derived faith , belief in social order and a loathing of discrimination . 
He says that at Queen 's University , Belfast , where he studied economics , most of his friends were nationalists . 
Stripped from his beloved regiment , Collins cuts an odd figure . 
A less colonel-like person you could not meet . 
He is wearing jeans , sandals , a bronze bracelet , one of those fashionable wristbands -LRB- a green `` support our troops '' one -RRB- , and a perfect white T-shirt that shows off his almost flat stomach and muscular arms . 
He is 45 , but far fitter than he was 10 years ago : the photographs in the lounge show a flabbier , less dashing officer , with brown hair and an old-fashioned haircut . 
He is amiable but a little detached , with steely-blue eyes that only occasionally settle on you . 
Mostly , he is speaking into the middle-distance , lecturing on grand themes , speaking to some unseen army . 
He wants so much to be taken seriously - as a thinker on Northern Irish politics -LRB- he foresees a political realignment -RRB- , third world aid -LRB- he 's been there - largely pointless -RRB- , state education -LRB- `` beyond repair '' -RRB- , and global affairs . 
He recognizes that he has now reached a fork in the road . 
He was courted by Conservative and Unionist politicians and does n't rule out standing for parliament in the future , but wants to get experience of life outside the army first . 
He is also hoping to present a television series on army history . 
His home is like a military museum - pity any burglar who tries to take on this super-fit former SAS man with his large collection of Gurkha knives - and you wonder how he will negotiate a fresh beginning outside the army . 
Will he ever free himself from the shadow of that speech ? 
`` Hopefully I will do other things in my life and it will become just a one-hit wonder , a bit like the birdie song , '' he jokes . 
But , in truth , he accepts that Ms Oliver 's excellent shorthand will provide the inscription on his tombstone . 
`` I 'm sure when I drop off my perch at whatever age , the great speech will come back in the obituaries . 
The moment it happened , it changed my life and nothing would ever be the same again . 
But war is like that . 
It changes everything and you can never go back to the time before . '' 
Rules of Engagement by Tim Collins is published by Headline , price # 20 Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : The Monday interview : Colonel Tim Collins This article appeared on p6 of the G2 section of the Guardian on 16.53 BST on Monday 23 May 2005 . 
