Brian Sedgemore -LRB- r -RRB- with Charles Kennedy this morning . 
Photograph : Gareth Fuller\/PA Brian Sedgemore , a Labor MP for 27 years , has defected to the Liberal Democrats and urged voters to give Tony Blair a `` bloody nose '' at the general election next week . 
Mr Sedgemore , who is standing down from parliament and not contesting his Hackney South and Shoreditch seat , said he was leaving Labor after becoming increasingly disillusioned with the government over the Iraq war and `` authoritarian '' anti-terrorism legislation . 
He accused the prime minister of telling `` stomach-turning lies '' over Iraq and using the `` politics of fear to drive through parliament a deeply authoritarian set of law and order measures '' . 
Making his first appearance as a Lib Dem this morning , he said : `` It is against this background I decided I could no longer support the Labor party and would join the Liberal Democrats . '' 
`` I urge everyone from the center and the left of British politics to give Tony Blair a bloody nose in the general election . '' 
The Liberal Democrat leader , Charles Kennedy , sought to use Mr Sedgemore 's defection as evidence that voting for his party would not be a `` wasted '' vote , resulting merely in the election of a Tory government . 
`` The Conservatives self-evidently can not win this general election , '' he said . 
`` People who want to vote against Tony Blair for a variety of reasons can and should vote Liberal Democrat in that knowledge . 
`` Let us have no more ridiculous scare stories from Labor 's high command that voting for the Liberal Democrats will let the Conservatives in . '' 
Mr Kennedy was reacting to Mr Blair 's repeated claim - made again in an interview in the Guardian today - that people who plan to vote Liberal Democrat risk waking up to a Tory government on May 6 . 
The Liberal Democrats have published a series of newspaper adverts today claiming that they would be Britain 's most popular party if everyone who wanted to vote for them did . 
Mr Kennedy also rejected suggestions that the defection of such a long-standing leftwing critic of the government as Mr Sedgemore proved that the Liberal Democrats were now to the left of Labor . 
Disillusioned Tory and Labor voters were equally attracted to the party 's commitment to scrap university tuition fees and provide free long-term care for the elderly , he said . 
Mr Sedgemore , meanwhile , denied that he was a hard-left Labor MP of the old school , and pointed to the health secretary , John Reid , and his predecessor , Alan Milburn , as examples of politicians with Marxist baggage . 
He would not , however , elaborate on a claim he made in the Independent today that there were more Labor politicians waiting to follow him out of the party . 
`` I am not alone , '' he wrote . 
`` A small group of us - all MPs who are standing down - decided we would leave the Labor party immediately after the election . '' 
Guardian Unlimited contacted a number of retiring Labor MPs , who all denied that they were planning to leave the party after the election . 
Veteran leftwinger Tony Banks said Mr Sedgemore 's claim that there were more Labor defectors in the wings was `` the easiest claim on earth '' to make . 
`` If he has any evidence he should put it forward . 
I just think Brian was looking around for company . 
Frankly , I deeply regret what he has done . '' 
Tam Dalyell also denied planning to leave Labor , but said he wanted to see Mr Blair deposed . 
`` As far as I am concerned it is until death do us part . '' 
The Labor leader himself was circumspect about Mr Sedgemore 's defection . 
Mr Blair told reporters at Labor 's morning press conference that the election was about issues such as health , education and the economy . 
`` Let 's not allow the fate of one individual to distract us from that . '' 
Mr Blair 's predecessor as Labor leader , Lord Kinnock , was more outspoken . 
`` What I am most concerned about is the feelings that will be engendered amongst his colleagues of three or four weeks ago from the parliamentary Labor party fighting marginal seats , '' he said . 
`` For them , his statement will appear to be a lance right through the spine . '' 
