Tuesday 26 April 2005 01.44 BST As the prime minister cleaves to the jaw-droppingly offensive premise that continued opposition to his Iraq adventure is born of his detractors having `` nothing serious to say '' , we are grateful to the brilliant internet comic strip Get Your War On , which alerts us to a tale of such powerful irony that it 's once again worth recalling why we went to war in the first place . 
Obviously , as far as terms of engagement go , international law has now been supplanted by Mr Blair 's personal reckoning of what `` the right thing to do '' is , but back then we vaguely remember some stuff about chemical weapons and , as evidence of the old boy 's willingness to use them , a load of glottal-stopped lip-quivering from the PM about what happened to the Kurds at Halabja . 
And so to one of the surest signs that this was merely what Alfred Hitchcock called a McGuffin -LRB- a plot device with no intrinsic value in itself -RRB- , with news of the fate of a coalition project , announced after Saddam 's fall in 2003 , to bring clean drinking water to Halabja 's hapless citizens . 
Specifically , it 's not happening any more . 
Well , you know how it gets . 
Security , more security - these things cost money . 
And hey : if Halabja 's residents want to raise a glass of sewage-contaminated water to their liberation , almost 50 % of them are hooked up to sporadically running supplies of it . 
Naturally , Downing Street are far too grand to bother getting back to us with a comment on the subject , so do assume the official response is along the lines of `` whatever '' . 
That said , the prime minister does allow us a glimpse into the tone of his thinking on such matters in the pages of the Daily Mirror . 
Quizzed by a reader panel on a variety of issues , Mr T is eventually forced to mention the war . 
`` And now we come to Iraq , '' he says . 
`` You know that feeling when you 're 5-0 down and your goalkeeper gets sent off ... '' Um ... kind of . 
Meanwhile , as part of our One to Watch series , we journey to Twickenham , where the Labor candidate disports himself with all the academic rigor of the attorney general . 
At last Wednesday 's public meeting , a constituent questioned Brian Whitington 's defense of the 45-minute justification by asking why we never attacked the WMD-possessing Moscow during the cold war . 
Absurd , retorted Brian - they 'd have only retaliated with WMD . 
Crystalline logic , but quite overshadowed when after the briefest of pauses he produced his trump card . 
`` But we did attack Russia , '' he explained . 
`` That 's why we backed Iraq in the war against Iran . 
Iran was supported by Russia , so by backing Saddam we were attacking Russia . '' 
Brian is challenging Lib Dem treasury spokesman Vince Cable , though evidently not in any intellectual sense . 
There is no such dumbing down in Crewe and Nantwich . 
`` While Cheshire county council is battling with a # 91m backlog of repairs , '' Tory candidate Eveleigh Moore-Dutton 's newsletter states , `` the government has seen fit to slash almost # 3m from the road maintenance fund . '' 
Perhaps it 's just us , but at this point things do seem to take a turn towards the opaque . 
`` Oratori agnascor quadrupei , '' Eveleigh goes on . 
`` Quinquennalis cathedras miscere agricolae , quamquam chirographi circumgrediet plane . '' 
But how 's it playing on the streets ? 
`` It 's very simple , '' agent Donald Potter replies briskly . 
`` It 's just a printing error . '' 
Well , one can quite see how it happened . 
Warmest congratulations , finally , to police in Sutton 's Worcester Park area , who after a four-month surveillance operation have at last amassed sufficient evidence to shut down a notorious local crack house . 
The property is located directly above Worcester Park police station , but splendid work for all that . 
