The prime minister is a war criminal Like Chamberlain in the 30s , Blair is an appeaser of a dangerous global power . 
He should be in prison , not standing for election Tuesday 26 April 2005 01.44 BST Tony Blair has been the worst prime minister since Neville Chamberlain , a figure with whom he shares a number of significant characteristics . 
Chamberlain was a supremely confident and arrogant politician , an excellent speaker and a deeply religious man with a hotline to God . 
He had an unassailable majority in parliament , was popular in the country and presided over a cabinet stuffed with nonentities . 
Unfamiliar with the outside world , he conducted his own disastrous foreign policy with the help of backroom advisers as ignorant as himself . 
By seeking to appease the German government , the principal threat to world peace at the time , he onlysucceeded in encouraging that country 's appetite for aggression and expansionism . 
His egregious errors played a not insignificant role in the outbreak of the second world war , the principal tragedy of the 20th century . 
Blair has followed in his footsteps , and is destined for the same place in history 's hall of infamy . 
Like Chamberlain , he is an arrogant and God-fuelled appeaser , the unseemly ally of an unbridled country that presents a global threat similar to Germany in the 1930s . 
Instead of seeking a grand alliance to confront this new danger - `` a coalition of the unwilling '' that would include the Europeans , the Russians and the Chinese - Blair has sided with the evil empire . 
He has taken up a role as its principal cheerleader , obliging Britain to become a participant in its wars of aggression . 
Today 's Labor party has been a supine collaborator in this policy of appeasement , just like the Tory party in the 1930s . 
Blair 's war party must be defeated at the polls . 
The most popular slogan at the moment is `` Blair must go '' . 
This simple message echoes across the political spectrum from the Conservative party to Respect , and even into the ranks of Labor itself . 
It clearly has majority support in the country . 
Blair is a war criminal who should be locked up behind bars without a vote , not standing for election . 
Yet Labor party supporters who dislike Blair have a bitter pill to swallow . 
The entire party shares in the war guilt of its leader and his silently complicit government . 
New Labor may be self-destructing , but old Labor is in no better shape . 
It was already in a terminal state of collapse in the 1970s , as the recent obituaries of Jim Callaghan have recalled . 
The idea that a lively party exists that might rally behind Gordon Brown is a forlorn hope . 
The Labor party is a shadow of its former self , as damaged and decimated as the trade union movement , and it will have no further role to play in the 21st century . 
Given its recent record , that is an outcome to be welcomed . 
The Tories , of course , are in no better shape . 
They too are led by war criminals , caught up in supporting a war of aggression that their traditional Arabist loyalties might perhaps have led them to greet with less enthusiasm had they been in power at the time . 
Their passivity over the war has occurred against a background of wider collapse , for the Tory party , like the monarchy , the Church of England and the BBC , is in terminal decline . 
There will be no return to the automatic Tory majorities of the 20th century . 
A freak Tory victory would hardly last a twelvemonth . 
At the last election I chose the Abstention party , and it romped home to a spectacular victory . 
Many may feel disposed to support it again , since the choices on offer are so singularly unattractive . 
The degeneration of British politics and the inability of a pusillanimous generation of MPs to prevent the slide to war continue to make abstention an attractive option . 
Yet the background mood to this election , not necessarily reflected in the opinion polls , remains this deep sense of anger and resentment against the Blair government , even of disgust , and this may yet drive people to vote rather than abstain , and lead to an unusual result . 
This year , because of the serious and lasting disaffection of a large slice of the electorate that traditionally sees it as its duty to vote , there is a slim but realistic chance of a change . 
Votes cast thoughtfully rather than tribally could bring about a breakthrough that would not only destroy the Blair government but create a new political framework . 
Each individual voter must use the vote to secure an anti-war majority in parliament , and to this end it will be necessary to vote in most cases , for the Liberal Democrats and occasionally for Respect or the Greens . 
Yet no one should be ashamed of voting for Tories who voted in parliament against the war . 
Ancient animosities must be set aside , as they were in the Commons vote that brought down Chamberlain . 
The ideal outcome would be that the vagaries of the existing electoral system , which requires the selection of a local MP rather than a party leader , throws up a result in which the three main parties would each have approximately 30 % of the MPs in the new House of Commons . 
The resulting hung parliament would bring home the troops from Iraq , just as the Spanish electorate was able to do . 
It would also have a further benefit , producing fresh electoral arrangements and the possible revival of interest in politics within the parliamentary arena . 
That might be unlikely , but is the most optimistic scenario that might emerge from the current contest . 
Richard Gott is the author , with Martin Gilbert , of The Appeasers , republished by the Phoenix Press Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
