By Ivan Watson and Jomana Karadsheh , CNN This photo of Tripoli was taken during a guided government tour on July 22 during a pro-Col . 
One man says quietly , `` We 're barely staying alive '' Muslim cleric says government troops can break fast to fight Officials say they expect a bloody holiday month Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Last-minute shopping before the start of the Muslim month of Ramadan brought back bustle and commercial activity to the center of a city that is increasingly showing strain from Libya 's grinding civil war . 
In downtown Tripoli , cars were backed up in traffic jams . 
Shoppers lined up outside a bakery waiting for bread . 
Not far away , another line of residents stood next to an ATM machine , waiting for their turn to withdraw cash . 
The busy scene on Sunday was a sharp contrast to previous government-sponsored tours of the city , which revealed rows of shuttered shops and streets largely devoid of traffic . 
Asked about how the civil war is likely to impact the imminent month of fasting and feasting , many Tripoli residents insisted they were not facing any hardships whatsoever . 
`` Mia mia ! '' 
said housewife Aisha Rajab , repeating a popular Libyan phrase that roughly translates to `` 100 % . '' 
`` Everything is good , '' she added , as she shopped with her sisters and nieces for food . 
`` Everything is available and at cheap prices ... we are hoping for victory for our leader -LRB- Moammar Gadhafi -RRB- ! '' 
Libyan leader 's cult of personality Rift in Libya rebels rank ? 
Details murky on Libya rebel chief death UK expels Libyan Embassy staff However , when a government guide was out of earshot , a Libyan man had a dramatically different assessment of the situation . 
`` We 're barely staying alive , '' said the man , who spoke discreetly and asked not to be named , due to what he claimed were large numbers of secret police and security forces operating in the immediate vicinity . 
`` Have n't you seen the fuel lines ? '' 
Long lines of parked cars snake through the city next to gas stations , where drivers sometimes wait days to buy gas . 
Huge piles of garbage have started to accumulate on streets , parks and beaches due to the departure of armies of guest workers who often fulfilled basic municipal duties . 
A gleaming , recently constructed Marriott hotel stands empty on one of Tripoli 's sea fronts , a symbol of the burst of foreign investment that was frozen after the conflict erupted last February . 
The NATO-enforced blockade of seaports and airports controlled by Gadhafi 's forces have severely disrupted trade , forcing Tripoli to rely largely on food and fuel trucked in from neighboring Tunisia . 
Earlier in July , the United Nations published a report warning about `` pockets of vulnerability '' in Tripoli and other Gadhafi-controlled cities . 
A U.N. humanitarian team reported seeing shortages of cash , medicine , and fuel . 
The besieged Gadhafi regime has acknowledged the growing hardship . 
In an interview several weeks ago with CNN , the finance and planning minister in Tripoli announced his government had begun pumping in `` large amounts of funds '' to drive down growing war-time prices of basic consumer goods like rice , flour , meat , eggs , sugar and edible oils . 
These measures appear to have helped Libyans preparing for a month of fast-breaking iftar feasts . 
`` Everything we need is available . 
There has been a slight increase in prices , very small increase , '' said an elderly retired engineer named Milad Omar . 
Harder to evaluate is the impact the conflict is having on the collective Libyan psyche . 
Regime officials strictly control the movements and conversations of foreign journalists . 
And after 42 years of strict Gadhafi rule , Libyans often appear visibly uncomfortable speaking openly about their situation . 
But on a recent visit to the market in Tripoli 's central Abu Salim neighborhood , CNN journalists met two families who said they had recently fled fighting in the nearby Nafusa mountains to the southwest of the capital . 
`` We woke up to shelling , '' said Mabouka Hassem . 
Her town of Al Josh came under attack from rebel fighters on Thursday morning , she said . 
`` We never expected it . 
Our neighbors who live in the hills above us attacked us . '' 
Hassem said she and her sister and their children fled crying and screaming , some barefoot . 
They arrived in Tripoli on Friday . 
`` We left with only the clothes on our back , '' said Nuri Mohamed Ali , a man who said he fled with his children from Gawalish , another front-line town , two weeks ago . 
He walked through the market with two of his children , shopping ahead of what is supposed to be a month focused on faith , spirituality and reflection . 
Officials in Tripoli have been preparing for what they say will be a bloody Ramadan . 
At a recent gathering in support of Gadhafi , a Muslim cleric told CNN that loyalist troops would be authorized to break their daytime fasts to fight on the front lines . 
`` Those who are fasting , if they get thirsty they should break their fast . 
-LRB- Because -RRB- those who are fighting are Mujahedeen -LRB- holy warriors -RRB- , '' said Mohammed Madani Chouairef . 
`` Everyone standing up to this sedition is a Mujahed except for those who are with NATO . '' 
`` It is very bad to fight against other Muslims during Ramadan , '' said Moussa Ibrahim , Gadhafi 's main spokesman . 
`` But it -LRB- Ramadan -RRB- makes us stronger , '' he added . 
Late Sunday night , hours before the official start of Ramadan , Tripoli shook with the sound of several explosions . 
NATO warplanes roared overhead . 
