AMMAN | Sun Oct 2 , 2011 7:42 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syria 's main opposition groups joined together Sunday to call on the international community to take action to protect Syrian people facing a violent crackdown on pro-democracy protests . 
A statement issued in Istanbul on behalf of the newly formed National Council rejected foreign intervention that `` compromises Syria 's sovereignty '' but said the outside world had a humanitarian obligation to protect the Syrian people . 
`` The Council demands international governments and organizations meet their responsibility to support the Syrian people , protect them and stop the crimes and gross human rights violations being committed by the illegitimate current regime , '' the statement said . 
The declaration and support for the National Council was a significant show of unity from the Syrian opposition after six months of mostly non-violent protests against President Bashar al-Assad have begun to be overtaken by more violent resistance . 
Armed insurgents , mostly in the central Homs region and in the northwestern province of Idlib near Turkey , have been so far outgunned . 
The official Syrian news agency said Saturday government forces had regained control of the central town of Rastan , after the most prolonged fighting yet between the army and insurgents who are led , according to residents , by army defectors . 
But underlining the more violent turn , Syrian authorities said that the son of Syria 's Mufti , who is appointed by Assad , was assassinated Sunday . 
It was the first attack against the state-backed Sunni clergy who have been a base of support for Assad 's ruling Alawite elite for decades . 
In Istanbul , the National Council said that the uprising must remain peaceful but that military assaults on numerous towns and villages , torture and mass arrests were driving Syria `` to the edge of civil war and inviting foreign interference . '' 
It also said the Muslim Brotherhood , the Damascus Declaration - the main grouping of established opposition figures - and grassroots activists all had joined the National Council . 
While few expect a Libya-style intervention in Syria , the declaration was nonetheless a way for the opposition to shake off its image of in-fighting and lack of cohesive leadership . 
`` The fact that Islamists , secular figures and activists on the ground are now on one council is a significant , '' a diplomat in the Syrian capital Damascus said . 
`` But they still have to demonstrate that they could be politically savvy and able to fill any political vacuum . 
They need a detailed action plan beyond the generalities of wanting a democratic Syria . '' 
The United Nations says 2,700 people , including 100 children , have been killed in six months of protests against Assad , whose Alawite minority sect - a Shi'ite offshoot - dominates the mostly Sunni Muslim country of 20 million . 
The 46-year old president , who inherited power from his father in 2000 , blames the violence on armed gangs backed by foreign forces , while his officials say 700 police and soldiers have been killed , as well as 700 `` mutineers . '' 
The government has dismissed the opposition organizing outside Syria as a foreign conspiracy to sow sectarian strife . 
The state news agency said `` armed terrorist groups '' killed five members of the security police in the Ghab region west of the city of Hama and used explosives to derail a freight train in the province of Idlib Sunday . 
It also said that Sariya Hassoun , the son of Mufti Ahmad Hassaoun , who is officially considered the highest religious authority in Syria , was assassinated in Idlib . 
Idlib , together with the central region around the town of Rastan on the Orontes River , 110 miles north of Damascus , have seen some of the biggest protests against Assad , followed by a fierce crackdown and fighting between loyalist forces and defectors and other insurgents . 
The two regions are a main reservoir of Sunni recruits to the military , which is led by mostly Alawite officers . 
Local activists said troops backed by tanks raided villages and towns looking for army defectors around Rastan Sunday , with tens of villagers arrested in the Houla and Talbiseh region , and the villages of al-Zafaran and Deir al-Foul . 
One activist said security forces killed three civilians on Sunday in the town of Khan Sheikhoun north of Rastan . 
He said that among them was activist Mohammad Tellawi , 35 , whose brother Mukhles was also killed three months ago . 
ISLAMISTS , SECULARISTS , CHRISTIANS AND KURDS The Istanbul declaration was read out by Bourhan Ghalioun , a secular professor of politics living in France . 
He was flanked by Islamists , including Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohammad Riad al-Shaqfa , Christian and Kurdish politicians and Samir Nashar , a member of the Damascus Declaration . 
Among those represented in the Damascus Declaration are former parliamentarian Riad Seif , seen as possibly playing a leadership role if Assad were to fall , and Riad al-Turk , Syria 's top dissident . 
Turk , 81 , but still operating underground , has moral authority over the diverse opposition , having spent 25 years in jail as a political prisoner , including almost 18 in solitary confinement . 
France has already publicly supported the National Council , but it has not yet won endorsement from the United States or Syria 's powerful neighbor Turkey , which has been enraged by what it describes as brutal killings south of its border . 
Assad has relied on Russia and China , which have major oil concessions in Syria and do not want to see Western influence in the Middle East spread , to block western proposals for United Nations Security Council sanctions on Damascus . 
The European members of the Security Council have been working in recent days to persuade Russia to accept a watered-down resolution on Syria that would threaten `` targeted measures '' against Damascus if it fails to end its crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators without explicitly threatening U.N. sanctions , Council diplomats said . 
European envoys say that they hope the Council will vote on the Syria resolution Tuesday . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
American front groups call for a new American front : any surprises there ? 
The National Co-ordination Body and others were excluded from this Council -- the international community needs to ask why there are such divisions before putting all their support behind one organization . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
