Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is facing a critical vote as investors grow increasingly wary of lending money to the country . 
And also on today 's program , we investigate the phenomenon of gallery rage as the latest blockbuster art exhibition opens in London . 
Business news with Simon Jack on Italy 's record borrowing costs as investor fears heighten over the state of the country 's finances . 
The government in Wales is to begin a consultation on moving towards a system of presumed consent for organ donation . 
Roy Thomas , Chairman of Kidney Wales Foundation and Glyn Davies , Conservative MP for Montgomeryshire , link text here debate the best way to increase the number of organ donors . 
MPs on the transport select committee have raised concern about environmental and cost issues of the government 's plans for high speed rail . 
Ian Williams , from Leeds , York and North Yorkshire Chambers of commerce , explains why his organization supports the proposal . 
Theresa May is to face questions about whether a secret decision to relax passport checks on foreigners at ports and airports allowed extremists and criminals to enter the UK . 
MP and former home office minister Alun Michael is one of those questioning the home secretary . 
A jury has found Michael Jackson 's personal doctor Conrad Murray guilty of the singer 's involuntary manslaughter after he died from an overdose of Propofol . 
Alistair Leathead reports from Los Angeles on reaction to the verdict . 
A large asteroid is heading towards Earth , measuring half a kilometre wide , and is expected to come closer to us than the moon tonight . 
Alan Fitzsimmons , astronomer at Queen 's University , explains how this close encounter will pose no danger . 
How much trouble is the Italy in ? 
Business editor Robert Peston and Megan Greene , of economic analysts Roubini Global Economics , give their verdict . 
Hogarth 's House in Chiswick , the country home of one of Britain 's most famous 18th century artists , reopens today three years after it closed for restoration . 
Nick Higham takes a look around . 
Thought for The Day with Abdal Hakim Murad - Muslim Chaplain at the University of Cambridge . 
MPs on the transport select committee have come out in support of the government 's plans to build a high speed rail network between Manchester and London but are questioning its costs and environmental issues . 
The Today program 's Nicola Stanbridge is in Kenilworth in Warwickshire hearing the concerns of a farmer who lives near to where the proposed line would run . 
And the committee 's chair , Louise Ellman , explains her mixed feelings about the plans . 
Silvio Berlusconi is facing a crucial vote on budget reforms in the Italian Parliament today as the country 's borrowing costs rocketed . 
Senator Lucio Malan , vice-president of the Italian Senate , explains why he believes that a Berlusconi resignation would not solve Italy 's problems . 
The gold-coloured coffin of Sir Jimmy Savile has been placed in the Queens Hotel in Leeds , so the public can go and pay their respects before its taken to St Anne 's Cathedral . 
BBC reporter Daragh Corcoran reports on the `` lying-in-state style arrangement '' for the DJ and charity fundraiser . 
Sports news with Garry Richardson . 
Four foreigners were recently kidnapped from areas close to the Somali border in Kenya and the capital Nairobi suffered two grenade attacks . 
Najib Balala , Kenyan Minister for Tourism , describes how he is working to make the country safer for tourists . 
With the borrowing costs for the Italian government reaching a record level , how high do bond yields have to go , before a country has to be rescued ? 
In Ireland that figure was 7 % . 
David McWilliams , a respected Irish economic commentator , analyses the state of Italy 's finances . 
