Page last updated at 07:48 GMT , Tuesday , 8 November 2011 The trial of Michael Jackson 's doctor , Conrad Murray , took place on the ninth floor of the superior court of Los Angeles . 
It 's one of the busiest courthouses in America . 
Michael Jackson 's family attended parts of the trial , including his sister La Toya . 
Fans say she often stopped to talk to them outside court before making her way up to courtroom 9-312 . 
The jury heard 49 witnesses in all . 
Janet Jackson also attended court during the trial as did her brother Randy . 
Mobile phones were banned in court and the judge had posters put up on the door to the courtroom warning media and the public against making `` outbursts '' . 
La Toya Jackson surrounded by minders after a day in court . 
Jurors had different entrances to the public and the media . 
The jury had lunch together and were driven between the court and a secret car park every day . 
The media broadcast from various positions outside court at 210 West Temple Street in downtown LA. . 
The jury included a professor , postman , bus driver , actor and movie animation supervisor . 
There were seven men and five women . 
Michael Jackson fans made their feelings known outside court during the trial , writing placards and camping out while evidence was heard inside . 
Some even made it into the court to watch the proceedings taking place . 
Fans waited nervously outside the courtroom on the day of the verdict on 7 November , many of them holding signs calling for justice for the legendary singer . 
A young Michael Jackson impersonator performs outside the LA courtroom . 
The decision , at around 1pm local time , sparked cheering and emotional scenes among many supporters . 
Murray was found guilty of Michael Jackson 's involuntary manslaughter . 
That means his dangerous actions in giving the singer the drug propofol caused his death , although he did n't intend to kill the singer . 
Conrad Murray was handcuffed in the court as his guilty verdict was confirmed . 
He was denied bail and will be sentenced on 29 November . 
He could face up to four years in jail and lose the right to be a doctor . 
