Page last updated at 06:56 GMT , Tuesday , 8 November 2011 Newsbeat US reporter in Los Angeles It had just gone 11am on the ninth floor of the courthouse in downtown Los Angeles when the three buzzes were heard . 
It came from the jury room and was the signal to say they had reached their verdict . 
Bored journalists waiting around inside suddenly grabbed their phones and scrambled for the exit . 
After more than six weeks the trial of Michael Jackson 's doctor , Conrad Murray , was about to reach its climax . 
It took just a few seconds for the news to filter through to fans gathered outside . 
There were excited screams and cheers with one man yelling : `` This is it for Conrad Murray . 
Now 's the time . '' 
Hundreds of fans gathered outside the court in downtown Los Angeles The judge ordered a two-hour delay before the verdict was read to give the families involved and the media time to prepare . 
During that period the hardcore Michael Jackson fans who 'd been there every day were joined by dozens more people , many of them just curious to see what all the fuss was about . 
With the pavement getting busier and the chants of `` guilty '' getting louder , Michael Jackson 's family pulled up in a fleet of blacked out limousines . 
His mother and father waved to the crowd as they made their way inside . 
Fans then huddled around their smartphones and laptops trying to get a signal to watch the live feed from inside the court . 
Most of them were unsuccessful but some managed to watch the moment the verdict was read . 
Jayda Bates , 17 , was emotional when the decision came through At first just a couple of people yelled , `` he 's guilty '' , before a ripple of cheers became an eruption when everyone realized the outcome . 
Jayda Bates was in tears : `` I 'm just so happy that Michael has finally got some justice . 
Conrad Murray deserves this moment . 
`` He 's had it coming for a long time . '' 
Shortly afterwards an ambulance arrived to treat someone who had fainted . 
Lesley Cole was outside the court for most of the trial : `` It 's crazy here right now but I 'm so glad I did n't miss it . 
Justice is going to be served now , I hope . '' 
While the majority of fans were outside , a few had managed to get tickets to watch the verdict inside the courtroom . 
Felicia Gilliam was one of them : `` I was sitting on the edge of my seat . 
There was a lot of tension in there . 
Felicia Gilliam was sitting near the Jackson family in the courtroom `` My stomach was boiling and bubbling just waiting for the verdict to be read . 
`` I was looking at the jury to see who they were , how they looked . 
`` I was two seats away from the Jackson family . 
One of the Jackson nieces hollered out and you could see Michael Jackson 's mother holding her hand . '' 
After a couple of hours the police were getting impatient with Michael Jackson fans blocking the pavements outside court and asked them to leave . 
Many of them will be back in a few weeks on 29 November when Conrad Murray is sentenced . 
He 's expected to serve up to four years in prison . 
