This live page is part of a BBC News trial to test new ways of presenting breaking news . 
Calls mount for Italian PM Silvio Berlusconi to resign as he wins a budget vote but appears to lose his parliamentary majority . 
French President Nicolas Sarkozy called Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu a `` liar '' in remarks overheard by journalists . 
The UK home secretary tells MPs she will not resign , after it emerged that border checks were relaxed over a four-month period . 
Fans of Sir Jimmy Savile pay their last respects to the British DJ , broadcaster and charity worker at a Leeds hotel . 
A Red Arrows pilot is seriously injured at the UK aerobatic team 's base at RAF Scampton , the BBC understands . 
Former heavyweight boxing champion , George Foreman Robert Peston Business editor , BBC News Norman Smith BBC News channel chief political correspondent Robert Peston Business editor , BBC News 0946 : Norman Smith Chief political correspondent , BBC News Channel 0949 : Norman Smith Chief political correspondent , BBC News Channel 1020 : Sanjoy Majumder in Delhi Norman Smith Chief political correspondent , BBC News Channel 1132 : Christian Fraser BBC News , Paris 1146 : Norman Smith Chief political correspondent , BBC News Channel 1206 : Tom Symonds Home Affairs correspondent Italy : Let 's recap on the events in the country so far today : Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi 's key coalition partner , Northern League leader Umberto Bossi , has urged him to step aside ahead of a crucial budget vote . 
Mr Berlusconi 's majority has crumbled ahead of the vote , with several MPs defecting or saying they will rebel . 
1243 : Dominic Casciani Home affairs correspondent , BBC News 1249 : Mark Lowen BBC News Nick Robinson BBC Political Editor 1308 : Mark Simpson at Antrim Crown Court Olympics David Bond BBC Sports Editor James Landale Deputy Political Editor , BBC News Jonathan Beale Defense correspondent , BBC News James Reynolds , Iran Correspondent , BBC News Arrows : Following reports a Red Arrows pilot has been seriously injured at RAF Scampton in Lincolnshire , here 's three things you may not have known about the aerobatic team . 
The Red Arrows have used the Hawk T1 aircraft , which is the Royal Air Force 's advanced trainer , since 1979 when it replaced the Folland Gnat . 
Marco Bardazzi , Managing Editor at La Stampa X Factor : Frankie Cocozza has left the X Factor , and his behavior on the show had already been the subject of an investigation by TV regulator Ofcom . 
The watchdog was looking into three potential breaches of its code by the ITV1 series . 
In October , the 18-year-old from Brighton appeared to swear after finding out he was getting through to the next round during a results show . 
On last weekend 's Saturday night show , viewers saw Cocozza out drinking with friends , which may have breached rules on glamorising alcohol . 
Hugh Pym Chief economics correspondent , BBC News 1633 : Danny Shaw Home affairs correspondent , BBC News Mario Buccelini from Teramo , Italy 1642 : Chris Boatman , who lives next to the RAF Scampton base 1649 : Dominic Casciani Home affairs correspondent 1651 : Dominic Casciani Home affairs correspondent The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
co. uk % 2Finc % 2Flive_event_experience % 2Fnews % 2F1_0_0 % 2Fmustache % 2Fgeneral % 2Fhi . 
