The victims of the tsunami pay the price of war on Iraq US and British aid is dwarfed by the billions both spend on slaughter Tuesday 4 January 2005 08.43 GMT There has never been a moment like it on British television . 
The Vicar of Dibley , one of our gentler sitcoms , was bouncing along with its usual bonhomie on New Year 's Day when it suddenly hit us with a scene from another world . 
Two young African children were sobbing and trying to comfort each other after their mother had died of Aids . 
How on earth , I wondered , would the show make us laugh after that ? 
It made no attempt to do so . 
One by one the characters , famous for their parochial boorishness , stood in front of the camera wearing the white armbands which signalled their support for the Make Poverty History campaign . 
You would have to have been hewn from stone not to cry . 
The timing was perfect . 
In my local Oxfam shop last week , people were queueing to the door to pledge money for the tsunami fund . 
A pub on the other side of town raised # 1,000 on Saturday night . 
In the pot on the counter of the local newsagent 's there must be nearly # 100 . 
The woman who runs the bakery told me about the homeless man she had seen , who emptied his pockets in the bank , saying `` I just want to do my bit '' , while the whole queue tried not to cry . 
Over the past few months , reviewing the complete lack of public interest in what is happening in the Democratic Republic of Congo , and the failure , in the west , to mobilise effective protests against the continuing atrocities in Iraq , I had begun to wonder whether we had lost our ability to stand in other people 's shoes . 
I have now stopped wondering . 
The response to the tsunami shows that , however we might seek to suppress it , we can not destroy our capacity for empathy . 
But one obvious question recurs . 
Why must the relief of suffering , in this unprecedentedly prosperous world , rely on the whims of citizens and the appeals of pop stars and comedians ? 
Why , when extreme poverty could be made history with a minor redeployment of public finances , must the poor world still wait for homeless people in the rich world to empty their pockets ? 
The obvious answer is that governments have other priorities . 
And the one that leaps to mind is war . 
If the money they have promised to the victims of the tsunami still falls far short of the amounts required , it is partly because the contingency fund upon which they draw in times of crisis has been spent on blowing people to bits in Iraq . 
The US government has so far pledged $ 350m to the victims of the tsunami , and the UK government # 50m -LRB- $ 96m -RRB- . 
The US has spent $ 148 billion on the Iraq war and the UK # 6bn -LRB- $ 11.5 bn -RRB- . 
The war has been running for 656 days . 
This means that the money pledged for the tsunami disaster by the United States is the equivalent of one and a half day 's spending in Iraq . 
The money the UK has given equates to five and a half days of our involvement in the war . 
It looks still worse when you compare the cost of the war to the total foreign aid budget . 
The UK has spent almost twice as much on creating suffering in Iraq as it spends annually on relieving it elsewhere . 
The United States gives just over $ 16bn in foreign aid : less than one ninth of the money it has burnt so far in Iraq . 
The figures for war and aid are worth comparing because , when all the other excuses for the invasion of Iraq were stripped away , both governments explained that it was being waged for the good of the Iraqis . 
Let us , for a moment , take this claim at face value . 
Let us suppose that the invasion and occupation of Iraq had nothing to do with power , domestic politics or oil , but were , in fact , components of a monumental aid program . 
And let us , with reckless generosity , assume that more people in Iraq have gained as a result of this aid program than lost . 
To justify the war , even under these wildly unsafe assumptions , George Bush and Tony Blair would have to show that the money they spent was a cost-efficient means of relieving human suffering . 
As it was sufficient to have made a measurable improvement in the lives of all the 2.8 billion people living in absolute poverty , and as there are only 25 million people in Iraq , this is simply not possible . 
Even if you ignore every other issue - such as the trifling matter of mass killing - the opportunity costs of the Iraq war categorise it as a humanitarian disaster . 
Indeed , such calculations suggest that , on cost grounds alone , a humanitarian war is a contradiction in terms . 
But our leaders appear to have lost the ability to distinguish between helping people and killing them . 
The tone of Blair 's New Year message was almost identical to that of his tear-jerking insistence that we understand the Iraqi people must be bombed for their own good . 
The US marines who have now been dispatched to Sri Lanka to help the rescue operation were , just a few weeks ago , murdering the civilians -LRB- for this , remember , is an illegal war -RRB- , smashing the homes and evicting the entire population of the Iraqi city of Falluja . 
Even within the official aid budgets the two aims are confused : $ 8.9 bn of the aid money the US spends is used for military assistance , anti-drugs operations , counter-terrorism and the Iraq relief and reconstruction fund -LRB- otherwise known as the Halliburton benevolent trust -RRB- . 
For Bush and Blair , the tsunami relief operation and the Iraq war are both episodes in the same narrative of salvation . 
The civilised world rides out to rescue foreigners from their darkness . 
While they spend the money we gave them to relieve suffering on slaughtering the poor , the world must rely for disaster relief on the homeless man emptying his pockets . 
If our leaders were as generous in helping people as they are in killing them , no one would ever go hungry . 
You can join the campaign against global poverty at : www.makepovertyhistory.org Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : George Monbiot : Tsunami victims pay price of war on Iraq This article was published on guardian . 
