By the CNN Wire Staff On the frontlines in Libya NEW : The Libyan oil minister says the nation 's political structure is in shambles NATO extends its campaign in Libya 90 days , the alliance says Gadhafi is considering a possible cease-fire , a Libyan spokesman says Under the prospective accord , `` everything would be on the table , '' he says Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libya 's oil minister confirmed Wednesday that he 's defected and said he 's considering signing up with the opposition movement . 
The announcement , another blow to the Moammar Gadhafi regime , comes after NATO said it has decided to extend its mission in Libya by 90 days , continuing a campaign that began in March . 
Shukri Ghanem told CNN in Rome that he left Libya because the suffering of the people became too unbearable . 
`` This war is getting even worse every day and there is no end to it and we would like to end this thing peacefully and come back to a solution quickly to reinstate democracy and constitutional government , '' he said . 
Man aids struggling Libyan refugees The opposition 's National Transitional Council is based in the eastern Libyan city of Benghazi . 
Ghanem could n't predict how long the Gadhafi regime will last but said the strongman 's political structure is in shambles . 
He said he does n't know how long he 'll be in Rome or when he 'll return to Libya . 
As for the NATO mission extension , Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen issued a statement saying , `` We are determined to continue our operation to protect the people of Libya . 
`` We will sustain our efforts to fulfill the United Nations mandate . 
We will keep up the pressure to see it through . '' 
Resolution 1973 was approved by the U.N. Security Council in March and authorized member states `` to take all necessary measures to protect civilians under threat of attack in the country , including Benghazi , while excluding a foreign occupation force of any form on any part of Libyan territory . '' 
The Libyan government has accused NATO of killing hundreds of civilians and wounding thousands more during a two-month bombing campaign in Libya . 
Between March 19 and May 26 , NATO air strikes have killed 718 `` civilian martyrs , '' according to Libyan government spokesman Musa Ibrahim , who on Tuesday accused the alliance of acting outside `` the limits of international law . '' 
Another 4,067 were injured , he said . 
CNN can not independently verify the figures . 
The government released the numbers after meetings between Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and South African President Jacob Zuma in which the men discussed a possible African Union-brokered cease-fire , Ibrahim said . 
Under the prospective accord , `` everything would be on the table , '' said Ibrahim , `` including the place and position of Gadhafi . '' 
But , Ibrahim said , the country 's longtime ruler would not step down from power as a prerequisite for further dialogue concerning the prospective cease-fire . 
Zuma had `` lengthy discussions '' with Gadhafi , his office said in a news release . 
`` We call on all leaders in Libya to exercise decisive leadership to find a solution to the crisis in the country , and to put the interests of their country first , '' Zuma said in the release . 
He also urged `` NATO and other parties to respect the -LRB- African Union 's -RRB- role in searching for a solution . '' 
An intensified NATO campaign has resulted in sizable defections from the Gadhafi camp , including eight generals who recently fled to Italy , the U.N. Under-Secretary-General B. Lynn Pascoe said in a written statement . 
In recent weeks , Gadhafi has been seen in public only rarely as NATO has stepped up attacks against his sprawling Bab el-Azizia compound . 
Rasmussen said Monday that Gadhafi 's `` reign of terror is coming to an end . '' 
`` He is increasingly isolated at home and abroad , '' Rasmussen said in a speech in Bulgaria . 
`` Even those closest to him are departing , defecting or deserting . '' 
Rasmussen said NATO has made `` significant progress '' in its Libya operation after conducting more than 3,300 strike sorties since March . 
Opposition forces have also gained ground in the port city of Misrata , pushing westward toward the Libyan capital , the statement said . 
Government forces have regrouped in positions along the country 's western Nafusa mountains , especially near the city of Yefran , where some 54,000 Libyans have fled to neighboring Tunisia , Pascoe said . 
Close to 900,000 people have fled Libya since the recent conflict began back in February , the United Nations says . 
Ghanem has been in charge of an industry battered by the civil conflict raging across the country . 
According to Ghanem 's curriculum vitae on the website of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries , he is married with three daughters and one son . 
He received a bachelor 's degree in economics at the University of Libya in Benghazi and earned advanced degrees in the United States , at Tufts University 's Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy in Boston . 
Ghanem has master 's degrees in both economics and law and diplomacy and a doctorate in international economics , the website says . 
He 's held various positions in the Libya 's government , including several spots in the Oil Ministry , and has been director of the OPEC secretariat 's research division . 
He has written many articles and books on energy , it says . 
He was secretary of the General People 's Committee from June 2003 to March 2006 , a position that 's equivalent to prime minister . 
Ghanem has been chairman of the Management Committee of the National Oil Corporation from April 2006 to the present . 
CNN 's Hada Messia , Raja Razek and Richard Roth contributed to this report . 
