It is not easy to divvy up $ 20 billion . 
Perhaps no one in America knows this better than Kenneth R. Feinberg . 
The nation 's unofficial authority on disbursing massive relief funds oversaw the paying out of billions of dollars for families of those who died in the Sept. 11 , 2001 , attacks and the Virginia Tech shootings . 
His phone rang once again this month , not long before word began to spread in Washington about such a fund for victims of the gulf oil spill . 
BP executives contacted Feinberg to see whether he would be willing to take the job . 
He agreed , and President Obama signed on . 
There is no blueprint for this kind of work , or at least there was n't until Feinberg and the small , loyal team that has worked with him for years created one in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks . 
After nearly a decade , they have gotten this difficult , contentious task down to something of a science . 
Feinberg flew to Mississippi and Louisiana on Friday to get started . 
He began by surveying the mess and meeting with governors . 
On Monday , he is scheduled to go to Houston to talk to BP executives . 
The company has already received an estimated 50,000 claims . 
Tens of thousands more could come its way . 
Back in Washington , Feinberg 's team was busy setting the machinery of the fund in motion . 
A Washington lawyer in private practice , he has worked with the same three people for decades : His brother , David ; the firm 's longtime business manager , Camille Biros ; and his law partner , Michael Rozen . 
They began arranging town hall meetings across the region , where frustrated people can vent their concerns and find out how to file claims . 
They set up 800-numbers and readieda Web site . 
In the coming weeks , they will hire scores of local lawyers , accountants , environmental experts and database engineers to staff community offices across five states . 
With the Sept. 11 and Virginia Tech funds , Feinberg 's team worked for free . 
This time , the operation will be funded by BP , and the company will pay the team a salary -LRB- it has not disclosed how much -RRB- . 
Feinberg , 64 , says his biggest obstacle will be earning the trust of a deeply suspicious population . 
Supremely confident and blunt-spoken in pinstripes and French cuffs , he is the picture of the Washington superlawyer -- albeit with an unmistakable Boston accent . 
But he must convince beleaguered shrimpers and bait shop owners and marsh boat captains that he is not there to represent BP or the government . 
Getting them to quickly settle their claims through the escrow fund instead of suing BP is critical to the success of the compensation program . 
`` This program can not be run from Washington , D.C. , '' Feinberg said in a news conference Friday after a two-hour meeting in Jackson , Miss. , with Gov. Haley Barbour -LRB- R -RRB- . 
`` You have to come down here to the states affected by this spill and hear firsthand what 's being done , what needs to be done , to provide prompt , fair , impartial compensation for people with a legitimate claim . '' 
`` Do not assume that everybody 's going to file a claim that should file a claim , '' Feinberg warned . 
`` There are people in our country very skeptical of a program like this , worried about it . 
` It 's too complicated . ' 
` I 'm not sure what I have to submit . ' ' 
I do n't trust them . ' 
` I 'm worried . ' 
` I 'm frustrated . ' 
` I 'm angry . ' '' 
Barbour offered his help in introducing Feinberg , telling his state 's residents that the man from Washington was `` somebody that everybody can trust . '' 
Obama and BP have given Feinberg carte blanche to establish an independent system to compensate those affected by the oil spill . 
`` It is my program , '' Feinberg said , noting that it has `` my imprimatur on it , not the administration or BP . '' 
Feinberg declined to comment for this article . 
Over the years , Feinberg has helped settle some of the nation 's most complicated legal disputes , including a class-action lawsuit by Vietnam veterans over the use of Agent Orange , the government 's Sept. 11 Victim Compensation Fund that distributed $ 7 billion to the 5,500 survivors and families of the dead , and the Hokie Spirit Fund that compensated families of the victims of the 2007 mass shootings at Virginia Tech . 
Obama also named him the `` pay czar '' overseeing executive compensation under the government 's Troubled Assets Relief Program . 
Each time he and his team wade in , they must establish guidelines so that people understand how the money is being doled out . 
It can be a touchy business ; inevitably there are those who believe they got too little and others got too much . 
`` You start thinking about how many different layers there are to this ; it 's a lot , '' said Rozen , Feinberg 's law partner . 
`` It 's the sheer enormity of all of this that cuts across so many different kinds of livelihoods , whether they be commercial fishermen or independent contractors or oil rig workers or tourist venues . '' 
Feinberg 's role is not to side with the victims , but to be an impartial arbitrator . 
`` We 're not looking to be an advocate -- pro or con , '' Rozen said . 
`` It 's a pretty simple set of instructions : to find the best way to compensate victims or people who have been harmed here by this disaster in the most efficacious and expeditious kind of way . '' 
Asked in an interview whether Feinberg might be cast in the South as a distrustful Yankee , Barbour said his accent is n't an issue . 
`` And the fact that he used to work for Senator Kennedy is n't an issue either , '' Barbour joked , noting Feinberg 's job in the 1970s as chief of staff to the late senator Edward M. Kennedy -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- . 
`` He has to just be straightforward and upright , '' Barbour said , `` gather around others who have no ax to grind but want this to be a fair process , and then conduct it in a way that is open . '' '' 
