By Maggie Fox , Health and Science Editor WASHINGTON | Mon Mar 2 , 2009 4:23 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Virtually all cases of the most common strain of flu circulating in the United States now resist the main drug used to treat it , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported on Monday . 
CDC researchers said 98 percent of all flu samples from the H1N1 strain were resistant to Roche AG 's Tamiflu , a pill that can both treat flu and prevent infection . 
Four patients infected with the resistant strain have died , including two children . 
This year , H1N1 is the most common strain of flu in the United States , although the flu season is a mild one so far , and still below the levels considered an epidemic . 
Few doctors even test patients for flu , and Tamiflu is not widely prescribed . 
But the news is sobering because the pill , known generically as oseltamivir , is one of the few weapons against influenza , which kills an estimated 36,000 people in the United States in an average year . 
It is also considered a key weapon against a potential pandemic of a new type of influenza , and this study suggests the virus can rapidly evade its effects . 
This season , nine children have died from influenza , most apparently healthy before they got infected , the CDC reports . 
Last flu season , only 19 percent of H1N1 viruses tested were Tamiflu-resistant , Dr. Nila Dharan and colleagues at the CDC reported . 
`` As of February 19 , 2009 , resistance to oseltamivir had been identified among 264 of 268 -LRB- 98.5 percent -RRB- U.S. influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- viruses tested , '' the researchers wrote in the Journal of the American Medical Association . 
They interviewed 99 patients and found 30 percent of them had been vaccinated against flu but became infected anyway . 
The vaccine is known not to fully protect against infection . 
`` Two patients died on the way to the hospital or in the emergency department . 
One patient was 4 years old and previously healthy , and one patient was 4 years old with neurological problems , '' Dharan 's team wrote . 
Dr. David Weinstock of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Dr. Gianna Zuccotti of Brigham and Women 's Hospital , both in Boston , said the quick spread of Tamiflu-resistant flu had surprised doctors . 
`` Undoubtedly , new surprises await in the perpetual struggle with influenza as one thing is certain -- the organism will continue to evolve , '' they wrote . 
`` For now , the best tools to mitigate influenza infection are tried-and-true -- vaccination , social distancing , hand washing , and common sense . '' 
GlaxoSmithKline , which makes the rival flu drug Relenza , said there was no indication influenza viruses were resistant to its drug . 
Relenza , known generically as zanamivir , is inhaled and is used even less commonly than Tamiflu . 
Flu already resists two older drugs , rimantadine and amantadine . 
There is no indication the two other types of season flu now circulating , H3N2 and influenza B , resist the effects of Tamiflu and the CDC recommends using a cocktail of flu drugs in patients now . 
`` Hundreds of thousands of flu patients continue to be treated with Tamiflu this season , '' Roche said in a statement . 
`` Treatment with antivirals such as Tamiflu can lessen the duration and severity of illness and can help curb the spread of flu , especially in crowded settings like households , schools and nursing homes . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox ; Editing by Will Dunham and Eric Walsh -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
