\* Mexican government announces fatal swine flu outbreak \* New mixture of viruses never seen before \* Some Mexico City residents don surgical masks -LRB- Updates with color , quotes -RRB- By Noel Randewich and Armando Tovar MEXICO CITY , April 24 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A deadly strain of swine flu never seen before has broken out in Mexico , killing at least 16 people and raising fears it is spreading across North America . 
The World Health Organization said it was concerned about what it called 800 `` influenza-like '' cases in Mexico , and also about a confirmed outbreak of a new strain of swine flu in the United States . 
Mexico canceled classes for millions of children in its sprawling capital city and surrounding areas on Friday after authorities noticed a higher number of deaths involving flu-like illness than normal in recent weeks . 
`` It is a virus that mutated from pigs and then at some point was transmitted to humans , '' Health Minister Jose Angel Cordova told the Televisa network . 
He linked the disease in Mexico to a new kind of swine flu that struck seven people in California and Texas . 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the virus in the United States was a never-before-seen mixture of viruses typical among pigs , birds and humans . 
All seven American patients have recovered . 
The Mexican government warned people not to shake hands or kiss when greeting or share food , glasses or cutlery for fear of contracting the flu . 
Mexico City , one of the world 's biggest cities and home to some 20 million people , was quieter than usual on Friday morning . 
Normally choking traffic was less chaotic in the absence of school buses and parents driving kids to school . 
Many people waiting to enter subway stations had their faces covered with surgical masks . 
The virus is an influenza A virus , carrying the designation H1N1 . 
It contains DNA typical to avian , swine and human viruses , including elements from European and Asian swine viruses , the CDC has said . 
WHO said about 60 people in Mexico have died from the disease . 
The Geneva-based U.N. agency said it was in daily contact with U.S. , Canadian and Mexican authorities and had activated its Strategic Health Operations Center -LRB- SHOC -RRB- -- its command and control center for acute public health events . 
Surveillance for and scrutiny of influenza has been stepped up since 2003 , when H5N1 bird flu reappeared in Asia . 
Experts fear this strain , or another strain , could spark a pandemic that could kill millions . 
