Energy firm beats expectations with # 3.6 bn quarterly profit but performance is overshadowed by Deepwater Horizon rig disaster Tuesday 27 April 2010 08.47 BST The Deepwater Horizon rig burning last week . 
There are now 1,000 people involved in efforts to stop oil leaking from the rig . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP BP has smashed City forecasts with a 135 % jump in profits , thanks to rising oil prices . 
The energy giant reported profits of $ 5.6 bn -LRB- # 3.6 bn -RRB- in the first three months of 2010 , up from $ 2.4 bn a year ago . 
Analysts had expected a figure of around $ 4.8 bn on a replacement cost profit basis , which strips out fluctuations in the value of oil inventories . 
The unexpectedly large jump in earnings was mainly thanks to BP 's exploration and production arm , which benefited from oil prices of up to $ 84 a barrel during the quarter . 
In early 2009 the oil price fell below $ 33 a barrel . 
The rally over the last year has helped oil producers , but hurt motorists who are now facing record petrol prices at the pumps . 
BP 's strong performance was overshadowed by the explosion last week at a drilling rig in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Eleven people are missing and presumed dead after Deepwater Horizon , hired by BP and owned by US firm Transocean , caught fire and sank . 
Around 1,000 barrels of oil are still gushing from the site into the sea each day . 
BP said it was committed to doing everything in its power to contain the environmental consequences of America 's worst offshore rig disaster in 40 years . 
There are now 1,000 people involved in efforts to stop two separate leaks , and deal with the growing oil spill , including BP workers and the US Coast Guard . 
`` The safety of the people working offshore is our top priority and the improved weather has created better conditions for our response , '' said BP chief executive Tony Hayward in a statement this morning . 
`` This , combined with the light , thin oil we are dealing with has further increased our confidence that we can tackle this spill offshore . '' 
BP is moving two rigs to the site to drill relief wells , which should help to shut the leak down . 
Four underwater robots have also been deployed to try to activate a cut-off valve which failed to engage before the rig exploded last Tuesday . 
