Tuesday 6 September 2005 01.48 BST Kofi Annan , the UN secretary general , expressed regret last night that the organization had ever become involved in the Iraq oil-for-food program . 
An investigation into the program is due to be published tomorrow , with Mr Annan expected to be criticised for poor management . 
In an interview with the BBC World Service Mr Annan , who is in London , said : `` Honestly I wish we were never given that program , and I wish the UN would never be asked to take that kind of a program again . '' 
The oil-for-food program was set up in 1996 to alleviate the impact of UN sanctions on Iraq by allowing Saddam Hussein to swap oil for food . 
The security council asked the UN to run it . 
But it was abused , mainly by Saddam , who is alleged to have used part of the revenues to buy influence . 
A senior UN official , Benon Sevan , is accused of corruptly receiving # 83,000 to help to facilitate an oil deal . 
Mr Annan ordered an inquiry into the affair last year , headed by Paul Volcker , the former head of the US Federal Reserve , who has released a series of interim reports that have damaged the reputation of the secretary general . 
Mr Annan has suffered from disclosures about the role of his son , Kojo , whose company secured one of the oil-for-food contracts . 
UN sources predict the report will focus more on Mr Annan 's management than his son . 
Mr Annan , who met Mr Volcker in New York last week , said : `` I suspect that there will be lots of criticism for myself as chief admin officer , probably something on the 661 committee -LRB- which ran the program -RRB- , the security council , the government of Iraq . 
When it comes to Iraq on this issue , no one is ... covered in glory . '' 
Mr Annan angered the US and Britain last year when , during a BBC interview , he declared the Iraq war illegal . 
The British government will not welcome his view , expressed last night , that the war has alienated Muslims and that Iraq has become a bigger base for terrorists than Afghanistan under the Taliban . 
