A bird flies off of a post near a barge carrying oil booms to be deployed to assist in the containment of oil from a leaking pipeline in the Gulf of Mexico near the coast of Louisiana in Venice , La. , Thursday , April 29 , 2010 . 
The leak resulted from last week 's explosion and collapse of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- Photographs showing a sheen of oil in the Gulf of Mexico southwest of the big BP spill are evidence only of government-approved work long under way , not a second major leak , an energy company said Tuesday . 
Site owner Taylor Energy Co. . 
LLC said in a written statement that a production platform about 70 miles -LRB- 112 kilometers -RRB- southwest of the Deepwater Horizon disaster was collapsed during Hurricane Ivan in 2004 by an underwater mudslide . 
Pictures taken by an aerial photographer over the weekend and posted on the Internet suggested that oil was leaking from the drilling rig Ocean Saratoga , owned by Diamond Offshore Inc. , and that a nearby vessel with a hose overboard was applying dispersant . 
But Taylor said the work boat was conducting scheduled drainage of the subsea containment system . 
The site has three containment domes below the surface , the company said . 
The domes had `` substantially reduced '' sheening over time , Taylor said , and leakage was slight because more than 100 feet -LRB- 30 meters -RRB- of mud and sediment cover the wells . 
Federal authorities have approved the cleanup project , which is under about 500 feet -LRB- 152 meters -RRB- of water , Taylor said . 
Taylor Energy president Will Pecue said in the statement that the company had been working with both the Coast Guard and the Mineral Management Service `` to address the resulting environmental impacts of one of the 10 most intense hurricanes ever recorded . '' 
Diamond Offshore said late Tuesday there had been no leak from its rig . 
The Coast Guard and MMS said earlier Tuesday that they were putting information together about the site but had not commented again by late in the day . 
MMS records show Taylor Energy has been working on cleaning up , decommissioning and abandoning the site since 2005 . 
Hundreds of platforms and wells dot the Gulf of Mexico , and releases of oil are not uncommon . 
Although Taylor Energy sold virtually all its properties in 2009 to Ankor Energy LLC , which retained most of Taylor 's staff and top management , Ankor said Tuesday that the lease was still owned and handled by Taylor . 
