Darryl Carpenter from CW Roberts Contracting demonstrates how efficiently hay soaks up oil 21-year-old prodigy Alia Sabur 's idea to cork the leaking pipe This is a rush transcript from `` Hannity , '' June 7 , 2010 . 
This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated . 
SEAN HANNITY , HOST : It has been 49 days since oil began spilling into the Gulf , and thus far BP and the Obama administration have not been able to plug the hole . 
But tonight on `` Hannity '' three Americans are here to share their ideas on how to stop the flow of oil and clean up this mess . 
Let me bring in the chairman of WOW Environmental Solutions , Engineer Nicholas Pozzi is with us . 
And the vice president of CW Roberts Contracting , Darryl Carpenter . 
And a 21-year-old prodigy professor Alia Sabur is with us . 
Guys , welcome to the program . 
I got to get to it . 
You have an amazing life story . 
So I want to get to you . 
You have a terrific idea here as well . 
All right , Darryl , why do n't we start with you . 
What you have been involved in has become an Internet sensation . 
I understand too that you have some guys there to demonstrate . 
I think over 700,000 hits now on YouTube using hay . 
They 're not doing it . 
Why do n't you tell us what you 've come up with ? 
DARRYL CARPENTER , CW ROBERTS CONTRACTING : We got a couple of guys here that 's going to demonstrate first while I kind of explain what we 're doing . 
We got George Roberts and Otis Goodson . 
We 're going to put some oil in the water . 
We actually have seawater from the Gulf of Mexico that we brought in and this is actually some crude oil from an oil well in Alabama . 
So we 're actually doing what would actually be out there in the ocean . 
George is going to take some hay , regular old hay like you have on the farm . 
Put it on top of the oil and it will actually absorb the oil up . 
Otis has got some polyester reinforced fabric . 
This stuff works great . 
It actually does better -- almost immediately it will absorb the oil up . 
So there 's two different products we 've been working with the hay and we 've -- in that timeframe we 've actually found some more products that work , too . 
And -- so we want to show a little bit of every one of it . 
But we 've not had any response on any of our products . 
HANNITY : Well , can I just -- CARPENTER : And we do n't -- we do n't know why . 
HANNITY : Can you ask one of your demonstrators there if it 's possible , turn it over ? 
Because what you do is you lay this on the surface , obviously , of the ocean and then you 'd just scoop up the hay -- HANNITY : -- and along with the hay you 're getting -- what percentage of the oil would you get ? 
CARPENTER : You can see right there . 
We can 95 percent of it right there . 
You can see how much is on the hay right there now . 
CARPENTER : Just with that little bit . 
And it just sucks it right up . 
HANNITY : And nobody is listening to your idea even though this has become an Internet sensation ? 
Nobody 's -- nobody reaching out to you ? 
CARPENTER : Nobody is -- look how clean the water is . 
Nobody is reaching out to us . 
Look at the clean the water is right there . 
CARPENTER : If it was n't saltwater you could drink it . 
Honestly , look at that . 
It 's clean as -- that is a great demonstration . 
All right , well -- HANNITY : I appreciate that . 
All right , let 's bring in Nick Pozzi . 
Nick , welcome to the program . 
Now you are a -- NICHOLAS POZZI , ENGINEER : Thank you . 
HANNITY : You 're a contractor . 
And you came up with a pretty interesting idea to suck the crude off the water 's surface . 
Let 's go to your idea and tell us what you 've got . 
POZZI : First of all , I want to say that hay sucks up -- just so you know -- 80 percent of its weight in oil so it 's very , very effective . 
It 's usually -- was used all over the world . 
It 's been used for years and years and years . 
It is nature 's most effective way and safe way to pick up oil . 
That 's number one . 
Number two is the fact that I 'm actually the chairman of WOW Environmental Solutions . 
And -- but I 've been a contractor , worked in Saudi Arabia for 18 years where we had , unfortunately , a lot of oil spills . 
And through lessons learned we developed ways to clean up oil everywhere , including at all level , all depths through different currents that hand off each other , to basically supply oxygenated water as well as nutrients to oyster beds and shrimp and so on and so forth in the Gulf of Arabia . 
HANNITY : All right , Nick -- HANNITY : Let me just -- because we only limited on time here . 
And you guys have three great ideas . 
HANNITY : So in other words , regardless of currents , regardless of depth you have been able to basically -- you have techniques that can suck up this oil . 
So in other words , if we would have started using that 10 days into the spill the chances of this reaching shore in the quantities that we 're going to be looking at here are negligible . 
And again , I ask you , did anybody from the government , BP , anyone reach out to you ? 
POZZI : No , we 've actually shared this idea on day two of the oil spill . 
POZZI : Went down to home and to BP headquarters and basically we could not get an audience . 
We have sent them over and over again information and they basically said it 's not an applicable for this particular spill . 
And I 've challenged them to an actual open debate about it and to tell me why it 's not effective and to demonstrate how it is effective . 
And I have not received any response back . 
Everybody seems to be looking at it but no one seems to be doing anything . 
HANNITY : I got to -- these are two great ideas that obviously work . 
It 's very frustrating . 
Let me bring Alia Sabur in here . 
First all , you were 10 years old when you were going to college . 
ALIA SABUR , NANOTECHNOLOGY PROFESSOR : Yes . 
HANNITY : How -- and your parents are here , they must be so proud . 
And you were teaching in college at 18 . 
HANNITY : You 're a professor . 
Now I read your story first in The New York Post . 
And you came up with a brilliant idea . 
Why do n't you tell everybody ? 
We have a picture of it but I want you to explain it yourself . 
SABUR : Well , the basic idea is that instead of trying to put something on to the pipe or around the pipe . 
SABUR : To try and basically stop it or to put a cork in it even . 
HANNITY : Put a cork in it . 
HANNITY : All right . 
Now just -- we have on the screen a diagram of what you came up with here . 
And the pipe is where -- you decided that you would try and plug it up with tires , right ? 
And it would be like rings of tires in a row -- SABUR : Like donuts around it . 
And then you have them deflated . 
It would be tricky enough to get that kind of construction in there with them deflated . 
So they need to be as small as possible and then we fill them up with hydraulic fluid . 
HANNITY : How do -- as I read this I was thinking to myself , but I 'm not the brilliant engineer , you are . 
How would you inflate the tires at that point ? 
SABUR : They are doing everything with robots . 
HANNITY : So you think they 'd be able to inflate them even 5,000 feet down ? 
SABUR : That 's how robots work on hydraulic fluid . 
HANNITY : All right , I 'm not the engineer , you are . 
But now you did meet with , I understand -- you did meet with the head of BP . 
You initiated the meeting , correct ? 
SABUR : Yes , and it was somewhat similar to what -- what was just mentioned . 
And I went down there and I tried to get a hold of someone just to listen to me . 
And I guess that it happened to work out well and then I met this guy , a BP executive . 
And I said , you know , look , I have this idea , can you take a look at it ? 
And first he did n't think it was my idea , because -- SABUR : Look at you and look at your two other guests , and then look at me . 
Do I look like the kind of person that comes up with this kind of idea ? 
HANNITY : You look like the person that I would like to invest a lot of money in the future , because you 're all very smart . 
I hope -- I mean this in all sincerity . 
I 'm worried about the fishermen . 
I 'm worried about the tourism industry . 
I 'm worried about our environment and our beaches . 
I want to say congratulations to you and to all of you for what you 're doing , your efforts . 
I hope somebody , you know , as Santelli said on the -- on the floor of the stock exchange : White House are you listening ? 
We have smart people here . 
They have some good ideas . 
Thank you for being with us . 
-- Watch `` Hannity '' weeknights at 9 p.m. ET ! 
Content and Programming Copyright 2010 Fox News Network , Inc. . 
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced , distributed , transmitted , displayed , published or broadcast without the prior written permission of Roll Call . 
You may not alter or remove any trademark , copyright or other notice from copies of the content . 
