June 7 : Obama meets with members of his Cabinet to discuss the response to BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill , in the Cabinet Room of the White House in Washington . 
WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama says his talks with Gulf fishermen and oil spill experts are not an academic exercise . 
They 're `` so I know whose ass to kick . '' 
One target for the presidential foot : Tony Hayward , the embattled chief executive of BP . 
Obama was asked by Matt Lauer of NBC 's `` Today '' about Hayward 's past comments that `` I want my life back , '' that the Gulf was `` a big ocean '' and that `` the environmental impact of this disaster is likely to be very , very modest . '' 
`` He would n't be working for me after any of those statements , '' Obama said , according to excerpts released by NBC . 
The interview was to air Tuesday . 
NBC aired portions and put out some excerpts Monday night . 
It was part of a stepped-up White House effort to show Obama is actively engaged in dealing with the worst oil spill in the nation 's history , and to distance itself from the London-based oil giant , formerly known as British Petroleum . 
Polls have shown a majority of Americans believe Obama has handled the crisis poorly . 
The administration is n't even using the same figures as BP any more for how much oil is flowing from the blown-out well and how much is being captured . 
Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen told a White House briefing Monday that a cap on the damaged oil well is now keeping up to 462,000 gallons of oil a day from leaking into the Gulf , up sharply from previous amounts . 
But his figures conflicted slightly with BP 's numbers . 
In a statement , BP put the amount being captured at 466,200 gallons . 
Allen said the government was using its own flow-rate calculations and no longer wanted to rely on those from BP . 
Obama met Monday with his Cabinet and Allen for a briefing on the oil spill , which began April 20 with an explosion and fire that killed 11 workers on a BP-leased rig . 
In remarks after that meeting , Obama sought to reassure the nation that the Gulf Coast would `` bounce back '' from the spill -- but not without time , effort and reimbursement from BP . 
BP is the majority owner of the oil well that blew , but other energy companies are also partners and will bear proportionate financial responsibility . 
Obama stepped up his rhetoric with NBC 's Lauer while on a trip to Kalamazoo , Mich. , to deliver a high-school commencement address . 
He strongly defended his role in dealing with the crisis , including his three visits to the region since the spill began . 
`` I was down there a month ago before most of these talking heads were even paying attention to the Gulf , '' Obama said . 
Obama said he has talked to a variety of `` experts '' on the oil spill in addition to the fishermen . 
`` I do n't sit around just talking to experts because this is a college seminar , we talk to these folks because they potentially have the best answers -- so I know whose ass to kick , '' the president said . 
