Poll shows negative ratings for BP , federal government Americans overwhelmingly see the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico as a major environmental disaster , and most want the federal government to pursue criminal charges against BP and its drilling partners , according to a new Washington Post-ABC News poll . 
Q. From what you 've seen and heard , do you think that the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is a major environmental disaster , a serious environmental problem but not a disaster , or is it not too serious an environmental problem ? 
Q. Do you think the federal government should or should not pursue criminal charges against BP and other companies involved in the oil spill ? 
Do you feel that way strongly or somewhat ? 
Public complaints against BP are twofold : Most give poor ratings to its reaction to the massive spill , and most blame the company and its drilling partners for taking unnecessary risks that could have caused the spill . 
But the government itself is also in the line of fire . 
More Americans have given negative ratings to federal reaction to the BP spill than poll respondents gave to the government 's initial handling of the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . 
Overall , 69 percent of those polled now say the government has done a `` not so good '' or `` poor '' job handling the spill . 
More polled , 81 percent , give low marks to BP for its response . 
-LRB- Some 59 percent give negative ratings to both the federal government and BP . -RRB- 
Criticism of the government and BP crosses party lines and spans the country . 
The Democratic discontent with the government 's response today - 56 percent give it low marks - contrasts with majority GOP support for federal efforts a few weeks after Katrina struck in 2005 . 
Another sentiment shared across the partisan divide is the rising feeling that the situation in the Gulf represents a major environmental disaster . 
About three-quarters of those polled now say so , up significantly from a Pew poll last month . 
In the new Post-ABC poll , those who see the spill as a disaster overwhelmingly advocate criminal charges against BP and its partners , and altogether 64 percent of Americans say the government should pursue such legal action . 
Most Democrats -LRB- 74 percent -RRB- and independents -LRB- 67 percent -RRB- support criminal investigation ; Republicans divide 50 percent in favor , 44 percent opposed . 
The poll was conducted June 3 to 6 among a random national sample of 1,004 adults . 
The results from the full poll have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points . 
Q : -LRB- HALF SAMPLE -RRB- How would you rate -LRB- ITEM -RRB- 's overall response to the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico - excellent , good , not so good or poor ? 
-- Positive -- - Negative - NET Excellent NET Poor The federal government 28 2 69 32 The oil company BP 16 1 81 54 Q : How much blame , if any , do you think -LRB- unnecessary risks taken by BP and its drilling partners ? -RRB- 
deserves for the oil spill - a great deal , a good amount , just some or none at all ? 
- Great deal\/Good amount - -- Some\/None -- NET Grt deal Good amt NET Some None All adults 73 55 18 23 17 6 Democrats 80 58 21 18 12 6 Republicans 61 42 19 34 28 6 Independents 76 61 14 22 16 5 By Jon Cohen | June 7 , 2010 ; 12:00 PM ET Where are the most important questions ? 
Rate President Obama 's actions to protect the wetlands , wildlife and affected residents of the Gulf . 
Rate President Obama 's handling of the gusher . 
We will need a Million Man\/Woman Oil Spill Clean Up Job Corps . 
Texas , Louisiana , Alabama , Florida , Georgia , South Carolina and other States will need them soon , as well as Millions of Hay Bales . 
The USA -LRB- Obama , Congress , Senate , FEMA , National Guards , -RRB- must Take over the Clean UP , -LRB- while BP works to Cap the Spill -RRB- , and Authorize a `` Million Man effort '' to Clean up the Gulf Coast Oil spill . 
This includes Salaries , Transportation , Equipment and Accommodations all billed to BP . 
The regions hotels suffering from Cancelations could use the business , and the country needs both the Jobs and the Clean Up . 
Bill BP for the Clean up costs Weekly even if it s $ 1 Billion a week . 
`` Get the Money and Clean it UP '' . 
The Longer it takes to Stop , the Longer they Pay for the Damage . 
Bring in Oil Tankers to Suck in the Oil and Water and Post Smaller Skimmer Boats closer to the Shore to get out of their way !!! Tankers sit lower in the water than Skimmers . 
It worked in the Persian Gulf and it can work here ! 
The smaller Skimmer Boats should be using Smart Sponges that Suck up the Oil without the water . 
AbTech Smart Sponges Absorb Oil while Repelling Water and Float for easy retrieval and the Oil\/Energy can then be Used instead of Wasted . 
With BP , it 's mostly white . 
BP lied -LRB- in pencil -RRB- on their drilling paperwork applications , BP broke it 's contract to provide all clean up and have all the necessary equipment ready to clean up oil spills . 
BP lied about the amount of oil coming from the leak for weeks and minimized everything about it . 
And yet people want taxpayers to pay to clean this up ??? Posted by : clairevb | June 7 , 2010 12:24 PM | Report abuse I was especially impressed by the residents of the area . 
There film over the weekend of a handful of BP workers cleaning the beach amid a sea of sunbathers . 
I know what they would say . 
`` It 's not my job to scoop up any of that oil . '' 
God forbid the locals pick up some oil blobs on their own . 
Red State American Values . 
Forty-two percent -LRB- 42 % -RRB- Strongly Disapprove , giving Obama a Presidential Approval Index rating of -17 ` verall , 46 % of voters say they at least somewhat approve of the president 's performance . 
Fifty-three percent -LRB- 53 % -RRB- disapprove . ' 
What does `` poor handling '' mean ? 
Not letting BP control the discussion ? 
The government does not possess equipment or better technical know-how than BP . 
That said , the administration needs to get moving and BP needs to admit fault and pay for all damages to the environment . 
However , I do n't really understand this whole Obama 's handling of the crisis issue . 
Do people want him to dive in and close the leak himself ? 
Gibbs said in the press conference that Obama and team constantly evaluated options but did n't elaborate on why certain ideas were discarded . 
If we had these details we would have insight into Obama 's judgment and then could say whether he handled the crisis properly . 
Currently though he is doing everything that any president would do - talks a lot about it , flies to the region , demands action from BP . 
What else do people want ? 
An important note from all this though is that he is blamed for poor handling just as Bush was blamed for Katrina . 
This shows that public is never satisfied with the leaders it elected . 
and O'BlahBlah 's actions are reacting with the incompetence and lack of coordination that they are known for !!! The Liar in Chief and the Fed . 
continue to point the finger of guilt at BP in THEIR efforts to divert the public spotlight AWAY from their own Incompetence , Mismanagement and total lack of Preparation !!! Posted by : thgirbla | June 7 , 2010 12:30 PM | Report abuse That 's because more Americans , considering the people who make up the majority in this country , care more about the loss of business , wildlife conservation and anything that makes Obama look inept than they do about the poor people of New Orleans that lost their lives and livelihoods to Hurricane Katrina . 
The sad part of it all is that the media , and conservatives -LRB- who would sell their collective souls to satan to have a major disaster like this blamed completely on Obama -RRB- compare an oil spill to the unnecessary loss of human life that stemmed from a levee that the government knew needed to be replaced . 
To me , there is no comparison and nothing can erase the memory of watching tens of thousands of human beings die and suffer while George Bush did nothing . 
But Obama rushed to handle the problem with the oil spill and people hate him . 
Well that makes since does n't it . 
Humans are n't as important as land . 
BP is paying Law Makers for support and even reporters\/newspapers just as the Bush\/Cheney propaganda did . 
What kind of civilizened country sees not problem with humans shown begging their Govenment for help as the Media shows people dying live on TV . 
Yet an Oil spill where people are demanding money for lost business and notice how no one is removing animals to safty knowing they will die . 
This is more political then reality and as long as the attacks on Obama continue the mission set out after election day to destroy Obama and the US will work . 
We are seeing the worse of our country as was seen during the Civil Rights Movement . 
No wonder the KKK endorsed Obama as President they knew they could get people to join their cause why hidding behind the Republican Party\/Tea Party . 
HALLIBURTON that 's cheney to you and me . 
This catastrophe is not unprecedented . 
There was a huge oil rig blow out back in 1979 . 
So it happened before and anyone with any sense would know it could happen again . 
Let 's face it , these rigs are in a well observed annual hurricane belt . 
I recall during Hurricane Katrina that the big worrry was about the oil rigs . 
No one expected that the levies would be the problem . 
So , I am not blaming Obama for the disaster . 
We had Carter , Reagan , Bush I , Clinton , and Bush II whose administrations similarly did nothing to prepare for this inevitablitiy . 
But I do blame Obama for his cavalier treatment of this ecological nightmare . 
In the first month of the spill where was any proactive leadership ? 
Why , it was directed against the people of Arizona for enforcing the laws our Federal government have ignored . 
And Obama had time to hug Calderon of Mexico as well . 
This was HIS agenda . 
The destruction of our coastline just did not fit his political goals . 
What are they still doing ? 
Barry the inept bungler then sat on his hands for weeks after the deadly explosion and oil leak . 
The ball will fall to the bottom of the pipe -LRB- upstream -RRB- Repeating this experiment using mercury instead of steel -LRB- a column of 1,000 feet makes a pressure of 5,700 psi -RRB- , BP -LRB- losing some profits -RRB- may clog the sinister well and stop killing people , animals , seas , countries , planets ... Choose the best . 
What are they still doing ? 
It will be many decades before the Gulf Coast recovers from this preventable ecological disaster which was caused first & foremost by greed . 
And , the greed continues today . 
America has a single goal - stop the oil & clean it up . 
BP has a very different goal - stop the oil & clean some of it up while preserving the integrity of the well . 
There lies the disconnect & Obama should be bright enough to sieze their assets and take them out of control so we can persue americas goal - STOP THE OIL & CLEAN IT UP . 
BP 's goal `` to preserve the integrity of the well '' is precisely why oil continues to flow today - 47 days after the destruction of the rig . 
Does anyone actually doubt that ? 
IF so - just wait & see my friends - just wait & see ? 
There film over the weekend of a handful of BP workers cleaning the beach amid a sea of sunbathers . 
I know what they would say . 
`` It 's not my job to scoop up any of that oil . '' 
God forbid the locals pick up some oil blobs on their own . 
Red State American Values . 
As a resident of this oil spill . . 
I can tell you we are picking it up . 
Most of the people you see on nthe beaches are those who came in spite of the oil spill ... The Fed Govt has SPECIFICALLY told us in NO uncertain terms that we are NOT to touch the oil or pick it up ... We are NOT listening . . 
sorry you have n't seen us picking up tons of this stuff off of our beaches . . 
but we are doing it ... and have been ! 
It would figure that someone wants to attacks us because of voting records ... Posted by : tbastian | June 7 , 2010 1:04 PM | Report abuse BP keeps minimizing and distorting the facts , the press sensationalizes things , but is trying to get at the truth , the American People are standing by while our precious natural resources are being devastated , the oil keeps on gushing out , and the Obama Administration is still wringing their hands . 
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE WATCHING AND COMING TO THEIR OWN CONCLUSIONS . 
AND THEY WILL SPEAK OUT THIS NOVEMBER , ON ELECTION DAY . 
THANK YOU DEMOCRATS FOR VOTING THIS RACIST OBAMA INTO OFFICE AS POTUS . 
If 9\/11 Katrina and now this spill have taught us is to be thankful CA has fallen in the ocean yet or that we never did fight an all out nuke war with Russia . 
Stop posting on your lunch break . 
You have lots of work to do . 
Well I REALLY give these stupid raters negative ratings . 
You fools have been yelling for off shore drilling , less government control and no regulation of big business . 
Well fools what you have here is off shore drilling , no government control and no regulation . 
DUH what on earth do you fools really want miracles ! 
The government does not know a think about capping an oil pipe 1 mile under the sea where humans can not go . 
So the way I see it is STOP off shore drilling , much more government control and regulation of Big business . 
Problem solved so all you idiots shut up and go away . 
Besides the Russians are coming . 
Think they 'd take my small claim and process it rapidly or will I face months of delays ? 
It 's the economy , economy , economy . 
If improvements continue and hiring picks up , polls will reflect that by November obviously . 
Most folks simply did n't care enough to follow the events via several sources of news . 
The plain fact is that what has happened resulted from years of neglect and letting the private sector run things . 
Just like the right-wingers always wanted . 
What limited cleanup supplies the Feds had were in Alaska where the ex-guvna there swears oil is never spilled . 
While this is a very sad situation , little can be done fast to fix it . 
The technology was grossly oversold . 
When the MMS had the ` sex for oil ' scandal , the wake up call was ignored . 
Again , too many folks just did n't care enough to get involved . 
The 1979 spill off the Texas coast should have been the standard by which these wells should have been governed in the future . 
All those wanting to blame the president need to look at the right-wing and it 's ` Drill baby drill ' act . 
Strangely though , they are all quiet now , awaiting the next election so that we can once again have the ones who caused much of the woes today put back in office so that they can complete their full and maybe final decimation of what was once the best place on Earth . 
Many of these same voters simply do not understand the critical thinking process which needs to be done before anyone is elected or sent back for another term in office . 
The facts show that deregulation has never worked as intended in any area where it was applied . 
Americans have been sold too many lies by some whose only motive is to become grossly rich at the expense of the working class which for the most part is becoming extinct . 
We can only hope that one day most Americans wake up and see who is actually out to ruin this great country . 
This will require some effort since so many simply do not involve themselves in the steps it will take like voting and studying the issues . 
Really doing some heavy critical thinking . 
Who knows at this point . 
Cheers Posted by : Finn_McCool | June 7 , 2010 1:21 PM | Report abuse The questions here are too generic to be of much use ... do you approve\/disapprove of the Federal Response does n't say why , and this is vital , especially if we 're drawing comparisons to Katrina . 
in the case of Katrina , the anti-big government party was in power , so their base still strongly approved of the Federal Response because they did n't believe there should be one . 
In this case , the pro-big-government solutions party is running the show , so both bases are strongly upset , with the Dems wanting a stronger federal response and Republicans torn between those wanting less regulation and less response -LRB- Geoge Will this past Sunday -RRB- , and those who want a stronger , more hands-on approach . 
We need a breakdown getting to that level , rather than simply saying approval\/disapproval if we really want to figure this one out . 
Otherwise , the poll is just about spin by talking heads . 
The critical errors happened during the Obama administration , when it had been in office for about 15 months . 
So far none of the news media have been persistent at finding out the major cause of the blowout : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Why did BP engineers use oversize 7-inch lower production casing ? 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Why did they use an inadequate volume of cement ? 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Why did MMS approve these high-risk designs ? 
If those major errors had not been made , there would almost certainly have been no catastrophe . 
Since almost one-fourth of all the oil and gas wells in the Gulf of Mexico show sustained casing pressure , it was clear that similar errors had been made many times before . 
Since about one in 400 Gulf of Mexico wells experiences a blowout , the environmental problems also are not rare . 
Since the world 's worst ocean oil disaster occurred in the Gulf of Mexico , 31 years ago at a shallow-water well , it was clear that another disaster was only a matter of time and chance . 
Before the recent catastrophe , there were many people warning the government about these problems . 
But under Secretary of the Interior Salazar those warnings were and are being ignored . 
His reorganization plan is only cosmetic , leaving most of the same people running the agencies who made most of the mistakes , under the same department . 
So yes , many people are blaming the Obama administration . 
It knew that there were major oil development hazards and major problems in the Interior department . 
It failed to correct the problems and failed to address the hazards . 
Did they insist that BP have a plan for a leak before drilling ? 
These inexperienced , no-nothing folks are more interested in vacations and image . 
Let 's get them out of there , starting in November . 
Most Americans to have opinions , but most Americans do not have informed opinions . 
When news organizations publish polls of what Americans think , it would be good to ask just what criteria or expertise most American have to credit their opinion as having any value . 
I think it is either lazy or cynical journalism to present the results of such polls . 
They are at best meaningless and at worst contribute to the mistaken notion that uninformed opinions have news value . 
This is a very different root cause than Katrina , where the Feds were responsible for creating the disaster conditions in the first place . 
With the oil spill , absence of regulation , chosen by the American people as what they wanted from government since the election of Ronald Reagan , has once again had a disastrous impact -- as it did with the S&L collapse and the ongoing recession . 
Americans ca n't have it both ways -- either government , federal and state , regulates capitalism with a heavy hand to protect the people , or it lets free enterprise run wild with inevitably terrible consequences . 
It is clear to EVERYONE in the world , that Obama and his team are failures , liars , and not very good leaders , except when they force new laws to be created , which the progressive socialist\/communist MINORITY want . 
Of course Obama did n't create the problem , but instead of finding new ways to bankrupt our country , he should be sending the right resources to get the job done . 
It is inexcusable that it has taken this long . 
INEXCUSABLE ... Posted by : Roughneck | June 7 , 2010 1:37 PM | Report abuse `` More Americans have given negative ratings to federal reaction to the BP spill then poll respondents gave -LRB- ... -RRB- '' Should n't that be `` than poll respondents '' etc. ? 
Most Americans to have opinions , but most Americans do not have informed opinions . 
When news organizations publish polls of what Americans think , it would be good to ask just what criteria or expertise most American have to credit their opinion as having any value . 
I think it is either lazy or cynical journalism to present the results of such polls . 
They are at best meaningless and at worst contribute to the mistaken notion that uninformed opinions have news value . 
com we need your prayers , thanks Posted by : eric279 | June 7 , 2010 1:51 PM | Report abuse The public is demanding criminal charges against BP without the faintest clue about what specific criminal laws have been broken . 
While it is possible some have been broken - i.e. Migratory Bird Laws that outlaw just about everything whether intentional or not - the roar from the public sounds a lot like `` Sentence First , trial second '' . 
Where is the massive clean-up effort ? 
It 's been nearly two months , and no end in sight . 
To-date we have a tiny fraction of the needed people working on containment and clean-up , with most of them performing in front of cameras ! 
Picking up tar balls one at a time by hand ?! In the meantime , efforts on the part of individual states have been hampered by the federal bureaucracy . 
In the meantime , the pitiful images of those poor oil-coated birds is enough to make one sick ! 
And not surprisingly , the so-called environmental groups have been relatively silent as we see one of the world 's worst environmental disasters unfold before our eyes . 
Yes , force BP to do whatever it takes to seal the leak , but it is the federal government 's responsibility ... from the President on down ... to protect our country from castastrophic damage . 
This holds true , whether it 's our shorelines or our borders ! 
But I do not believe that our current President sees it that way at all . 
It seems that we are being led by a Vigilante President who does n't understand the reasons for separation of governmental power . 
The Rule of Law seems ready to be thrown out by Obama , his Cabinet , and many members of Congress . 
If our judicial process is flawed , change it . 
But do it with Constitutional changes not by a Presidential Putsch . 
Americans should never allow the Executive Branch of government take over all judicial functions . 
America is at significant risk , with extremists on both the Left and the Right . 
Middle of the road Americans , who are in the majority , should resist any and all efforts of extremists , regardless of their party affiliation . 
Obama however , can not be blamed for the previous Eight years of ingrained obsfication and out-right flounting of environmental law by the federal government , endless sleezy sweet heart deals and payola scandals between the petrolium industry and government agencys and the perpetual turning of a blind eye to shoddy workmanship and non-existent contingentcy planning for major oil spills by the federal and state agencys responsible for overseeing the oil Industry in the Gulf of Mexico . 
No , this is the previous Administration 's legacy to Obama and our nation and no amount of double talk and chest beating comming from the Right will EVER change this fact . 
You should have said the Obama adminstration is doing a terrible job . 
But , of course , this is simply liberal media bias 101 , is n't it . 
When a Republican is in office , any problems are attributed to the adminstration by name , but when a Democratic is in office , it 's the amorphous `` government '' that is to blame . 
It 's wearing really thin . 
I feel so left out ... Where IS the full poll ? 
It would be good to read it directly instead of filtered through the Washington Post -LRB- even though the Post is half-owner - or maybe because it is ? -RRB- . 
Were `` pollees '' asked if civil charges should also be filed , or is that a given ? 
Do most of us really think that BP , et al , did this on purpose and thus are criminally liable ? 
And now are dragging their collective feet in order to stay on front pages , etc. , and keep the stock price falling ? 
Do we really think the Obama Administration should be held accountable for not responding with more vigor , with more ... ? 
If this administration HAD responded more vigorously -LRB- learn from Khrushchev ! 
Take your shoe off and pound the lectern !! -RRB- , it would now be berated for behaving like Big Brother , socialist , C-o-m-m-u-n-i-s-t . 
Terrible tragedies such as this one need all of us to pull together , to seek answers without rancor -LRB- there s plenty of time for that later -RRB- , not have so many people -LRB- including the admiral in charge for the administration -RRB- taking so much of their time answering the same questions over and over and over again before 24-7 reporters\/cameras\/etc . 
Instead of figuring out whom to blame right now , those of us who believe in its power should do some serious praying Posted by : jujones1 | June 7 , 2010 2:00 PM | Report abuse This is the Obama administration ... Now the Cheney oil disaster ... ... Remember folks the secret energy task force Dick Cheney put together in 2003 made up exclusively of BP , Mobil , and Exxon oil execs who Cheney allowed to write this nations regulattory policies . 
Including letting the oil companies exempt themselves from environmental and safety regulations . 
The result ... the BP oil disaster . 
Just look at all of these posters not just blaming Obama for something that the government really can not even fix . 
But they mock him and call him names . 
When THEIR President leaves people for dead for a whole week in a major metropolitan area of the U.S.A. they come to HIS defense . 
But a disaster literally 1 MILE below the surface of the ocean ? 
Time to call the President names like `` Obummie '' or `` Oblah-blah '' or `` Vigilante President '' . 
You people calling President Obama these immature names are nothing more than ice-cold I-D-I-O-T-S . 
I am one of them . 
I think the Obama administration people that did the last few inspections of the off shore oil rig should be prosecuted , they obviously are on the take , and did n't do the job they were hired to do at all . 
The people at BP that made the decisions and took the short cuts to save themselves money to pocket at the expense of all Americans in this accident should also be prosecuted . 
They took the short cuts , they are responsible for this disaster 100 percent . 
BP has had many violations in the past , and nothing has been done to them . 
Now we have to suffer for their actions . 
Prosecute these criminals to the fullest extent . 
However what the critics and the media pundits fail to realize is that President Obama is a real person and not one who plays a president on TV . 
These nattering nabobs of negativism think they are watching the West Wing TV show where a make-believe president neatly resolves whatever problem befall the nation by the end of the weekly show . 
And , both the liberal and conservative talking heads seem united in demanding that the President personally take charge of the crisis and that he take the oil company CEO by the scruff of his neck and put his head in a feces-filled toilet bowl . 
This might satisfy some but most people hope that he remain outwardly cool , calm and collected . 
There is broad agreement that Bush-like shooting from the lip or hip and Clintonesque , `` I feel your pain '' game , is NOT the way to go . 
As much as the press would like to see the President spend more time in the Gulf Coast it is better that he not go down there and personally take charge of the situation . 
This will only slowdown the response and would further disrupt the lives of ordinary citizens as anyone who has been delayed by a passing presidential motorcade will tell you . 
The media would better serve the nation by reporting on how the crisis came to be , rather than spend hours and hours opining on what the President should be and what he must do to solve it . 
Let Obama be Obama and with now-retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen as the national incident commander of the oil gusher disaster we will all get through this . 
Voters have spent the last thirty years or so dismantling the government to give us limited government and now we wish immediate response . 
Me thinks communications have broken down on many many fronts . 
BP only did what voters would allow it to get away with , which is another massive communications breakdown on many many fronts . 
In the decades and centuries ahead the oil spill will resolve itself . 
Saying we are gonna clean this up is political jargon to avoid reality . 
Polls confuse fact with opinion . 
Just because such-and-such percentage of some sample group believe something , does not even begin to make it true ! 
On the one hand , people are anti-government and do not want government involved in their lives . 
On the other hand , when a disaster occurs , then the government needs to be involved and fix the problem immediately -- you know , provide the quick fix -- even though it does n't have the tools that an oil company has . 
Besides , the loose non-regulations with oil and the oil companies does not rest with the current administration but with the Bush-Cheney administration who went to bed with the oil companies and allowed oil companies to co-op federal agencies . 
What people fail to note isObama did initiate action from day one . 
Unfortunately he did n't make a big photo-op out of the intial oil spill which Americans lap up . 
The next time a major problem occurs , the administration needs to make several photo-ops and spread across television . 
After all , it 's then that the American people will believe something is being done by our government . 
America 's majority is no longer . 
And the fact -LRB- fact -RRB- of the media filling all pages with `` tea party anger '' and Sarah Palin 's deepest thoughts how she hates Obama . 
Great democracy we got going here ! 
The anti-government wackos are the same -LRB- max -RRB- 30 % of Americans who thought GW Bush was doing a great job after he wrecked our economy . 
Now it is a Democrat ca n't spend money to stimulate the economy to create jobs -- which every economist in the world knows is the best thing in the world . 
Listen and forgive this in advance : there are many , many good people down in Louisiana , Texas , Alabama , Mississippi , and Florida , but like their Right Wing preachers like to say , `` this is God 's wrath on them '' ! 
Every ignorant voter in those five states who has constantly voted for Conservative candidates bashing government and praising the `` enterprise `` of the private sector are seeing not God 's wrath but a rebuke for being so stupid as to vote against their own interests . 
Please note how Rand Paul called Obama `` un-American '' for criticizing BP ! 
If Red States are going to rule the country , god bless all of us ! 
The facts no longer matter to wingnut morons in this country . 
And to creeps like screwjob , why do n't you take time from your endless posting and volunteer your time and services in Gulf ? 
20,000 federal folks could sure use relief as well . 
Or is being the inspiration for massengil not of any use ? 
Umm , the Deepwater horizon rig has been operaating since 2001 ... '' -LRB- 3 -RRB- Why did MMS approve these high-risk designs ? '' 
One of the really big questions is whether MMS approved . 
Someone later asked if BP had filed plans with regulators to deal with such an accident and then stated `` obviously not , '' when in fact they did provide assurances that they had the necessary plan to deal with a spill ten times this size . 
this is where `` trust but verify '' comes in , a little too much trust in the oil companies and not enough verification apparently . 
`` Where is the massive clean-up effort ? 
It 's been nearly two months , and no end in sight . '' 
the sad truth , there is no real way to clean a wetland like those in Louisiana , many biologists think standard cleanup tchniques would do more harm than good . 
As would have Louisiana 's original idea to build earth walls around them to protect them from the oil in the first place - it would have blocked the oil , but also the flow of salt water and it 's mixing with freshwater , vital to the stability of those ecosystems . 
That might have saved the plants from oil , but still killed them just as predictably . 
Probably the sad truth is , as Wolff reported yesterday , Obama was probably briefed on Day 2 just how bad this was going to be and for how long , and the only real solution was the relief well . 
You ca n't turn around and promise bold action and vow to use the resources of the Federal Government to stop it when you know it wo n't do any good -LRB- and thus just further upset public expectations when efforts fail , as has been left to this point with BP itself -RRB- , and you ca n't pull a Michael Scott and walk into a national pressroom and say `` ladies and gentlemen , WE ARE SCREWED . '' 
The biggest government failre is in preventing this from happening in the first place and for not having a better emergency plan in place . 
Once it happened , it was too late . 
The easiest fixes for the future - do what other nations do and require at least one relief well pre-dug -LRB- I think Norway requires three , we do n't likely because it drives up the cost of the wells and drillin allies have probably blocked it in the past -RRB- , breaking up MMS as has now been proposed , and actual enforcement rather than the lax enforcement that has been ongoing for far too long . 
`` Should Federal Criminal Charges be pursued against the Obama Administration for Willful failure to take action for agenda\/political reasons ? '' 
See , I 'm still confused , and this is why I want a better poll than approval\/disapproval . 
Is the Obama administration a bunch of big government socialist\/fascist thugs running over the constitution , or are they not doing enough and ceding too much responsibility to private corporations ? 
even his critics on this page ca n't agree -LRB- and some apparently disagree with themselves on their own posts -RRB- . 
Particularly the Man In Charge , Barack Obama . 
Those 30 % of the nation who hate Obama , well , this is still a racist nation . 
That 's what all the birther and `` socialist '' charges are all about . 
And again , the MSM is extremely active giving these viewpoints credence . 
Our elected president is doing a fantastic job under hard circumstances . 
He is trying to rescue us from our own selves . 
Nothing at wrong with that given our collective American selves are obviously close , very close to a piece of s. Posted by : walden1 | June 7 , 2010 2:41 PM | Report abuse Media needs to concentrate on unemployment and what has created it . 
The oil spill will resolve itself in the next few hundred years or so . 
It 's really too late to do anything now . 
The carcinogens and toxins are in the water and seabed . 
Wanna play ya gotta pay . 
Why would any reasonable person lay blame on President Obama for BP 's mess in the Gulf or liken the response of the White House this time to its response to Katrina ? 
-LRB- I remember the picture of Bush first viewing the ravages of Katrina from the safety of his helicopter window . -RRB- 
Some good may still come out of this : The secret files of the notorious meetings between Cheney and his energy task force revealed . 
Sadly , however , racism in this fair land will continue . 
See my post detailing sectors that could be impacted including Gulf , Florida and Southeast Coast tourism ; commercial and recreational fishing ; boating ; services in tourism areas ; ecosystem services ; health care . 
Katrina was a `` natural disaster '' caused by a huricane . 
BP Oil spill was a preventable man-made disaster caused by bad engineering , bad management , and bad regulators . 
You ca n't really get mad at the weather , but you sure as hell can point the finger at the people who mismanaged BP Oil . 
The RESPONSE to the BP OIL spill is slow Posted by : rmorris391 | June 7 , 2010 3:06 PM | Report abuse How many pieces of paper inked with images of dead presidents will it take to return the Gulf to its condition on 4\/19\/2010 ? 
Let 's look at what the poster child for loose regulations , the Republicans , did ; and we will see : . . 
1 -RRB- They defeated new drilling regulations that might have prevented the Drill-Baby-Drill Oil Spill , 2 -RRB- Fought supporting development of the electric car , 3 -RRB- Fought research and development of sustainable alternative energy resources , 4 -RRB- Created a culture in America that Poo-pooed environmentalist as gloom and doomers , and butterfly chasers . 
... And when it was discovered that the Chicken littles were telling the truth , Republican mouth pieces like Limbaugh , Beck , and farmsnorton continued to make up lies about them , Big Oil was pushed out into the deep waters ... HOGWASH ... . 
As if Big Oil wasn t greedy for the oil rich fields of the deep , after they had depleted most of the good fields in the shallow waters of the Gulf of Mexico . 
5 -RRB- Created a culture where agencies were just the bungling arms of an unworthy government who should only get out of the way and stop being a problem , 6 -RRB- Created a culture were agencies got into bed with the Corporations they regulated , 7 -RRB- In 2005 Republicans passed regulations which left environmental concerns to the judgment of the Oil Corporations , 8 -RRB- In November 2008 , a dozen Republican drill baby drill cohorts -LRB- two of them previous appointees with stanch Republican track records against environmental science and safety regulations -RRB- were made civil servants in high positions in the MMS , in order to delay for a long time Obama being able to have proper influence over that agency , 9 -RRB- Bush appointees headed MMS until Elizabeth Birnbaum , who was appointed by Obama , took office in July 2009 . 
Even after that , the dozen Republicans , who had at the last minute been entrenched high up in the MMS , remained there because of civil service laws -LRB- See : . . 
10 -RRB- In April 2009 , three months before Elizabeth Birnbaum s appointment , while still operating under Bush appointees and the dozen entrenched civil servants , BP s Deepwater Horizon s permit was signed , wavers and all . 
11 -RRB- Just last week Republicans prevented any raise on the $ 75 million economic injury cap better to have Americans to shoulder that trillion dollar of losses to their homes , jobs , and businesses . 
Now I agree in part with the Republicans . 
Obama should have moved faster ... Indeed , he was naive to think that after eight years of Republicans , he d be inheriting agencies that were professional ... ... OBAMA SHOULD HAVE TAKEN A FLAMETHROWER TO WHAT THE REPUBLICANS DID , AND THEN CORRECTED THEIR MISTAKES . 
After all ... they were black ... and we know how Republicans feel about `` those people '' . 
And now ... as is clear ... Republicans are MORE bothered that the `` evil federal government '' that they despise has n't stepped in and spent huge amounts of our tax dollars fixing things for a giant corporation that got away with murder under Republican deregulations . 
So much for all that `` state 's rights '' and `` stay out of big business '' or `` we 'll secede '' screaming we 've been hearing from the wingnuts these past eighteen months . 
Not clear how many lives could have been saved had the government acted quickly but let 's say 800 or so . 
Now while the gulf area will suffer for many years from this , most of these folks have their lives except for 11 who died on the rig . 
Now we get polls comparing the two . 
Well frankly , in my mind , there is no comparison . 
With the Louisiana government and senators , republicans and democrats daily trying to score political points against the president it 's no wonder people see the response negatively . 
First it s Carville blaming the WH for not doing enough . 
Next it s Jindall speaking with lightning speed suggesting he has all the answers . 
Next we have both of them asking the president to stop the deep sea moratorium before we determine what happened and how to prevent the problem from happening again . 
This is same attitude we ve had that got us into this mess in the first place . 
Also , why was the Louisiana state bird on the endangered list in the first place if they cared so much as they seem to now ? 
The problem we have in this country is that everything is done according to a poll . 
When do we stand up and do what s right regardless of the poll ? 
Americans have got to come together on these issues and stop playing politics with every issue . 
There is a sad state of affairs in this country . 
He is a complete failure Dont cry that Obama is getting blame for his failures ! 
He deserves the blame . . 
Obama however , can not be blamed for the previous Eight years of ingrained obsfication and out-right flounting of environmental law by the federal government , endless sleezy sweet heart deals and payola scandals between the petrolium industry and government agencys and the perpetual turning of a blind eye to shoddy workmanship and non-existent contingentcy planning for major oil spills by the federal and state agencys responsible for overseeing the oil Industry in the Gulf of Mexico . 
No , this is the previous Administration 's legacy to Obama and our nation and no amount of double talk and chest beating comming from the Right will EVER change this fact . 
Many ignored that warning . 
New Orleans under their Mayor did not get those people out when they thousands of buses just sitting there with no one to drive them . . 
It is not Bushs fault that these people decided to stay and die . 
The levies were not going to be fixed just before that storm . 
There was no way anybody could have fixed them that fast . 
The response to this oil spill was worse then Katrina . 
This Bozo who is President was out playing golf and taking Michelle out to dinner while this was going on . 
He is a total joke . 
He lies when he says they were at it since day one . 
It is now day 49 and he still has done nothing but started committees that do nothing . 
He is killing us slowly . 
He will not be our President next time ... Posted by : CaptainSad | June 7 , 2010 3:31 PM | Report abuse How was the President to fix the problem ? 
The media should answer that question ! 
The news media was out everyday saying that the President should do something ; the President should get mad ; the President should say this or that . 
Just shut up , please ! 
You people in the media need to suggest how to solve this problem . 
I was taught that if you come with a complaint and a problem then come with a solution . 
Was the President to call out the military to spoon the oil off the surface or build a pipe or dig a new well in 2 hours ? 
What could the President do , really ? 
Getting angry and calling the people who created this problem and what would you have the President to say ? 
The first thing that needed to happen is to grieve for those who lost their lives ; call in the experts to asset the problem ; once the problem has been asseted than figure out how to fix the problem . 
But you media people need to make up your minds , BP is a private international company who obtained the permit to drill on American soil from a foreign country . 
How does an the American government take control of a foreign company by seizing their assets and that is what our government has done . 
You people cried that the federal government was taking over the banks and auto industry when the government support the companies ; now you are yelling that the government did n't do enough in this case . 
Make up your minds . 
Mr. President , you are correct to keep calm , rely on experts for advice and move slowly to take our oil wells back from foreign countries . 
I support you 100 % . 
By the way , whatever happened to Obama s Eric Holder gathering information to determine sufficient grounds to file criminal charges against BP ? 
The American people probably won t hear about it again because an investigation into criminal or civil violations would back fire on the U.S. government federal agencies involved with BP . 
What a news scandal that would be U.S. v. BP court battle to determine who s at fault for the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
Got to admire their creativity and I was tired of doe eyed looks from casters asking `` what new pain for me . '' 
The poll probably omitted hard and important questions , too , like : What should the government have done on Day 1 ? 
c. Nationalize BP and take over the entire recovery effort . 
We all know damn well that doing c would have created a public big government uproar . 
We all know that b and b2 would go unanswered except , perhaps , to suggest that the well be nuked , a stupid idea . 
More important though is that the negative response clearly indicates folks continuous need to blame others than themselves . 
The spill and BP 's behavior is the result of laizzes faire and free market economics and politics in vogue since Ronald Reagan uttered the phrase `` government is the problem . '' 
The fools bought the lie are now unable to accept their share of the blame . 
I am reminded of the rationing in the 70s caused by a Middle East crisis . 
At the time it was popular to be for oil independence and conservation . 
But , immediately after the crisis and rationing ended , independence and conservation disappeared into the woodwork . 
The SUV is the perfect example . 
Is n't it time to own up to our responsibilities instead of blaming others . 
True but really irrelevant . 
It may be improved and every drop it catches is a bonus in my mind . 
Success is usually a series of improvements . 
`` Criticism of the government and BP crosses party lines and spans the country . 
The Democratic discontent with the government 's response today - 56 percent give it low marks - contrasts with majority GOP support for federal efforts a few weeks after Katrina stuck in 2005 . '' 
I actually feel sorry for that BP supervisor who insisted that the drilling mud be replaced by seawater ; he had no clue that 11 men would die and BP would have a multi-billion dollar clean up problem - he probably just wanted to impress the guys in the main office . 
But procedures have to change and business culture has to change - the view that shortcuts are O.K. if they save a few dollars for bonuses has to go . 
It 's one thing to say 69 % disapprove , but if this is sixth or seventh on their list of concerns behind jobs , the economy , etc. , then it 's not as big a deal , whereas when Katrina hit , it moved up towards the top . 
Obama 's job is not to plug the damn hole but to protect our Gulf States shoreline . 
Obama was negligent and incompetent in dealing with this as a president . 
It took many weeks before Obama was forced to go to Louisiana and only after Obama was criticized by his own ardent democratic supporter which include James Carville . 
Even then Obama continued to party including Paul McCartney , playing Golf , Basketball , fundraising , campaigning . 
Obama has no American values at all in his heart . 
Obama is letting our country be destroyed irreversibly by ignoring our national security as proven by 4 islamic terrorist atttacks on our homeland in just 15 months of Obama in office . 
Obama was unable to turn the economy around and we have a high unemployment rate because instead of the the multiple job stimulus bills to help the ordinary Americans it was actually used to bail out Obama 's cronies in wall street , big banks , automakers and unions which give all politicians kickbacks and bribes and also to protect the politicians massive investments in money and stocks on wall street and big banks . 
This is why now we have a $ 13 trillion in debt and the Obama gov ' t is continuing to SPEND MASSIVELY AND BORROW MONEY MASSIVELY , INCREASE TAXES IN JANUARY 2011 , RATIONING AND MORE SPENDING IN OBAMACARE WHICH WILL COLLECT BEGINNING IN JAN. 2011 HIGH INSURANCE PREMIUMS AND TAXES ON EVERYBODY INCLUDING INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE YOUNG AND HEALTHY OR FACE FINES AND PENALTIES , BUT THE HEALTH COVERAGE DOES N'T KICK IN UNTIL 5 YEARS FROM NOW . 
We are being mocked and attacked by all our enemies including our allies in South Korea and Israel . 
We are defenseless and vulnerable militarily and economically . 
We are running out of time rapidly and the US military should save us now before it is too late . 
We now have a treasonous , corrupt , tyrannical , islamic loving,anti-America , anti-US military,anti-CIA , arrogant , elitist dictatorship composed of crime families from D.C Posted by : mahalapril | June 7 , 2010 4:29 PM | Report abuse Actions speak louder than words : What Obama has Not Done Yet is : Require Current Drillers to be subject to new Insurance and Safety Regulation Requirements -LRB- & Frequent Inspections to Verify compliance and well maintained 450 Ton Blow-Out Preventers -LRB- BOP -RRB- to include : \* Remote Acoustic Triggers for Shut Off Valves , \* Require Drillers to be Insured for Worst case Scenario -LRB- $ 100 Billion ~ $ 500 Billion from the looks of this accident -RRB- . 
\* The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund supported by industry fees should be raised from $ 1 Billion to $ 500 Billion . 
\* End the Billions in Tax breaks for Oil Companies . 
\* Authorize a Million Man\/Woman Oil Spill Clean Up Job Corps to Help Texas , Louisiana , Alabama , Florida , Georgia , South Carolina and other States soon , as well as Millions of Oil Absorbing Hay Bales . 
\* Blocked BP from paying Billions in Stock Dividends . 
\* Put BP 's American Operations under Temporary Receivership \* Ordered an Independent Analysis of Oil Spill Flow Rates Posted by : liveride | June 7 , 2010 4:34 PM | Report abuse The lack of understanding of how the federal government bureaucracy works reflected in many of the comments listed here is probably indicative of the general ignorance and willful stupidity of the electorate . 
First , the GS system , which most of the various department employees are classed under , was set up to deliberately shield the workforce from political influence -LRB- read , political activities on the part of the party in power -RRB- , and second , the practice of `` burrowing '' , by which political appointees are converted to career employees need to be considered to truly understand the actions , or lack thereof , on the part of this `` federal government '' lack is so blithely referred to as a monolithic entity . 
Many of the front-line employees who potentially could be culpable for the gross negligence , i.e. drill rig inspectors , were most probably hired , reviewed , and promoted during the prior administration . 
Also , intransigent MMS employees such as the regional Alaskan office that have shown themselves to be `` in bed '' with the oil companies are almost certainly long-time career employees that the current administration did not hire , review , retina , and promote -LRB- there just has n't been enough time -RRB- . 
So , to review for the ignorant and simplistic among us : the current administration could not have possibly hired the employees whose failures have contributed to BP 's , Transocean 's , and Halliburton 's dismal technical performance . 
Nor could the annual review process had enough time to `` weed them out '' . 
While we 're at it , are the calls for government an indication that the populace feels that petroleum engineering and deep-water submersible technology are `` core government '' functions that ca n't be outsourced to private concerns like BP , etc ? 
That certainly has n't been what has been said for the past thirty years or so . 
So , make up your minds , outsourced governmental functions whose performance is outside of review or control , or accountable government employees ? 
You ca n't have it both ways , geniuses . 
is it time to post every resource that has been deployed again . 
Or how much bureaucratic coordination had to be done . 
From the Coast Guard to the fisherman who lost everything ????? I 've got the list . 
The stats are phenominal of what the US Government -LRB- with our Congress -RRB- and the White House has deployed to fight this . 
BP is to blame . 
And what do they do , pay dividends and waste money on commercials . 
Son of Top Hat is not working as well as it should , but they wo n't let you know that . 
Admiral Thad Allen has to give America the stats . 
Wo n't hear it from BP . 
And now BP wo n't acknowledge the 2 plumes that have developed a mile away from the rig ... nor will they acknowledge the 3rd breach in the pipeline . 
The psi is going to be too much . 
And Son of Top Hat will pop right off . 
Or explode right off . 
BP only was going to drill one relief well ... White House told them they will build two . 
White House is giving the orders and BP does n't like it one bit . 
AND , BP accountants better be working 24\/7 to write the checks to the families affected . 
Families can go through SBA and the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund because along with the 69 million invoice the White House gave to BP ... another one for 8.1 billion is coming down the pike . 
New figures show this spill will cost 425 billion dollars . 
ANd you can bet , the President will RIDE HERD on BP to pay . 
So now it is Obama 's turn to be seen as the failure when a bad thing happens on his watch ; that is as it should be . 
Does this mean we now build more nuclear , solar , wind and etc. ; I havent seen that push yet , and that will be the biggest failure of all . 
The BP CEO gets on TV every day to say he is going to pay for all of this ; its hard to figure out the point of Obama then saying the same thing as if its a new idea of some sort . 
All big-time crap takes a really long time to resolve , longer than our life spans can easily adjust to it . 
Examples : Bay Bridge breaks in 1989 SF earthquake , new span ready in 2014 ; Muslim attack on WTC in 2001 , area built up again in -LRB- fill in the blank -RRB- ; Arab Oil Embargo of 1973 , and we 'll adjust to that new reality by -LRB- when exactly ? -RRB- . 
How long to come up with some decent technical means to fight these runaway gushers in the future-no one knows , we just know how to file lawsuits and scrape 40 % off the top . 
I still haven t see or heard any Republican who will even admit that Bush was once POTUS . 
Bush and Cheney are still causing havoc with their gosh darn exploding offshore oil rigs this time . 
Well , Republicans never did care anything about the environment , or clean air or clean water . 
Now that they 've got their lungs full of pollution in their own back yards breathing that stench of spilled oil and wondering how long before they get sick from it , maybe next time they 'll remember why they do need clean air and clean water . 
Rate President Obama 's actions to protect the wetlands , wildlife and affected residents of the Gulf . 
Rate President Obama 's handling of the gusher . '' 
What about the Big Oil Companies like Halliburton , BP and Trans Ocean who ACTUALLY spilled the oil ? 
You just love the oil companies and you just hate President Obama , we already know what you 're going to say and really do n't care to hear anymore . 
Now go breathe in that bad air and keep yourself quiet while the grown ups handle this mess . 
Obama was n't ready to present , he has n't projected confidence in his `` role . '' 
In fact , he seems to find it a `` chore , '' best left to his WH staff , or whomever ? 
To wit , however , someone prompted Obama to claim he was `` in charge . '' 
-LRB- ???? -RRB- This morning Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen , having demonstrated the near genius command of the situation , further displayed the height of military form and discipline as he stood by `` Gabby Gibby '' who was attempting to project his very limited comprehension of the issues surrounding control of the oil debacle as if he knew what he was talking about ; at that time Admiral Allen gallantly and gently took over the presentation . 
Just love the `` brusin '' of BP for costs of Public Relations ; next Obama will retain that expertise ? 
Discipline of the Armed Forces is unforgiving ; they do n't have a UNION to secure them from incompetence . 
And our federal bureaucracy of those highly paid and secured union folk could n't handle Toyota , the building financial crises ? 
And the figures were damning 70 % who thought the government was amiss , absent or off on the golf course . 
As onetime newspaperman , that would be my headline , not BP . 
But not for the Obama - besotted media . 
With all the millions of unemployed people , why could n't the government have employed some of them to clean the beaches & save these creatures ? 
TO Truth1 : Have you been reading -LRB- or watching -RRB- the media or reading the government 's propaganda ? 
With all the millions of unemployed people , why could n't the government have employed some of them to clean the beaches & save these creatures ? 
TO Truth1 : Have you been reading -LRB- or watching -RRB- the media or reading the government 's propaganda ? 
But Fox has aired videos of Pres. Obama next to pics of oily pelicans . 
- My 3 nephews went down to Work with the OIL Disaster Clean-Up - , and were told to Go Home , - Youa re NOT needed !? - We have enough people doing the Clean-Up ! 
-- Also , some were told - if You are Not from a Gulf-State-Affected , - then we can NOT Hire-You !!! -- WOW - and the rest of the Nation thought this was a bit out-of-control !! -- IT IS being Cleaned-UP very Efficiently , Quickly , and NO MORE WORKERS ARE NEEDED - PERIOD !!! -- Please , - what is the Truth , - and what is really going on in the GULF States ?! -- Wonder how many illegals are being Employed on this small Job ?! Posted by : jward52 | June 7 , 2010 6:10 PM | Report abuse This Oil leak catastrophe in Gulf is another proof as to what utter complete lunatics Republican positions have been , that is Republicans from Reagan downward have been selling American people this ultimate con job that : `` Government is the problem not the solution ... '' So in this Gulf of Mexico Oil leak catastrophe , are Republicans like Gov Bobby Jindal calling for private industry to come to their rescue or are they calling for the Federal Government to come to their rescue ? 
So what happened to the Tea baggers and Republican lunatics that `` Government can not do anything ... '' etc. non-sense , why are they not asking the Federal Government to stay away from this leak and ask the same Wall Street owned for profit companies that caused this leak to take care of the pending disaster in Gulf Coast ? 
Why the deafening silence to this question from the Tea baggers and Republican lunatics !!! So this is another example of Republican lunacy having in time lead to a disaster . 
That is this disaster , like the disaster in WV Massey Mine , like the disaster in Wall Street , like the disasters in US Main street where 2Mill + Americans go bankrupt each year due to health care costs while ZERO European or Canadian go bankrupt each year due to health care costs because they all have Universal nationalized health care are due to the Republican lunatics having sold this ULTIMATE Con Job to the American people , that : 1 - `` Government can not do anything ... '' 2 - `` Government is the problem not the solution ... '' 3 - `` People distrust the Government more than they dislike big business -LRB- aka Wall Street -RRB- '' Posted by : ThinkDeep | June 7 , 2010 6:24 PM | Report abuse obama regime in free fall majority of americans disgusted with dear leader Fifty-eight percent -LRB- 58 % -RRB- continue to favor repeal of the health care law , a figure that includes 48 % who Strongly Favor repeal . 
Overall , 46 % of voters say they at least somewhat approve of the president 's performance . 
Fifty-three percent -LRB- 53 % -RRB- disapprove . 
The Rasmussen Reports Media Meter shows that media coverage of President Obama has been 41 % positive over the past week . 
The president 's 40 % approval rating on the oil spill trails his overall job approval rating by seven points . 
`` In the New Normal this is GREAT '' , the Czar said . 
Those who feel the Federal Government and President Obama should do more , exactly what do you think they should do ? 
1 -RRB- prosecute BP for criminal acts 2 -RRB- ban all gulf drilling 3 -RRB- put more government money into clean up 4 -RRB- all of the above or other ideas ? 
Now , have any of you in the past said we need smaller government , government needs to stay out of the way of business , or business needs less regulation ? 
What part of the `` blame '' do we assign the American voters who have been less than enthusiastic regarding renewable energy and weening our selves off of petroleum products ? 
Why blame the government when many of you could be heard chanting , `` Drill baby , Drill '' ? 
They are making promises they are not keeping . 
Tallahasee , FLA has oil now . 
And guess what ... . 
the oil is traveling under the booms . 
Next stop on the train wreck of BP ... Posted by : TheBabeNemo | June 7 , 2010 7:10 PM | Report abuse note in the post not one single word about trying to STOP the leak `` I 'm curious . 
Those who feel the Federal Government and President Obama should do more , exactly what do you think they should do ? 
1 -RRB- prosecute BP for criminal acts 2 -RRB- ban all gulf drilling 3 -RRB- put more government money into clean up 4 -RRB- all of the above or other ideas ? 
Now , have any of you in the past said we need smaller government , government needs to stay out of the way of business , or business needs less regulation ? 
Perhaps I 'm naive or just old fashioned but I refuse to the follow this path . 
But it 's clear that many of the comments here do take that path . 
Almost as sad as the environmental disaster now unfolding in the GOM . 
As one comment here notes , there is plenty of blame to go around . 
That is so very correct . 
BP 's certainly at the top but the regulators failed in several areas , particularly the MMS . 
But knowing that and accepting it in no way can be translated to Obama-bashing or name calling . 
No President can know everything the Administration is doing , or NOT doing . 
Plus the President has to find ways to keep the system working , which sometimes involves compromises and deal making . 
After all if Mr. Obama had on his second day in office stopped all deep-water GOM drilling and there followed a shortage of gasoline for the US we 'd be reading the results of a poll about that crisis today , probably with just as many comments about how the President had failed , ca n't be trusted , and is a fool . 
It 's just not possible to make all people happy all the time . 
That 's begs the question , of course of just how long would most Americans sit still and accept gas rationing to prevent further such disasters , especially if this rationing interfered with getting to work , going on vacation , or going to see the __________ play ? 
We are entering day 50 , and for Pete 's sake , still do not know who is in charge -- the retired Coast Guard Admiral is doing his best , but have an idea that the munchkins in Washington are holding him back . 
Does Obama just not understand that his weakness is being observed with interest by our adversaries ?? What will he do if Iran starts a problem with Israel ? 
BLAME IT ON BUSH ?????? Oh -- understand that Obama is going to feign ` toughness ' with Brian Williams on June 8 -- telling Williams that he meets with his people and scientists to determine ` whose `` butts '' to kick ' ! 
Hope Williams had the good sense to ask him who he as kicked !! Posted by : wheeljc | June 7 , 2010 7:38 PM | Report abuse Chris Matthews just did a segment on Hard Ball and blamed the whole Gulf Oil Spill fiasco on Dick Cheney and Halaberton . 
The first task is to stop the flow of oil and cap the damaged well . 
Second comes the clean-up and environmental remediation . 
Then come the bills , followed by the lawyers . 
If she decides upon a legal career , my third-grade granddaughter may be among those lawyers who will become involved with the future litigation that is bound to smother the courts . 
She may be near retirement -LRB- although lawyers never retire -RRB- when everything is resolved . 
There are many questions yet to be answered . 
There are many allegations that have to be proven . 
There are many contractual agreements that have to be examined and interpreted . 
By the time the questions are answered , litigated , appealed , and appealed some more , our current President will be a former President with a library to his name . 
BP probably will not exist in its present form , and the brown pelicans probably will again be thriving in their native habitat . 
We 'll all should be smarter about the risks of deep-water drilling and hopefully be less demanding of fossil fuel . 
In the meantime , focus on the present -- and do it quickly . 
Obama s speech is still on You-Tube . 
These books are in the Jewish part of the Bible , the Old Testament , which is also part of the Christian Bible . 
Note that Obama has never even CRITICIZED the Koran , much less MOCKED it . 
Deuteronomy 28 , in the very book Obama mocked by name , pronounces specific curses : 15 However , if you do not obey the LORD your God and do not carefully follow all his commands and decrees I am giving you today , all these curses will come upon you and overtake you team obama confusion and stupidity ?? 20 The LORD will send on you curses , confusion and rebuke in everything you put your hand to , until you are destroyed and come to sudden ruin because of the evil you have done in forsaking him ineffective failed stimulus billions unable to produce any jobs ??? 38 You will sow much seed in the field but you will harvest little , because locusts will devour it . 
39 You will plant vineyards and cultivate them but you will not drink the wine or gather the grapes , because worms will eat them . 
40 You will have olive trees throughout your country but you will not use the oil , because the olives will drop off . 
foreign debt loss of national sovereignty ??? 43 The alien who lives among you will rise above you higher and higher , but you will sink lower and lower . 
44 He will lend to you , but you will not lend to him . 
He will be the head , but you will be the tail . 
but like an infomerical -- theres more obama calls more curses down on his head by his ceaseless nonstop political attacks on israel assuring the curses in genesis 12 and 27 then finally obama demands israel cede jerusalem incurring the specific curse in zechariah : Zechariah 12:3 -LRB- New International Version -RRB- 3 On that day , when all the nations of the earth are gathered against her , I will make Jerusalem an immovable rock for all the nations . 
All who try to move it will injure themselves . 
like the mayor of las vegas said obama is a real slow learner Posted by : ProCounsel | June 7 , 2010 8:06 PM | Report abuse 1 . 
The situation would be a lot better now if President Obama had , within one week of the oil rig explosion , simply sent a squad of Marines backed by the US Navy to close down every BP oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico and assure the American people that they would remain closed until the underwater gusher was shut down , the oil pollution cleaned up , and the investigation into what went wrong was complete . 
BP has insufficient incentives to resolve this mess and as the trillion dollar catastrophe matures , public expectations will develop for the federal government to step in to manage the cleanup and bear the costs , however vast . 
BP 's army of attorneys are cagily anticipating that development and noting Exon 's success in stalling reimbursements for cleanup expenses . 
Some are still pending . 
Default Engineering is a simple process of designing devices , in the absence of intelligent direction or power resources , to respond in a way that minimizes dangers , costs , and inconvenience . 
An elementary example is a refrigerator door , when abandoned , will use abundant gravity and careful balancing to close itself . 
The BP\/Halliburton blowout preventer was apparently devoid of any default engineering and no amount of surface meddling could make the valves on the device close . 
An effective , well-engineered blowout preventer would have cost a few thousand dollars more , but instead the United States has a trillion dollar disaster on its hands and we can ill afford the cost of an effective clean up . 
Is Attorney General Holder prosecuting any of the MMS staff for their dereliction of duty ? 
And have those clowns ever heard of default engineering ? 
This must change , obviously . 
BP was greedy and brought this upon the Gulf . 
BP has rejected other solutions , choosing instead solutions which seem to allow for later use of the well , rather than an immediate and permanent sealing of it . 
Obviously , the govenment has to create a specialized deep water emergency operations to deal with wells like this in the future . 
The current law has to changed to allow the feds to take over without incurring liability to the well owner , which is not what the situation is now . 
Had Obama taken charge brought in the Navy , Marines , and seized control of BP assets and employees , and failed , the disaster would have been the taxpayers from the day he acted , not BPs . 
Now , if we take over because of its continued failures , BP is still liable . 
I wonder what King George II would have done ? 
Set off a bomb to seal it , and really released the oil flow ? 
There is a company called NALCO . 
Goldman Sachs , Blackstone and Apollo all purchased NALCO . 
NALCO is based in Chicago with subsidiaries in Brazil , Russia , India , China and Indonesia . 
NALCO is associated with the University of Chicago Argonne program . 
The Obamas both worked for the University of Chicago . 
UChicago Argonne received $ 164,000,000 in stimulus funds this past year and just added two new executives to its roster : one from NALCO , the other from the Illinois Department of Education . 
If you dig a little deeper you will find NALCO is also associated with Warren Buffett , Maurice Strong , Al Gore , Soros , Apollo , Blackstone , Goldman Sachs , Hathaway Berkshire . 
Warren Buffet\/Hathaway Berkshire increased their holdings in NALCO just last November . 
-LRB- Timing is everything -RRB- . 
The dispersant chemical is known as Corexit . 
What it does is hold the oil below the water s surface . 
It is supposed to break up the spill into smaller pools . 
It is toxic and banned in Europe . 
NALCO says they are using older and newer versions of Corexit in the Gulf Posted by : yourmomscalling | June 7 , 2010 8:47 PM | Report abuse On what grounds would the US Government have to file criminal charges when no laws were actually broken ? 
How can the US point any blame at all when the regulators were exposed to be in the oil companies ' pockets ? 
Pray tell , who do you suppose set up those relationships ? 
Is BP considered such a behemoth now that we are to believe they came over and set up these cozy friendships with our regulators ? 
Wake up and smell the crude . 
Here everyone is a master engineer with all the answers if people would just listen to them . 
Here everyone has figured out how it is all just one big conspiracy to screw the common man and make the fat cats richer . 
Tying NALCO with the University of Chicago and Obama is classic . 
I would say that post exemplifies `` crackpot '' in its grandest display if I did n't think the poster was actually trying to be funny . 
One thing is for certain ... reading through some of the comments truly shows the base level of intelligence in this country . 
Make them work to clean up the mess , wearing leg irons . 
And I do mean all of them . 
The clowns surfing porn sites instead of doing their jobs . 
The big-business-first politicians who made the system fail . 
Secret energy policy writers who refused to be accountable -LRB- I mean Cheney -RRB- . 
The meat puppet who let all of this happen -LRB- I mean 43 and his staph -RRB- . 
This is n't a BP disaster . 
This is an oil industry disaster . 
Why are n't other companies pitching in to help ? 
It would be good publicity for them . 
But other companies are just as responsible . 
Transocean owned the platform . 
They have some responsibility , too . 
-LRB- I say that as a stock holder . -RRB- 
Halliburton -LRB- Cheney surfaces again -RRB- performed work on this platform just before the failure . 
And the equipment company who made , installed and maintained the faulty blowout protector , they are responsible , too . 
Where is the accountability for these people ? 
But listening to the rants and raves and the current government is the culprit . 
The right-wingers are rewriting history again and the leftist are letting them get away with it . 
Do none of these people care about the truth of the matter ? 
Are they really so eager to search out scapegoats and skip past the truth ? 
After all , the truth of the matter is that after the criminal neglect of their duty , both on the part of the previous Administration AND the MMS , there is no way the current Administration could have done any better . 
The damage done under Bush and Cheney is just too great . 
Thanks to them , NO agency of the US government has the equipment or the expertise to clean up major oil spills . 
What expertise there is , is among the oil companies . 
This is a sad situation , of course . 
But this IS the damage Bush and Cheney have done . 
What is worse , it is n't even close to all the damage they have done to our environment and energy industry . 
It is just the tip of the iceberg . 
Why , the damage is so great , I 'll bet there are people at BP who now wish they had had the government insisting on that acoustic switch after all . 
The switch is expensive , but it cost a LOT less than cleanup will cost ! 
And even the most short sighted exec at BP must have known that Republicunning pampering of the oil industry was not going to last forever : surely they knew the next Administration would be much more willing to hold their feet to the fire to make them pay for the damage -- and then some . 
So yes , they should have known that saving the money by skipping the switch was a false economy , one that now is costing them a LOT more than the cost of that switch . 
However , I do n't really understand this whole Obama 's handling of the crisis issue . 
Do people want him to dive in and close the leak himself ? '' 
He would do far worse damage to the country down there than he 's doing up here . 
Barack Hussein Obama , mmm , mmm , mmm is every bit the failure some predicted him to be . 
Unfortunately , there is no way to have an intelligent discussion with all those racist haters . 
Right wing tactics work , for about 30 % of the US population . 
Keep on watching FOX News and enjoy your trailers and outhouses . 
Oh , the inconsistencies of it all . 
I think Obama is a magnificent human being who is doing the very best he can under an incredible burden of trying circumstances ... not the least of which is the wish of the Republicans that he `` fail '' . 
You think McCain\/Palin could have even begun to handle this ? 
No wonder it refuses to tell -- each barrel is worth royalty money it owes , so the lower the figure BP says is flowing into the Gulf of Mexico , the lower its liability to the American taxpayer . 
What a cheap and corrupt company BP is . 
After the blowout is plugged and it pays the cleanup costs , the company should be sued for royalties , then kicked out of America . 
$ 100 million is a drop in a bucket to them and they can just pass on the cost to drivers . 
If found guilty of negligence or wrong doing the penalty should be the same as if you or I were negligent and bankrupted thousands of people and killed off co-workers and millions of animals . 
We would be sued for all we owned and spend the rest of our lives in prison . 
Since the Supreme Court recently declared that Corporations -LRB- foreign and domestic -RRB- are equal to us U.S. citizens for elections then the CEO and Board members should be treated equally to us in a criminal case . 
Is n't that right Justices Scalia , Roberts , and Thomas ? 
Author , `` Diary From the Dome , Reflections on Fear and Privilege During Katrina '' Posted by : patriotpaul | June 8 , 2010 3:47 AM | Report abuse Can someone please explain how the same people who are constantly calling for government to get out of their lives and stop bailing out failing companies are criticizing the government for not taking over the recovery effort from BP ? 
You ca n't have it both ways . 
A point in every direction is the same as no point at all . 
Products from all four companies should be boycotted . 
Here , there 's good news to tell you : The company recently launched a number of new fashion items ! ! 
Fashionable and welcome everyone to come buy . 
If necessary , welcometo : Handbags -LRB- Coach l v f e n d i d & g -RRB- $ 35 Posted by : itkonlyyou112 | June 10 , 2010 11:28 PM | Report abuse Dear customers , thank you for your support of our company . 
Here , there 's good news to tell you : The company recently launched a number of new fashion items ! ! 
Fashionable and welcome everyone to come buy . 
If necessary , welcometo : Handbags -LRB- Coach l v f e n d i d & g -RRB- $ 35 Posted by : itkonlyyou112 | June 10 , 2010 11:29 PM | Report abuse Dear customers , thank you for your support of our company . 
Here , there 's good news to tell you : The company recently launched a number of new fashion items ! ! 
Fashionable and welcome everyone to come buy . 
If necessary , Handbags -LRB- Coach l v f e n d i d & g -RRB- $ 35 Posted by : itkonlyyou112 | June 10 , 2010 11:30 PM | Report abuse Dear customers , thank you for your support of our company . 
Here , there 's good news to tell you : The company recently launched a number of new fashion items ! ! 
Fashionable and welcome everyone to come buy . 
If necessary , Handbags -LRB- Coach l v f e n d i d & g -RRB- $ 35 Posted by : itkonlyyou112 | June 10 , 2010 11:32 PM | Report abuse Dear customers , thank you for your support of our company . 
Here , there 's good news to tell you : The company recently launched a number of new fashion items ! ! 
Fashionable and welcome everyone to come buy . 
If necessary , welcometo : Handbags -LRB- Coach l v f e n d i d & g -RRB- $ 35 Posted by : itkonlyyou112 | June 10 , 2010 11:35 PM | Report abuse Dear customers , thank you for your support of our company . 
Here , there 's good news to tell you : The company recently launched a number of new fashion items ! ! 
Fashionable and welcome everyone to come buy . 
If necessary , welcometo : Handbags -LRB- Coach l v f e n d i d & g -RRB- $ 35 Posted by : itkonlyyou112 | June 10 , 2010 11:36 PM | Report abuse Dear customers , thank you for your support of our company . 
Here , there 's good news to tell you : The company recently launched a number of new fashion items ! ! 
Fashionable and welcome everyone to come buy . 
If necessary , welcometo : Handbags -LRB- Coach l v f e n d i d & g -RRB- $ 35 Posted by : itkonlyyou112 | June 11 , 2010 12:02 AM | Report abuse come on , we are Americans - ww2 mobilize ! 
Think crinoid -RRB- precast concrete rings , ship e.g. barge Mississippi , palce over leak , stack and bring OIL to surface . 
@ 10 feet thick approx . 
We must find way to fix this thing , if for no other reason so we can move on to the next big thing . 
Stuff lady gaga in the opening and have her inflate her ego . 
No mention of the annular bad drilling mud which caused the blowout . 
No mention of the nipple-down bop nipple-up surface casing solution . 
55 days of oil spilled due to media lies . 
