D.C. lawyers handling oil spill-related litigation Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
The controversy over the April 20 explosion that killed 11 workers and sent oil gushing into the Gulf of Mexico is spilling into Washington as BP and others enlist help from the city 's lawyers and lobbyists to deal with a growing list of civil suits , government inquiries and federal investigations . 
Here 's a look at some of the key players on the legal front . 
The chair of WilmerHale 's public policy and strategy practice group and a member of the firm 's controversy department , Gorelick has represented the oil giant in prior hearings on Capitol Hill . 
Prior to joining the firm in 2003 , Gorelick was the vice chair of mortgage giant Fannie Mae for five years , but it is her long tenure as second-in-command in the Clinton administration 's Justice Department that makes her an appealing choice for companies in crisis . 
She is also currently representing financier Steven Rattner , who oversaw the government bailouts of Chrysler and General Motors , in the Securities and Exchange Commission 's investigation into whether he paid off officials to win business from New York 's pension fund . 
Thomas H. Milch , Arnold & Porter The chairman of Arnold & Porter , who will be representing BP on the environmental aspects of the Deepwater Horizon spill , has a wealth of experience handling environmental lawsuits brought by private parties . 
As the former head of the firm 's environmental practice group , Milch counseled companies on environmental compliance issues , advised corporations about lawsuits brought under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and has recently focused his practice on remedial measures taken at ecologically contaminated sites . 
In addition to matters he has handled for clients , Milch has been a member of the American Bar Association 's committee on environmental law , chaired an ABA committee on environmental litigation and served on the boards of the Environmental Law Institute , Wildlife Trust International and Resolve , a nonprofit dispute resolution group that handles environmental matters . 
John H. Beisner and Ivan A. Schlager , Skadden , Arps , Slate , Meagher & Flom The two Skadden partners will be representing drilling rig owner Transocean in front of Congress . 
Schlager heads the firm 's Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States practice ; Beisner is co-head of Skadden 's mass torts and insurance group . 
Beisner , who joined Skadden from O'Melveny & Myers last year , has a history representing corporations in a variety of high-profile crisis situations , including Merck in the Vioxx painkiller lawsuits , Bank of America in its settlement with state attorneys general over troubled Countrywide mortgages and Ford Motor in litigation over faulty Firestone tires . 
Schlager has a depth of experience developing regulatory strategies during multinational mergers and acquisitions , but it is his work representing corporations during congressional and government investigations , including Fox Broadcasting and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios , that likely appealed to Transocean as it faces multiple government inquiries . 
William K. `` Bill '' Brewster , Capitol Hill Consulting Group 
