An intriguing aspect of the BP oil spill is that , before the accident , deepwater drilling seemed to be a technological triumph . 
About 80 percent of the Gulf of Mexico 's recent oil production has come from deepwater operations , defined as water depths exceeding 1,000 feet . 
In 1996 , that was 20 percent . 
Jack-up rigs , which are oil platforms on stilts in a few hundred feet of water , have given way to the `` mobile offshore drilling unit '' -LRB- MODU -RRB- . 
It keeps its position through the interaction of global positioning satellites and on-board engines that activate directional propellers to offset ocean currents and wind . 
Seismology and submersible robotic technology have also advanced . 
The Deepwater Horizon rig was not testing new limits . 
It was drilling in about 5,000 feet of water when others have approached 10,000 feet . 
The safety record was good . 
The American Petroleum Institute , the industry 's main trade group , says that since 1947 , oil companies have drilled more than 42,000 wells in the Gulf of Mexico and recovered about 16.5 billion barrels of oil . 
Against that , spills totaled about 176,000 barrels from 1969 to 2007 . 
In a typical year , it was a few hundred barrels . 
By contrast , recent production is about 1.6 million barrels a day . 
Cost-cutting by BP , careless rig operators and lax regulators have all been fingered as plausible culprits in the blowout . 
President Obama has appointed a commission to investigate the causes , and the Justice Department has launched a criminal investigation . 
There will be extensive analyses . 
But the stark contrast between the disaster 's magnitude and the previous safety record points to another perverse possibility : The success of deepwater drilling led to failure . 
Continuing achievements obscured the dangers . 
This pattern applies to other national setbacks . 
Consider the financial crisis . 
It was not the inherent complexity of subprime mortgages or collateralized debt obligations -LRB- CDOs -RRB- that caused the crisis . 
It was the willingness of presumably sophisticated investors to hold these securities while ignoring the complexity and underlying risks . 
But this behavior was understandable at the time . 
The economy seemed to have become less risky . 
High inflation had been suppressed . 
Since 1982 , there had been only two relatively mild recessions , those of 1990-91 and 2001 . 
Economists talked of the `` Great Moderation . '' 
The stock , bond and foreign exchange markets had become less volatile ; day-to-day price movements were smaller and less erratic . 
One study of the 2004-06 period found that stock market volatility in seven advanced countries had dropped about a third from historical averages and that bond market volatility was down almost a fifth . 
Well , if the economy and markets had become less risky , then traders and investors could take what once would have seemed greater risks to increase profits . 
They did -- and created new vulnerabilities for markets and the economy . 
The belief that past economic and financial instability had been quelled encouraged future instability . 
Or take the Toyota scandal . 
Few auto companies enjoyed as envious a reputation . 
Toyota consistently did well in surveys of reliability and customer satisfaction . 
This success -- and the resulting image inside the company and among government officials -- helps explain why Toyota reacted so slowly to problems with its accelerators and why government officials were not more assertive . 
Problems were minimized because they seemed out of character for Toyota . 
One theory of the oil spill is that the deepwater technology is inherently so complex and dangerous that it ca n't really be understood or regulated . 
The safety record before the BP spill seems to rebut that . 
The problem is that the system broke down . 
Careless mistakes were made . 
Or regulators were co-opted by industry . 
The post-crisis investigations will presumably fill out the story . 
But they may miss the larger question of why . 
No one has yet suggested that the blowout reflected a previously unknown geological phenomenon -- something in the oil formation -- or a quirk of technology that no one could have anticipated . 
Perhaps studies will reveal one or the other . 
But the prevailing assumption is that this accident was preventable , meaning that human error was responsible There 's a cycle to our calamities or , at any rate , some of them . 
Success tends to breed carelessness and complacency . 
People take more risks because they do n't think they 're taking risks . 
The regulated and the regulators often react similarly because they 've shared similar experiences . 
The financial crisis did n't occur so much because regulation was absent -LRB- many major financial institutions were regulated -RRB- but because regulators did n't grasp the dangers . 
They , too , were conditioned by belief in the Great Moderation and lower financial volatility . 
It is human nature to celebrate success by relaxing . 
The challenge we face is how to acknowledge this urge without being duped by it . 
