WASHINGTON\/VENICE , Louisiana | Thu Jun 24 , 2010 7:26 pm EDT WASHINGTON\/VENICE , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Obama administration lost a legal skirmish on Thursday when a judge refused to put on hold his decision lifting a ban on deepwater oil drilling imposed after the worst spill in U.S. history . 
After striking down the moratorium on Tuesday , a federal judge in New Orleans rejected a request to allow the six-month ban to stand while the government appeals his decision . 
Judge Martin Feldman issued a brief order denying the stay request , pointing to his previous ruling that criticized the ban as arbitrary , far-reaching and unjustified given the impact on thousands of oil industry workers and communities . 
The government has appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and can ask it to stay Feldman 's decision . 
It is also revising the ban to make it more flexible and possibly open some areas to drilling , but has not said when it will issue a new moratorium . 
Feldman 's latest ruling was more unwelcome news for the administration , which has been on the defensive over what critics call a slow and ineffective response to the 66-day-old spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The government imposed the moratorium after a well owned by BP Plc ruptured on April 20 , unleashing millions of gallons of crude into the sea , one of the biggest environmental catastrophes to hit the United States . 
But the ban , set by President Barack Obama while a commission investigates the causes of the disaster , has been condemned by some on the Gulf Coast , where the economy is closely tied to the energy industry . 
`` I think he 's lost his mind . 
If they shut down the oil fields , I might as well shut down , '' said Joan Strohmeyer , who owns a hotel in Venice , Louisiana . 
The spill has shut down rich fishing grounds , threatened the Gulf Coast 's tourism industry , tarred beaches and killed hundreds of turtles and birds and dozens of dolphins . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar told lawmakers in Washington the government was aware of the moratorium 's impact on the Gulf Coast economy , but he said the ban was necessary `` until we get to a level where we can provide a sense of safety to the American people that drilling can in fact continue . '' 
Oil companies say the government has not proven the need for a blanket ban on deep sea drilling and warn it will lead to major layoffs . 
Judge Feldman agreed and in his ruling on Tuesday sharply rebuked the U.S. government . 
BP SHARES HIT NEW LOW The spill has undermined investor confidence in BP , a staple of British pension funds , as estimated clean-up costs soar . 
The British energy giant has seen its shares lose almost half their value since the spill . 
BP 's U.S.-listed shares closed down 3.13 percent at $ 28.74 in New York trading on Thursday , hitting a new year-low . 
The company 's stock lost 2.47 percent in London . 
Analysts said investors were reacting to news that the U.S. government was reviewing the environmental impact of BP plans to drill in Alaska . 
`` Think about it . 
How many holes can you have in a bucket ? 
There are just too many problems , '' said Joe Saluzzi , co-manager of trading at Themis Trading in Chatham , New Jersey . 
Shareholders are also worried about how much BP will ultimately have to pay for cleaning up the mess in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Under U.S. political pressure , it agreed last week to set up a $ 20 billion fund to pay damages to oil spill victims . 
BP also faces more than 240 spill-related lawsuits , most filed on behalf of businesses , including commercial fishermen , shippers and resort operators , according to the Westlaw database . 
Westlaw is a unit of Thomson Reuters . 
But at its current levels BP 's share price is attracting some interest -- fund managers who focus on undervalued and unloved stocks have started buying BP shares . 
The purchases seem small so far and some portfolio managers are still analyzing whether the company will come out of the disaster intact , managers speaking at the Morningstar annual investing conference in Chicago said on Thursday . 
BP said its oil-capture systems at the leak collected or burned off 16,830 barrels of oil on Wednesday , a 38 percent drop from Tuesday 's record rate of 27,100 , after an underwater accident forced a 10-hour shutdown . 
With the hurricane season having officially started on June 1 , BP is keeping an eye on stormy weather , which could hamper its clean-up and containment efforts . 
The U.S. National Hurricane Center said a tropical wave over the western Caribbean Sea could develop into a tropical depression over the next couple of days as it moves toward the Gulf of Mexico . 
Most weather models forecast it would move toward the southern Texas and Mexico coasts . 
Earlier , some models had projected the wave would move toward the BP clean-up operation in the central U.S. Gulf Coast . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
There is way too much pressure to cap it with mud or cement . 
Come on BP don t make a bad situation worse . 
Use a one million lb malleable lead tapered cap . 
You will have to cut loose the Blowout Preventer first using a CLEAN CUT . 
Stop the insane dispersants . 
It is worse than cleaning the oil on the surface , way worse . 
If BP wants to collect the oil , perhaps they should consider using a capture pipe to the surface the same size or larger then the pipe installed at the Blow-Out Preventer instead of the `` Garden Hose '' They are using now . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
