Options trader Nassim Nicholas Taleb made his name and career anticipating the powerful historic events he calls `` Black Swans , `` which include World War I , the rise of the Internet and the stock market crash of 1987 . 
In two books published in 2001 and 2007 , he urges readers to concentrate more on what they do n't know than on what they do . 
More recently , Taleb has blasted bankers and economists who issued reassuring forecasts right up to the brink of the current global financial crisis . 
He spoke recently with Washington Post reporter Peter Whoriskey . 
Excerpts : You 're a fierce critic of the entire field of economics . 
Do n't economists know anything ? 
You have close to a million people out there in economic life . 
How many people saw the extent of what could happen in this financial crisis ? 
Some people said we 'd have a problem of too much leverage , but very few saw the potential total impact that could come out of it . 
They did n't see the cascading effects that can be produced by a complex system . 
Years ago , I noticed one thing about economics , and that is that economists did n't get anything right . 
I wanted to find out the reason . 
They would say their models are not perfect . 
But data show that you do much worse using their models than you would without them . 
It 's a bull -LRB- expletive -RRB- science . 
Can you give a specific example ? 
Every time I saw -LRB- Federal Reserve Chairman Ben -RRB- Bernanke -LRB- on television -RRB- , I would have a fit of rage . 
He claimed that we were in a period of `` great moderation . '' 
He did not understand that Black Swans are preceded by low volatility and the buildup of hidden risks . 
He mistook absence of volatility for the absence of risk . 
It was like someone sitting on dynamite and saying `` It 's okay , we 're safe because nothing has happened . '' 
In a complex system , things that are fragile should be allowed to fail very fast . 
-LRB- Former Fed Chairman Alan -RRB- Greenspan and Bernanke let something fragile , like the banks , survive very long . 
The longer it takes to break , the worse the outcome . 
That 's why I think Obama needs to start with a new economic team -- Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and Lawrence Summers were among those who did n't see this coming in the first place . 
He needs new people who understand complex systems . 
What about economist Nouriel Roubini ? 
Was n't he calling attention to the potential danger ? 
