Jailed militia leader counselled ex-foes Friday 27 May 2005 00.01 BST When Sheikh Ali Bapir saw his fellow prisoners at the US-run detention center near Baghdad airport he was angry . 
They were the men he had fought against most of his life . 
Now he was in prison with them . 
He knew their faces from TV : Ali Hassan al-Majid , aka Chemical Ali , the alleged mastermind of gas attacks on the Kurds and of the brutal suppression of the Shia ; Taha Yassin Ramadan , the former Iraqi vice-president and a confidante of Saddam Hussein ; Tariq Aziz , the former deputy prime minister in the Ba'athist regime ; and Barzan al-Tikriti , Saddam 's half-brother . 
In the near distance , separated from the others by a barbed wire fence , was Saddam . 
Released without charge at the end of last month after 22 months in custody , Sheikh Ali , 44 , the leader of the Komala Islami Kurdistan -LRB- Kurdistan Islamic group -RRB- , spoke to the Guardian about his encounters with the former Iraqi leadership . 
`` Why did you put me in here with criminals and mass murderers ? '' 
he would ask of his interrogators . 
`` I have never been a Ba'athist and I am not a terrorist . 
I even killed my brother because he spied for the Iraqi intelligence . '' 
But as the weeks progressed , he channelled his rage into pity and became a spiritual guide to the ex-Ba ` athist leaders , teaching them the Qur ` an and leading them in prayer . 
`` At first I was hostile to them , '' he said . 
`` What they did to my people and the Iraqi people in general was not to be forgiven . 
But they were also in prison and in a weak position . 
It was my duty under Islam to show mercy , even to these people who had never shown mercy to others . '' 
Sheikh Ali was reluctant to talk about individuals but said many of the former leaders looked like `` broken men '' . 
His sermons and counselling had an effect . 
`` Some of them did recognize their mistakes . 
Some of them told me they would go to their cells and open the Qur ` an and cry because now they made sense of what they did and how horrifying were the results of their actions . '' 
Saddam was in a separate part of the prison , and even though the sheikh could see him , they never spoke . 
Before the war , Sheikh Ali and his 3,000 followers were based in the Kurdish town of Khormal . 
Like many political leaders who fought against the regime , he also commanded a militia - of about 1,000 men - which controlled a mountain area of north-eastern Iraq close to the Iranian border . 
Sheikh Ali opposed terrorism and advocated ties with the west . 
But his territory abutted the region controlled by the mili tant group Ansar al-Islam . 
Sheikh Ali was accused of helping the group by allowing Ansar 's guerrillas to take refuge in his areas . 
In the first days of the war to remove Saddam , US cruise missiles hit his two-storey compound , killing 43 of his followers and wounding at least 50 . 
The Americans apologised later but offered no compensation . 
In July 2003 he arranged to meet US officers at a hotel in the lakeside resort of Dukan to ask for compensation but was arrested on his way there . 
He was flown to Mosul , where he was told he had been arrested on four counts : of planning to attack US forces ; of helping Ansar al-Islam ; of having links to the previous Ba'athist regime ; and of having relations with Iran . 
`` I told them that the charges were baseless and asked them to produce evidence . 
They were clearly clueless about my participation in the resistance to Saddam , and about my pronouncements against Ansar , '' he said . 
Sheikh Ali had broadly supported the war to remove Saddam . 
For the first nine days he was interrogated `` perhaps 50 times , day or night '' , after which he was transferred to the prison containing `` high value detainees '' . 
He said he was tortured but refused to go into details . 
`` I do n't want to explain . 
I will only tell you the consequences of the torture . 
When I went to prison my weight was 75kg -LRB- 165lbs -RRB- but after nine days I had lost 15kg . 
and my heartbeat was very quick . 
I told everything to the Red Cross . '' 
His prison cell was 2.5 metres by 2.5 metres -LRB- 8ft by 8ft -RRB- . 
`` It had a bed , a blanket , a big strong door , and no windows . 
Much of the time there was no electricity , no lights , '' he said . 
`` At the beginning I spent 23 hours inside my cell . '' 
After several months , he was allowed out of his cell for longer periods . 
`` During the break , we would pace along an open-air corridor , '' he said . 
`` For the first four months we were not even allowed to say hello to other prisoners ; we had to keep our distance by a few metres from them . 
If we broke those rules they would take away our exercise privileges . '' 
Later the rules were relaxed . 
`` They gave us chairs so we could sit next to each other and talk to each other , '' he said . 
He received his first letter seven months after his arrest but was not allowed a phone call until a year later . 
There were no newspapers . 
`` We got some information from our guards , '' he said . 
`` For example I knew when Saddam arrived . 
And I used to see him when he was being taken to the doctor . 
The guards told me that he talked big words , but that he was often depressed . '' 
The Americans gradually began to understand Sheikh Ali was not a security risk and allowed him to teach classes in religion to the other inmates . 
He described a senior former regime figure who had broken his arm after falling in the shower , and `` was very down , and needed spiritual sustenance '' . 
Some of those he spoke to denied knowledge of the regime 's campaign against the Kurdish areas in the late 1980s , during which 180,000 Kurds were killed . 
`` Some said they did know but it was just a few villages that had been destroyed . '' 
`` One claimed Iraq was not responsible for Halabja -LRB- where 5,000 Kurds were gassed -RRB- , but that it was the Iranians . '' 
After six months of interrogation , the American interrogators were replaced by two Britons . 
`` They informed me immediately that they knew the accusations against me were baseless , '' he said . 
`` But they also informed me that I would be kept in prison for as long as the interests of US national security demanded . '' 
Then one day in April , the director of the prison stores came to him and told him he would soon `` be traveling '' . 
`` It was strange to be told this by the stores manager and not the interrogation officers . 
Perhaps they were somehow ashamed . '' 
The next day he was asked to sign a form , promising to renounce Ba'athism and not mix with Ba'athists after his release . 
`` I told them I 'd prefer to go back to jail than sign this paper , '' he said . 
`` It would darken my name . 
It would be like accepting that I was a Ba'athist . '' 
Now Sheikh Ali hopes to convince Islamists to renounce violence . 
He regards the suicide bombers in Iraq as being foreigners who are `` ignorant '' of Iraq and Islam . 
`` The Qur ` an says it is wrong for even one innocent Muslim to be killed among 100 guilty people , '' he said . 
`` Killing an innocent policeman or other people who are just job seekers is not Islamic . '' 
He also hopes to be able to help convince the west of the mistakes it has made with the Islamic world . 
`` When I was in prison I tried to tell the Americans not to always engage the Islamic world through a process of conflict , '' he said . 
`` It 's like spring water . 
You should allow this spring water to come out from the ground in a natural way . 
But if you try to push it and oppress it , it will take another course and come out of the ground in a very unnatural way . '' 
