` Father ' of Malaysia savages Bush and Blair Mahathir brands US a rogue nation terrorising innocents and stands by claim that Jews ` rule the world by proxy ' Mahathir Mohamad , modern Malaysia 's founding father and moderate Islam 's self-styled champion , denounced the Bush administration yesterday as a `` rogue regime '' bent on terrorising innocent civilians . 
He also said he was disappointed that Tony Blair , who he called a `` proven liar '' , had won re-election after joining the US invasion of Iraq . 
Reflecting the rage felt across the Muslim world over abuse scandals in Afghanistan and Guantnamo Bay , and continuing violence in Palestine and Iraq , Mr Mahathir said President George Bush and other US politicians were `` ignorant '' people who believed might made right - a return to colonial-era `` old thinking '' . 
Speaking to the Guardian at his offices in Putrajaya , near Kuala Lumpur , Mr Mahathir also claimed that the Israeli government had been given a free hand by Washington to continue to expropriate Palestinian land and entrench its control over Jerusalem . 
The war on terror would not end until the Middle East conflict was justly resolved , he said . 
Asked whether he regretted his statement that `` Jews rule the world by proxy '' , which caused an international furore in 2003 , Mr Mahathir said he took nothing back . 
`` US politicians are scared stiff of the Jews because anybody who votes against the Jews will lose elections . 
The Jews in America are supporting the Jews in Israel . 
Israel and other Jews control the most powerful nation in the world . 
And that is what I mean -LRB- about Jews controlling the world -RRB- . 
I stand by that view . '' 
On his balcony overlooking the tower blocks , mosques , bridges and artificial lakes of Putrajaya , Malaysia 's new administrative capital which he created in the 1990s , Mr Mahathir , 79 , cuts a slight , almost self-effacing figure . 
His personal manner is reserved and courteous to a fault . 
Earlier in the day , he had lectured students at his Perdana Leadership Foundation on the importance of education and development in the Muslim world to defend the Islamic faith . 
The problem was not Islam itself , he said , but the many incorrect interpreta tions of the Qur ` an that were exploited by extremists . 
`` Islam is a positive , not a negative force . 
Today most Muslim countries seem incapable of developing good governments , they are always fighting each other , assassinating each other and doing all the wrong things . '' 
Distortions of the Prophet 's teachings had held back the peoples of many Muslim countries , he said . 
But Mr Mahathir 's strongest criticism was directed outwards . 
Even though he retired as Malaysia 's longest-serving prime minister in 2003 , many in the region still regard him as the country 's leader and one of Asia 's most influential voices . 
His anger is undimmed ; his rhetoric flows unstaunched . 
`` The US is the most powerful nation , '' he said . 
`` It can ignore the world if it wants to do anything . 
It breaks international law . 
It arrests people outside their countries ; it charges them under American law . 
`` The US war on terror is a way of terrorising people . 
If you are an Iraqi and you are expecting to be bombed , are n't you terrified ? 
If you have done nothing , if you are an innocent Iraqi citizen and you are expecting any time a rocket to fly in and blow you to pieces , are n't you terrified ? 
`` That is terror -LRB- and -RRB- the US is as guilty of terrorism as the people who crashed their planes into the buildings ... Bush does n't understand the rest of the world . 
He thinks everybody should be a neocon like him . '' 
Mr Mahathir was equally scathing about Israeli policies in Palestine . 
He said his visit to the West Bank last month had been deliberately disrupted by the Israeli government . 
Specifically , he said he was blocked from traveling to Jerusalem and Jenin , scene of some of the worst Israeli violence in 2002 , where he was to open a school funded by Malaysia . 
Israel has denied impeding his visit . 
`` I suppose I was mistaken in thinking that there are parts of Palestine that are under the control of the Palestinians . 
But apparently the Israelis have occupied the whole of Palestine . 
They do anything they like there , '' he said . 
Mr Blair had discredited himself and Britain in Muslim eyes by backing the Iraq war , Mr Mahathir said . 
`` He was wrong and he was more wrong because he tells lies . 
You know , Jack Straw came to see me -LRB- on the eve of the war in January 2003 -RRB- and I asked him , ` Why are you with the Americans ? ' 
He said we 're trying to influence the Americans not to take that kind of action . 
But it seems it was the other way round . 
`` They -LRB- Britain -RRB- were influenced in supporting America to do something that they knew was wrong ... They knew they were being lied to , and yet they supported the Americans and today 300,000 Iraqis are dead because of these lies . 
`` I think a person like Blair would feel very guilty and I am disappointed that the British people would re-elect a person who obviously told lies ... We 're beginning to lose faith in the present leadership of Britain . '' 
One eventual consequence , he suggested , could be Malaysia 's withdrawal from the Commonwealth . 
Malaysia , which is encircled by conflicts in western Indonesia , the Philippines and southern Thailand , fully supported the fight against religious and political fanaticism , he said . 
But the west was going about it the wrong way . 
`` Even if you get Bin Laden , you ca n't be sure there wo n't be another Bin Laden . 
You can not get terrorists to sign a peace treaty . 
The only way to beat terror is to go for the basic causes . 
`` They do n't blow themselves up for no reason , they 're angry , they 're frustrated . 
And why are they angry ? 
Look at the Palestinian situation . 
Fifty years after you created the state of Israel , things are going from bad to worse . 
`` If you do n't settle that , there will be no end to the war on terror . 
For how long are you going to go on examining people 's shoes ? '' 
Mahathir Mohamad , 79 . 
Malaysian prime minister , 1981-2003 . 
Most high-profile of many roles is adviser to national car company , Proton , one of the nation 's flagship industrial enterprises . 
Formally eschews limelight , but still regarded as influential political heavyweight . 
Slagging off western nations at every opportunity . 
Ignoring the International Monetary Fund during the 1997 Asian financial crisis . 
After ridiculing his policies at the time , the IMF has admitted Mr Mahathir 's action proved extremely effective . 
Bringing Formula One motor racing to Malaysia . 
Grand , often wasteful , infrastructure projects . 
These include the Petronas towers - until 2003 the world 's tallest buildings - and Putrajaya , a , purpose-built capital city . 
