Tuesday , July 6 , 2010 ; 9:26 PM Experts say that the newly discovered oil in Lake Pontchartrain near New Orleans is not likely to cause much environmental damage . 
But the presence of tar balls and oil sheen so close to the Big Easy is a psychological blow . 
`` This proves that the oil can come in , '' said John Lopez , director of coastal sustainability for the Lake Pontchartrain Basin Foundation . 
`` It 's kind of , on an emotional level , disconcerting to see this happen . '' 
High seas and strong winds over the weekend pushed the oil into the 630-square-mile lake that borders the city and its major suburbs and is primarily used for recreation . 
Much of the oil gushing from the Deepwater Horizon explosion more than two months ago has washed ashore near small Gulf Coast towns that are at least a two-hour drive from New Orleans . 
But Lopez said he had long predicted that the leaking crude could make its way into the lake , especially after Tropical Storm Alex churned through the region last week . 
On Friday , one of Lopez 's assistants spotted tar balls along Cat Island , off the coast of Mississippi . 
By Sunday , evidence of the oil had traveled west , to a narrow waterway known as the Rigolets that feeds into Lake Pontchartrain . 
By Monday , tar balls were washing up near the Treasure Isle community in suburban Slidell , on the eastern edge of the lake . 
Lopez said he notified authorities , who had also spotted the oil . 
He estimated the amount at less than 100 barrels -LRB- 4,200 gallons -RRB- and said it was possible that the oil could move farther into the lake . 
In fact , he said , the direction of the wind could push it right up to the small beach near the University of New Orleans , where his office is located . 
He has tasked a staffer to begin walking the beach daily in search of tar balls . 
Because the oil found thus far was a relatively small amount and highly weathered , Lopez said he did not expect it would cause much damage to the lake environment . 
But he said he was most concerned about the impact on the blue crabs , shrimp and fish that live in the lake when they are not in the Gulf . 
His group is seeking $ 7 million to fund a five-year impact study . 
`` It 's a co-dependency , '' he said . 
The wind was causing problems well out to sea as well . 
The area around the leaking wellhead , nearly 50 miles off the Louisiana coast , was buffeted Tuesday by strong , 20-knot winds and resulting waves that topped five feet high Tuesday . 
Those conditions were too rough for most of the `` skimmer '' boats assigned to the gulf , said Thad W. Allen , who has retired as a Coast Guard admiral but has stayed on as the national incident commander for the spill . 
In addition , Allen said , the waves were delaying efforts to hook up a third siphon from the leaking well to a ship on the surface . 
A ship called the Helix Producer has arrived at the site , with the capacity to increase the roughly 25,000 barrels a day -LRB- 1.1 million gallons -RRB- being siphoned from the well to more than 53,000 barrels -LRB- 2.2 million gallons -RRB- . 
But connecting it to the siphon requires workers to descend to a platform just above the water 's surface ; if the waves are too high , the platform might be dangerously unsteady . 
A National Weather Service forecast said waves are expected to remain this high until at least Thursday . 
Allen spoke from BP 's U.S. headquarters in Houston , where he was meeting with the oil company 's leaders about what may be the next step to contain the leaking well . 
That would entail removing the current containment cap , which fits over a stub of pipe leading out of the well 's blowout preventer on the seafloor . 
This cap leaks on purpose : If oil does n't seep out , officials fear that seawater will leak in and create slush-like `` hydrates '' that will gum up the system . 
Allen said the next step is to replace that cap with a tighter-fitting one that would allow no oil to escape . 
But the process could take seven to 10 days , he said , during which oil would leak from the pipe stub . 
Now , he said , officials will debate when -- and whether -- to do it . 
He said that if the Helix Producer brings up enough oil , it may not be necessary to replace the cap . 
`` The question is , do we want to wait and look at the product '' that comes up after the Helix Producer is connected ? 
In addition , Allen said that tar balls found along the Texas coast this week did not appear very weathered , making it unlikely that they had floated from the leaking well . 
Instead , he said , officials believe that they may have been accidentally carried to Texas by vessels working for the cleanup effort . '' 
