Residents in Beirut describe what happened The clashes , between Sunni pro- and anti-Syrian groups , followed the shooting dead on Sunday of two anti-Syrian clerics . 
The violence is the first in Beirut since the conflict began in neighbouring Syria in March last year . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut says the incident shows how divided the Lebanese are over the Syrian crisis . 
It follows a week of clashes in the northern city of Tripoli between anti-Syrian Sunnis and Alawites who support the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . 
Syrian and Lebanese politics have been deeply intertwined throughout the history of the two states . 
Syria , the dominant partner , had a large military presence in Lebanon for 29 years , finally withdrawing soldiers in 2005 , but maintaining a strong influence . 
Political factions in Lebanon have often defined themselves as pro- or anti-Syrian . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut Given how deeply and sharply Lebanon is divided over Syria , it 's a miracle that there has n't been much more violence than there has . 
But the killing of two Sunni clerics at a Lebanese Army checkpoint in the north of the country on Sunday could hardly pass without consequence - though the fallout could have been much greater . 
Only in Beirut did the tension break into open conflict . 
And it was restricted to a clash between Sunni groups , with the mainstream Future faction of Saad al-Hariri using the occasion to squeeze out the small , pro-Syrian Arab Movement Party , whose leader Shaker Berjawi fled . 
In nearby areas of south Beirut , Hezbollah - the most powerful force in the land - kept well out of it . 
Political and religious leaders from all sides urged restraint , while the government pledged a vigorous enquiry into the death of the two shaikhs . 
Divisions over Syria are the defining issue in Lebanese politics . 
Everybody knows how real the danger is that the country would be torn apart if those differences are allowed to erupt freely onto the streets . 
Sunday 's violence was triggered by the shooting dead of two Sunni sheikhs linked to the anti-Syrian Future movement , headed by opposition leader Saad al-Hariri , at a Lebanese army checkpoint in the north on Sunday . 
Supporters of Mr Hariri responded by blocking main roads with burning car tyres , but security forces intervened to clear them . 
In Beirut 's southern district of Tariq al-Jadideh , offices of a local pro-Syrian leader came under attack by gunmen . 
Rocket-propelled grenades and machine-gun fire were heard for much of the night . 
But the clashes died away after the leader , Shaker Berjawi , left the area , and the Lebanese Army moved in . 
Sunni religious and political leaders have called for the utmost restraint , and an investigation has been launched into the killing of the two sheikhs . 
Correspondents say there are fears of a return to the violence seen in clashes between Sunni and Shia Muslims in 2008 which brought the country close to civil war . 
