Oil floats around a rig at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico May 31 . 
-LRB- AP Photo -RRB- Bipartisan pressure is building on the Obama administration to reconsider its ban on new offshore drilling , with Gulf lawmakers decrying the moratorium as an overreaction to the BP oil spill that will compound the economic damage the disaster is inflicting on their states . 
Lawmakers and industry groups warn that the moratorium could cost thousands of jobs and drain hundreds of millions of dollars out of the local economy . 
That 's on top of the billions of dollars studies predict could be lost from hits to the tourism and fishing industries along the Gulf . 
President Obama , in an interview Thursday , defended the decision as necessary to give officials time to figure out what went wrong before the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded April 20 -- killing 11 workers and triggering the historic leak -- and how to prevent such a disaster from happening again . 
`` Until that happens , it would be irresponsible of me to lift that moratorium , '' Obama said on CNN . 
Following conflicting signs from his administration , Obama said that the moratorium only applies to deepwater wells , as opposed to those in shallow water . 
But with the ban on new deepwater drilling extended for a six-month period , lawmakers are adamant that a compromise be reached . 
They are also concerned new restrictions on shallow-water drilling could hinder the local industry . 
`` Obviously we need to learn the lessons from this incident ... but to completely shut down deepwater -LRB- drilling -RRB- and even threaten shallow water is a huge economic blow , '' Sen. David Vitter , R-La . 
, told Fox News on Friday . 
`` And on top of the recession and on top of the hit that the oil is directly making on our economy , that is another big , big economic blow that is going to knock us down . '' 
Vitter suggested the administration instead start an `` immediate and very rigorous '' safety inspection program , while only shutting down those rigs that have problems that ca n't be addressed immediately . 
Vitter said he planned to speak with Obama about the issue during his visit to the Gulf coast Friday -- the president 's third since the oil leak began . 
The senator wrote in a letter to Obama on Thursday that the deepwater drilling ban , which is estimated to affect 33 rigs in the Gulf , could eliminate up to 4,000 Louisiana jobs in the short-term and `` possibly 20,000 jobs throughout the course of the year . '' 
Sen. Mary Landrieu , D-La . 
, warned about the danger of a permanent flight of the industry from the region . 
`` If these big rigs ever leave the Gulf ... it 's not like you can make those every day or every year . 
Some of them take years to build . 
If they leave the Gulf and go drill under long-term contracts off the coast of Africa , they 're not coming home any time soon , '' she said . 
The Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association , a trade group representing oil and gas interests in the Gulf region , estimates that lost wages from all 33 rigs could total $ 330 million per month . 
The National Ocean Industries Association , citing the figures , said in a statement that the six-month moratorium will `` make things much worse by putting more Gulf citizens out of work . '' 
Obama was looking to expand offshore drilling before the BP disaster . 
The explosion led him to rethink that element of his energy plan , as he delayed or canceled lease sales in the Gulf , off the coast of Virginia and off the coast of Alaska . 
The White House on Thursday acknowledged there will be job losses from the moratorium . 
`` I do n't think there 's any doubt , '' Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said . 
But he argued that the commission investigating the incident needs to be able to first determine what `` failsafe '' measures can be implemented to prevent future disasters . 
`` I think that 's important . 
The president thought that was important . 
I think that the citizens of the Gulf think that 's important , '' Gibbs said . 
