MEXICO CITY -- MEXICO CITY -LRB- AP -RRB- -- It started with a burst of gas through the drilling well . 
Workers scrambled to close the safety valves but within moments the platform caught fire and collapsed . 
Tens of millions of gallons of oil gushed into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Numerous attempts to stanch the spill failed . 
Three decades later , the 1979 Ixtoc disaster remains the Gulf 's -- and the world 's -- worst peacetime oil spill . 
The parallels between that disaster and the current BP oil spill offer sobering lessons . 
There were no quick fixes for Ixtoc : It took 10 months to stop the leak , with Mexico 's state-owned oil company , Pemex , trying methods similar to those that BP has attempted at its Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Pemex managed to slow the spill a little using several methods including forcing metal spheres into the well . 
But it could n't stop the leak until two relief wells were drilled -- and even that did n't work right away : the oil kept gushing for another three months after the first well was completed . 
In the end , Ixtoc spewed a record 140 million gallons of oil . 
Massive slicks reached the northern Mexican Gulf coast and Texas , where it would eventually coat almost 170 miles -LRB- 275 kilometers -RRB- of U.S. beaches . 
But the most tragic thing about Ixtoc may be the lessons not learned . 
After the oil stopped gushing and crude was no longer washing up on beaches , funding for research largely dried up and the oil industry missed an opportunity to study the disaster and apply what it learned to future offshore drilling endeavors , said Larry McKinney , the director of the Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies at Texas A&M University . 
`` Unfortunately , from a science standpoint , not much was followed up on , to learn from , '' says McKinney . 
`` That was a mistake that was made that hopefully wo n't be repeated . '' 
So far , Deepwater Horizon has spilled an estimated 21 million to 45 million gallons of oil . 
BP managed to place a funnel-like cap on the well late Thursday with the aim of pumping some crude to the surface , but it was too early to tell if would work or how much oil they could collect . 
If the Pemex disaster serves as a precedent , the BP spill could continue even after the two relief wells are expected to be finished in August . 
By then , it could surpass Ixtoc as the worst oil spill in history , said Tad Patzek , chair of the Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering Department at the University of Texas-Austin . 
`` We are looking at an August time frame for stopping it , '' Patzek said . 
`` If for one reason or another that stopping is left imperfect or it takes another drill or what have you , we 're looking at another four months , at that time this spill would look like the Ixtoc spill . '' 
The BP spill , at a depth of nearly 5,000 feet , is proving more complicated to choke off than Ixtoc , a shallow-water rig about 150 feet deep . 
The Ixtoc well could be accessed directly , while the Deepwater spill must be combated remotely , using robots to wield clamps , saws and other tools while monitoring the action by video feed . 
`` They could fight Ixtoc from and at the surface , '' said Robert Bea , a professor of engineering at University of California at Berkeley who has studied offshore drilling for 55 years and worked for Pemex for a number of years . 
For Deepwater , `` they must fight from the sea floor remotely , from the sea surface miles above . '' 
Most recently , BP tried to stop the gusher by pumping in heavy drilling mud and cement . 
The tactic , called a `` top kill , '' had never been tried 5,000 feet underwater . 
It did n't work . 
The good news is the Ixtoc experience suggests the Gulf of Mexico has natural properties that help it cope with massive oil spills , scientists say . 
Warm waters and sunlight helped break down the oil faster than many expected . 
Weathering reduced much of the oil into tar balls by the time it reached Texas . 
Two decades after the Ixtoc disaster , marine biologist Wes Tunnell sank his diving knife into an area where he had spotted a tar patch just after the spill . 
The blade came out black and tarry but the hardened surface of the patch was under sand , shells and algae that had completely covered it . 
`` No one else would know that it was anything other than a rock ledge , '' said Tunnell of the Harte institute . 
`` I think that the Gulf of Mexico is hugely resilient , or at least it was 30 years ago . 
We 've insulted it a lot since then in various ways . '' 
The Gulf has also long dealt with oil that naturally seeps from the seafloor . 
Some experts estimate that tens of millions of gallons seep into the Gulf from natural up-wellings each year , fostering large populations of oil-eating bacteria and microorganisms . 
However , it is unclear how much any of that will help this time around . 
The Deepwater spill is closer to sensitive coastlines than Ixtoc was . 
And it is affecting Louisiana marshlands that are more sensitive than the more sparsely populated Texan and Mexican coastlines that Ixtoc reached . 
`` Obviously there were some helping factors -- nature , climate , current -- that in the end helped people -LRB- with Ixtoc -RRB- so that 's good news , '' said Patzek . 
`` However ... the Ixtoc well seemed to have been a little farther out from sensitive places . '' 
The depth of the BP spill could also complicate the Gulf 's ability to cope . 
The oil-eating bacterial populations are located mainly on the surface or near shore , where the Ixtoc oil appeared . 
BP has tried to break up the oil deep underwater , pumping chemical dispersants directly into the damaged well . 
That could be a mistake , McKinney said . 
While chemically dispersing the oil keeps the spill less visible and ugly than Ixtoc , it prevents the oil from floating up to the surface where wind , waves , bacteria and sunlight could help break it up , he said . 
And some environmentalists question the safety of the dispersant itself . 
`` I know , out of sight , out of mind , '' McKinney said . 
`` But also , out of sight is what can kill you , like a cancer , and that may be the bigger problem . '' 
Pemex estimates that about half the Ixtoc oil may have burned away in the rig fire that lasted months . 
About a quarter dispersed and the rest was either recovered or evaporated . 
Ixtoc threatened coral , sea turtles , shrimp and commercially valuable fish . 
Some species have rebounded while others have drastically declined . 
Jack Woody , a retired officer with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service , was in northern Mexico a month after the Ixtoc spill , leading the U.S.-Mexico effort to save the Kemp 's ridley sea turtles . 
He watched as the oil slick closed in and tar balls began washing up at the Rancho Nuevo beach , the only significant nesting ground for the female turtles , which had dwindled to a population of about 300 . 
Hatchlings were just emerging , and helicopters desperately tried to ferry the baby turtles to open ocean beyond the slick . 
`` I thought we were too late , '' Woody said . 
The turtle population continued to dwindle until 1988 but has since rebounded to up to 12,000 , due in part to programs to relocate hatchlings to safer beaches in Texas and cut down on turtle deaths in shrimp nets . 
`` I was wrong . 
This is the one time I like to be wrong , '' Woody said . 
Scientists say it is difficult to know how much long-term damage Ixtoc caused because it is hard to separate the effects of the spill from overfishing , sediment , runoff and other pollution . 
Tunnel said his students saw coral islands ringed by oil `` like black doughnuts '' after Ixtoc . 
Many of those islands have since lost most of their coral cover but Tunnel could not say whether the spill was to blame . 
Other causes , he said , could include overfishing of coral-friendly fish , coral collecting and sewage . 
After five years or so , the tar mats on Texas beaches largely disappeared , probably broken up and swept seaward , and Ixtoc was largely forgotten for 30 years , until another explosion on an offshore oil rig in a different part of the Gulf . 
