' I was a woman in a warrior 's world ' General Janis Karpinski was commander of Abu Ghraib prison when the abuse scandal erupted . 
In a memoir out this week she reveals her fury at being made the scapegoat I rarely fell asleep in Baghdad . 
I would collapse on my bunk , pass out from the heat for a few hours , then drag myself out for a pre-dawn run , while it was still only 27C-32C . 
Army leaders did not seem to want me to run , but I ran anyway . 
The senior warriors seeing this reserve general , a woman , running at 4.30 am decided to do something - or maybe it was just a coincidence that they kept changing the rules . 
When they announced that personnel - women especially - were no longer to run by themselves , I had to stifle a laugh . 
Eventually they decided women could run , but not before 6 . 
What was the army protecting me from in this secure base ? 
I continued my pre-dawn runs . 
The 800th Military Police Brigade , which I commanded , was one of a patchwork of reserve units that had come to Iraq to hold prisoners of war . 
But we were now being sent to Baghdad to help restore the Iraqi civilian prison system - a mission the brigade never had prepared for . 
Working in decimated facilities with inadequate supplies and incarcerating robbers , murderers and suspected terrorists was not in our playbook . 
But it was our job . 
We would operate under the auspices of the task force commanded by General Ricardo Sanchez . 
Some commanders , no matter their appearance , radiate dynamism and leadership . 
Sanchez , a dour-looking individual , did not . 
When I went to meet him , the message I got was : over my dead body this female is going to be in charge of all the police operations in this country . 
It turned out that there was one other female general on the ground : a one-star who ran the intelligence staff for Sanchez . 
But I was commanding troops in a combat zone - and that was tough for the combat generals to take . 
Our `` interim '' facility at Abu Ghraib was morphing into our maximum prison for all of Iraq . 
In the summer of 2003 , we had 700-800 prisoners . 
By September , nearly 3,000 . 
By the autumn , 7,000 . 
In short , Abu Ghraib was working well . 
Within a month after taking our first prisoners there , the leader of the military intelligence -LRB- MI -RRB- brigade at the prison , Colonel Thomas Pappas , came to see me . 
His MI specialists were interrogating security detainees 24\/7 . 
His teams harangued the prisoners , and he in turn was harangued by Sanchez to get better information . 
The creeping MI takeover of Abu Ghraib culminated in November , when Sanchez issued an order for the 205th MI brigade , under Pappas , to take tactical control of Abu Ghraib . 
The chain of command was murky . 
I was still in charge of the MP -LRB- military policemen -RRB- guards , but from then on Pappas controlled the life of what had become an intelligence and interrogation center . 
It is still hard to believe that , within a month , the seasoned soldiers of the 372nd MP company , with a previous deployment to Bosnia under their belts , would perpetrate prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib that would shock the world and severely damage America 's standing in the Middle East . 
I can only speculate about what might have happened . 
The MPs of the 372nd found themselves supervising security detainees . 
While these MPs had never handled such prisoners before , the civilian MI interrogators came to the job with worlds of experience and a mandate to crack down . 
The interrogators enlisted the MPs in their cause , a trick imported from Guantnamo . 
Soldiers who had been trained to treat prisoners humanely now heard praise for softening up the interrogation subjects . 
Good job keeping the lights on all night ; good job blasting music incessantly . 
Good job because they 're really talking now . 
No MPs would have known anything about the more sophisticated techniques employed by the intelligence specialists . 
These were aimed at Middle-Eastern Muslim prisoners in particular : the shame of being seen naked , of having a woman see them without clothes , the humiliation of wearing women 's underwear , the fear of dogs . 
Only experienced intelligence operatives could have told the MPs to use such techniques . 
Unfortunately , in Specialist Charles Graner , they found an enthusiastic disciple . 
Graner enlisted his girlfriend , Lynndie England , whom he knew would readily join in the sexual humiliation . 
His supervisor , Staff Sergeant Ivan Frederick , joined in , and the company 's more senior NCOs and officers , who should have seen what was happening , did n't . 
I never had the slightest idea that anything out of the ordinary was happening . 
Neither soldiers nor prisoners reported any infractions , or raised any concerns . 
In retrospect , I have asked myself whether I was tough enough with these subordinates and in my whole approach to leadership in Abu Ghraib . 
Did I spend too much effort trying to take care of my soldiers and devote too little attention to training and disciplining them ? 
When interrogators encouraged these young MPs to `` soften up '' suspected terrorists , they had no relevant training to fall back on . 
Neither Pappas nor I knew what had been happening in cellblock 1A . 
One night in December , an MP named Specialist Joseph Darby was sent there to drop off a document . 
Darby saw a couple of naked detainees and made a hasty exit . 
Then , as he was looking through a disk of images Graner had given him for a record of the unit 's service in Iraq , Darby came upon some of the shocking photos . 
He later slipped a disk under the door of the criminal investigation field office at Abu Ghraib . 
When an agent examined it , he was floored , and the scandal unfolded . 
What could I have done to stop the abuse before it started ? 
Why did I not see something like this coming ? 
When I formally reported to General Sanchez , the commander said not a word . 
I said , `` Sir , when I saw the pictures I was absolutely sickened by them . 
I thought I was going to throw up . '' 
He put his hand up to stop me . 
`` Do you have any idea what this will do to my army ? '' 
`` Sir , I ca n't even begin to understand what these soldiers were thinking . '' 
Again he put up his hand . 
`` This is unacceptable , '' he said . 
He had to be worrying about protecting himself . 
Two months earlier , he had taken away authority over Abu Ghraib -LRB- but not the other prisons -RRB- from me , and handed it to his own intelligence officer , who acted through Colonel Pappas , the intelligence man on the scene . 
Under pressure from Washington to increase the flow of `` actionable intelligence '' against a growing Iraqi insurgency , he had , in effect , cut me out and taken direct control . 
But now things were going sour , he was staking down a sacrificial lamb . 
I did n't leave my meeting with Sanchez chastened . 
All of my career , I had wanted nothing but to serve as a soldier , yet time and again I found myself singled out not as a rising officer , but as a woman . 
Here I was back in that role I could not shake : the woman in a warrior 's world . 
There had to be a prominent scapegoat , and how could I have not seen who it would be ? 
Following Major General Taguba 's investigation , I was formally relieved of my command . 
But President Bush delivered a blow I had not expected at all - vacating my promotion to general and demoting me to colonel . 
It is immensely difficult to accept these verdicts of dishonor from my government and my army , when I know in my heart I do not deserve them . 
Yet I remain immensely proud of my service . 
I was made for a life in the military , and I hope my experiences will ease the way for the women who will follow me in that career . 
Extracted from One Woman 's Army by Janis Karpinski , published by Miramax Books tomorrow . 
