MOSCOW | Thu Sep 1 , 2011 5:45 am EDT MOSCOW -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Russia recognized Libya 's ruling interim council as the country 's legitimate authority on Thursday , moving to increase its influence on postwar reconstruction and protect its economic interests in the oil-producing North African nation . 
`` The Russian Federation recognizes the National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- as the current authorities , '' the Russian Foreign Ministry said on its website www.mid.ru . 
Russia , which was critical of NATO 's operation in Libya , announced its decision as leaders and envoys from world powers and international bodies gathered in Paris to coordinate Libya 's political and economic reconstruction . 
Moscow had billions of dollars worth of arms , energy and infrastructure deals with Libya under its deposed leader Muammar Gaddafi , and Russian officials have expressed concern they could be lost in the transition . 
`` We proceed from the position that all previously agreed treaties and other mutual obligations ... will be implemented in good faith , '' the Foreign Ministry said . 
Russia allowed Western military intervention in Libya to go ahead by abstaining from a U.N. Security Council resolution vote in March , but then repeatedly accused NATO forces carrying out air strikes of overstepping their mandate to protect civilians and of siding with anti-Gaddafi forces in the civil war . 
President Dmitry Medvedev , however , joined Western nations in urging Gaddafi to give up power and made clear he could not seek refuge in Russia . 
Nonetheless , some in Libya have signaled that the new authorities could slight nations like Russia and China in favor of those that gave more support to Gaddafi 's foes . 
Russia 's representative at the Paris talks , Medvedev 's special Africa envoy Mikhail Margelov , said he was confident that would not happen . 
`` I do n't think the new government of Libya will start off by evaluating contracts with Russia on political rather than technical and economic criteria , '' the Interfax news agency quoted Margelov as saying . 
Last week , Medvedev called for talks between Gaddafi 's backers and opponents , and suggested that Russia would recognize the NTC if it was able to `` unite the country for a new democratic start . '' 
The Foreign Ministry statement urged the council to carry out its `` declared reform program , which calls for the development of a new constitution , the holding of general elections and the formation of a government . '' 
Russia 's NATO envoy , Dmitry Rogozin , warned on Wednesday that unity among anti-Gaddafi forces would not last and said further Western military intervention was likely . 
`` As soon as the common enemy is defeated , the opposition will unavoidably meet with internal disagreements , '' Rogozin told Russia Today television . 
`` And I am certain that at that moment certain Western countries will try to provide themselves with a military presence in order to get control over Libya 's oil reserves . '' 
Russian companies Gazprom , Gazprom Neft and Tatneft have invested hundreds of millions of dollars in oil and gas exploration in Libya . 
State-run Russian Railways was building a high-speed railway from Sirte to Benghazi on Libya 's Mediterranean coast under a 2.2 billion euro -LRB- $ 3 billion -RRB- contract awarded during Gaddafi 's rule . 
