Sometime this summer , President Obama will have to start thinking about one of the big decisions of his presidency -- whether to reappoint Ben Bernanke as chairman of the Federal Reserve when his term expires next January . 
What complicates the choice is that the other obvious candidate is Lawrence Summers , the White House economic czar . 
Bernanke has emerged as one of the few heroes of the financial crisis , widely praised for his innovative stewardship of the Fed . 
He 's still something of a sleeper in Washington , so low-key that the frequent descriptions of his `` soft-spoken '' manner do n't do justice to just how quiet he is . 
But in fixing the financial breakdown , he has been a veritable tiger . 
The Bernanke Fed is so much more powerful than its predecessors that it 's almost a different institution . 
Bernanke agreed to sit down for a luncheon interview last week to talk about lessons learned . 
Behind him through the picture window of his private dining room was a majestic view of the Mall , but the Fed chairman was as reserved and fastidious as ever -- even as he described his battle to contain the greatest financial crisis of the past half-century . 
I asked him what message he might leave for his successor to explain what these two tumultuous years have taught him . 
Bernanke offered a surprising answer : For all the computerized financial engineering that preceded the meltdown , he thinks it resembled a classic 19th-century bank panic . 
Investors thought their money was parked in securities that were as safe as bank deposits . 
When these securitized assets proved to be riskier than expected , investors panicked . 
`` We were seeing variants of classic panic behavior , '' Bernanke said , remembering the wild days of 2007 and 2008 , when supposedly safe markets suddenly locked up as frightened investors rushed to get their money out . 
Bernanke recommended studies by Gary Gorton , a Yale economist who has analyzed the ways the recent panic resembled those of the late 19th century . 
In his latest paper , `` Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand , '' Gorton explains that the long-ago panics typically came at the height of the business cycle and involved new information that frightened depositors into withdrawing their money . 
Such bank panics disappeared for nearly 75 years after the enactment of federal deposit insurance in 1934 . 
The panic psychology returned with stunning force in 2007 , when Wall Street suddenly lost confidence in new instruments created by the shadow banking system , such as mortgage-backed securities . 
It 's hard to imagine now , but these exotic instruments were embraced by risk-averse investors such as money-market funds , pension funds and corporate treasuries . 
When that safety proved illusory , people rushed for the exits . 
As Fed chairman , Bernanke scrambled for innovative ways to pump money and confidence back into these markets . 
If one tactic did n't work , he quickly tried another . 
When the panic first hit in August 2007 , Bernanke took the unusual step of sharply cutting the discount rate for lending directly to banks . 
Banks proved wary of using the discount window , so Bernanke created a less-stigmatizing `` Term Auction Facility . '' 
Next came special Fed facilities to bolster money-market funds , the commercial-paper market , mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities -- all with complicated names and strategies . 
But the mission was consistent : to lend into the panic , and to reassure the markets that the Fed was really , truly committed to maintaining liquidity , no matter what . 
Gradually , the panic eased . 
More jury-rigged rescue programs may be on the way . 
Barney Frank , chairman of the House banking committee , is drafting a bill to provide federal insurance for the municipal bond market , which could add hundreds of billions of dollars in new federal obligations . 
The Fed has n't objected , saying this is a fiscal problem for Congress , not a monetary issue . 
A muni bailout would increase the immense debt hanging over the economy and the risk of future inflation . 
The challenge ahead for the Fed is to clean up the debris -- including all the special structures created to contain the crisis . 
Obama will want a Fed chairman who can convince the markets that the central bank will crush inflation , regardless of the short-term pain or the howls from politicians . 
He will need someone who can reverse gears in a hurry and who can say no convincingly . 
Is that person likely to be the quiet radical , Bernanke ; or the outspoken , market-savvy former Treasury secretary , Summers ; or some dark-horse candidate ? 
Each would have strengths and liabilities at a post-crisis Fed , but there 's a strong argument for not changing what , right now , looks like a winning team . 
The writer is co-host of PostGlobal , an online discussion of international issues . 
His e-mail address is davidignatius@washpost.com . 
