Get Wonkbook delivered to your inbox or mobile device every morning . 
It 's like reading it on the blog , only much more convenient . 
Your essential source for the latest news on the intersection of Wall Street and Washington . 
Michael Leachman of the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities argues that the stimulus has created more jobs than recovery . 
Bruce Katz , Emilia Istrate , and Jonathan Rothwell note that rising exports would do a lot for metropolitan areas . 
The Sustainable Defense Task Force proposes cuts to the defense budget . 
Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin compare the Gold Standard and the Euro . 
Flavio Cunha and James Heckman revew research suggesting that non-cognitive skills are important for young people 's life prospects . 
Politics , politicians , big business and the economy Did Bill Clinton Cause the Financial Crisis ? 
I think Bill Clinton makes a persuasive case that it was what he did n't do , rather than what did do , that contributed to the financial crisis . 
There are n't very compelling arguments out there that repealing the Glass-Steagall Act -- the law that separated commercial and investment banking -- contributed much to the crisis . 
Some , in fact , say it did the opposite , as it allowed commercial banks to help stabilize the system by buying investment banks , as happened when J.P. Morgan acquired Bear Stearns . 
But avoiding the regulation of derivatives was a major error . 
And Clinton is pretty honest on that point . 
He thinks Republicans would have stopped him from actually doing anything about derivatives , but that does n't absolve him of the responsibility for at least thinking he should do something about derivatives . 
He does , however , say that his team was pretty convinced derivatives would remain a niche market . 
And there 's reason to believe him . 
I like posting this graph -- I posted it two days ago , in fact -- and it fits well here : There was a massive acceleration in the size of the derivatives market between 2003 and 2008 . 
You 're looking at a 300 percent jump . 
Something , in other words , changed . 
Derivatives became more important to the financial system . 
But it happened after Clinton left office . 
Which makes it hard to say what he would have done if faced with the 2003 derivatives market as opposed to the 1997 derivatives market . 
Clinton swears he was `` queasy '' about derivatives back in the '90s . 
Not queasy enough to do anything about them , but enough to bring them up with Alan Greenspan . 
If the derivatives market had been three or four times larger than it had been in 1997 -- and if it had gotten that way in a matter of years -- maybe Clinton would have gotten downright nauseous and decided something needed to be done . 
It 's hard to say . 
But it 's not something that Clinton , or his critics , can prove or disprove . 
In the mid-to-late '90s , we were barely beginning to connect the dots on the tech bubble . 
The housing bubble was still a decade away . 
-LRB- Graph credit : The Peterson Institute for International Economics ; Photo credit : AP Photo\/Hankuk Economic newspaper , HO . -RRB- 
By Ezra Klein | May 28 , 2009 ; 11:00 AM ET This graphic does n't show at all what happened under Clinton - maybe the market tripled under him too ? 
It did n't do a good job of explaining the mechanics that led to the blowup - just that at some point correlation went to 1 and LTCM started losing hundreds of millions of dollars every day . 
It also made it sound more like LTCM started making too many unhedged and unscientific bets , which undercuts the whole `` even with the best science , you ca n't eliminate risk '' moral of the story . 
This gave real estate a distinct advantage over other capital investments and distorted investment decisions from that time on . 
I 'm sure you could find a graph that would show the beginnings of the housing bubble in 1997 . 
I 'm not blaming the entire crisis on this tax change or on the Clinton Administration but it definitely constituted a significant Governmental puff into the housing bubble . 
Falls : That 's a great point . 
I 'll post it up . 
And yes , government needs to protect the people from the wolves . 
But I am needled by the idea that the bright boys on Wall Street are simply wolves - that they have no morality at all other than greed to govern their behavior - that they absolutely MUST be strictly regulated or their actions will blow us all up . 
The actions of the people who profited most from the riskiest behaviors - the esteemed members of the financial community - are what caused the downfall . 
The bankers made the choice to be driven by greed instead of the best interests of their business . 
So yes , the government failed to step in to prevent a meltdown - yes , the government dismantled Glass-Steagall - yes , yes to all of that . 
But the bankers chose to engage in the actions that took down the economy . 
And they profited nicely as it happened . 
My recollection as a non-economics person is that some of the book 's explications were useful , some were too glossy . 
The book 's main value to me was the revelation of the sheer number of players who are the same people today , doing the same `` jobs '' -LRB- badly -RRB- , looking for the same outcomes . 
Except on a larger scale . 
The prologue , in fact , has Bear Stearns as the key player \* refusing \* to bail out a struggling hedge fund ! 
Took me a couple tries to realize he was talking about LTCM and not Giant Insolvent Commercial Bank . 
Why Clinton could n't remember the name is downright bizarre . 
The Glass-Steagall Act and other Depression-era reforms were written to prohibit the financial schemes that brought upon the Depression . 
Under Reagan and Bush they began to be dismantled , leading first to the Savings and Loan debacle . 
Ignoring this warning sign , the cult of deregulation -LRB- and that 's what it is -- a cult -RRB- kept casting its spells , leading to the overturning of Glass-Steagall ; less than a decade later , we are on the precipice of Depression II . 
And those responsible for this are now in charge of the economy ! 
But what the hay -- Mexico sent 30 mil up here to see that it was signed . 
At first , low paying jobs . 
Who care about the working poor ? 
It must be so because nobody uttered a complaint . 
Then the illegals started pouring in to take the low paying jobs . 
The mantra was `` jobs nobody wanted '' . 
I ask you , how were those jobs handled BEFORE illegals ??? I suppose I have the IQ of a gnat but I actually thought the politicians were in Washington to protect the US citizens . 
Now , we have a Clinton Whitehouse and Obama is only a figurehead -LRB- or is he a beard -RRB- . 
Color me stupid but I actually voted for him . 
Now , in the popular fashion , he is going after Medicare and Medicaid . 
He has done more to bankrupt this country than even Clinton did . 
I thought he was so smart but he has just taken snippets -LRB- unsuccessful ones -RRB- from other Presidents . 
I noticed the part taken from Nixon DID NOT include his price and wage controls . 
Sorry people , he seems to actually want to use inflation to deplete the average person 's savings . 
That 's not change the way us voters envisioned it . 
None of those reasonably can be blamed on President Clinton . 
I guess the headline on the column makes for an eye catcher , but in terms of a realistic claim , NO. . 
The banks and Wall Street decided that they could make a lot of money if they securitized mortgages , passing them off to whomever would buy those securities . 
They had incentive to loan to anyone who walked in the door regardless of qualifications , because they were passing those loans off and they thought real estate would appreciate forever . 
There was no link in the securitization chain that did their job the way the system was designed . 
Mortgagees , appraisers , bankers , rating agencies all failed to act ethically , and the regulators of the Bush administration all looked the other way because everyone was getting rich . 
This was a total breakdown of the system and the watchdogs who were the last line of defense . 
And to top it all off , the CDS market magnified the risk a thousand fold with absolutely no one raising a finger because they were designed to go under the regulatory radar . 
Hopefully the deregulation\/no regulation crowd has learned a lesson , but I doubt it . 
A ` reporter ' thought of a good headline and is using it , with the approval of the Washington Post . 
But there is n't a substantial word or thought in the article ... only sensational suggestion . 
Shame on Mr. Klein , shame on The Washington Post . 
Fannie and Freddie were founded for the express purpose of giving mortgages to people who could not afford a mortgage . 
Democrats pushed the idea hardest , but even Reagan and George W. Bush often repeated it . 
Greenspan 's zero interest rate finally made it possible to write mortgages with no down payment and ridiculous interest rates . 
It simply HAD to happen ! 
Many in the party think he was `` Republican lite '' , and I do as well . 
He did some good things but in the `` modernization financial reform act '' he was under the influences of his Treasury Secretary Rubin and Summer . 
They were too close to Wall St and we are paying for that closeness now . 
However , he did n't create the corruption of the SEC and Bush philosophy was to look the other way when things started to go bad . 
Granddaddy Bush ran Brown Brothers Harriman in NY . 
Averill Harriman 's last wife Pamela put Bill Clinton in power socially in Washington , got rewarded by being Ambassador to France . 
Bush I and Bill Clinton are big pals post-Katrina . 
And someone posted BHO is a puppet if not a beard , well , gee whiz . 
Now Bill Clinton and Bush II are appearing together onstage for around $ 200 a ticket -LRB- but they ca n't sell out -RRB- . 
Gee , there would n't be any long-term heavy financial connection here , would there ? 
LOL Posted by : daddio | May 28 , 2009 7:15 PM | Report abuse Yes , Ezra , let 's `` all '' forget that we had Bush in office for the past EIGHT years . 
Makes sense to blame Clinton , right ? 
But the collective strategy and resources of the American people will save this nation from their foolishness in days to come . 
Although we 've been slapped silly by the notional hand of excess -- we 're at a better place than we were before the derivatives hit the fan . 
We are now required to discipline ourselves back to thrift and innovation . 
Placing blame at this point is pointless . 
What are you going to do to improve the condition of your loved ones and your community in the challenges ahead of us ? 
Carey Rowland , author of Glass half-Full Posted by : carey_glasshalffull | May 28 , 2009 8:45 PM | Report abuse Because , Carey , understanding history , perhaps in this case fault , is supposed to help us in the future . 
And , accpeting your stand would make my thought silly : Overlay onto the chart of the growth of derivatives one showing the rise in use of subprime mortgage lending and the rise in rate of appreciation of residential real estate . 
Perhaps a perfect storm ? 
; `` You 're blaming Clinton too much ! '' 
I agree with jd51 et al that the problem was about how we have handled housing , going back however long . 
As a country , as an extension of the American dream , we have prioritized owning a house over finding a good job , or being able to move to a good job if it opens across the country . 
We made it exceptionally easy through deductions and interest rates and securitization to buy a house and settle down , and excessively difficult due to job-based health insurance and home-closing costs to move into a better situation . 
All that is a big part of why we do n't have as much class mobility as people think , and why the current economic crisis is happening . 
And I think we should appreciate that Ezra is at least somewhat focused on both of these primary problems . 
