TUNIS\/TRIPOLI | Wed May 18 , 2011 7:32 pm EDT TUNIS\/TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The wife and daughter of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi crossed the border into Tunisia , a Tunisian security source said , but it was unclear whether they were on a diplomatic mission or seeking safe haven . 
Arabic television stations quoted Tunisian officials as denying that the family members were in the country , saying that Safia Gaddafi and her daughter Aisha were on a U.N. sanctions list and would therefore not be allowed in . 
However , the security source said the two women came to Tunisia with a Libyan delegation on May 14 and have been staying on the southern island of Djerba near the Libyan border . 
It did not appear that they were traveling with Shokri Ghanem , Libya 's top oil official , who is believed to have also crossed into Tunisia several days ago and defected . 
Government officials in Tripoli were not immediately available for comment . 
The Tunisian Interior Ministry denied that any members of the Gaddafi family were in the country in remarks to Al Jazeera and Al Arabiya TV . 
Al Jazeera quoted a ministry spokesman as saying Tunisia would arrest any members of the Gaddafi family should they enter the country under a U.N.-imposed travel ban . 
A Libyan opposition source said the women were in Djerba to accompany Aisha 's husband , who he said had been injured in the Libyan conflict , and was seeking treatment in Tunisia . 
A commentator on a daily political talkshow on state-run Libyan TV dismissed reports Gaddafi and members of his family had left Libya as `` rumors '' and `` psychological war '' spread by rebels and the West . 
`` Those people -LRB- Gaddafi and his children -RRB- live among other people and if any of those rumors were true it would be possible to find this out , '' the commentator said . 
Italian officials have speculated that Gaddafi , who has been in power for four decades , was wounded during a NATO air strike in the capital last month which killed his youngest son and three of his grandchildren . 
Libyan television has shown footage of the leader since the bombardment and aired an audio message in which he taunted NATO forces , saying he was in a place where their artillery could not reach him . 
Since the revolt began in February against Gaddafi 's rule , Aisha Gaddafi has made several public appearances backing her father , and attacking the rebels and Western powers trying to overthrow him . 
A month ago she appeared at her father 's Bab al-Aziziyah compound in Tripoli and addressed cheering crowds of supporters in an event broadcast live on Libyan state television . 
`` Talk about Gaddafi stepping down is an insult to all Libyans because Gaddafi is not in Libya , but in the hearts of all Libyans , '' she said . 
On Tuesday , Libyan rebels and a Tunisian security source said the head of Libya 's National Oil Corporation , Shokri Ghanem , had defected and fled to Tunisia . 
If confirmed , the defection would undermine Gaddafi 's efforts to cling to power . 
Ghanem would be the most senior Libyan official to defect since former foreign minister Moussa Koussa switched sides in Britain earlier this year after passing through Tunisia . 
-LRB- Reporting by Joseph Nasr in Berlin , Christian Lowe in Algiers and William Maclean in London , Writing by Sylvia Westall ; editing by David Stamp -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Safia and Aish have fled the country , it is very important news . 
Now , we are interested in knowing about the chief of the gang -LRB- Gaddafi -RRB- , where is he now ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
