ISTANBUL\/LONDON | Mon Jun 6 , 2011 5:19 pm BST ISTANBUL\/LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Fuel shortages in many parts of Yemen worsened as the country 's main oil pipeline remained shut and tight funding hit imports , trade and shipping sources said on Monday . 
A blast in March on the pipeline , suspected to have been carried out by angry tribesmen , has stopped the flow of light Marib crude , which has forced the 130,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- Aden refinery to shut and hurt fuel supplies . 
`` There has been no flow of crude and no Marib output . 
The fuel shortages are worsening , especially in Sanaa , '' a Yemen-based shipping source said . 
`` Yes they 're importing , but not enough as they do n't have the money for it , and you ca n't find a lot of people these days to sell to them , trade with them . '' 
Trade sources said that repairs and testing of the pipeline would take around two weeks from when the work begins . 
`` When that will be remains unknown and depends on the willingness of tribes to allow it to happen , '' one source said . 
Yemenis celebrated on Monday what many hoped will be a new era without President Ali Abdullah Saleh , who is now recuperating in Saudi Arabia after an operation to remove shrapnel from his chest a day earlier . 
The future remains uncertain for Yemen , home to an al Qaeda wing aiming to exploit a potential power vacuum in a nation near vital global oil transport links and torn by complex rivalries among tribal leaders , generals and politicians . 
Yemen produced a total of around 260,000 bpd of crude oil in 2010 . 
Around 110,000 bpd of that is light crude , which is in short supply globally after Libyan output came to a virtual standstill due to a revolt there . 
In recent weeks Yemen has tried to boost fuel imports to make up for the closure of the Aden refinery . 
`` There are several vessels due -- two in the next coming days for diesel to be used in power stations , -LRB- and -RRB- at least one cargo of gasoline . 
But the thing is they 're running out of fuel very quickly , '' the shipping source said . 
A trade source said fuel shortages have meant fuel prices have soared , with a 20-litre container of petrol in bigger cities such as Aden costing 1,500 rials -LRB- $ 7.01 -RRB- and much higher at around 7,000 rials in more remote areas . 
`` People are buying fuel where they can and taking it to other areas where supplies are more scarce , '' the source said . 
While Yemen 's light Marib crude output has been shut since mid-March , heavier Masila crude output and exports have so far been unaffected . 
Any descent into chaos in Yemen , the Arab world 's poorest country , which lies next to oil giant Saudi Arabia and major shipping lanes , would alarm Gulf neighbors and Western powers worried about al Qaeda . 
