WASHINGTON | Mon Jun 6 , 2011 5:16 pm BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Iceland 's new plan to lift capital controls in two phases is a `` difficult challenge '' and will depend on the country returning to global capital markets , a senior International Monetary Fund official said on Monday . 
IMF mission chief to Iceland Julie Kozack told a conference call with reporters the authorities ' commitment to strong policies should enable the economy to stay on the course of recovery . 
The IMF approved a $ 225 million -LRB- 137 million pounds -RRB- loan disbursement for Iceland on Friday as it nears the end of a $ 2.1 billion IMF program agreed in 2008 after its top banks collapsed , forcing it to seek financial aid from the IMF and Nordic partners . 
`` The authorities ' strategy strikes the right balance between moving cautiously and not eroding any of the gains made so far which could undermine confidence , '' Kozack said . 
She said it was up to Iceland 's government to decide whether it wants a follow-up IMF loan program . 
Kozack said it was important that Iceland return to the markets as quickly as possible , although the fund does not have a specific timeline in mind for when that should happen . 
`` The sooner Iceland can return to markets the better , '' Kozack said , adding : `` It -LRB- would be -RRB- a very strong signal of a normalization of Iceland 's relationship with international capital markets and that is an important signal . '' 
In a sign of its recovery , Iceland has begun meeting with investors about a possible Eurobond as it prepares its first international sale of bonds since its economic meltdown . 
Kozack said Iceland 's credit default swap spreads have been at post-crisis lows of around 210 basis points , which `` gives us some comfort that Iceland may be able to issue -LRB- debt -RRB- at reasonable rates . '' 
Debt crises in Ireland , Greece and Portugal have pushed up borrowing rates . 
The latest IMF review was delayed due to a nationwide referendum in which Icelandic voters rejected a revised $ 5 billion repayment plan for Britain and the Netherlands for money lost in a Landsbanki Icesave accounts during the financial crisis . 
The dispute will now be decided through legal channels . 
An IMF report released on Monday said a better-than-expected asset recovery of Landsbanki estate `` provides comfort that public finances will remain on a sustainable path even if Iceland is found to have a sovereign obligation in the Icesave dispute '' . 
Kozack said the IMF was initially concerned that the uncertainty around the unresolved Icesave dispute could affect investment plans and hurt economic growth in Iceland . 
However , she said 2011 investment projects remain well financed and have not been affected by the Icesave dispute . 
`` We have not revised our investment projections down and we are still confident investment will continue going forward , and that growth will be investment led , '' she added . 
-LRB- Reporting by Lesley Wroughton ; Editing by James Dalgleish -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
