Yemen 's President Ali Abdullah Saleh -LRB- L -RRB- and Vice President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi smile at the Presidential Palace in Sanaa February 9 , 2011 . 
LONDON | Mon Jun 6 , 2011 4:52 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh 's departure to have his wounds treated in Saudi Arabia offers Yemen a precious chance to halt a slide into civil war and achieve a peaceful transition of power . 
Much could go wrong . 
Young protesters eager to add Saleh to the list of toppled Arab autocrats have greeted his exit with euphoria , but they fear a come-back by the wily leader , who was wounded along with other senior officials in an attack on his palace on Friday . 
Vice-President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi , now Yemen 's acting leader , was quoted by the state news agency Saba Monday as saying Saleh was recovering and would return within days . 
The future of Yemen is uncertain . 
Lying next to Saudi Arabia and vital maritime oil routes , it hosts a virulent al Qaeda wing exploiting feeble state control in an impoverished nation riven by rivalries among tribal leaders , generals and politicians . 
`` If Saleh remains out of the country and if his sons and nephews do n't begin instigating or taking provocative action , Yemen can avoid all-out war , '' said Yemen expert Gregory Johnsen . 
`` At the same time , we have come dangerously close in the last couple of weeks to what could easily be classified as a civil war , so it 's too early to say . 
It could go either way . '' 
The attitude of Saudi Arabia , which has traditionally played an equivocal role in Yemeni politics , could be decisive . 
`` The Saudis will seize the opportunity ... to extend his medical recovery into a political rest , '' said Yemen expert Khaled Fattah . 
The risk of Yemen descending into Somalia-style anarchy was `` a nightmare for Saudi national security . '' 
The kingdom took Saleh in for urgent hospital care on what a Saudi official termed humanitarian grounds . 
`` We do n't interfere in his decision -LRB- to stay or return -RRB- , '' the official said . 
That may be Riyadh 's public stance , but the United States and its European allies will be quietly pressing the Saudis to ensure that Saleh 's absence from Yemen becomes permanent . 
The Saudi cabinet said Monday that Gulf states would pursue effort to broker an agreed transfer of power . 
`` I do n't think the Saudis or his people want him back , '' said a Western diplomat . 
`` He does n't have regional support . 
I 'd be surprised if he came back and it 's too nice a let-out for him . '' 
Saleh , however , initially delayed traveling because he was seeking assurances from Saudi King Abdullah that he would be able to return after treatment , a Yemeni government source said . 
Saudi Arabia is Yemen 's main aid donor and has also long funded Yemeni tribes to maximize its own influence , but it has struggled to manage the crisis in its neighbor , failing to get Saleh to sign a Gulf-brokered plan for him to relinquish power . 
`` I 'm not sure Saudi Arabia is the infallible snake charmer that people on the outside believe it to be , '' Johnsen said . 
After nearly 33 years in power , Saleh has left the Arab world 's poorest nation close to chaos and economic collapse . 
A shaky truce has calmed Sanaa after two weeks of fighting between Saleh 's forces and a powerful tribal federation in which more than 200 people were killed and thousands forced to flee . 
The president may have handed over to his faceless deputy , Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi , but some of his sons and nephews remain in charge of well-equipped military and security units . 
They have the firepower to challenge General Mohsen Ali , a Saleh kinsman who defected to the opposition with his troops , or to take on the Hashed tribesmen who have fought Saleh loyalists . 
Others who will demand a say include a disparate axis of Islamist and leftist parties , as well as the youthful protesters who want a `` new Yemen '' -- a civil state ruled by democracy , not the corrupt patronage politics that stamped Saleh 's rule . 
`` There is no single institution or individual in Yemen who is capable of exerting control , '' said Fattah . 
`` Yemen 's formal structures such as political parties and government institutions are in no position to shape events . 
The divided military , on the other hand , is a reflection of tribal coalitions and elite struggle , not state power , '' he added . 
A possible roadmap for transition would involve forming a national council of tribal elders , generals , clerics and opposition politicians -- including representatives of rebels in the north and south -- as well as the emerging youth movement . 
The opposition coalition has endorsed the vice-president 's assumption of power as a first step in the transition , ahead of parliamentary and presidential elections . 
For many Yemenis , the turmoil since January has compounded a struggle for survival in a land where rapid population growth has further stressed scarce water , food and other resources . 
`` In the very short term , the priority is demilitarization of public life , summoning all military units back to barracks and pulling tribal militia from the streets of Sanaa , '' Fattah said . 
Many people , including those internally displaced , may need humanitarian relief until basic services can be restored . 
Any new government will struggle to rescue Yemen from economic disaster or to satisfy 23 million people seeking relief from crippling poverty , corruption and failing public services . 
`` The top priority will be creating jobs , '' said Johnsen . 
`` This is going to be very difficult . 
The next government will really have its hands full . 
It will have to make very difficult decisions which will anger many portions of the population . '' 
Ironically , the single most effective way to reduce unemployment in Yemen , would be for Saudi Arabia and other Gulf oil producers to open their doors to Yemeni migrant workers . 
Johnsen said the United States and Europe could try to convince the Gulf countries fretting about instability in Yemen that this would serve their own interest , as well the West 's . 
`` That would be a tough sell for the Obama administration , given historic Saudi fears about letting Yemenis in . '' 
