Thousands of people have taken to the streets in the northern Syrian city of Aleppo , activists say , in the biggest protests there since the revolt began . 
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said several people were injured by tear gas and live ammunition . 
Protests were reported elsewhere , a day after activists called for rallies in solidarity with students in Aleppo . 
Observers say anti-government sentiment is rising there , after security forces killed students in a raid in early May . 
Videos posted by activists show hundreds of people taking part in anti-government rallies in various parts of Aleppo . 
Syria 's second city has so far not experienced the violence seen in other cities during the uprising and has remained largely loyal to the government of President Bashar al-Assad since protests began in March 2011 . 
Analysts say its ability to keep control of Aleppo is one of its key tests . 
Separately , the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon has said that Islamist militants from al-Qaeda must be behind two deadly suicide car bomb attacks in the capital on 10 May . 
Mr Ban also said the death toll in the Syrian crisis now stands at 10,000 people . 
Syrian activists reported protests on Friday in Damascus , Homs and Idlib . 
On Thursday , activists at Aleppo University streamed their rally live on the internet . 
State TV said government forces had foiled an attempt to blow up a booby-trapped car carrying approximately 600 kg of explosives in the eastern province of Deir Ezzor on Friday . 
The Friday protests in Aleppo came a day after students held a large rally at the city 's university . 
Activists streamed their rally live on the internet on Thursday . 
They were demanding the removal of Mr Assad and his government during a visit by UN observers . 
Footage showed scores of demonstrators chanting loudly . 
A YouTube clip apparently from the same rally shows students climbing on top of a UN vehicle . 
A voice could be heard in the background saying in English `` the university of the revolution '' . 
Another YouTube video , filmed through the windscreen of a car , appears to show a demonstrator being beaten by a group of men wielding sticks . 
Nearly 260 unarmed UN observers have been deployed in Syria to monitor a ceasefire , which has largely collapsed since it was brokered in March by UN and Arab League representative Kofi Annan . 
The UN secretary general said their deployment had some `` dampening effect '' on the violence , but not enough to halt it . 
`` We are trying our best efforts to protect the civilian population , '' Mr Ban added . 
Last week 's suicide car bomb attacks in Damascus killed 55 people and injured 372 - the deadliest attack on the city since the uprising against President Assad began . 
Syrian officials have blamed `` foreign terrorists '' for the twin bombings . 
Earlier this month Syria sent a list of 26 names to the United Nations of foreign nationals it had apprehended , claiming most of them were members of al-Qaeda . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
