This September 18 , 2010 BP video frame grab shows a remote operating vehicle -LRB- ROV -RRB- working at the site of BP 's Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
HOUSTON | Sun Sep 19 , 2010 3:58 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - With a final shot of cement , BP Plc permanently `` killed '' its deep-sea well in the Gulf of Mexico that ruptured in April and unleashed the worst oil spill in U.S. history , the top U.S. spill official said on Sunday . 
Some 153 days after the Macondo well ruptured , the U.S. government confirmed that BP had succeeded in drilling a relief well nearly 18,000 feet below the ocean surface and permanently sealing the well with cement . 
`` The Macondo 252 well is effectively dead , '' retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen , who has overseen the U.S. government 's response , said in a statement . 
`` We can now state , definitively , that the Macondo well poses no continuing threat to the Gulf of Mexico . '' 
President Barack Obama , whose public approval ratings were hurt by public discontent over the U.S. government 's initial response to the spill , welcomed the long-awaited development as an `` important milestone . '' 
Obama said his administration was now focused on making sure the Gulf Coast `` recovers fully from this disaster . '' 
`` This road will not be easy , but we will continue to work closely with the people of the Gulf to rebuild their livelihoods and restore the environment that supports them , '' Obama said in a statement . 
On Thursday , a relief well bored into the bottom of the Macondo well to pump in cement and seal the reservoir for good . 
BP pumped cement for seven hours on Friday , and finished a pressure test early on Sunday that showed the well was permanently clogged , Allen said . 
The development provided an anticlimactic end to the disaster nearly five months after the well ruptured on April 20 , causing an explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig that killed 11 workers and spewed more than 4 million barrels of oil into the sea . 
Tony Hayward , BP 's gaffe-prone chief executive who absorbed the brunt of public anger over the spill , called the final plugging `` a significant milestone , '' and reiterated the company 's commitment to cleaning up the mess . 
The spill marred the coasts of four U.S. Gulf states , prompted a ban on new deepwater drilling and left BP 's image in tatters in the United States , home to 40 percent of the London-based oil giant 's business . 
The disaster also wiped about $ 70 billion from BP 's market value and spurred BP to replace Hayward with an American , Bob Dudley , effective October 1 . 
Oil spewed unchecked into the sea from the mile-deep -LRB- 1.6 km deep -RRB- well for 87 straight days until July 15 , when BP engineers sealed it with a cap . 
By then , the well had gushed more than 16 times as much as the 257,000 barrels of oil spilled by the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska in 1989 . 
For the U.S. offshore drilling industry , which is reeling from a deepwater drilling ban imposed by the White House soon after the spill , uncertainty still abounds . 
Operators in the Gulf -- long considered a haven from the political uncertainties of Venezuela and Russia -- will now have to contend with stricter federal regulations that will make it harder and more expensive to drill . 
`` There 's clearly a sense that the page has been turned now , '' said Daniel Yergin , oil industry historian and chairman of IHS CERA . 
`` It 's now the day after for the oil and gas industry in the Gulf . '' 
In New Orleans , which has seen its tourism and seafood industries hurt by the spill , word of the well 's permanent demise brought little rejoicing . 
`` I feel like any world citizen would in this crisis -- that it was a threat to the entire world ecology , '' said Carey Beckham , a partner at Beckham Bookshop in the French Quarter . 
`` I 'm relieved , but the jury 's still out . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It 's nice to see they are letting someone make a comment again . 
The censorship is almost beyond belief . 
Bob Dudley had better get it right . 
His predecessor was sent to Siberia ... ; ^ -RRB- -- a cool site ; Balkingpoints ; incredible satellite view of earth This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
