` Lack of operating discipline ' contributed to BP spill , engineers ' report says Wednesday , November 17 , 2010 ; 1:05 AM A panel of scientific experts studying the Gulf of Mexico oil spill has concluded that `` an insufficient consideration of risk and a lack of operating discipline '' contributed to the disaster , adding that key `` decisions also raise questions about the adequacy of operating knowledge on the part of key personnel '' on the ill-fated drilling rig . 
The interim report from the National Academy of Engineering and the National Research Council says that a variety of failures `` indicate the lack of a suitable approach for anticipating and managing the inherent risks , uncertainties , and dangers associated with deepwater drilling operations and a failure to learn from previous near misses . '' 
The report , set for Wednesday afternoon release but reported by the Wall Street Journal , draws largely on evidence that has already emerged in the course of other inquiries into the April 20 blowout at the Macondo well . 
The blowout killed 11 people aboard the Deepwater Horizon oil rig , which caught fire and sank , triggering the enormous oil spill . 
The committee of academics appears to have been taken aback by the education and training levels of people on the rig . 
The chairman of the committee is Donald C. Winter , professor in the University of Michigan 's Department of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering . 
`` Personnel on the Deepwater Horizon were mostly trained on the job , and this training was supplemented with limited short courses , '' the report said . 
`` While this appears to be consistent with industry standard practice and current regulations cents it is not consistent with other safety-critical industries such as nuclear power or chemical manufacturing . '' 
Like the presidential oil spill commission , the National Academy of Engineering took aim at the cementing job on the Macondo well . 
It pointed out that there had been a loss of drilling mud in the hole , indicating probable fractures in the rock that would weaken any cementing job . 
It noted that the well design complicated the drilling operation , especially given that there were multiple hydrocarbon zones . 
It also criticized the failure to run one kind of cement test and the failure to pay any attention to bad results from another test of the cement . 
With regard to rig workers ' failure to determine why a critical pressure test failed , the report says their conduct `` suggests a lack of onboard expertise and of clearly defined responsibilities '' and `` a lack of management discipline that is inconsistent with the stakes involved . '' 
That pressure test should have detected faults in cement designed to seal the well . 
