What BP should have done This morning a committee of the National Academy of Engineering released its interim report on the BP oil spill -LRB- here 's the pdf of the report -RRB- . 
It 's written in committee-speak and is a little chewy at key moments , such as when it addresses whether BP traded safety for dollars . 
There 's a general -LRB- and rather obvious -RRB- message to the oil industry and to government regulators that they need to upgrade their personnel , their training and take more seriously the hazards of drilling holes in the deep sea . 
Here 's a key passage that gives you a flavor of the report : The often-made assertion at the MBI hearing -LRB- a joint investigation of the Coast Guard and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -RRB- that safety was never compromised suggests that the risks that are an inherent part of engineering processes in this and many other industries were not fully recognized . 
As it appears from the testimony that many of the pivotal choices made for the drilling operation and temporary abandonment of the well were likely to result in less cost and less time relative to other options , the committee will be examining the use of a separate path of reporting and oversight employed elsewhere to ensure that decisions made in the interest of cost and schedule do not unreasonably compromise safety . 
Lurking in that paragraph is a key insight . 
The line about no-tradeoff of safety and cost carries a footnote to the testimony of John Guide , the Macondo well team leader , who worked at BP 's Houston office . 
As the committee notes , the well team leader `` was responsible for cost and schedule in addition to decisions affecting the integrity and safety of the well . '' 
So he 's always got two things in mind : efficiency and safety . 
And they tug against each other , inevitably . 
Doing that extra cement test ? 
Waiting around for parts to be delivered ? 
How long do you wait for the cement to cure before going on to the next step ? 
Should you speed things up by doing simultaneous operations -LRB- say , offloading mud to a supply boat while doing a pressure test on the well -RRB- even if that complicates the monitoring of the well ? 
Go back to that paragraph , and the line about `` the risks that are an inherent part of engineering processes in this and many other industries were not fully recognized . '' 
Here 's one way to translate that into English : This is dangerous stuff ! 
The only truly , 100 percent safe thing to do is not drill at all ! 
But of course , there 's reality . 
We use a lot of oil in the USA . 
We 're addicted to it . 
It has to come from somewhere . 
If you want domestically produced oil you have to go where the oil is , such as the Gulf of Mexico . 
And there 's a lot of oil in the deep water . 
Here 's the fact , though : Even if you build the case that we need offshore drilling , and even if you believe we need offshore deep-water drilling , you could still argue that we did n't need the Macondo well . 
BP could have -- and arguably should have -- abandoned the Macondo well . 
Not temporarily abandoned , which is what it was doing on April 20 when the well blew out and the Deepwater Horizon turned into an inferno . 
BP was converting the exploratory well into a production well and was going to plug it with cement and let an oil platform produce the oil later on . 
But BP had the option -- and considered the option , according to witness testimony in October -LRB- I ca n't put my finger on it but I remember it , and it got some press -RRB- -- of saying , in effect , `` This well is a nightmare -- and we quit . '' 
The Gulf of Mexico is a hard place to drill in general -LRB- it is famously `` overpressured '' and gassy -RRB- , but this well had special challenges . 
A quick primer : Wells are drilled using heavy `` mud '' that serves multiple functions , from cooling the drilling bit to circulating out the chips of rock to , most importantly , helping control the well and keeping it from blowing out . 
But the mud has to be the right weight . 
If it 's too heavy , it can escape into the reservoirs down there in the rock . 
If it 's too light , it 'll get bullied by the hydrocarbons . 
There 's something called the pore pressure and something called the fracture gradient and what you ideally would like to see in a well is a big difference between the two . 
But this well had a narrow window in which to operate . 
The mud weight had to be very precisely adjusted . 
This morning I talked to Mark Zoback , one of the NAE committee members . 
Zoback , a professor of geophysics at Stanford , said , `` The cement job may have been doomed from the beginning . '' 
He pointed out that there were five reservoirs or `` sands '' down in the Macondo well , with differing qualities and pressures . 
The top sand was a brine sand , for example , and it had greater pore pressure than the sands with oil and gas farther down . 
The BP team tried to cement the whole suite of sands in a single job , with a single cement density , and that was a recipe for failure , Zoback said . 
`` It may have been ill advised to try to cement off all five of these sands in one operation because they had to thread the needle with respect to the pressures , '' he said . 
They could have tried other cement strategies , other well designs , other tests . 
They could have done a lot of things differently . 
And it might have worked . 
And Macondo might be sitting there neatly plugged with cement , waiting in the gulf for someone to drill it again and pull out all that oil . 
But I keep thinking of something that Shane Roshto , one of the 11 men killed in the blowout , said to his wife , Natalie , at home before returning to the Deepwater Horizon : `` Mother Nature does not want to be drilled there . '' 
Thanks for answering a bunch of the questions I had about about that oil well . 
This is the first I 'm hearing about the five different sands and the problem of cementing them . 
It 's also pretty fascinating to learn that the entire cementing operation might have been doomed from the git-go . 
I confess I have n't followed all the stories as closely as I might , but for me this is the first I 'm hearing of the '' `` This well is a nightmare -- and we quit '' theme . 
We 've known from the beginning BP was shutting the well down ... but with the understanding it was for later production by somebody else . 
There was no `` we quit ; it has beant us '' aspect to it -LRB- not that I saw , anyway -RRB- . 
It really shades the perspective quit a bit . 
And the Roshto quote indicates some of the people on the weel knew it . 
Ca n't wait for your book to come out . 
While I am sure the loss of revenue from their lease for that area will cost them something in the long run , perhaps it 's for the best that they just walk away . 
Turtle domes , diapirs -LRB- not to be confused with diapers -RRB- , and canopies . 
Interesting that the story in the Wall Street Journal came out 13 hours ago , and the NYT published yesterday -LRB- but no interview with Zoback in Palo Alto -RRB- ... Note , too , that this interim report -LRB- final report due in June -RRB- by the National Academy of Engineers also pointed a lot of blame at the federal Minerals Management Service . 
Funny that that 's not mentioned in Joel 's write-up . 
Once it was apparent that the BP leadership was going to change , he would have blocked all actions until the new team took over . 
Think of all the money they would have saved . 
Even fracking , mentioned in the article I linked to below in terms of drilling for natural gas , was a plot element in last week 's CSI episode -- also a concern in Texas , as the article points out . 
Who did I run into or what did I read about the huge increase in drilling activities , increase in propery values , scramble for housing , going on just to the southwest of us ? 
I think the team should be called `` Washington Pass-the-Bucks . '' 
There 's the obvious animal reference . 
The double entendre , given that Congress appropriates monies , plus the do-nothingness of the institution . 
Comprehensive energy policy or immigration reform , anyone ? 
Did anyone catch his interview this week on Morning Joe . 
Of course , they changed the subject on him to the political situation , rather than letting him talk about the two disasters that occurred in his state under the management of two different administrations . 
He had a lot to say about federal ineptness , and Jindal 's comments about the more recent one definitely caught my attention . 
Hard to get excited about a book from speculative press members who write that the Gulf spill may be carried by currents up the Atlantic seaboard . 
Or the irrational public that did not book rooms in the Sunshine State , prompting frivolous lawsuits against BP . 
Do you think the speculation led to the irrational behavior ? 
I 'm having enough problems with speculative reporting by the Patriot Ledger in Quincy regarding those old bones turned up in 1999 in Scituate -- not to mention the corresponding reports compiled by the state government ! 
And tell me why it is that Salazar has lifted the ban on offshore drilling but BOEMRE refuses to issue any permits ? 
That 's strange , is n't it ? 
And have any of us changed our oil consumption behavior ? 
Sometimes you are dealing with situations which get out of hand very quickly . 
Little projects you do n't think are a big deal erupt into things where people are running around looking for the shot-off valves . 
My last plumbing project was several years ago . 
I replaced both of the shower valves in our house one summer while our son was at scout camp . 
That way we only needed one bathroom usable at a time . 
At each phase , I shut off and drained the house but I had to have a restart plan to get service back even if the project was n't quite done . 
` You can never have too many valves ' is a good motto . 
That is as long as leaky valves are n't your problem . 
I do n't quite get though why the well should have been shut down permanently earlier . 
The over-budget part does indicate it was n't their best work , but was it that bad earlier ? 
Cassandra , I 'm with you on the Mother Nature quote . 
laloomis , I thought the complaint about the Hill was that they were doing too much . 
Now they 're Do-Nothings ? 
I guess you have to spend some time on the Hill to know what goes into running the federal government . 
Besides , the oly buck passing these days has been in Dub 's new book . 
Do n't know anything about any books by speculative press members -LRB- huh ? -RRB- 
Wow , talk about having information no one else has . 
\* RME \* Posted by : Scottynuke | November 17 , 2010 3:22 PM | Report abuse This is a very nuanced and sophisticated piece of analysis that can not be reduced to being either fer sumthing or agin it . 
In other words , it is doomed . 
But it does have the virtue of being true . 
Sometimes the secret in any complex endeavor is to recognize and respect the limits of one 's knowledge . 
This has been called the courage of uncertainty . 
Alas , as we all know , in many , many cases the last thing powerful people want to hear is the phrase `` I do n't know . '' 
When this happens the temptation to find somebody else who can exploit the ambiguity to support the position they find pleasing can be overwhelming . 
And from this comes much mischief . 
One afternoon in June 2009 , Gov. Sarah Palin was sitting in the Washington office of her friend Fred Malek , whom she met through McCain during the 2008 campaign . 
She was listening to the former White House aide to Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford map out logical next steps to her political career . 
Focus on amassing a good record as governor , he advised her . 
Run for a second term . 
Develop some policy expertise . 
Do some extensive overseas travel . 
Generate some good will by campaigning for fellow Republicans . 
Malek told me that he could tell that this was n't what Palin wanted to hear . 
Here 's the problem , she replied impatiently : I 've got a long commute from my house to my office . 
I do n't have the funds to pay for my family to travel with me , and the state wo n't pay for it , either . 
I ca n't afford to have security at my home -- anybody can come up to my door , and they do . 
Under the laws of Alaska , anybody can file suit or an ethics charge against me , and I have to defend it on my own . 
I 'm going into debt . 
Numerous decisions to proceed toward abandonment despite indications of hazard , such as the results of repeated negative-pressure tests , suggest an insufficient consideration of risk and a lack of operating discipline . 
The decisions also raise questions about the adequacy of operating knowledge on the part of key personnel . 
That is about the most severe beat-down I have ever read in a formal report . 
I do n't see how that could have been accidental ; she must have made a checklist or something . 
I wonder if Malek ever told her not to worry too much about shopping for a new dress . 
Or to make nice with Lisa Murkowski . 
It 's rare to see `` they were careless and ignorant '' in such a document . 
In Our Fair City taking care of business in the waning days of my mayoralty . 
Two terms of working on being more empathetic is paying off . 
I can kind of , sort of , see some merit in Palin 's resignation . 
Of course that could just be confidence that her successor could n't possibly be anything but better . 
Did notice the annihalation detector in the diagram though , that amuses me so some reason . 
Looking back , in sense he was melding Hoyle 's `` steady state '' theory with the opposite of the Big Bang , the `` Big Crunch '' . 
Do n't know that I could have made a good petroleum drilling expert . 
I wonder how much of Brazil 's huge , alluring , and difficult oil fields will prove undrillable , or at least not-prudently-drillable . 
Bj n Lomborg 's column is n't all bad , but his best guess about sea level rise seems to be far lower than what the experts are suggesting , which is on the order of planning for as much as 5 feet rise over the next 90 years . 
His comments about Tokyo 's defenses against subsidence are appropriate , but perhaps more in the context of preserving New Orleans under present-day conditions than about the future . 
Tokyo 's flood defenses make the `` improved '' defenses of New Orleans look unfit for areas inhabited by human beings . 
The Netherlands has an excellent national plan for adapting to rising sea level . 
While much of the Netherlands ' water management has roots in traditional practices , the national plan is a matter of extremely sophisticated engineering and environmental planning . 
Doing something similar for Chesapeake Bay would be an immense undertaking . 
The Everglades are unsalvageable , except to the extent that restoring natural water flow can According to geologist Harold Wanless of the University of Miami , the southern Florida metro area -LRB- specifically Miami and Ft Lauderdale -RRB- ca n't be protected by levees because the underlying rock is too porous . 
Wanless thinks we need to be planning for radical shrinkage of the urban area and its eventual demise -LRB- aided by decreased rainfall and nastier hurricanes as the land area shrinks -RRB- . 
Despite the thicket of inane comments on Lomborg 's column -LRB- and David Brooks -RRB- , modeling works . 
It 's easy to lie with models , fool yourself with models , lead others astray , whatever . 
But making mathematical models is essential to economics , population biology , running electricity grids , planning highways , drilling for oil , and any number of other things essential to making modern society work . 
Much modeling requires only high school algebra and access to Microsoft Excel , which gives the functionality of matrix algebra . 
He will be missed . 
in the cementing operation . 
If the well bore is steel drill pipe encased and they are cementing the bore , how does the porosity of the sand the bore go through affect the cementing job ? 
I wonder how much Allred charged the maid ? 
Now to go eat chili , with beans . 
Been on four hours now . 
Snow expected tomorrow on the left coast but nice today . 
He is clearly getting the best medical care of the family . 
Kguy , I hope this d-bag will find an irate female soldier that will set him straight . 
He 's also advocating grizzly bear extinction . 
This particular d-bag is clearly from the low end of the human experience . 
Although , maybe , some momma grizzly bears might warrant some control measures . 
Shooting them from helicopters maybe ? 
`` I was Hubble 's assistant '' is a pretty good job interview opening for an astronomer . 
May Mr. Sandage rest in peace , he sounded like an interesting guy . 
I note here that people my father 's age are falling off the tree in greater number ... Posted by : shrieking_denizen | November 17 , 2010 9:14 PM | Report abuse Sandage sounds like he was quite the smart guy and I 'm sure he will be missed . 
I had no idea there even was a Cosmology Prize of the Peter Gruber Foundation , but it sure sounds pretty cool . 
And is n't the Hubble Constant one that varies ? 
Kinda like the speed of light did during the Big Bang ? 
Here is the cosmology cartoon I have been saving for when it was on boodle : Posted by : yellojkt | November 17 , 2010 9:23 PM | Report abuse I 'm no drilling engineer bh72 . 
But the cementing job is to inject some cement between the casing , a sturdy steel tube , and the local geology . 
The cement job fills the gap between the outer casing and the drilled surface . 
As the hole is drilled down this small interspace might , or might not , be filled with cementing matter . 
It 's rarely cemented all the way down . 
The cementing technique and the cement itself will vary depending on the local geology -LRB- or sands , as the oil people say -RRB- , as the outer steel casing does n't vary . 
The Macondo goes through alternating layers of salt and shale for about 2 miles deep ; surely the cementing job will face different challenges depending on where it 's at . 
Pressure of the product and type of geology\/sand must be important in choosing the cementing technique for the segment at hand . 
It seemed worth finding the original , so here it is . 
DB 's very own words : Posted by : DaveoftheCoonties | November 17 , 2010 10:32 PM | Report abuse Perhaps young William decided to propose now as his own best effort to boost the economy . 
Should help manufacturing and retail sales in certain pockets around the world , eh ? 
I may contribute to his bail fund . 
That may not be the case , as she may have a different oncologist group . 
Anyway , if there is any infomation I have that could be helpful to her or to you , you have my email address . 
I 'd be glad to come and sit with her and you . 
I 'm sure she has the utmost confidence in her doctor and the PAs or NPs who assist him\/her . 
Yesterday the infusion clinic was crowded and I was put in one of the small rooms for two around the edges of the large room . 
I call it the `` bad kids room '' , but actually it is cosy and the other patient was having blood pressure problems with her infusion and she and I had a frank chat about the avastin she was being given -LRB- which I loved -RRB- . 
When I left she thanked me for being so positive and and she said that it helped her . 
Cassandra , re your message of last kit , words of wisdom regarding parents hopes and expectations for their children . 
Good morning , friends . 
I meant to tell you JA , the kit is great , as usual . 
I do n't understand a lot of the jargon concerning the technical side , but you do make it understandable to some degree , even for a dummy like me . 
I think what I like about it most is the human aspect because all this technology does have a human component , a very large component . 
And I think also that is the aspect of this sad story that draws many . 
I woke up this morning , and I like the sound of that . 
Anyway , I have a sore throat , do n't know where that came from . 
The weather here yesterday was just too beautiful for words . 
It was the kind of day where one knows , we , as in humans , are just a tiny thread in this huge system . 
The daughter is having contractions , so the count down continues . 
Slyness , hope the procedure is n't too uncomfortable for you . 
And I hope you are enjoying this beautiful weather . 
I 've read part of a study concerning the way North Carolina spends on education . 
We get a D + . 
I 'm not really shocked , the signs are all around . 
And the governor getting ready to announce there 's going to be less money not to get ! 
Have a sunshiny day , folks , and love to all . 
I hope everything goes quickly and well , and that the baby is here shortly , and healthy ! 
Take care of that sore throat , too , Cassandra . 
No good being sick . 
Mr. T came down with a cold yesterday , so I 'm keeping my distance . 
Geekdottir came home from a trip last weekend with one , so I 'm being distant with everybody ! 
Ham biscuits with Kona coffee and Tazo tea on the ready room table . 
We need something to warm us up , there was frost on roofs this morning . 
Palin does n't say `` I could be a better President , '' she says `` I could beat Obama . '' 
As it often seems to be , the emphasis is on winning and losing instead of governing . 
Unless , of course , she was talking about bowling . 
A much better and cooler day awaits today . 
This is antimatter Thursday , right ? 
CERN gets a first good look at antihydrogen . 
I need to get myself an antiproton trap . 
I would n't know what to to use for bait though . 
It 's about time someone wiped that smug smirk off hydrogen 's face . 
For some reason , I 'd put my money on the tall black guy . 
In bear news , I like the phrase `` Many of the mostly single , adult males were relatively fat , with `` wide rear ends '' and a belly `` with a dish to it , '' '' Posted by : shrieking_denizen | November 18 , 2010 8:27 AM | Report abuse RD_P beat me to the punch on Palin vs Obama . 
Beat him at what ? 
Her voice alone defeats me . 
I take great satisfaction in the fact that she 's the Repugs ' worst nightmare ... reflected well here by Ann Telnaes ' animated cartoon -- Did anyone espy the meteor showers last night ? 
I thought about setting my alarm for 3:00 am to take a look-see but did n't since I 've not slept a whole night through in the last few months . 
Would n't you know ? 
For the first time I slept over eight hours straight ! 
\* grinning at major breakthrough \* Holding several of you close in my heart today ... slyness , Cassandra 's daughter , TBG and sister . 
In her wildest dreams she does n't see that ! 
She probably thinks that if she wins , the ability would be implied . 
Patti Smith won the National Book Award for nonfiction . 
Franzen not only did n't win the fiction award , he did n't even make the final cut . 
Andy Borowitz hosted the event for the second year in a row : I said last year that publishing was a sinking ship , Mr. Borowitz said . 
I believe that publishing is still very much in the process of sinking . 
Publishing is a Carnival cruise ship . 
It s on fire , the toilets don t work , but we are surviving day to day on Pop-Tarts and Spam . 
I still do n't believe Palin wants to be president ; I think she 's learned her lesson that governing means actually doing the work . 
But she has also learned another lesson all too well : that she can make millions by keeoing her `` brand '' and her face out front , AND , even more important , the incredible strokes to her ego by being the Queen Bee , the kingmaker , the powerbroker , the `` face '' of the Tea Party , that entire package . 
So yeah , sure , she can freely and joyously say she can beat Obama . 
It 's no longer a political statement -LRB- or even a delusion -RRB- ; rather , it is simply a necessary part of her schtick , her pitch , her sales presentation . 
This is n't Palin 's politics ; this is Palin 's marketing . 
She 's not channeling Lee Atwater ; she 's channeling Billie Mays . 
And not only that , she has about another year and a half of this befofre she has to finally get serious , figure out her best exit strategy -LRB- `` for the good of the party , I reluctantly withdraw ... blah blah -RRB- and become kingmaker when she endorses somebody else . 
That 's a year and a half of marketing , of selling , of speaking fees and book sales and appearances . 
Ai n't no freaking way she 's gonna give any of that up , or sit down and shut up . 
It 's money , people , money . 
She 's a publicity crack addict who gets well paid for her addiction . 
Always good to see bear news , even if the news is not particularly good . 
We are late getting ice here as well , though it is mostly humans who suffer when lakes are late in freezing . 
It delays the start of ice fishing and the attendant commerce . 
John McCain is at an age where you 'd think he 'd at least be considering how he wants to be remembered , if indeed he is remembered much at all . 
How do you explain that ? 
Palin 's voice is like fingernails on a black board . 
As usual RD , you cut to the heart of the matter - winning vs. governing - perfect ! 
SciTim , may your friend find new stars for the angels to play with . 
Hope everyone remains sniffle-free . 
Around here we seem to have a norovirus outbreak , especially in the schools . 
One week until ` Merikan Thanksgiving . 
Where has the time gone ? 
All the errors accrued by not cementing each zone separately could have been remedied . 
One difficulty for the layman and me has been a lack of access to the records of other wells nearby . 
Obviously those records are trade secrets and I understand that . 
I think a clearer picture would emerge of the engineering issues and how `` standard practices '' working in that geological area had emerged . 
As I understand it , those sands and the intervening strata are geologically younger than other fields . 
The sand grains are only loosely cemented in the sandstones . 
This fact does not make the drilling uncontrollable . 
It means , just as has been said , that each zone needs special attention , individual focus , when encountered . 
Methods to do that have long been known and widely used . 
Even if the well had cost twice as much , the profit would have still been substantial . 
That 's a fact . 
Tell us what is with , etc. . 
Cass : a baby , am smiling . 
And , want ease and comfort for all of you . 
We need to see this always and be light and kindness . 
Babies !!!! BAYBEES ... sweetness . 
TBG and VL -- cancer does provide the occasions of heroes and those who love them . 
Hydrogen\/Antihydrogen ... now , all day I will note the pairs of being\/unbeing . 
RD -- let 's concentrate together on No Leaves ... can you share your secret APP on that ? 
That 's money that came from YOUR premium payments . 
It did n't go to doctors , it did n't go to your health care , it did n't go to corporate shareholders . 
It went to defeat Democrats . 
Something has to be done about that ; I just have n't figured out what . 
I really do n't get the whole thing , but then I 'm not a Telnaes fan . 
I just do n't find any of her animations to be witty commentary or funny . 
Poor babies , just ca n't live without all them perks . 
We pay , they enjoy ... hmmm , is n't that a form of socialism ???? Posted by : ftb3 | November 18 , 2010 11:01 AM | Report abuse Oh , wait -- perhaps it means that she was searching the Republican party for its political manhood , which she found at last and has taken control of . 
Yes , perhaps that 's it . 
MoftM , I do n't always vibe on Telnaes myself but am compelled to look for some reason . 
Probably like I 'm compelled to waste time doing the Sudoku and crossword every day ... habit . 
But yeah , he 'd have a serious height advantage over her in a game of 1-on-1 . 
Sigh - bummer it does n't pay much . 
I got my first Bachelor 's degree in Physics , but discovered that a BS in Physics in Louisiana means that you can -LRB- a -RRB- get a higher degree in Physics and teach Physics ; -LRB- b -RRB- go to work offshore as a Petroleum Engineer ; or -LRB- c -RRB- leave the state and field . 
So I went to Purdue and switch to engineering . 
`` Engineers are the oompa-loompas of science '' - Sheldon Cooper Posted by : ArmyBrat1 | November 18 , 2010 11:28 AM | Report abuse Thanks shrek & jumper for the cementing info Posted by : bh72 | November 18 , 2010 11:30 AM | Report abuse Army brat ... you owe me a new keyboard ... get over here now and commence the clean up ... OOMPA LOOMPAsss : will tell many scientists but engineers , well not so much . 
YK , can we get an Amen ... you self-examining engineer of multitudes ... Posted by : CollegeQuaParkian1 | November 18 , 2010 11:55 AM | Report abuse talitha , I quit looking at her stuff a while ago . 
I read my select comics and all the editorial cartoons everyday , except hers . 
I usually get what she 's referencing , but I miss why it 's relevant to her animation subjects . 
And that reminds me , I really ought to get back into the habit of doing a sudoku everyday . 
\* pulls out pencil \* Posted by : MoftheMountain | November 18 , 2010 12:05 PM | Report abuse MoftheMountain , have you tried doing the online Sudoku ? 
It took me a while to get the knack but it 's pretty cool . 
I still do the 5-star and super-sudokos in pencil , though . 
As the Howard Wolowitz of the Boodle , I really ca n't side with physicists so far along The Spectrum that they are nearly falling off . 
We 're tired of getting pushed around ! 
My latest compulsion is to do the entire outside edges before further solving . 
Of course , I ca n't do that on the difficult ones . 
Interesting article to read while they yammer about Sarah Palin and her brood on the TV news : Posted by : Jumper1 | November 18 , 2010 1:09 PM | Report abuse Yep , I tend to do the 9x9s online , but the difficult ones tend to get printed out -LRB- I find it easier to do them if I 'm writing -RRB- , and I LOVE the 16x16s . 
I had a Dell magazine -LRB- Variety Puzzles ? -RRB- 
subscription for several years , and I would always flip straight to the back to do the 16x16 as soon as it came in . 
Today though , I had a paper one from my daily puzzle calendar . 
: -RRB- Posted by : MoftheMountain | November 18 , 2010 1:22 PM | Report abuse yellojkt , at my place of employ we do n't regard `` The Big Bang Theory '' as a sitcom . 
It 's more of a documentary . 
In fact , one of the Chief Scientists refers to himself as `` Sheldon , with better social skills . '' 
The oft-used gag `` Dr. Cooper . 
MISTER Wolowitz '' is repeated around here . 
Except the guy they call `` MISTER '' actually has a PhD . 
But to the true geeks it does n't count ; it 's not like it 's from an engineering school or something - it 's just Harvard . 
Of course , we have something like 25 MIT PhDs , so they 're allowed to make that joke . 
Just having my Master 's from Purdue , I tend to duck and cover during those gags . 
: - -LRB- Posted by : ArmyBrat1 | November 18 , 2010 1:28 PM | Report abuse Did manage to catch a few Leonids last night even with the moon up . 
I 've been so busy that I have n't been able to give all the really cool sciency stuff all the attention I 've wanted to . 
But I will catch up between the many things I have to do this afternoon and kickoff of the Bears at Miami tonight ... -LRB- talk about time dialation ... oy -RRB- . 
TBG , I 'm glad you and SoTBG and the rest of your family know we love you . 
You 're \* our \* family , y ' know ? 
MotM - maybe you 'll write a book about living in that house ? 
As has been pointed out , engineering is n't just limited to engineers , but not that many of us are Mr. Scott - some of us are Wile E. Coyote -LRB- I have definitely had my moments . -RRB- 
Sounds like some highly edjacated folks at your workplace . 
The 16x16 sudokus can be fun , if one has time . 
As often as not , I prefer folding money , but that 's just me . 
Hope I 'm in a position to catch the game once I 'm at my destination . 
\* SIGH \* Posted by : Scottynuke | November 18 , 2010 2:44 PM | Report abuse In my little backwater of engineering too much education is sneered at . 
A PhD is likely to met with snorts of derision and eye rolls . 
It does add some cred if you have a master electrician license -LRB- which I do n't -RRB- or similar qualifications to show you have actually have some ` real ' experience . 
My token ploy is to casually mention that I got my start in the industry hand drafting shop drawings graphite on mylar . 
It would be cooler if I could brag about doing ink on vellum , but that method is a just little before even my time . 
My wife laughs harder at BBT than I do not because she gets the geek jokes -LRB- but she secretly gets most of them -RRB- , but that she recognizes a little too much of her husband and her son in it . 
While I do n't relate much to the academia world , I do claim that the late lamented ` Freaks and Geeks ' series was actionably biographical . 
And while my showkiller tendency has somehow let 30 Rock and BBT survive into multiple seasons , I still have the touch since both Caprica and Rubicon have bitten the dust . 
I 'm also on standby for an earlier flight . 
If I can make it to Philly , I 'm home free since there are plenty of seats from there to BWI . 
At least where I am has free wifi or it would be back to Angry Birds until the cellphone battery dies . 
I boldly predict that when he does the conservative blogosphere and radiowaves will jump at the chance to say how it is another example of why he is a wishywashy liberal who is a failure . 
It wo n't matter that the President pardons the turkey every year ... just as it did n't matter that Bush had hosted a Ramadan dinner every year . 
It is just what they do . 
My head hurts either way . 
A man comes up to try and use them , and despite my repeated use of `` There 's no power here '' and `` Many people have already tried , '' he goes ahead and tries every outlet before adtmitting defeat and putting his AC adapter away . 
\* shrug \* Posted by : Scottynuke | November 18 , 2010 3:16 PM | Report abuse lol , bc . 
Friends have suggested that I write down my stories from the mountain house for my memoirs . 
-LRB- Rabid groundhogs , sliding backwards down icy roads , fighting Mother Nature for the driveway , AT keggers , basement bees-we had it all out there . -RRB- 
This house was supposed to be about having a less interesting housing experience . 
Instead , it 's just turning out to be another chapter . 
MsJS , the only thing I can fold from a dollar anymore is an elephant , and I 've never been able to do any origami without explicit instructions . 
I sincerely admire those who can . 
: -RRB- Posted by : MoftheMountain | November 18 , 2010 3:18 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Wilbrod_Gnome | November 18 , 2010 3:21 PM | Report abuse Marking power outlets is a singularly risky endeavor , Wilbrodog ... \* L \* Posted by : Scottynuke | November 18 , 2010 3:23 PM | Report abuse Once again , Wilbrodog ... electric currents , fluid currents are two separate streams . 
I 'm never letting Wilbrodog help with the christmas tree lights again . 
I do n't do really complicated ones , just ones like this . 
Wilbrod , dogs and power cords tend not to mix well . 
Maybe just let W-dog supervise . 
But I 'm still trying to figure why that elephant 's genitalia honks when Palin wanks it . 
\* sigh \* I guess thoroughness , attention to detail , and intellectual curiosity are just more of the old virtues that have fallen by the wayside . 
I have sounded off about Presidents running their various agencies , but have frankly been ignorant about exactly how much they can do . 
I find an article by Elena Kagan on this topic : Posted by : Jumper1 | November 18 , 2010 3:46 PM | Report abuse Money , Mudge . 
And I think the verb you want is `` tonk '' not `` honk '' Posted by : Wilbrod_Gnome | November 18 , 2010 3:46 PM | Report abuse `` That 's flammable , better water it pronto ! '' 
Oh well , you know what I mean . 
Snuke , it 's rather the same -LRB- trying all the dead outlets -RRB- as the tendency to punch the elevator button that is already lit . 
I really like the stars . 
One year I made modular boxes for x-mas candy , but I have no idea how I did it or what I 've done with the instructions . 
My sister can do the shirt . 
For some reason , that 's the one that has stuck with her , like me and the elephants . 
The Decider was famous for sending every deserving Texan to their final demise . 
He even let the poor Scooter lying down on the battlefield . 
Yet he let go of a handful of succulent , juicy birds that were ready for the cranberry treatment . 
I 'll never understand the man . 
Kudos to whoever was defending the use of models in science last night . 
It 's no big deal , but I think I 'd have gone with `` block '' rather than `` stop '' in that headline . 
There was a scene in `` Braveheart '' where the army looking to stomp William Wallace and his boys was amassed opposite him on the field . 
They fired some arrows and some other stuff and the rebel dudes did n't retreat . 
Just as the `` guy that orders a big assault '' was about to order a big assault , the commander stopped him and ordered him to send in the Irish conscripts\/mercenaries -LRB- I ca n't remember which -RRB- first ... since they were only on loan and were n't that important . 
Dick Armey and the other leaders of the new conservative army remind me of that commander . 
Their idea : Let 's save OUR skin and energy for a while . 
Let 's just send in the Tea Party . 
Maybe they 'll win all by themselves . 
I like that elephant . 
I give folded money to all sorts of people . 
My rehab doctor thinks it 's a riot . 
I 'm working on designs for tree ornaments right now , including gift boxes , Xmas trees , snowflakes , candy canes and wreaths . 
I 'll post some pics in a couple of weeks . 
Wilbrod , I use the term ` supervise ' loosely , but I know what you mean . 
Lawdy , it get dark here early these days . 
Must go find football food for tonight 's game . 
I like that elephant . 
I give folded money to all sorts of people . 
My rehab doctor thinks it 's a riot . 
I 'm working on designs for tree ornaments right now , including gift boxes , Xmas trees , snowflakes , candy canes and wreaths . 
I 'll post some pics in a couple of weeks . 
Wilbrod , I use the term ` supervise ' loosely , but I know what you mean . 
Lawdy , it get dark here early these days . 
Must go find football food for tonight 's game . 
Please do post the pics , I 'd love to see them . 
: -RRB- Posted by : MoftheMountain | November 18 , 2010 5:51 PM | Report abuse Science magazine is unavailable online -LRB- it 's publication day -RRB- . 
I hope it is n't being held hostage . 
The cover 's a nice evening photo of the Washington Monument from the Lincoln Memorial . 
The AAAS annual meeting will be in Washington , in February . 
That 's one heck of a career . 
I hope Wilbon does as well at ESPN . 
Mmm , Mr. Fusion replaced by Mr. Sewage ... We gotta get back to the future and improve it , you know . 
Cow output just ai n't as sexy a fuel as star-heat is . 
The source is `` medscape '' from today . 
Here is only a short intro , the whole thing is too long . 
Editor 's note : Later in the evening on November 18 , the Senate passed its bill postponing a 23 % cut in Medicare reimbursement to physicians from December 1 to January 1 . 
November 18 , 2010 House Democrats introduced legislation today that would postpone a 23 % cut in Medicare reimbursement for physicians set for December 1 until January 1 , 2012 , and instead boost rates by 1 % in the meantime . 
I wonder if this guy listened to his Mom when he was a kid and was wearing a clean pair just in case ? 
Some folks just really , really should n't drink . 
I have something to say to ArmyBrat , but fear I 'm BOO . 
Lovely to see you all here , still , though . 
Doing some consulting work , and was informed today that I 'm on the shortlist of 5 for the full-time management job I really , really want . 
Hope you are all feeling in a good place , Boodlers . 
My fingers are crossed for you ! 
Funny stuff here this afternoon , kudos to all involved ! 
We 're having some trouble get the two sleds loaded , and a couple of the sled dogs are having leadership issues . 
The one team has a couple of Iditarod veterans on it , and they keep wanting to head over toward Nome . 
The other team is made up of the second-string benchwarmers who do n't get to do the major sled races . 
There 's a Chihuahua , two Shar-peis , a Bichon , a Weimaraner , two actual huskies , and a Jack Russell . 
So , yes , your mojo 's on the way . 
You 're just going to have to be patient Posted by : curmudgeon6 | November 18 , 2010 9:49 PM | Report abuse Posted by : seasea1 | November 18 , 2010 9:55 PM | Report abuse My money 's on the Weimeraner , the Malamutes and the Jack Russell . 
Clearly , the JR terrier will lead the way . 
`` All dogs are bad , but terriers have more original sin than any other breed . '' 
I 've talked to her until I 'm blue in the face . 
I 've feeling good about it . 
Even if it does n't end up as a job , they 're seeing my abilities . 
That reflects well on me . 
I ca n't really deal with the JR -- way too much dog for me . 
Best of luck to you , Yoki ! 
Chuffed is , well , feeling all blown-up and bouncy with happiness . 
You know , ` chuffed ! '' 
Was looking at the Kit , and thinking that the title `` What BP should have done , '' could almost as easily have been , `` What BP Should n't Have Done . '' 
And something I should n't do is stay up too much later watching a futile football game . 
The ` fins got nuthin ' . 
If you 're not watching maybe you can catch it on a later broadcast . 
But I love that you all do . 
No , I don t have a cell phone . 
I just mumble to myself . 
Nevertheless , the number of cell phones in Chile exceeds the number of people in the country . 
Haff a good day , everyone . 
Cold in the G house today because all the windows are open . 
The basement floor was finished yesterday and the sealer is SMELLY . 
Had a hard time sleeping as the odor crept upstairs to the top floor . 
Off to take my sister to chemo today . 
She lives an hour south of here and has her infusions in Richmond , so there 's some good time spent together , like sisters like to have , not just in the infusion room , but the car , too . 
Time flies by when you 're with the ones you love . 
Keeping a good thought . 
Yoki-hope it 's not too late to fax mucho macho . 
Saw Stewart 's send up of Beck last night and second the recommendation to view it in rebroadcast , or online . 
Pomegranate , Greek yogurt with honey , banana , and granola for those without time for a hot breakfast . 
A little chocolate in your latte ? 
Off to Tampa for a long Thanksgiving break so later gators . 
Hug a gator for me . 
Road trips are kinda fun no matter what the circumstances . 
It 's a tough situation but you get to spend time with your sis . 
I envy how close you are to your siblings . 
I 've got to download some books from Audible for the car-ride to Atlanta and back next week . 
I 'm leaning towards the new Bill Bryson book . 
I only wish people who think Beck is for real would watch the clip and have their eyes opened - yeah , I know , wishful thinking . 
Time for a small rant : I have caller ID and never answer the phone if I do n't know who is calling . 
Over the last two or three weeks the March of Dimes has called here at least three times a day , every day . 
It always rings three times before stopping so it never goes to voicemail . 
The last call was five minutes ago . 
I have never had so many calls from a solicitor , not even the politicians can beat this for persistence and annoyance . 
Do charities not get the message that repeatedly calling me is going to make me less likely to contribute to them ? 
I am tempted now to pick up next time they call and give them a contribution that they will not like ! 
We have n't given anything to them for years and years yet we still get a call about once a month , usually early on a Saturday morning , asking if we will have anything for them that week . 
Next time I will ask to be taken off the list , but I doubt it will help . 
He always writes in a way that amuses and informs . 
Too bad he did n't teach my high school math classes , I 'd certainly be better at it now . 
; - -RRB- Posted by : badsneakers | November 19 , 2010 8:55 AM | Report abuse Posted by : yellojkt | November 19 , 2010 9:13 AM | Report abuse We encourage users to analyze , comment on and even challenge washingtonpost.com 's articles , blogs , reviews and multimedia features . 
User reviews and comments that include profanity or personal attacks or other inappropriate comments or material will be removed from the site . 
Additionally , entries that are unsigned or contain `` signatures '' by someone other than the actual author will be removed . 
Finally , we will take steps to block users who violate any of our posting standards , terms of use or privacy policies or any other policies governing this site . 
Please review the full rules governing commentaries and discussions . 
