June 15 : Oil company executives , -LRB- L-R -RRB- ExxonMobil Chairman and CEO Rex Tillerson , Chevron Chairman and CEO John Watson , ConocoPhillips Chairman and CEO James Mulva , Shell Oil Company President Marvin Odum and BP America Inc President and Chairman Lamar McKay testify on the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico during a House Energy and Commerce hearing on Capitol Hill in Washington -LRB- Reuters -RRB- . 
Oil company executives , in an attempt to distance themselves from the crisis in the Gulf , put the blame on BP for the worst oil spill in U.S. history during a key congressional hearing Tuesday . 
House members used Tuesday 's hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee to chastise oil companies , accusing them of being no better prepared than BP to avert an environmental catastrophe . 
With top oil company executives waiting to testify , Rep. Henry Waxman , D-Calif . 
, asserted that their companies ' spill response plans amounted to `` paper exercises '' that mirrored BP 's failed plan . 
Their strategies to plug a spill deep beneath the sea are the same failed strategies that have stymied BP , Waxman said . 
The other companies `` are no better prepared to deal with a major oil spill than was BP , '' said Waxman , setting the tone for a tense hearing . 
But oil company executives were quick to distance themselves from BP . 
Chevron chief executive John Watson said Chevron 's deep-water drilling activities `` are safe and environmentally sound , '' but he said the company welcomes any new standards and `` we must learn from this accident . '' 
ExxonMobil chief executive Rex Tillerson told the committee that the Gulf spill would not have occurred if BP had properly designed its deep-water well . 
`` We do not proceed with operations if we can not do so safely , '' said Tillerson . 
Shell president Marvin Odum insisted , `` Safety and environmental protection shall and will be Shell 's top priorities . '' 
On Monday , Waxman 's committee released documents that showed BP made a series of money-saving shortcuts and blunders that dramatically increased the danger of a destructive spill from a well that an engineer ominously described as a `` nightmare '' just six days before the April blowout . 
Investigators found that BP was badly behind schedule on the project and losing hundreds of thousands of dollars with each passing day , and responded by cutting corners in the well design , cementing and drilling efforts and the installation of key safety devices . 
`` Time after time , it appears that BP made decisions that increased the risk of a blowout to save the company time or expense . 
If this is what happened , BP 's carelessness and complacency have inflicted a heavy toll on the Gulf , its inhabitants , and the workers on the rig , '' Waxman and Rep. Bart Stupak , a Democrat and chairman of the committee 's investigations panel , wrote in a letter . 
One lawmaker after another expressed frustration at BP 's inability to stop oil gushing from its stricken well as the chief executives representing ExxonMobil , Chevron , ConocoPhillips and Shell -- as well as BPAmerica -- sat shoulder to shoulder at the witness table . 
BP said Tuesday it was speeding up payments for large commercial claims . 
The company said in a statement that it has approved initial payments toward 90 percent of large commercial claims filed as a result of financial losses in the Deepwater Horizon explosion and spill . 
BP said it approved 337 payments totaling $ 16 million to businesses that have filed claims larger than $ 5,000 apiece . 
Initial payments began over the weekend and will be completed this week , the company said . 
The Obama administration has pressured BP to speed up payments of claims in the wake of the Gulf oil spill . 
Meanwhile , Republicans used the hearing to accuse the White House of `` exploiting '' the Gulf oil spill crisis in order to pass a Democratic-backed energy and climate bill that 's stalled in the Senate . 
`` The president is trying to exploit this disaster to pass his national energy tax , '' Rep. Steve Scalise , R-La . 
, told members of the House Energy and Commerce Committee , as well as the nation 's top oil executives , who gathered Tuesday on Capitol Hill . 
`` Stop exploiting this disaster to pass this cap and trade tax , '' Scalise said . 
`` Cap and trade '' is a phrase used mostly by Republicans to refer to a climate measure the House approved last year . 
The legislation would `` cap '' the amount of pollutants firms could emit . 
But firms could pollute more by trading for `` credits '' with other polluters , and many Republicans have decried the policy as a `` national energy tax . '' 
President Obama is expected to ask Congress to approve climate legislation when he speaks to the nation in his first Oval Office address Tuesday night following a two-day trip to the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` To exploit this crisis to resurrect his climate change legislation is just wrong , '' added House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence , R-Ind . 
`` People expect the administration not to use this incident to advance their liberal agenda . '' 
A few Republicans joined Democrats to pass the climate bill in the House a year ago . 
But the legislation is stymied in the Senate . 
Many moderate Democrats fear the bill could hurt jobs in the energy sector and along in the Gulf Coast . 
The House hearing marked the first time that the chief executives of the major oil companies -- all leaders in deep-water drilling in the Gulf -- were called before Congress since the April 20 BP explosion on the Deepwater Horizon . 
The accident killed 11 workers and unleashed the nation 's worst oil spill . 
The government has estimated that as much as 2 million gallons -LRB- liters -RRB- of oil a day may be flowing into the Gulf . 
Waxman 's committee is expected to question BPAmerica chairman Lamar McKay on internal company e-mails and documents that the lawmaker said showed that BP made repeated decisions in the days and hours before the explosion that increased the risk of a major well blowout . 
Fox News ' Chad Pergram and the Associated Press contributed to this report . 
