President Obama has made clear that he sees the BP oil spill as a way to breathe new life into efforts to pass climate and energy legislation aimed at reducing the use of carbon fuels such as oil and coal . 
But Republicans are launching a pre-emptive strike , saying an oil spill is not a good reason to tax all forms of energy . 
`` The president is trying to exploit this disaster to pass his national energy tax . 
Stop exploiting this disaster to pass this cap-and-trade tax , '' Rep. Steve Scalise , R-La . 
The congressman was referring to the `` cap-and-trade '' legislation that Democrats have been trying to push through Congress since last year . 
After the House approved a version of the bill last June , the Senate has been sitting on the proposal while other issues like health care and financial regulation moved to the front of the legislative line . 
Now that the BP oil spill has focused national attention on the potential negative effects of offshore drilling , Republicans say Obama will use it to his political advantage . 
`` Never has a mission statement fit an administration as perfectly as Rahm Emanuel 's ` never allow a crisis to go to waste . ' 
Climate change policy is important , but first things first , '' said Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , describing the energy bill as a tax on everyone that would `` do nothing '' to stop the leaking well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` Somehow he thinks he can use the tragedy in the Gulf as a reason to pass cap-and-trade , '' said Sen. James Inhofe , R-Okla . 
`` There is no relationship between the oil spill and cap-and-trade . '' 
The climate bill most likely to pass the Senate is one sponsored by Sens. Joe Lieberman , I-Conn . 
, and John Kerry , D-Mass . 
They said on Tuesday that their bill will save energy and create jobs . 
`` It will create 440,000 additional jobs annually through 2020 and 540,000 additional jobs through 2030 , '' Kerry said . 
Lieberman said one analysis shows the plan would save 2 million barrels of oil a day by 2030 -- in part by getting heavy trucks to run on natural gas . 
He said that inaction at this point would lead to sustained dependence on oil and `` risk repetition of what 's happening in the Gulf today . '' 
But critics are extremely skeptical about both claims . 
Previous assessments of cap-and-trade bills warned of job losses , and analysts say savings in oil are hard to come by : `` In automobiles , at least in the short run , next 10 years or so , it 's very difficult to switch from one energy source to another , '' said David Kreutzer , research fellow for energy economics and climate change with the Heritage Foundation . 
He said the climate legislation and its mandate to cut emissions would end up hurting the country 's coal industry `` dramatically . '' 
Fox News ' Jim Angle contributed to this report . 
