WASHINGTON -- In 1969 , Sen. Gaylord Nelson was so moved after seeing the devastation of an oil spill off the California coast near Santa Barbara that he called for a national teach-in on the environment . 
The following year the resulting '' Earth Day '' kick-started the modern environmental movement and shaped the way Americans thought about their air , water and soil . 
Forty years later , the magnitude of the Gulf oil spill far exceeds Santa Barbara 's spill of up to 100,000 barrels , but there has n't been a comparable societal transformation . 
Last week , legislation imploded in the Senate to reduce greenhouse gases blamed for global warming , derailing environmentalists ' top goal , and no national consensus has emerged to move America off oil and other fossil fuels into clean energy . 
Even a new more modest Senate bill , aimed at boosting energy efficiency and preventing oil spills , faces an uncertain future . 
Nelson , a Wisconsin Democrat who had long championed the environment , laid out the idea of a teach-in during a speech in Seattle . 
He wrote the speech on napkins while flying there , recalls his daughter , Tia Nelson . 
The senator 's call inspired the first Earth Day , with millions participating across the country , including 2,000 college campuses and 10,000 elementary and high schools . 
Congress adjourned so lawmakers could give speeches . 
In 1970 , President Richard Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency and signed the National Environmental Policy Act and the Clean Air Act into law . 
Worries about air pollution , the dangers of DDT and polluted rivers from industrial wastes played a part . 
But the Santa Barbara spill was the catalyst . 
It `` triggered a social movement and helped to create a new politics , the politics of ecology , '' mystery novelist Ross Macdonald once wrote . 
In contrast , President Barack Obama last month used an Oval Office speech to push for clean energy , but Republicans accused him of trying exploit the Gulf tragedy for political gain . 
The president took it from both sides , as some liberal commentators faulted him for failing to specifically back a cap on carbon dioxide emissions linked to global warming . 
The Gulf spill is estimated between 94 million and 184 million gallons , far worse than Santa Barbara 's total . 
But the 10-day spill from a well blowout six miles offshore covered miles of California 's sandy beaches with a thick , oily sludge . 
Pictures of dead seals , dolphins and thousands of birds captured the nation 's attention . 
`` Santa Barbara 's psychological effect was huge , and it really got into the American mind in ways that clean air and clean water and other things had a hard time doing because they were n't personified , '' says Oliver A. Houck , who teaches environmental law at Tulane University in New Orleans . 
`` So why has n't BP yet had the same transformative effect ? 
When Santa Barbara came along it was a big deal . 
When BP comes along , there are so many big deals that it has a hard time competing for attention . 
That said , I think it 's got an enormous national play . '' 
The Santa Barbara spill featured its own version of Tony Hayward , the former chief executive of BP who angered people early on with comments such as `` The Gulf of Mexico is a very big ocean , '' playing down the potential environmental impact . 
In February 1969 , Fred Hartley , the Canadian-born head of Union Oil Co. , which owned the Santa Barbara well , told a Senate hearing in Washington : `` I am always tremendously impressed at the publicity that the death of birds receives vs. the loss of people in our country in this day and age . '' 
Noting there had been no loss of human lives from the Santa Barbara well blowout , Hartley added , `` Relative to the number of deaths that have occurred in this fair city due to crime ... it does seem that we should give this thing a little perspective . '' 
Hartley rejected calls to halt offshore drilling in the Santa Barbara Channel , citing arguments similar to those employed by opponents of the Obama administration 's moratorium . 
Hartley said he told Ronald Reagan , California 's governor then , that it would be like `` making a decision to shut down the whole university educational system because there is a riot in San Francisco . '' 
Lois Capps , now a Democratic congresswoman representing Santa Barbara , was a young stay-at-home mother in 1969 who would often take her two children to the beaches there . 
`` It shaped my views along with everyone in the region , '' she says . 
`` It was such a devastating event . 
The spill was much closer to the shore , so we felt its impact sooner and more directly than this long , drawn-out affair we 're having in the Gulf . '' 
Capps says there has been a strong reaction in Congress to the BP Gulf spill , with dozens of hearings and several pieces of legislation making their way through the House and Senate . 
But it 's too early to draw conclusions about a societal shift , she says . 
`` It does n't happen overnight , '' Capps says . 
`` I think these things build like a tidal wave . '' 
Gaylord Nelson 's speech calling for a teach-in came eight months after the January 1969 spill , and the resulting Earth Day did n't take place until more than a year later -- April 1970 . 
And it was not until 1981 that Congress imposed a ban on offshore drilling along most of the nation 's coastal waters , an action widely attributed to the memories of the Santa Barbara spill a dozen years earlier . 
The moratorium endured for a quarter century , until Congress lifted it in 2008 . 
`` I think we 're going to see a really significant response to what happened in the Gulf played out over time , '' says Sarah Chasis , ocean initiative director for the Natural Resources Defense Council . 
`` I think it 's going to affect people 's consciousness , thinking , the way they approach issues for a long time . '' 
There are signs this is starting to happen . 
An Associated Press poll last month found that 72 percent of Americans rated the environment as extremely important or very important -- up from 64 percent in May and 59 percent in April . 
Actor Ted Danson , a board member for the international ocean conservation group Oceana , says the focus has until now been stopping the leak . 
`` I am hopeful . 
I think the time will come , '' Danson says . 
`` Oil is a very , very powerful lobby . 
And the basic feeling out in the world , and I think mostly created by people whose interests are in oil , is that alternative energy is a very sweet , kind , loving thought , but certainly its day has not come . 
We need oil . '' 
James `` Bud '' Bottoms , a Santa Barbara resident who co-founded `` Get Oil Out '' in 1969 , says the Gulf spill reminded him of those days . 
`` The same thing happened here , '' says Bottoms , now 82 . 
`` We stood there on our banks and saw our harbors and beaches black , about two or three inches of thick goo . 
We stood here and cried along our beach . 
We thought our lives were over here in Santa Barbara . '' 
Bottoms penned a children 's book in 1969 called `` Davey and the GOM , '' which was n't published until 2008 . 
`` GOM '' stands for `` Giant Oil Monster . '' 
It 's also the acronym the offshore drilling industry and government regulators use for something else : The Gulf of Mexico . 
