By Gloria Borger , CNN Senior Political Analyst Gloria Borger : On one level , it made sense for France , Britain to take the lead She says Obama was seeking to de-emphasize U.S. role in Libya mission President has said Gadhafi must go , but U.N. resolution did n't call for regime change She says Obama has been vague on what the exit strategy is for the military intervention Editor 's note : Gloria Borger is a senior political analyst for CNN , appearing regularly on CNN 's `` The Situation Room , '' `` AC360 , '' `` John King , USA '' and `` State of the Union . '' 
Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The story of the Libyan intervention may pain some of the most ardent believers in the proposition that it is America 's role to take the lead , all of the time , everywhere . 
But when the French and the British began the first sorties into Libyan airspace , it made an awful lot of sense : It 's their neighborhood after all . 
And when the Arab League decided to support some kind of allied intervention , it seemed a powerful consensus was developing . 
Then came the United Nations resolution , and the deal was sealed . 
Some complained that President Barack Obama had dithered and that it was too late for an effective no-fly zone . 
Others applauded his insistence on not going it alone . 
Put me in that camp : Without a strategic reason for unilateral U.S. military action , this is clearly a humanitarian effort . 
And a worldwide one . 
So if the president has done the right thing , why does it feel as if something is wrong ? 
It 's hard to pinpoint exactly , but there 's an amorphous and unsettling nature to this action . 
On the one hand , there is one coalition goal that has been explicitly stated and affirmed : This is an effort to keep Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi from murdering his own people . 
Yet there 's another goal here -- an implicit one -- that suddenly no one can explain in any great detail : Gadhafi has to go . 
It 's something the president himself said two weeks ago . 
And on Monday , he labored to separate his own words -LRB- as in , the end of the Gadhafi regime is `` U.S. policy '' -RRB- from the wording of the U.N. resolution -LRB- the humanitarian protection of the Libyan people -RRB- . 
In other words : We know the ouster of Gadhafi is part of the preferred endgame . 
But we ca n't make it part of the official coalition plan because regime change is nowhere in it . 
What are U.S. expectations for Libya ? 
How Americans feel about Libya The president has stated the obvious : The military operation is there to prevent a bloodbath . 
But we know that the military , political and financial pressure is also there to remove Gadhafi . 
So we understand the ultimate goal , but the coalition ca n't spell it out . 
Nor can we do it , exactly -- at least not as a stated goal . 
-LRB- And the generals were out in force over the weekend explaining that indeed , Gadhafi could potentially remain in power . -RRB- 
So we 're left with the prospect that once the rebels are no longer in danger of being overwhelmed by Gadhafi 's forces , we will then proceed to the `` tightening the noose '' phase of the operation that will finally lead to Gadhafi 's departure . 
And then there 's this : How do we know when we have succeeded ? 
How can we judge a humanitarian crisis averted ? 
Sure , we can tell when the danger to innocent civilians has abated -LRB- because we have destroyed or dismantled Gadhafi 's air capability -RRB- . 
But if the core of that danger is a murderous thug who still reigns , can you only abate it by removing him ? 
That 's where the strategy gets a tad circular : How can you ensure the end of the killing unless you get rid of the hideous man ordering it ? 
Richard Haass , the president of the Council on Foreign Relations and who is no fan of this intervention , tells me that America 's problem is an administration that is focused more on process than policy . 
`` This was based too much on getting support and not enough on a sustainable plan , '' he says . 
`` I do n't think we thought it through . 
Simply getting a coalition does n't mean it 's a good idea . 
Getting the Arab League does n't make it a good idea . 
Multilateralism does n't make the end better . '' 
In fact , it probably makes the intervention even more difficult to manage . 
In theory , the Obama doctrine -- which is clearly attempting to change the storyline of American military intervention in the Arab world -- is a game-changer . 
In a way , Barack Obama is still behaving as he did as the editor of the Harvard Law Review , hanging back until a center of gravity is established . 
But in the specific case of Libya , the caution can be confusing : Try as we might , there 's no way to keep American participation in any military action in the backseat , no matter who flies the first planes . 
There 's no way to ensure that any multilateral coalition works . 
And , most important : Is there a way to leave if Gadhafi stays ? 
And if we win -LRB- whatever that means -RRB- , who 's left ? 
Who are the Libyan rebels , if they are anything cohesive at all ? 
And what if the civil war flares up after we tamp it down ? 
Is that our problem ? 
Or some other country 's problem ? 
Clearly , the ambiguity is exactly what Obama was trying to avoid . 
Or if he does , he has n't told us about it . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Gloria Borger . 
