CNN Student News - 3\/23\/11 Download PDF maps related to today 's show : THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT . 
CARL AZUZ , CNN STUDENT NEWS ANCHOR : Not every rescue worker in Japan is human . 
We 've got a report coming up about rescue dogs and how they carry out their unique work . 
I 'm Carl Azuz . 
CNN Student News starts right now ! 
AZUZ : Things are getting more tense in the nearby country of Yemen . 
Protesters there have been calling for the president , Ali Abdullah Saleh , to step down . 
President Saleh made an offer to the people who are against him . 
He said he would step down , but at the beginning of next year . 
The opposition rejected that offer . 
That want Saleh out now . 
The protests have gotten violent at times , with government crackdowns leading to dozens of deaths . 
Because of that , some officials in President Saleh 's government are now supporting the opposition . 
And this was the scene at the Interior Ministry building in the Egyptian capital of Cairo on Tuesday . 
This fire broke out after a protest at the building earlier in the day . 
The protest was peaceful . 
People were calling for higher wages . 
They denied setting the fire , which was put out in less than an hour . 
BRIAN TODD , CNN CORRESPONDENT : With an energetic , hardwired bust , Atticus charges into the rubble , bouncing around a fallen roof . 
He 's focused on one thing : finding a living , breathing human amid the sprawling wreckage of the tsunami . 
It might seem an unfair request of a German shepherd , but Atticus and more than a dozen other dogs working with U.S. and British rescue teams here are more than equal to it . 
How important are these dogs to these operations ? 
ROB FURNISS , BRITISH CANINE SEARCH SPECIALIST : Very . 
There 's a lot of technical gear . 
Obviously , the listening devices , the cameras . 
There 's all that stuff , all that stuff for locating people . 
But at the end of the day , you ca n't beat a dog for hitting the scent of a human being . 
TODD : Like most canine specialists , Rob Furnace has a tight bond with his Border Collie Byron . 
TODD : The dogs are so highly trained , they 're able to block out the scent of a deceased person and pick up only on someone who 's alive . 
Their success rate is impressive . 
These teams pulled more than a dozen survivors safely from the rubble in Haiti , in no small part due to teammates like this German shepherd named Wracker . 
But keeping them sharp involves some creativity . 
The team just had to do a drill with Wracker because they have n't found anyone alive in a few days . 
They 've just had one of their own team members hide in this place , out of sight , just out of any sensory perception for Wracker . 
Sent Wracker in there to see if they could find that team member . 
That 's how they keep the dogs sharp if they have n't found anyone in a few days . 
You stare in amazement as they run full speed , jump , land and bounce off objects that are so jagged and uneven that most people could n't even attempt it . 
But they 're not invincible . 
Did he give you any kind of a signal or did you just see the blood ? 
TODD : Tomo , a German shepherd , snagged something in his paw . 
A little field surgery and he 's back in the game . 
Later on , Wracker needs more work to stitch up a wound . 
Never during either incident do we hear one whimper from either dog . 
TODD : Traveling , sleeping , eating and playing with their handlers is part of the routine . 
Their communication is so instinctive that they sometimes understand each other just by making eye contact . 
We did n't witness them finding survivors in Japan , but the dogs serve another purpose for those who 've lost everything . 
ELIZABETH KREITLER , FAIRFAX CANINE SEARCH SPECIALIST : Having the dog and seeing the times that the people in Haiti or something would enjoy a little solace from the dog , that 's also part of their job and helpful to everybody , to teammates and myself alike . 
TODD : All of these dogs actually live with their handlers , who are heavily involved in their training . 
That helps solidify the bond between them and helps them get through these long deployments a long way from home . 
Brian Todd , CNN , Unosumai , Japan . 
TOMEKA JONES , CNN STUDENT NEWS : Today 's Shoutout goes out to Mrs. Golebiewski 's social studies classes at Northridge Middle School in Middlebury , Indiana ! 
The word `` vernal '' refers to what season ? 
You know what to do ! 
Is it : A -RRB- Winter , B -RRB- Spring , C -RRB- Summer or D -RRB- Fall ? 
You 've got three seconds -- GO ! 
Vernal comes from the Latin word for spring . 
That 's your answer and that 's your Shoutout ! 
AZUZ : The vernal equinox occurs when day and night are equal lengths , and this happened Sunday night . 
That event marks the official start of spring . 
But depending on where you live , it does not mean you should start packing up your snow gear just yet . 
A winter storm brought snow and rain to California on Monday , leaving thousands of homes without power and closed some schools and roads . 
Every road into California 's Yosemite National Park was closed after storms dumped three-and-a-half feet of snow throughout the park . 
And in New Jersey , on the East Coast , some people spent the first full day of spring clearing sidewalks instead of hitting golf balls . 
AZUZ : As you might expect , the weather 's a little warmer down in Miami , Florida . 
Officials there are hoping some new outdoor facilities will let Floridians do more than just have fun in the sun . 
They want people to work out -- outside ! 
Men 's Health Magazine recently named Miami as America 's fattest city . 
Now , that is a reputation that city officials want to shed , so they 're installing these outdoor gyms in order to encourage people to get out and get in shape . 
If you ca n't afford a memership ? 
These outdoor facilities are totally free . 
And as you can see , some fitness fanatics are already putting them to good use . 
AZUZ : But what we 're curious about is this : Do you think it 'll work ? 
Some of the people in that video , you could tell it was n't their first time at a gym . 
But do you think these outdoor facilities would encourage folks who would n't normally work out to hit the equipment if it 's outside ? 
Head to our blog at CNNStudentNews.com and weigh in with your thoughts . 
AZUZ : An undefeated senior season . 
Anthony Robles is definitely an impressive athlete . 
He 's also an inspiration . 
Robles was born without a right leg . 
He 's never let that hold him back . 
He adapted his wrestling style , building the strength and size of his upper body into more than other wrestlers in his weight class . 
That style helped him win a national title recently . 
Robles says everyone faces some kind of adversity . 
The key is to stay focused . 
ANTHONY ROBLES , NCAA WRESTLING CHAMPION : Everybody has their own obstacles in their life , whether it be physical , mental , the outside world . 
Whatever it is , everybody experiences their own obstacles , and it 's about just looking beyond that , and really just focusing on your goals and going after them . 
AZUZ : Good insight . 
Before we go today , there 's a shuttle mission we 're talking to you about that 's never going to get off the ground . 
But it 's not supposed to . 
About 2,000 employees at NASA 's Kennedy Space Center got together to form this human shuttle in the parking lot . 
It 's a tribute to the space program , which is going away . 
Probably cost a lot less than an actual shuttle . 
It took about an hour . 
We sped the thing up so you could see how it all came together . 
It 's impressive that they found a spot to pull this off . 
AZUZ : But if there 's anything NASA 's good at , it 's finding space . 
We hope that you 'll find space for CNN Student News tomorrow , when we return . 
We will look forward to launching into more commercial-free headlines then . 
