People gather at the wreckage of a U.S. F-15 fighter jet , southeast of Benghazi , Libya , on March 22 , 2011 . 
Since the U.N. Security Council authorized action Thursday to protect civilians from the effects of Libya 's civil war , a vigorous debate has erupted over the U.S. role in the intervention . 
In CNN.com 's Opinion section , writers raised questions about the ultimate goal of the military operation and U.S. policy . 
CNN 's Ed Henry describes President Barack Obama 's dilemma here . 
Here are links to the writers ' op-eds and brief excerpts : Daniel Kliman : Obama 's geopolitical juggling act Regardless of how the intervention plays out , Libya consumed Obama 's attention during a trip intended to boost U.S. economic and security cooperation with key countries in the Western Hemisphere . 
As he worked to manage an urgent crisis while sustaining focus on an over-the-horizon but nonetheless vital foreign policy objective , Obama was in a predicament familiar to his predecessor . 
... Obama could have canceled his Latin American trip to remain in Washington while the Libyan bombing campaign commenced . 
Instead , braving criticism at home , he embarked on a tour amounting to a long-term investment in America 's geopolitical position . 
The United States has historically overlooked Latin America . 
Yet today , the region constitutes a market nearly as large as China 's , boasts an influential rising power in Brazil and hosts dangerous criminal insurgencies that respect no borders . 
Whatever U.S. interests exist in Libya -- there is room for reasonable debate -- the country does not outweigh the rest of the Western Hemisphere . 
Gloria Borger : Obama and Libya : Tell us how this ends In theory , the Obama doctrine -- which is clearly attempting to change the storyline of American military intervention in the Arab world -- is a game-changer . 
In a way , Barack Obama is still behaving as he did as the editor of the Harvard Law Review , hanging back until a center of gravity is established . 
But in the specific case of Libya , the caution can be confusing : Try as we might , there 's no way to keep American participation in any military action in the back seat , no matter who flies the first planes . 
There 's no way to ensure that any multilateral coalition works . 
And , most important : Is there a way to leave if Gadhafi stays ? 
And if we win -LRB- whatever that means -RRB- , who 's left ? 
Who are the Libyan rebels , if they are anything cohesive at all ? 
And what if the civil war flares up after we tamp it down ? 
Is that our problem ? 
Or some other country 's problem ? 
Clearly , the ambiguity is exactly what Obama was trying to avoid . 
