Get To Know Piers Morgan Tonight : Donny Deutsch Guest Hosts This evening `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' welcomes the return of Donny Deutsch , as the brand guru is back for a fourth stint as guest host Last night Piers Morgan hosted a live show to discuss the current situation in Libya and to ask some hard questions . 
First Piers talked to Ali Suleiman Aujali , former Libyan Ambassador to the U. S , who was very outspoken against Gadhafi . 
`` He must be captured dead or alive , '' Aujali said . 
Piers also talked to Paul Wolfowitz , former U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense , and Anne-Marie Slaughter , former Director of Policy Planning for the State Department , about what the Arabs want and how they 'll get it . 
Wolfowitz said that if we did n't go into Libya it `` would have been a blood bath in Benghazi . '' 
He emphasized , `` The Arabs want freedom . '' 
Slaughter said the Libyan opposition is working to defeat Gadhafi and `` what we 're doing is making it possible for them to do that . '' 
Piers , how many of those returning libyan fighters on both sides got their training as `` volunteers '' to fight US soldiers in Iraq , via Syria ? 
Libya posessed the highest PER CAPITA foreign fighters whom left Libya to go to Iraq . 
Arte these returning fighters breeding the chaos in Arab lands now ? 
Below is a list of fighters by name , country , city of residence . 
PDF file is way too many pages to print , but leads one to wonder if these revolts were comprised off fighters returning from Iraq ? 
The opening clip on Piers Morgan tonight -LRB- Mar 22 -RRB- showing violence in the street is stated to be `` thought to be from today '' . 
The one shot on a cell phone with another person stepping out onto a balcony however is a clip we have already seen during the first week of protests in Libya . 
why , oh why , do you have Rick Santorum on . 
I mean , who really cares what he has to say . 
what does he have , maybe 10 % support of trhe Republican nut case right wing . 
so , he has maybe 3 % support in the country ? 
so how low do your support ratings have to be to be disqualified from being on television as a voice that hs any importance . 
Why dont you have Charlie Sheen on to talk about the war . 
I think he probably has much more credibility than that idiot . 
Yes , i would agree with Henry Shustin . . 
Rick Santorum is about as looney as they get . 
if anyone can tell you how things are it is political leader Kuchinich from Ohio , atleast this man can tell you how it is , whether you or his fellow elected nutjobs care to hear about it . 
Go interview Kuchinich some day and then you will realize about all the failures of the US State Department 's foreign policy . 
Rick Santorum lost his re-election bid by the largest margin ever in PA senatoral elections , he has been out of the national spotlight for four years and yet you lead him off as an expert on Libya . 
I do n't get it . 
I enjoy your show and your style , but this one has me confused . 
It 's not a political party thing or a liberal-conservative issue , it just what could he know and other that yip about the President , I ca n't see what he can add to the discussion or the discourse on international concerns . 
Piers , we do not need another hour of Anderson Cooper . 
I am on the verge of leaving CNN programming at 6PM all together . 
3 hours of news is too much . 
Do what you were supposed to do , get our minds off the wars for an hour , and do interesting one on one interviews , politicians , entertainers , extra-ordinary people . 
Your wannabe news show is for the birds and dry as dirt . 
CNN is a 24 hour news station . 
You want celebrity interviews , try Fox . 
You can watch Ann Coulter , Sarah Palin , Michelle Bachmann , Christine O'Donnell all being interviewed . 
I want to inform you that the supply from the west of the city of Misurata comes from 3 camps , the first is the so-called camp market Althelata corresponding to the market Allata Bzletn and base camps the other two come after the bridge Zlitin direct dist I want to inform you that the supply from the west of the city of Misurata comes from 3 camps , the first is the so-called camp market Althelata corresponding to the market Allata Bzletn and base camps the other two come after the bridge Zlitin direct distance of 200 meters and one on the right and the other on the left in case of bombing Hedda camps in addition to the camp volcano south Zlitin the supply and security will Idhwr in Hedda battalions i seen this ambasador of libyia to usa , in beginning of libyian revolution , in his interviw with , i believe mr. anderson he support kadafi , now he is against kadafi , not because not of changing opinions , just because of his private interests , and he is afraid if kadafi win this battle , he going to be gone from his lucrative position , as ambasador of lybia , also i do n't like propaganda what is going on cnn permnanet underlaying that action against kadafi is to protect civilians , a seen on your video that civilans are armed with heavy weapon , some of them are taking picture on line of fire , they risk their lives on their own , because there is civil war , also a seen small kids there , what kind of parents let them go on line of fire , the other propaganda is about no flying zone there is no kadafi planes , and i seen regular cars destroyied , tanks , and buildings , because of flying zone , if coalition forces support rebels is simple to say that we are support military rebels and we want take kadafi aut , so it would be the best scenario , but this stupid propaganda make simple unbelivable in usa and koalition intentions in addition i think that even kadafi will be out , it is going to be bloody long war , because kadafi supporters will fight even without kadafi I was just wondering that same thing ... just who are these supporters ? 
Is Libya more divided than Egypt seemed to be ? 
Because those supporters seem awfully passionate in those videos , like they 'd continue the fight ... What would the coalition do then ? 
If it 's just Libyan versus Libyan ... March 23 , 2011 at 12:55 am | Report abuse | my advise in this situation libya that kadafhi should go sooner or later . . 
united nations did the right way to protect the civiliens destroy kadafh regims because this is a civil war it is not iraq or afhanasten . . 
etc now it a very tough situation because the mess has started . 
the country 's that support that bring some troops in and tell the civilines that want dremocracy should move out . 
ai believe a lot of kadafhi military want to do the same thing should drop the guns who is left until finding kadaphy all the way to the end . 
one more time it isnot Irak or afhanistan . 
fight door to door find the enemy it is a civil war . 
i believe the president of the united states made the right decision because it is power to action Your opening film shot for tonights -LRB- 22March 2011 -RRB- episode : How embarrassing !!! Do you realize that this film shot was from the recent Egyptian uprising , NOT Libya ??? What are you trying to do ??? I immediately recognized this film footage ... look at the Mubarak THUGS in yellow hats with sticks ... Remember the silhouette of the people from the upper decks looking down as the Mubarak Thugs attacked the local Egyptians ? 
I like your show ... but your STAFF failed you miserably tonight !!!!!!! The no-fly zone may possibly save Benghazi , however , in the long term ; the only sustainable solution would require Gadhafi s removal . 
Gadhafi will respond only to force , remember he s already lived through American bombings of Tripoli in 1980s . 
This is not a comment about last nights show as sadly we are not getting your show in South Africa any more . 
We throughly enjoyed the program when it first came to CNN & now for no reason what so ever it has been taken off the schedule . 
This is completely unacceptable & please can someone at CNN sort this out & return your excellent program to the CNN International Service ASAP . 
This is this second email I am sending in this regard . 
CNN you guys got your photos wrong . 
The photos was from Egypt not Libya . 
I understand both countries are in Africa , it 's like saying Mexico instead of United States . 
How do I trust you all now ? 
If you all had a shortage of photo clips you all could borrow from Aljezeera -LRB- US -RRB- that has very graphic photos of Libya and the killing of little kids playing ball by the Israelis . ? 
What is the difference between Netanyahu and Sadam Husain or Gaddafi ?? Where is the UN now ? 
You all did the same thing with Ahmadinejad interview , he said something to the effect by his translator in English '' In history no occupier has ever stayed on the land indefenately '' CNN and the Western media said '' Israel will be wiped out from the face of the earth '' . 
Around the same time Ahmadinejad received an award by the Jewish Rabbis . 
Why should one group of people be allowed to occupy land some one is living on presently and be ruthlessly KILLED by another group because it was written in the book FIVE to SIX thousand years back ? 
If this is the case can we give Normandy to Great Britain and the Americas back to the Native Indians ????? The Lies , Fascism , Hypocrisy is the root of the problems in the Middle East not the Judaism , Christianity or Islam . 
The Al-quida is a creation of the West and the media spin . 
Who ever monitory gains from this conflict are the culprits . 
Now do we go attack Iran because Israel wants us to ????? Does any one think about our service men an women who are made to fight these wars from our tax dollars ? 
Why do any interviews at all on the Lybian conflict , what the coalition should do is drop leaf-lets to all opposition fighters telling them to spread the word to get clear of any cities where pro-Gadaffi fighters or supporters may be and once their all clear , `` JUST LEVEL THE ENTIRE COUNTRY WITH THOUSANDS OF DAISEY-CUTTERS '' ... Boom-bang problem solved , then move back in and mass bury the bodies and go on with the new government they want !!! And they will always know what will happen if things get out of control again ... `` PROBLEM SOLVED , NO MORE THREAT FROM THE COUNTRY OF LYBIA '' \* Wayne \* This would simply be loved by avid Daisey-Cutters in this country of ours . 
And we have plenty of them around up on the Hill too aka McCain & Leiberman . 
There has developed a perverse fondness in our nation of seeing us bomb far off nations . 
We raelly love to sit back & enjoy the fireworks . 
I quite agree with the comments posted by @ Nani . 
The reason the Middle East is in upheaval of violence can be explained to some extent by what this blogger said . 
For too long we in the US & Western countries in general have followed a policy based on bigotry , suspect poltical agenda and deception while dealing with issues in that region . 
American public has been insidiously shielded from the truth and reality on the ground by Lobbies & special interests . 
Openly & calendistinely supported by politicos whose loyalty to American interests is subservient to the interests of another state posing as our ` ally ' . 
Unfortunately our mainstream media tags along . 
Mr. Morgan its time that anchors like yourself perk up courage , in the face off ungodly opposition I know , to bring the truth to American public . 
Put the likes of Robert Falk the American academic , Ilan Pappe the Israeli historian and public intellectuals like Naom Chomsky , Uri Avnery and MJ Rosenberg on your show and do the right thing . 
As always , well written and spot on with your assessment . 
Very nice to see you again IKHAN . 
It has been a long time ... and you have been missed How does one attempt imposing Democracy out of the Barrel of a gun is beyond any ones critical thinking . 
Arabia : After all , the people who would like to rise against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia are those Shias and Sunnies they just happen to be close to Iran , that we simply can not risk as Iran it 's to good target to deviate some home truth . 
Besides , if the House of Saudi is removed , the extremists will take over ... what ? 
Saudi are not enough extremists in power already ? 
Well , that depends on how we define `` extremists '' if thrown out the surviving Israels will be in question . 
The House of Saudi have distorted Islam and lets not forget the 19 terrorists were Saudi citizen along with Bin Laden . 
So who is the terrorising there people ??? Bahrain : A dot of a country with over 40 percent Arab Shia 's , 30 percent foreigners and 30 percent Suni 's . 
The country that is surviving on Saudi money and US tax dollars . 
Where will the Kingdom go ???? they loathe the Saudi 's that feed them . 
Who is killing the Bahrain people ? 
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia sent Pakistani born solders to do the genocide ... and the Pakistani police is doing the killing in hospitals . 
What do we do ? 
Nothing just wait and see . 
Bahrain has no OIL just some stupid pearls . 
Chechnya : Oh no ! 
Russia is a rather strong nation and they are after all , simply `` defending themselves '' against those `` Muzlem terrorists '' in Chechnya . 
China : A country that has woken up and will be taking on the world . 
China is a matured country but do they trust us ? 
What happened to Qinjiang and Tibet ? 
we do n't hear of them even the Dalal Lama is retiring , what happened to all the human right issues that we use to hear ? 
We were sure the Muzlem Uighurs in Qinjiang were `` terrorists '' and we hear no protests from the Tibetans . 
Israel they are not technically killing its own people , they are simply killing people under its occupation . 
Who cares about Palestinians they are all terrorist resisting the occupation and not cooperation . 
the Chairman of the WA State Republican Party said , `` I think there is something in the DNA of the Arabs that makes them violent '' . 
No he is not a raciest he was stating a FACT , had he said this about Jewish brothers next door that would be `` RACIEST '' . 
He would be out of sacked , shoed , kicked out , spat on out of office like the Designer for House Dior few weeks back . 
Iran : Oh yes , Iranians ! 
Those Mullahs and Ahmeda whats his name should be blasted out of existence because they are a threat to Israel , I mean , the whole world ! 
They have WMDs , nukes and all that bad and evil things , beside the leader has beedie eyes that shine like a monkey and Sara Pailen can not get his spelling right or pronounce his name so lets attack Iran this will keep the Middle East conflict and a little longer the Kingdom of Saudi can hold on to his golden toilet and Israel can occupy Libya and Egypt and Sara Palen , Trump and Newt can run the White House . 
The Iranian are all `` terrorist '' though they have never occupied any country or attacked any of it 's neighbors and 54 percent of it 's women have university degrees . 
-LRB- This must fear Pailen -RRB- The Iranian are Arin 's not Arabs but this does not matter we still do n't like them . 
Ivory Coast : Ouch , do they have oil or not ? 
This little country should probably be left to settle its own problems , What are we world 's the Security for the world ? 
India : India is a democracy country and the Kashmiri people are after all , `` Muzlem terrorists '' . 
We simply do not have the resources to engage all countries in the world . 
Beside we ca n't fight all the curry smelling people . 
Pakistan : Pakistan is where our tax dollars is going feeding Zardari and friends build there palaces in England and Dubai . 
We do n't need to attack Pakistan they are eliminating innocent people for $ $ $ they just call the dead terrorist . 
Who is going to identify them ? 
They let the US drones bring down the whole village while Zardari son studies poetry at Oxford waiting for his father to abdicate before he is called King . 
Long live corruption but who cares we are getting the Al quidas out ! 
Sri Lanka : What genocide ? 
this completely is a UN issue and they are busy in Haiti right now , short staffed because of all the conflict and earthquakes . 
Yemen : Dear Lord Yemen , against the worst `` terrorists '' . 
If Yemen falls , then Al-Qaeda will take over and we need to maintain a low , low profile . 
The Yemenis will bring the Kingdom of Saudi down right after the flood and storms on a Friday . 
Friday prays will be soon banned in Saudi Arabia after this predication and that black cat under the stairs will be brought to trial in Court . 
Libya : OK so what 's going on in Libya ? 
We can not get Gaddafi out because we need to bombed Libya flat into the ground then take Gaddafi alive with his son , his wives , his nurses and all his female body guard to the Hague and given him proper treatment and justly try them in court that will take years and cost millions of dollars and some get very rich . 
While we will build Libya we will take it 's oil in exchange . 
You make me sick Piers . 
The US got into WW11 because Germany was bombing the British . 
We saved Britain and most of Europe . 
Now when the Libyans ask for our help you are calling us wrong . 
Kadafi is killing his own people instead of giving them a Democratic government . 
He closed the hospitals for God 's sake . 
He is ignorant monster . 
You were probably born 20 years after the war because we took to the air . 
The Guy who Helped Bush-Cheney attack Iraq on false pretenses killing 1 million Iraqis ? 
The Same Paul Wolfowitz who gave a commencement speech on June 2001 PREDICTING 9\/11 ? 
Piers ... you are not an American so perhaps you are the wrong man for the job . 
Press in the USA serves as watchdog not as Ministry of Propoganda . 
Wolfowitz is a war criminal responsible for 9\/11 as sure as Alquaida is ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
OJ , Lance , Casey Anthony ? 
Can they ever get their reputations back ? 
@garyvee , @Faith_Saile , @HuntsmanAbby , Stan Van Gundy hashing it out . 
9:51 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` We do n't focus on it as an illness ... we look at them as crazy '' Stan Van Gundy on ex-LAPD cop killer , others who commit mass murders . 
9:45 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` There will be more people entertained by the tweeting during the State of the Union than the speech '' @garyvee #SOTU 9:40 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Yet you follow me , you dumbass -RRB- RT @ROSSH2304 Everytime someone rt 's a @piersmorgan tweet a little bit of me dies inside ... please stop !! You were fabulous ! -RRB- 
RT @reallorraine Thanks @piersmorgan and Life Stories team & brilliant audience - made me feel very relaxed and happy ! 
