Kofi Annan is embarking on an immediate and full-scale lobbying campaign to persuade members of the United Nations to adopt what he calls `` the most far-reaching reforms in the history of the UN '' . 
The UN secretary general 's blueprint for change , outlined on Monday , recommends abolishing the controversial human rights commission , enlarging the security council from 15 to 24 seats , setting new rules for military intervention , tightening oversight of the UN 's contracts and sanctions programs , and creating a new peace-building body to strengthen civil society in countries ravaged by conflict . 
Contained in a 63-page draft report to the general assembly , entitled In Larger Freedom : Towards Development , Security and Human Rights For All , the reform package ran into prompt criticism from several countries . 
But Mr Annan insisted that his plans should not be seen as an `` la carte menu '' from which member states took only the bits they liked . 
`` It 's going to take lots of work , lots of work here in this building with the permanent representatives , lots of work with capitals , with the heads of state and government , lots of work by certain envoys that I hope to send out , '' he said . 
`` I believe that , as difficult as it is , the member states -- the majority of the member states -- will come to conclude that what is on the table ... is in their long-term interest and go along with it , '' he added , noting at one point that this included the US . 
After the fierce divisions over the Iraq war , corruption in the oil-for-food program , and sexual abuse scandals involving peacekeepers , the reform package lifts the UN back on to the high ground of global concerns . 
It is an effort to find common ground between North and South . 
It tries to meet the priorities of rich countries , which put most store by security against terrorism and nuclear proliferation , and poor states more concerned with poverty and disease . 
Mr Annan warns that a catastrophic terrorist act in a big western city could undermine poorer countries ' economies , while an outbreak of disease in a poor region could spread to the developed world . 
The report gives equal weight to the UN 's three basic purposes : development , security and human rights . 
In the introduction Mr Annan says : `` We will not enjoy development without security , we will not enjoy security without development , and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights . 
Unless all these causes are advanced , none will succeed . '' 
The report 's most radical proposal , to end the human rights commission , fits in with Bush administration wishes . 
In place of the commission , which meets for only six weeks a year , it proposes a smaller and less politicised council that can meet regularly . 
Mr Annan says the existing commission has `` been increasingly undermined by its declining credibility and professionalism '' . 
Echoing Washington 's argument , he said some states had sought membership on the commission `` not to strengthen human rights , but to protect themselves against criticism , or to criticise others '' . 
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International applauded the proposal but said that any reforms should retain independent investigators and an ability for witnesses and victims to testify . 
Other controversial recommendations build on those of a high-level panel that Mr Annan set up last year to study security threats and challenges . 
It called for international agreement on a new definition of terrorism to outlaw all attacks on civilians , and proposed a change in the balance between state sovereignty and the right of states to intervene . 
The plan for a universal definition of terrorism ran into criticism from Algeria and other Arab states , who fear it may rule out the right of armed resistance to foreign occupation . 
In a move that will please developing countries , the report calls for new powers for the economic and social council that many feel has been sidelined by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . 
It should hold annual ministerial-level meetings to review progress towards the UN millennium development goals , Mr Annan says . 
France 's UN ambassador , Jean-Marc de la Sabliere , summed up general reaction to the report when he said it was `` ambitious but achievable '' . 
