Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
The battle against the giant Gulf of Mexico oil slick gained traction Wednesday , even as officials raced to prepare for a sudden course shift that could push the thick gunk into the shipping channel of the Mississippi River . 
Two weeks into the crisis that began with an explosion on the rig Deepwater Horizon , robotic submarines sealed one of three leaks on the sea bottom . 
The mile-deep plumbing fix did not diminish the amount of oil flowing from the blown-out well , but it simplified the next step in the emergency response . 
That step involves what has been called a containment dome . 
It 's not a dome at all , but a boxy , four-story-tall , 100-ton metal structure used in shallow water after Hurricane Katrina . 
Refurbished and equipped with mud flaps , the dome on Wednesday was to take a 12-hour journey by barge from an industrial port to the open gulf , where it was scheduled to arrive by early Thursday above the blown-out well . 
If all goes as planned , a crane mounted on a second barge will lower the dome 5,000 feet to cover the largest and most worrisome leak , a break in a 21-inch pipe known as the riser . 
That leak is 460 feet from the wellhead and is the source of the overwhelming majority of the oil escaping the well . 
The dome is supposed to capture the oil and pump it through pipes to a barge at the surface . 
This will take several days to get up and running , but by Monday a significant amount of the oil gushing into the gulf may start to wind up instead in the barge , said BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles . 
At a news conference , Suttles and other officials tried to manage expectations , noting that such a recovery operation has never been attempted at such a great depth . 
`` It 's very complex , and it will likely have challenges along the way , '' Suttles said . 
A few hours after its scheduled departure , workers were still trying to make sure the unwieldy dome was securely fastened on the barge . 
The oil itself remained offshore for another day , but it is spreading , creeping closer to the Mississippi River Delta and threatening Louisiana 's Chandeleur Sound and Breton Sound . 
The three-day forecast by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration projected that the oil will move into the Mississippi 's deepwater entrance , known as the Southwest Pass , and drift west of the delta , which would be dire for the fishing industry along that stretch of the Louisiana coast . 
On Tuesday , leaders of the National Wildlife Federation set out in a boat from Pass Christian , Miss. , and found oil about 18 miles off Mississippi . 
`` The first thing that hit us 18 miles from the Biloxi wetlands was the nauseating smell , like spilled gasoline at a gas station , but stronger , '' Jeremy Symons , a spokesman for the group , wrote in an e-mail . 
`` Then we ran into a seemingly endless sea of brown heavy sludge floating on the water . 
With open ocean behind us , the oil sludge spread in front of us as far as we could see . '' 
In Plaquemines Parish , La. -- the area that follows the Mississippi to its mouth , and the land nearest to the oil leak -- Parish President Billy Nungesser said he feared that the fishing ban east of the river 's mouth would be extended west . 
`` Half the people ca n't pay their light bills , '' he said . 
`` If they close the western side , the other half will be out of work . '' 
Better weather and calm seas , a meteorological anomaly recently , made possible a controlled burn of the oil on the surface for the first time in a week . 
A fleet of boats skimmed oil from the surface , and planes dropped chemical dispersants wherever the slick edged toward Louisiana 's coastal islands . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
