Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
What do you call a gigantic man-made disaster that is threatening to despoil the ecosystems and wreck the economies of the Gulf Coast ? 
The answer is important , if you happen to be one of the companies responsible for it . 
The massive slick spreading toward Louisiana has gone by several names since crude oil began gushing from a damaged drilling rig on April 20 . 
Media accounts have referred to it as `` the Gulf oil spill , '' `` the Deepwater Horizon spill '' and the `` Gulf Coast disaster . '' 
President Obama , leaving little doubt about whom he considers responsible for the epic mess , put a brand name on it in remarks in Louisiana on Sunday . 
The president dubbed it `` the BP oil spill , '' after the company -LRB- formerly British Petroleum -RRB- that leased the now-damaged drilling platform . 
The Environmental Protection Agency refers to it the same way in its official pronouncements . 
The name of a disaster can be critical , both as a historic matter and the more immediate matters of image , public relations and legal liability . 
BP has said it will honor `` legitimate '' claims from people and businesses seeking compensation from disruption caused by the spill . 
But since there are likely to be many disputed claims -LRB- `` This is America -- come on , '' BP chief executive Tony Hayward told the Times of London on Wednesday -RRB- , having your company 's name inextricably linked to a disaster ca n't help when a jury begins assigning damages . 
BP could face the same fate as another oil giant , Exxon , whose name is forever stamped on the 1989 oil spill in Prince William Sound , Alaska . 
That spill was named for the Exxon Valdez , the tanker that hit a reef and ruptured . 
Other calamities -- plane crashes , the Tylenol poisonings -- have been shorthanded by a corporate or product name , too . 
But companies do n't always get top billing , even when they acknowledge responsibility . 
The leak of poisonous chemicals at a plant in Bhopal , India -- which killed as many as 12,000 people -- came to be known more by its place of origin than by the company that owned the plant , Union Carbide . 
Similarly , the partial meltdown of a Pennsylvania nuclear power plant in 1979 was named after the facility where the incident occurred , Three Mile Island . 
Few people remember the name of the company that operated the plant and was responsible for its safety , General Public Utilities . 
bp.com -RRB- avoids any linkage , calling it `` the spill '' or `` Gulf of Mexico response '' or `` BP 's MC252 response , '' a reference to the rig known formally as Mississippi Canyon 252 . 
In a series of television interviews on Monday , BP 's Hayward tried to thread a tricky needle , taking responsibility for the cleanup but shifting some of the blame to others . 
`` This was n't our accident , '' he said on ABC 's `` Good Morning America . '' 
`` This was a drilling rig operated by another company . 
It was their people , their systems , their processes . 
We are responsible not for the accident , but we are responsible for the oil and for dealing with it and for cleaning the situation up . '' 
`` You 're not responsible for the accident ? '' 
host George Stephanopoulos asked , a bit incredulously . 
Hayward explained that the explosion occurred on a rig owned by Transocean , a drilling company based in Switzerland , and that the rig was leased by BP . 
`` It was their equipment that 's failed ; it was their systems and processes that were running it , '' Hayward said . 
Major oil spills are infrequent in the United States , and there 's no standard way of naming them , said Bill Bush , a spokesman for the American Petroleum Institute , a Washington industry group . 
The two usual ways are by location -LRB- `` the New Orleans spill '' -RRB- or by the name of the facility or ship involved -LRB- Exxon Valdez , Argo Merchant , Athos 1 -RRB- . 
Companies typically do n't get tarred ; the 1969 spill off the coast of Southern California came to be known not by the company that caused it , Union Oil of California , but by where it happened -LRB- `` the Santa Barbara spill '' -RRB- . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
