BP is getting more political , and that may help weather oil-spill storm John Browne , the former chief executive of energy giant BP , used to brag about his company 's relative lack of political involvement , saying the London-based conglomerate purposely shied away from spending too much on lobbying and campaign contributions . 
But since Tony Hayward took over as CEO in 2007 , BP has increased its spending on U.S. politics , a move that may help the firm weather the political storm over its devastating oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The company has mobilized a massive Washington lobbying campaign over the past week in response to the worsening crisis , dispatching senior executives to meet with Obama administration officials and members of Congress , while Hayward and other executives make frequent media appearances to defend BP 's performance . 
The onslaught underscores the expanding political role of BP , which has spent nearly $ 20 million on Washington lobbying since January 2009 and now ranks second only to ConocoPhillips within the powerful oil and gas industry , according to lobbying disclosure data . 
Its list of hired lobbyists reads like a Who 's Who of the profession , from Democratic powerhouse Tony Podesta to former Reagan aide Kenneth Duberstein . 
The company 's political action committee has also stepped up its contributions to lawmakers of both parties , particularly to key representatives of oil-dependent states such as Louisiana and Alaska . 
Unlike most other oil companies , BP also shifted some of its donations to Democrats as the party gained control of Congress , though it still gives the most to Republicans . 
-LRB- Barack Obama 's presidential campaign did not accept corporate donations , but received about $ 77,000 from BP employees . -RRB- 
BP America , the company 's U.S. affiliate , has a special `` external advisory council '' that includes former House majority leader Thomas A. Daschle -LRB- D-S.D. -RRB- ; two former GOP senators , Warren Rudman -LRB- N.H. -RRB- and Alan K. Simpson -LRB- Wyo. -RRB- ; Christine Todd Whitman , an Environmental Protection Agency administrator under George W. Bush ; and Jamie S. Gorelick , a deputy attorney general during Bill Clinton 's administration , according to BP records . 
Leon Panetta , President Obama 's CIA director , also served on the council before taking his intelligence post . 
A BP spokesman did not respond to a request for comment on the firm 's political activities in Washington . 
Athan Manuel , director of the Sierra Club 's Lands Protection Program , said BP 's more aggressive lobbying efforts in recent years have been a disappointment to environmental groups , which were heartened by the company 's earlier pledges to move `` beyond petroleum '' and into alternative forms of energy . 
`` They seem to have returned to a more traditional oil-company approach , '' Manuel said . 
`` They 've decided to become just as active as Exxon or anyone else . '' 
One major recipient of donations from BP is Sen. Mary Landrieu -LRB- D-La . -RRB- 
, who has taken more than $ 15,000 in PAC contributions and thousands more from BP employees , according to data from the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics . 
Landrieu said at a hearing earlier this year that the risks of offshore drilling were `` minimal , '' and since the spill has urged caution in moving to curtail the practice . 
Landrieu told MSNBC on Wednesday that she has received donations from environmentalists and oil companies . 
`` I 'm very proud to actually receive money from both sides of this debate , because they , I believe , understand that I 'm as honest a broker as I can be here , '' she said . 
`` I am not a handmaiden to the oil industry . '' 
Turkish American groups were outraged when a House committee voted this year to label an Ottoman-era slaughter of Armenians as `` genocide , '' complaining that they had been out-lobbied by the other side . 
Now activists have started a new advocacy group aimed at publicizing the views of ethnic Turks in the United States . 
The project , dubbed Ten Thousand Turks , is being spearheaded by the Turkish Coalition USA Political Action Committee , which has given federal candidates more than $ 270,000 since 2007 . 
The group aims to sign up 10,000 members by October . 
G. Lincoln McCurdy , the PAC 's treasurer , said Turkish Americans ' views have `` not been heard collectively in great numbers ... We intend to change that , and start a new chapter of Turkish American activism in American politics and civic life . '' 
