Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
The catastrophic oil spill unfolding in the gulf has provided the environmental community with a rare opportunity to shift public opinion on climate and energy issues , an opening on which it has been quick to capitalize . 
National environmental groups -- including the Sierra Club and the Natural Resources Defense Fund -- have rushed volunteers and scientific experts to the Gulf of Mexico to help with the cleanup in the aftermath of the Deepwater Horizon rig 's collapse . 
But they are also holding news conferences , filming TV spots and organizing protest rallies , all aimed at persuading lawmakers to block new offshore oil drilling and pass legislation curbing U.S. greenhouse gas emissions . 
`` It 's very difficult , in our society , to cut through the din and get people to listen and pay attention , '' said Friends of the Earth Managing Director David Hirsch , whose group is preparing TV ads on the issue . 
`` Unfortunately , these are the times when it happens . 
These are the moments when you can be heard . '' 
Jack Gerard , president of the American Petroleum Institute , questioned environmentalists ' tactics . 
`` It 's unfortunate that some would seize on a tragic accident to push a political agenda , '' Gerard said . 
`` We do n't have the facts yet . '' 
Although the exact cause of the blowout remains unclear , activists have used the spill to bolster their argument that the risks of offshore oil exploration outweigh its benefits , and that the United States would be better off focused on promoting alternative energy sources . 
`` This does serve as a wake-up call , to both the administration and Congress , to focus more effort on reducing the demand for oil , '' said Sierra Club Executive Director Michael Brune . 
A little over a month ago , it appeared that environmentalists would have to accept the prospect of expanded oil drilling off the U.S. coasts , as President Obama identified new areas for exploration and the three senators working on a bipartisan climate bill -- John F. Kerry -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, Lindsey O. Graham -LRB- R-S.C. -RRB- and Joseph I. Lieberman -LRB- I-Conn . -RRB- 
-- inserted offshore drilling provisions into their draft . 
But now the administration has said it will review its proposal , and two GOP governors -- California 's Arnold Schwarzenegger and Florida 's Charlie Crist -- have reversed course and said they oppose any drilling off their state 's shores . 
At least two Democratic senators , Robert Menendez -LRB- N.J. -RRB- and Bill Nelson -LRB- Fla. -RRB- , have said they wo n't support a climate proposal that encourages offshore drilling , and even some moderate Republican senators say they want to reexamine the role offshore drilling should play in the nation 's energy supply . 
`` Whether it should be there in the future is an open question , '' said Sen. Richard G. Lugar -LRB- R-Ind . -RRB- . 
BP was one of three major oil companies prepared to endorse the compromise Senate climate bill last month -- Lieberman described them to reporters in late March as `` our new friends '' -- and Lieberman indicated Tuesday that he did not think the senators would pull offshore oil drilling from the package before they formally introduced it . 
But a Democratic Senate aide who spoke on the condition of anonymity said when it comes to the bill 's drilling language , `` We will have to change things from where they were before , but we need to figure out what that is . '' 
The aide that the bill 's sponsors are encouraged by the fact that the spill has `` engaged and activated a large part of the environmental community . 
We feel like this is a really good opportunity for us . '' 
Reaching a drilling compromise that will attract Republican support without alienating Democrats such as Menendez and Nelson remains a challenge . 
For the moment , however , environmentalists appear to think they have the upper hand . 
The Sierra Club has not only mobilized 2,000 people to volunteer in the Gulf states , it will hold a `` Clean It Up '' rally Saturday in New Orleans along with simultaneous `` solidarity events '' such as demonstrations at BP gas stations around the country and mock oil spills that will involve temporarily laying black trash bags on beaches . 
Dozens of green groups now participate in a daily `` oil disaster war room call '' to plot their strategy . 
`` I 'm not crazy about what got it there , but we 've got to take , advantage of it , '' Ocean Conservancy President Vicki Spruill said of the spill 's moment in the media spotlight . 
`` We 've got to turn this crisis into an opportunity . '' 
But Obama and his top deputies have yet to talk about reducing the nation 's dependence on fossil fuels in connection with the oil spill , something that worries environmentalists such as Brune . 
`` There 's no mention yet of how to get to the root of this , '' he said . 
`` If we 're not getting to the root problem -- our addiction to oil -- we 're going to see this problem repeated again and again . '' '' 
