View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
Thursday , May 6 , 2010 ; 11:30 AM PORT FOURCHON , LA. -- The 125-ton box that BP hopes will control the underwater oil geyser threatening the Gulf Coast arrived Thursday morning at the site of an offshore rig 's collapse . 
Later in the day , the 40-foot-tall containment dome will be lowered by a huge crane onto the spouting wellhead . 
Although a containment device has never been used so far below the surface , the company that made it -- Wild Well Controls -- believes that this one can capture and then pipe up to waiting tankers a substantial amount of the oil that would otherwise be released to the sea . 
Given the large and steady stream of oil coming out from the rupture , the well-being of thousands of Gulf Coast residents and countless creatures that live in the hyper-fertile region depend on the box 's success . 
Louisiana officials announced Thursday that they had discovered two more dead birds , covered in oil , near the Grand Gosier Islands . 
Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry tried to moderate expectations that the containment device would be a silver bullet . 
`` I know we are all hoping that this containment system will work , but I want to remind everybody that this containment system is a first of its kind deployed in 5,000 feet of water , '' Landry said , according to the Associated Press . 
The waters at the spill site were calm Thursday morning , AP reported . 
A spokesman for BP , which is working to contain the oil spill , told the news service that the drop is expected after noon Thursday . 
The device is the latest of a broad range of techniques being used to staunch the oil leak , created by the explosion of the Transocean Deepwater Horizon Rig on April 20 , killing 11 workers . 
The launch Wednesday night of the gleaming box from Port Fourchon , an industrial hub at the very southern tip of Louisiana , captured the uneasy balance of forces at work here , where the marshlands hit the sea . 
The barge inched away from the Wild West yard along a canal flanked by cranes , discarded oil rigs , tank farms and endless barbed wire -- a gas industry outpost of heavy equipment and hard-hat men . 
Helicopters come in and out regularly to the port , and oil rigs are visible on the horizon . 
The dome , which was used in shallower waters during Hurricane Katrina , was modified at the Wild Wells yard . 
Two more are being prepared . 
The barge then traveled the Bayou Lafourche to the deeper waters , passing some of the most fertile marshes in the nation -- where fish and crustaceans of all kinds flourish in the rich outflow of the Mississippi River . 
One side of the bayou is an industrial park ; the other side part of a national park . 
The road down to Port Fourchon runs alongside another bayou , now filled with hundreds of fishing boats . 
They supply a significant percentage of the nation 's seafood , but are now unable to go out to work . 
Even the harshness of Port Fourchon can not eliminate the fertility of the land : Drainage ditches filled with trash and garbage still are alive with crabs and schools of darting fish . 
While fishermen have been vocal in their dismay about the spill , the army of workers at Port Fourchon were officially mum as the dome moved out . 
Wild Wells referred all questions to the Unified Command Deepwater Joint Information Center many miles away in Robert , La. , and workers from companies nearby said they were told not to speak with reporters . 
One man , however , offered this reminder : `` You know , '' he said , after speaking on the condition of anonymity , `` we have as much riding on this as the fishermen and beachfront folks . 
If this can be controlled , we go back to business like before . 
If it creates a big mess , we 're in big trouble for quite a while . '' '' 
