BP has changed its chief executive since the oil spill Oil giant BP has announced a return to profit in the three months to September after last quarter 's record loss . 
The firm said its replacement cost profit for the period was $ 1.85 bn -LRB- # 1.15 bn -RRB- , as against the $ 17bn loss recorded from April to June . 
The previous loss reflected the massive costs of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill crisis , which followed an explosion on a drilling rig in April . 
BP said the cost of the oil spill had now risen by $ 7.7 bn to $ 39.9 bn . 
Bob Dudley , who led the clean-up , became BP 's chief executive last month . 
He replaced Tony Hayward , who was criticised for his leadership during the crisis . 
BP said the $ 39.9 bn cost of the oil spill included $ 20bn set aside under pressure from the US government for compensation payments . 
Eleven workers on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig were killed by the explosion on 20 April and hundreds of miles of coast were polluted . 
The well was finally capped on 15 July , after an estimated 4.9 m barrels of oil -LRB- 171m gallons -RRB- had leaked into the sea , and fully sealed in September . 
BP 's $ 1.85 bn third-quarter profit compares with a $ 5bn profit for the same period in 2009 . 
Robert Peston Business editor , BBC News BP 's return to the black shows quite how strong and profitable it is . 
BP has taken a further $ 7.7 bn -LRB- # 4.8 bn -RRB- of charges relating to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill - bringing to almost $ 40bn the total provision that it has made for the ultimate costs of the debacle . 
BP has benefited from a higher oil price , which boosted earnings in its giant exploration and production division by more than $ 2bn , offsetting a fall in the amount of oil produced . 
That division is being broken up , as part of comprehensive efforts by the new chief executive Bob Dudley to rehabilitate this battered business . 
His cure also includes shrinking BP , selling off up to $ 30bn of assets by the end of the year , to cover those huge oil spill costs . 
The news was well received by the markets , which sent the company 's share price up more than 1 % by early afternoon . 
`` The update provides a stark reminder that the fallout from the spill will follow BP for some considerable time to come , '' said Richard Hunter , head of UK equities at Hargreaves Lansdown stockbrokers . 
`` In the meantime , BP has refocused itself with safety as a priority and , in terms of its normal operations , the company continues to generate enormous amounts of income . '' 
In another development , Japanese firm Mitsui said on Tuesday that one of its subsidiaries , Moex Offshore , had been billed $ 1.9 bn by BP to cover costs from the oil spill . 
Moex owns 10 % of the Macondo oil well project operated by BP . 
Mitsui said it had withheld payment , because it said there was uncertainty about the amount due . 
Last week , US investigators said cement used to seal the Macondo well may have contributed to the blow-out that caused the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Both BP , which owned the well , and Halliburton , the contractor responsible for the cement , were aware of tests showing it was unstable , they said . 
Halliburton has denied the claims , saying the tests were invalid as they were on a different kind of cement . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
