The fate of the gushing Gulf of Mexico oil well , and of deep-water oil drilling in general , remained very much unresolved Monday , even as BP engineers finally installed a massive new sealing cap that could potentially enable them to shut down the well permanently . 
The drama in the depths off the coast of Louisiana unfolded as , in Washington , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar issued a new moratorium on offshore drilling , trying a new tack to get around an injunction issued recently by a New Orleans federal judge . 
Instead of banning offshore drilling based on water depth , he barred drilling by the types of rigs and equipment used in deep water . 
An Interior Department spokesman said that none of the 33 rigs whose work was interrupted in May would be able to resume their activity . 
`` I am basing my decision on evidence that grows every day of the industry 's inability in the deep water to contain a catastrophic blowout , respond to an oil spill and to operate safely , '' Salazar said . 
BP and its oil-industry allies hope that in the days ahead they will gain the upper hand on the Macondo well , drilled by the Deepwater Horizon rig and spewing oil since the fatal blowout April 20 . 
If all goes perfectly , the well could stop polluting the gulf before it is plugged at its base with mud and concrete . 
On Saturday , BP yanked away the `` top hat '' containment cap that had been lopsidedly parked on the well since early last month . 
Over the next 48 hours , technicians used robotic submersibles and hardware lowered from the surface to reconfigure the well 's outlet . 
Instead of the jagged hole of the sheared-off riser pipe , the well was fitted with a new , simple chimney-like opening , which Monday spurted a plume of oil made frothy by injected chemical dispersants . 
The new chimney enabled BP to deploy a huge structure known as the `` 3 ram capping stack . '' 
It has three valves that can be used to close the flow of oil . 
First it had to be installed -- no slam-dunk in the cold , dark , highly pressurized deep-sea environment , where ice-like methane hydrates can quickly form and clog openings . 
With the new cap in place , oil and gas still flow out a perforated pipe at the top of the stack . 
Next will come the critical `` integrity test . '' 
It 's really a pressure test . 
How the well performs in the test will shape everything that follows . 
Before the test begins , BP will stop collecting oil from the well . 
Although the top hat , which funneled oil to a surface ship , is no longer in the picture , there is still oil flowing to a surface rig called the Q4000 via a line attached to the blowout preventer . 
The Q4000 has been burning about 8,000 barrels -LRB- 336,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day . 
On Monday , a new ship , the Helix Producer , began siphoning oil through a different line connected to the blowout preventer . 
That ship potentially could capture up to 25,000 barrels a day if ramped to full production . 
To test the well 's integrity , BP will gradually shut down the flow of oil and gas until the flow stops -- nothing out the top , nothing to surface ships . 
BP engineers and government scientists will scrutinize the pressure building in the well . 
`` Higher pressures are good news . 
They indicate that the well bore has integrity , '' said Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer . 
If the pressure does n't rise as expected , that will suggest that the well has been damaged below the seafloor . 
Suttles played down the possibility that the test could damage the well and cause leaks into the surrounding rock formation . 
But clearly these will be anxious moments in the gulf . 
`` The last thing you want to happen is have the well blow out and collapse around the wellhead , '' said Greg McCormack , director of the Petroleum Extension Service at the University of Texas . 
`` When that happens , you have a heck of a time killing that well . '' 
`` You can think of it as this great big faucet that we 're going to slowly crank down and turn off the flow and then check the pressure over a period of time , '' BP spokesman Steve Rinehart said Monday . 
The pressure readings will offer clues to what 's happening out of sight , below the gulf floor , in the well bore , Rinehart said . 
`` Will it hold ? 
Or will it leak out ? '' 
If the pressure test suggests that the well has n't been compromised , BP will leave the well `` shut in . '' 
That wo n't mean the well is dead . 
The killing of the well is still the job of the relief well . 
About the end of this month , Suttles said , BP will intercept the Macondo well and attempt to kill it with heavy mud and then concrete . 
The deep-sea activity and Washington political pronouncements formed a backdrop for the first public hearing by the presidential commission investigating the spill . 
Oystermen and sports anglers described businesses in peril . 
A senior Coast Guard official testified that tar balls will wash up for `` weeks , if not months . '' 
Some witnesses pleaded for the commission to take a stand on the drilling moratorium . 
Among the most vocal were representatives of companies that service the oil industry . 
They contended that jobs will be lost permanently and that rigs will leave the region . 
Larry Dickerson , chief executive of Diamond Offshore Drilling , said two deep-water rigs that had employed 150 people will move to Egypt and West Africa rather than wait out the ban . 
He speculated that the cause of the Deepwater Horizon disaster will be found to be `` reckless operating mistakes , '' probably tied to pressure to hasten drilling . 
His employees , Dickerson said , talk about the federal bailout of the auto industry : `` They ask how come they get bailed out and we get driven out ? '' 
The commission must deliver a report to President Obama six months from Monday . 
Flaherty reported from New Orleans . 
Staff writer Steven Mufson contributed to this report . '' 
