ON BAYOU DUFRENE , LA. -- Aaron Cortez 's job is as small as the gulf oil spill is huge : His crew is supposed to track down pieces of oil-absorbing boom that have drifted away , and pull them back into position with metal hooks . 
But for someone who enjoyed the self-reliance and independence of his old job catching bayou crabs , it 's nothing more than that . 
`` Now you 're gonna see how boring our job is , '' Cortez , 21 , said one Saturday afternoon . 
Ahead in the sweltering marsh , an errant piece of boom bobbed like a lost swimming-pool noodle . 
Cortez , who works for a contractor hired by BP , is part of a historic shift in employment that has altered the rhythms of daily life around the Gulf of Mexico . 
As the crews of local boats have been hired to help with the cleanup , thousands of men and women used to solitary , autonomous days on the water have become , in effect , low-level employees of an oil company . 
For these crews -- usually seen only in long-range TV shots , faceless participants in the gulf 's drama -- working for BP can bring good pay and the pride of fighting the spill hand-to-hand . 
But for some it comes at a psychological cost : They have given up control of their lives in exchange for hot days , bewildering bureaucracy and a nagging sense that the oil is still winning . 
The toll for a few individuals has been extreme , as illustrated last month , when a charter-boat captain working for BP committed suicide in Alabama . 
`` We 're dealing with people who are very resilient and used to being in charge of their own destiny . 
When that 's taken away , it creates an emotional and psychological crisis , '' said Anthony Speier , deputy assistant secretary of Louisiana 's Office of Mental Health . 
In the days after the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig sank April 22 , BP began hiring private boats to lay out containment boom , spot globs of oil on the surface and test for oil below the water . 
Its best-known program , called `` Vessels of Opportunity , '' has now hired more than 3,200 boats , paying $ 1,200 to $ 3,000 per day . 
In some places , the program has been welcomed as an economic lifeline . 
In Pass Christian , Miss. , the mayor said so many local fishing boats have enrolled that `` it looks like the Spanish armada when they 're coming in in the evening . '' 
`` The unknown of where you were going to get your next paycheck from , all of that was taken away when BP employed us , '' said William Scarborough , 40 , who owns five of the boats that sail out of Pass Christian harbor . 
He said many of his crew members have been dragging oil-absorbing boom underwater to check for pockets of oil , a task that is much less back-straining than their usual work catching , hauling and sorting oysters . 
`` It 's as close to a stress-free work environment that I could have ever have hoped for , '' Scarborough said . 
`` I mean , my guys , they show up to work with bells on every morning . '' 
But for crews based in other spots around the gulf , working for BP can mean long hours , confusing orders and an unsettling up-close view of the spill in their fishing grounds . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
