JADU , Libya | Mon Jul 11 , 2011 12:39 pm EDT JADU , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - In a packed classroom on a cool evening near the front line in Libya 's civil war , 15-year-old Mira is teaching children to spell out the names of animals in the ancient Berber script , an act that once could have landed her in one of Muammar Gaddafi 's jails . 
The indigenous people of north Africa , known to others as Berbers and among themselves as Amazigh , were brutally suppressed under Gaddafi , who considered the teaching of their language and culture to be a form of imperialism in his Arab country . 
They have become crucial supporters of the rebellion seeking to topple Gaddafi , with their stronghold in the Nafusa Mountains southwest of Tripoli emerging as one of the main fronts . 
Berber was the main language of North Africa before Arabic arrived with the Muslim conquest in the 7th century . 
It is still spoken in the Sahara and in mountainous parts of Algeria , Morocco and Tunisia as well as Libya . 
Activists say most of the Arabs of North Africa are in fact descended from Amazigh peoples who were there before the arrival of Islam . 
Today , the rebel-held town of Jadu , normally home to about 20,000 people but now swollen with refugees from areas within shelling range of Gaddafi 's troops , has become the center for the rebirth of Amazigh culture and language . 
Shops have painted Amazigh signs above their doors . 
For a few weeks , a radio station has been broadcasting from here in both Arabic and Amazigh , in what Berber activists believe are the first conversations in their language over Libyan airwaves in four decades . 
An Amazigh publishing house has printed four books so far over the past month , billed as Libya 's first publications in the language since Gaddafi seized power . 
And there is Mira 's school , where classes are held six evenings a week from 5:30 to 7:30 pm . 
The children study the Amazigh language at basic and advanced levels , as well as English , and sing songs in the courtyard . 
Their teachers learned Amazigh in secret from their parents at home . 
Nearby is a museum , with local artifacts defiantly labeled in the once-banned script , items bearing the distinctive geometric patterns that Berbers say are part of their heritage . 
Early in his rule , Gaddafi declared that anyone studying the Amazigh language was drinking `` poisoned milk from their mother 's breast , '' explained Fathi Anfusi , a 48-year-old Amazigh activist who escaped Tripoli and arrived in Jadu last month . 
Gaddafi accused Amazigh activists of being on the payroll of Western intelligence agencies and seeking to divide the country . 
Berber activists were rounded up and jailed . 
The hero of their movement , a poet and journalist named Said Mahrooq , was paralyzed after being run down by a car . 
Even giving children Amazigh names was forbidden . 
Anfusi , an agronomist by profession , wanted to name his daughter Tala , a Berber name meaning `` fountain . '' 
He was forced to register her with the Arabic name Hala instead . 
FRIENDS ... FOR THE REVOLUTION Even the Berber name of the Nafusa mountain range was banned . 
On Gaddafi 's maps , the region is known only as the Western Mountains . 
Gaddafi 's government still uses hostility to the Amazigh as part of its propaganda , warning Arabs in nearby towns that Berbers are coming out of the hills to attack them . 
Inside rebel-held territory , Arabs and Berbers say they are united . 
Rebel units from Berber towns like Yefren and Jadu have been fighting side by side with units from Arab towns in the mountains , such as Zintan . 
All fly the same pre-Gaddafi flag and profess similar goals of creating a democratic state . 
But although they fight side by side , the units are still kept separate . 
When they captured the village of al-Qawalish last week , one of the first acts of the rival units was to hurriedly spray-paint the names of their Arab or Berber home towns on village walls . 
An Arab rebel fighter in Zintan winced when this reporter referred to the Nafusa Mountains . 
`` Never say the Nafusa Mountains . 
That 's what the Berbers call it . 
We call it the Western Mountains , '' he said . 
But are n't you all friends ? . 
`` We are friends for now , '' the fighter replied , pausing for a moment to consider . 
`` For the revolution . '' 
Anfusi acknowledges that hostility between Arabs and Berbers will probably outlast Gaddafi 's time in power . 
`` We will discover about each other . 
This will need time . 
Maybe we need five years . 
Maybe ten years to build our country . 
This is our opportunity , '' he said . 
But in his own way , Gaddafi had inadvertently helped . 
The Libyan leader 's crackdown on the rebellion this year had united the Arabs and Berbers of the mountains for the first time , Anfusi said . 
`` The people , they all hate Gaddafi . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
