Bailout Could Deepen Crisis , CBO Chief Says Peter R. Orszag , director of the Congressional Budget Office , testifies on Capitol Hill yesterday . 
-LRB- By Brendan Hoffman -- Getty Images -RRB- The director of the Congressional Budget Office said yesterday that the proposed Wall Street bailout could actually worsen the current financial crisis . 
`` Ironically , the intervention could even trigger additional failures of large institutions , because some institutions may be carrying troubled assets on their books at inflated values , '' Orszag said in his testimony . 
`` Establishing clearer prices might reveal those institutions to be insolvent . '' 
In an interview later yesterday , Orszag explained using the following example : Suppose a company has Asset X , whose value is recorded on the books as $ 100 . 
Because of the current economic decline , Asset X 's real value has dropped to $ 50 . 
If the company takes part in the government bailout and sells Asset X for $ 50 , the company has to report a $ 50 loss on its books . 
On a scale of millions of dollars , such write-downs could ruin a company . 
Such companies `` look solvent today only because it 's kind of hidden , '' Orszag said . 
`` They actually are insolvent '' already , he said . 
In hearings on Capitol Hill so far this week , criticism of the bailout plan put forward by Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke has largely been restricted to the shape of the $ 700 billion proposal , how the money will be spent and what sort of oversight Treasury should have . 
But Orszag yesterday questioned the wisdom of the plan itself , testifying that `` it therefore remains uncertain whether the program will be sufficient to restore trust . '' 
In yesterday 's interview , Orszag said , `` The key question is : What are we buying and what are we paying for it ? '' 
Orszag offered alternatives , such as equity injections into particularly troubled companies , but allowed that those could lead to further problems , as well . 
In the end , he said , Congress must pass some sort of relief , if only because Wall Street is expecting it . 
`` If we did nothing , there is a significant risk of another collapse of confidence in the financial markets , '' he said . 
Then , there is the paperwork cost of the bailout . 
The budget office `` expects that the administrative costs of operating the program could amount to a few billion dollars per year , as long as the government held all or most of the purchased assets , '' he testified , without defining what he meant by `` a few . '' 
