Bush Calls Bailout Vital to Economy , Will Meet With McCain and Obama President Bush said yesterday that the credit crisis that has seized world markets could devastate the U.S. economy unless Congress acts quickly to approve a $ 700 billion bailout plan for the nation 's financial system , a message aimed at reluctant lawmakers as much as a deeply skeptical public . 
`` Our entire economy is in danger , '' Bush said in an address from the White House , emphasizing that the massive bailout was not targeted at `` any individual company or industry . 
It is aimed at preserving America 's overall economy . '' 
Warning that `` America could slip into a financial panic , '' Bush blamed the crisis on `` easy credit '' in the housing market and `` the faulty assumption that home values would continue to rise . '' 
As mortgage loans went bad and borrowers defaulted , he said , investors have succumbed to a `` widespread loss of confidence '' that threatens to shut down consumer lending , decimate the stock market , cause businesses and banks to fail -- and cost millions of Americans their jobs . 
`` Ultimately , our country could experience a long and painful recession , '' Bush said . 
`` Fellow citizens , we must not let this happen . '' 
Bush delivered the prime-time speech , his first in over a year , after a clamor on Capitol Hill for him to acknowledge the most serious financial crisis in decades and to personally make the case for the government intervention his administration has proposed . 
Five days after unveiling the bailout plan , which seeks to purchase troubled assets from faltering financial institutions , administration officials were still struggling to line up support among lawmakers appalled by its cost , doubtful of its methods and outraged by the speed with which they were being pushed to act . 
While the usually fractious Senate seemed to be coming together behind a version of the proposal , the administration had big trouble in the House , particularly among mistrustful Republicans who said the White House had failed to make a case for the bailout in terms ordinary people could understand . 
`` I 'm seeking answers to two fundamental questions : Why this ? 
And why now ? '' 
Rep. Deborah Pryce -LRB- R-Ohio -RRB- said before Bush delivered his remarks . 
`` You ca n't make a move this large without the approval of the American people . 
And we do n't have it , yet . '' 
Despite such skepticism , top members of the House Financial Services and Senate Banking committees are slated to sit down this morning in an effort to draft the final details of a bipartisan bill . 
Bush also invited congressional leaders as well as presidential candidates John McCain and Barack Obama to meet with him at the White House today . 
The president 's top economic advisers were lobbying hard yesterday for passage of the bill . 
In testimony before the House Financial Services Committee , Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. said the White House would drop its resistance to lawmakers ' demands for limits on executive compensation at companies that accept taxpayer money . 
Rep. Barney Frank -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, the committee 's chairman , called that a `` big step forward '' and said he would push next year to apply those limits more broadly . 
Frank said Democrats in the House and Senate had reached agreement on a bill that would include an oversight board to monitor the bailout program , requirements that taxpayers share in future profits of companies that seek assistance and new powers for bankruptcy judges to modify home mortgages for distressed borrowers . 
Lawmakers also discussed doling out the money in segments , Frank said , adding , `` It 's not going to be a straight $ 700 billion . '' 
Democrats will present that bill this morning to Republican lawmakers in hopes of reaching a final agreement , Frank said . 
He said the biggest sticking points are likely to be the bankruptcy provision and a proposal by Senate Democrats to dedicate to affordable housing some of the proceeds from the eventual sale of the assets . 
Hours before Bush 's speech , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi -LRB- D-Calif . -RRB- 
and House Minority Leader John A. Boehner -LRB- R-Ohio -RRB- issued a joint statement saying they were `` working in a bipartisan manner '' and had `` made progress '' on a bill . 
But even as the substance of a deal began to take shape , the politics were in turmoil . 
McCain declared that he did `` not believe that the plan on the table will pass '' and announced he was leaving the campaign trail to return to Capitol Hill to lead negotiations , a move panned by Democrats as a political stunt . 
Meanwhile , with less than six weeks until the November election , Democratic leaders said they would approve the plan only if a majority of Republicans in both chambers endorsed it as well . 
