State regulators trying to help life insurance companies cope with the financial crisis have granted $ 6 billion of relief from requirements meant to ensure financial stability , according to data released yesterday . 
The top recipients were Allstate Life Insurance Co. with $ 1.4 billion ; Jackson National Life Insurance Co. with $ 825.6 million and Hartford Life Insurance Co. with $ 655.2 million , according to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners . 
The relief typically came in the form of accounting changes that allowed companies to pad their financial cushions , in effect making them appear stronger than they otherwise would . 
Insurance companies are required to maintain such cushions , known as capital and surplus , to absorb losses and pay claims . 
Much of the padding involves increased counting of potential tax benefits that could end up being worthless to the companies . 
For the top three recipients , the regulatory relief accounted for 42.6 percent , 22 percent and 16.1 percent , respectively , of their financial cushions as of Dec. 31 , 2008 , according to an analysis of the NAIC data . 
Like other investors and financial institutions , life insurance companies have seen the value of their investments reduced by the financial crisis . 
Unlike banks , though , insurers have yet to receive federal bailouts to replenish lost capital . 
Industry leaders have argued that regulatory relief could help insurers weather the crisis . 
They have expressed hope that it will stave off downgrades to their credit ratings , which can be damaging to their business . 
They also want to avoid having to raise capital from investors , which could cost a lot of money and dilute the value of shareholders ' stock . 
Critics such as the Consumer Federation of America have argued that the relief could weaken insurance companies and leave policyholders at greater risk . 
The American Council of Life Insurers , an industry group , sought blanket relief earlier this year from the NAIC , an umbrella group for state regulators . 
When the NAIC refused , many state regulators filled the breach , granting special dispensations to individual companies headquartered in their states . 
Some state regulators said they wanted to make sure their home-state companies were n't left at a competitive disadvantage . 
The result is an accounting hodgepodge that makes it harder to compare insurers and gives some companies an edge over others . 
When insurers ' finances deteriorate below certain levels , state regulators can take a number of steps , such as requiring companies to submit a recovery plan or taking them over altogether . 
With few exceptions , the relief granted by regulators did not allow companies to escape increased supervision , the NAIC data suggest . 
