Pity Barack Obama 's economic advisers . 
The blogs are now demanding their scalps , and Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and his colleagues face a nasty dilemma : There are no solutions to the banking crisis without extraordinary political and financial risks . 
Thus , they have adopted a three-pronged approach , delay , delay , delay , in the hope that somebody comes up with a breakthrough . 
Here 's the problem : Today 's true market value of the U.S. banks ' toxic assets -LRB- that ugly stuff that needs to be removed from bank balance sheets before the economy can recover -RRB- amounts to between 5 and 30 cents on the dollar . 
To remain solvent , however , the banks say they need a valuation of 50 to 60 cents on the dollar . 
Translation : as much as another $ 2 trillion taxpayer bailout . 
That kind of expensive solution could send the president 's approval rating into a nose dive . 
Consider : $ 2 trillion is about two-thirds of the tax revenue the federal government collects each year . 
The logical alternative -- talk show hosts ' solution du jour -- is to temporarily restructure or nationalize the banks and leave taxpayers alone . 
Remove the toxic assets , replace management and cut the too-big-to-fail financial dinosaurs into smaller , nimbler entities . 
Then reprivatize these smaller banks and let the recovery begin . 
Oh , if it were that simple . 
I suspect Obama 's advisers would like nothing more than to dismantle an irresponsible firm such as Citigroup . 
They are afraid to do so , for one reason : All the big banks are connected to a potentially lethal web of paper insurance instruments called credit default swaps . 
These paper derivatives have become our financial system 's new master . 
The theory holds that dismantling a big bank could unravel this paper market , with catastrophic global financial consequences . 
Nobody knows , because the market for these unregulated financial derivatives , amounting potentially to over $ 40 trillion -LRB- by comparison , global gross domestic product is now not much more than $ 60 trillion -RRB- , is the financial equivalent of uncharted waters . 
Geithner has reason to be terrified . 
He was part of the Henry Paulson-led team that underestimated the devastating global-contagion effect of the collapse of Lehman Brothers . 
Geithner wo n't make the mistake of underestimation again . 
Geithner also knows that the mood in Congress has changed . 
Were a global financial brush fire to break out as a result of bank restructuring or nationalization , today 's populist Congress might just let it burn . 
Congressional anger is likely to intensify when policymakers realize that credit default swaps demand a stream of premium payments like a life insurance policy , not just a payment due at termination . 
And recent signs indicate that firms such as Citigroup , in recycling their taxpayer bailout funding , may have helped other financial firms , including some in Europe , meet these payment obligations . 
In addition , Geithner worries that because the troubled insurance giant American International Group -LRB- AIG -RRB- is a conduit for the banks ' use of credit default swaps , a collapse of AIG -LRB- as an unintended consequence of dismantling the big banks -RRB- could be catastrophic . 
AIG 's more than 300 million terrified holders of insurance-related investments and pension funds , who have investments totaling $ 20 trillion -LRB- U.S. GDP is $ 14 trillion -RRB- , could suddenly rush for redemptions -- the equivalent of a run on a bank . 
Geithner would face a worldwide insurance collapse to accompany his global banking collapse . 
Or again , maybe not . 
Here 's another likely Geithner fear -- that Congress forces the banks ' bondholders to take a hit . 
So far , only stockholders have lost out because of the banking crisis . 
One reason for the fragility in the credit default swap market of late is that markets fear that bank bondholders , who today are protected even before U.S. taxpayers , could soon see their status change . 
The worry is that if even bondholders are put at risk , U.S. and foreign investors alike would stop financing all corporate America . 
The administration says that wo n't happen , but market participants believe -LRB- probably correctly -RRB- that this White House ca n't control Congress . 
So our Treasury secretary has no choice but to talk of bank stress-testing and other tactics to buy time before the big bank bailout . 
Notice that the president 's budget already contains a contingency fund of up to $ 750 billion for a future bank bailout -- a politically shrewd number that roughly matches the size of the Paulson bailout . 
The true cost is likely to be two or three times as much , unless some last-minute intellectual breakthrough -- a tax holiday for derivatives ? 
The Obama team needs to remember that we got into this mess because of a lack of financial transparency . 
It 's time to tell the American people what the stock market already knows : that the path to recovery will probably be expensive and politically unpopular , perhaps explosively so . 
This dire situation could take us all down , which is why Obama should name a proven , world-class problem-solver who is not from Wall Street as his bank workout czar . 
James Baker , the former Republican secretary of state and Treasury secretary , comes to mind . 
Other possibilities : former Democratic senators Bill Bradley or George Mitchell . 
Perhaps the White House should name a team . 
In the end , at least one thing is certain : Our present position is unsustainable . 
The longer we delay fixing the banks , the faster the economy deleverages , the more credit dries up , the further the stock market falls , the higher the ultimate bank bailout price tag for the American taxpayer , and the more we risk falling into a financial black hole from which escape could take decades . 
David M. Smick is a global financial strategist and the author , most recently , of `` The World Is Curved : Hidden Dangers to the Global Economy . '' 
