This age of fanaticism is no time for non-believers to make enemies Humanists need to be less fussy about working with the religious who share our commitment to social justice The old story of Voltaire on his death bed is surely familiar . 
A priest bursts in on him crying , `` Renounce the devil and all his works ! '' 
Voltaire affably replies , `` This is no time to make enemies . '' 
This time of terrorist and terror , real and imagined , is no time for non-believers to make enemies . 
Fundamentalism and fanaticism are rife , but are being rejected or resisted within their own religions by most Christians and Muslims . 
If we humanists are fully secure in our non-belief , scepticism and secularism , we can work together with those of all beliefs who fight against new or born-again enemies to freedom . 
We should not confuse the pinpricks of religiosity -LRB- religious broadcasting on the BBC -RRB- or the specific body blows of even the modern Catholic church with the real threats to democracy , freedom and international law now posed by both Christian and Muslim fundamentalists . 
Archbishop Rowan Williams began a recent lecture on `` Law , Power and Peace '' with the scornful irony : `` The Iraq war was fought for the sake of freedom and democracy , so we are incessantly told . 
And ... whatever else may have resulted from that ill-fated enterprise , the present situation is not exactly freedom and democracy . '' 
There was that huge , memorable anti-war demonstration , but also Rowan Williams speaking out in powerful and reasoned terms . 
I felt that he `` spoke for England '' then , just as Robin Cook spoke for real Labor . 
Part of the motivation of the religious who spoke against the war and the mad lack of foresight and preparation for pacification may indeed have been their religious beliefs ; but the substantive arguments were rational , prudential and moral in universal terms . 
Let me make a confession . 
An admirably troublemaking body called the Citizen Organising Foundation is strong in the East End of London . 
They campaign on issues of poverty , discrimination and empowerment . 
They are an inter-faith body - Christians of many denominations , Jews , Muslims and Hindus . 
I met them through a common concern with citizenship education . 
They stretched their ecumenicity by electing me , a vice-president of the British Humanist Association , as an honorary fellow at a ceremony at St Martin-in-the-Fields ; I risked a humanist blasphemy trial gladly , because all their practical actions were motivated by a morality of social justice . 
That is what they had in common . 
Oh yes , they speak , as do Rowan Williams and the Chief Rabbi , of morality needing a grounding in faith . 
But their real religious differences , if insisted on at every turn , would render impossible their common commitment to concrete objectives of justice and human rights . 
The great German theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer , killed by the Gestapo , famously argued in his prison letters for a religionless form of Christianity appropriate for the new secular world . 
Such thinking was also that of Paul Tillich , and John Robinson 's book Honest to God was a pop version that so offended the pious tabloid editors . 
The phrase `` secular Christianity '' , current for a while among Protestant theologians , led not surprisingly to some confusion . 
The South African theologian and anti-apartheid activist John de Gruchy has revived the 16th-century usage of More and Erasmus to speak of `` Christian humanism '' . 
This is not merely a commitment to social justice among all of us , religious and irreligious alike , but recognition that , through shared natural reason , politics is a secular activity . 
For politics is inherently concerned with arbitration and compromise between differing values and interests , whereas the fundamentalist believes in a clear and literal truth in an ancient text and in a duty to impose truth on others . 
There are bizarre similarities of belief between the fundamentalists of Protestantism and Islam . 
They each believe we are in `` the last days '' and that Armageddon , the final victory or the `` Rapture '' is near at hand - so little need for the slow and tolerant processes of legal arbitration and political compromise . 
We humanists do not need to mute our intellectual criticism of religion , but for social and political purposes we should work with those who can be the most effective combatants against fanaticism . 
To work with those of other beliefs implies , of course , tact and courtesy to mute immediate criticism of what for the time and purpose at hand are irrelevancies . 
It is historically and psychologically foolish for secularists to believe that criticism of all religious belief is an effective way of combating violent fanaticism . 
We too can spend too much time preaching to the converted . 
And we do , up to a point , have a lot in common with most believers . 
Rowan Williams earlier this year talked to the Citizen Organising Foundation on `` Who 's Bringing Up Our Children ? '' 
`` What are the characteristics you would regard as marks of maturity , or having grown up as a human being ? 
... A human adult is someone who believes that change is possible in their own lives and the lives of those around them . 
A human adult is someone who ... knows they are not right about everything , and that they wo n't live for ever . 
An adult is someone sensitive to the cost of the choices they make for themselves and the people around them . 
An adult is someone who is not afraid of difference ... who is aware of being answerable to something more than a cultural consensus - someone whose values and priorities are shaped by something other than majority votes ; which is why I add -LRB- but you would expect me to -RRB- that an awareness of the Holy is an important aspect of being an adult . '' 
Well , we would expect him to , would n't we ? 
But his basic argument , like that of Bonhoeffer and John de Gruchy , is that political justice is a secular imperative . 
Our motivations may differ ; but surely we can respect differing motivations if they point to common action ? 
For Rowan Williams asked : `` What if we live in an environment where apathy and cynicism are the default positions for most people on issues of public concern ? 
... What if our environment is passive to the culture of the global market , simply receiving that constant stream of messages which flows out from producers and marketeers ? '' 
Those questions used to be answered with moral authority by Labor governments , but now there is only New Labor 's moral vacuum . 
Rowan Williams speaks with an impressive interrogating authority . 
Philosophically he is a pluralist who can quote both the churchman Neville Figgis and the Jewish atheist Harold Laski . 
Humanists must assert the secularity and plurality of politics and citizenship ; but in doing this we should not assume all believers differ from us . 
Christian humanists also believe politics is part of the secular sphere -LRB- the natural law , not the divine law -RRB- . 
Religious fanaticism thrives domestically where there is either physical poverty or poverty of political and social ideals , and internationally where there is gross injustice . 
Humanists need to be more active in social policies and less fussy about the company we keep . 
