Barnaby Rogerson and Rose Baring dispel popular misconceptions about the Islamic world with their timely collection , Meetings With Remarkable Muslims , says Louisa Waugh At last year 's Edinburgh international book festival , the author Mourid Barghouti stood in front of a large audience and said to us : `` We Palestinians are just like all of you . 
We row with our wives , sometimes get drunk , or tell lies . 
We dance in the streets , love our friends and gossip when we should know better . 
But you only see us on television when we are either killing people or being killed . '' 
Barghouti is from the city of Ramallah , but lives in exile in Cairo . 
When I talked to him after his reading , he told me that he does not hate Israelis , but despises the stereotypes meted out to Palestinians . 
In their brief introduction , the editors , Barnaby Rogerson and Rose Baring , describe current stereotypes of Muslims and Islamic culture as their motive for collating this book . 
`` Realising that the lies , half truths and manufactured fears by which this -LRB- Iraq -RRB- war had been sold to the public were backed by images of the Islamic world latched on to by our media - of bearded fanatics , suicide bombers and veiled gunmen - it seemed important to offer a truer , broader picture . '' 
The result is an eclectic avalanche of travel literature : from memoirs to chance encounters , stories of unusual life-long friendships to physical and spiritual journeys . 
The contributors are professional authors , as well as academics , film-makers , doctors , and translators , plus an Iranian singer-songwriter and an English sculptor who carves her work in stone . 
Indeed , one of the delights of this unusual book is the spectrum of writing styles it embraces . 
These veer from the brisk , quintessentially English tone of Juliet Peck describing her friendship with the Afghan mujahideen commander Abdul Haq , to Shusha Guppy 's quietly reverential tale of a janitor at the Tehran theology college where her father used to teach . 
Some of the shortest stories of all encapsulate the most memorable meetings : Tahir Shah 's affectionate recollection of `` conversations paid for in postage stamps '' with his elderly Moroccan shanty town neighbor , or Peter Clark 's elegiac vignette about reuniting Wilfred Thesiger with his former traveling companion , Musallim bin al-Kamam . 
The overall tone is more poignant and nostalgic than joyful . 
War , revolution and foreign occupation have wreaked havoc across the Islamic world , especially in the past 20 years . 
A substantial number of the characters we are introduced to have since died . 
Others have been maimed in recent invasions in the Middle East , Afghanistan and Iraq . 
In `` The Girl from Gardez '' , Alberto Cairo describes meeting a young Afghan woman called Samar Gul , who has had one of her legs blown off by a bomb the Americans were supposedly aiming at the Taliban . 
`` Six members of Samar Gul 's family were killed . 
The only survivors were herself and her younger sister . 
Her sister is not speaking to her : she can not forgive Samar Gul for saving her life by sending her out to draw water from the well just before the blast . '' 
The majority of these stories have been written by white middle-class professionals , who remain very much the dominant commentators in our culture . 
It would have been refreshing to have read more by non-British Muslims at home or abroad , and it is a shame that there are no contributions from the Balkans . 
But ultimately this is an imaginative and timely collection . 
Louisa Waugh 's Hearing Birds Fly is published by Little , Brown . 
To order Meetings With Remarkable Muslims for # 17.99 with free UK p & p call Guardian book service on 08708360875 . 
Write your review of this or any other book , find out what other readers thought or add it to your lists Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Review : Meetings With Remarkable Muslims edited by Barnaby Rogerson and Rose Baring This article appeared on p9 of the Guardian review section of the Guardian on 01.01 BST on Saturday 22 October 2005 Latest news and views from the Guardian 's books team paullaity : Read this : clever and funny and rightly cutting . 
