By Imogen Foulkes BBC News , Geneva The meeting in Geneva will try to come up with a new strategy to end violence in Syria For 16 months , government troops and opposition forces have been fighting . 
Thousands of civilians have died and thousands more have lost their homes in a conflict which has , UN human rights investigators say , been characterised by widespread rights violations such as torture , revenge killings and abduction . 
In their latest report , the investigators warn that the conflict has now spread right across the country , and that sectarian violence is becoming more common . 
Obviously no-one wants such a situation to continue . 
The problem is that the big powers do not , yet at any rate , agree on how this conflict can be brought to an end . 
Kofi Annan has outlined a plan for the transition of power in Syria The aim of the Geneva meeting is to try to get Kofi Annan 's six-point plan back on track . 
In fact the plan has never really been on track . 
The very first point on Mr Annan 's list , a ceasefire , has never been observed . 
Now Mr Annan hopes he can get agreement on a peaceful transition of power , something also envisaged in his six-point plan which called for `` an inclusive Syrian-led political process to address the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people '' . 
Mr Annan says he is optimistic that the Geneva meeting will come up with a strategy , but just hours before the senior diplomats were due to arrive , the signs were not good . 
Remember , this meeting almost did not happen at all because the big powers could not even agree on who should be invited . 
Mr Annan , Russia and China had all suggested that Iran , as Syria 's neighbor and a regional power , should be at the negotiating table . 
The United States and Britain said no , accusing Iran of unhelpful meddling in Syria 's conflict . 
In the end Iran was left off the invitation list , and Russia agreed to come anyway , a compromise many observers viewed as a positive sign . 
But now there is another , and even bigger , stumbling block . 
Kofi Annan has apparently prepared a draft document outlining how a transition of power could happen , with the creation of a unity government followed by multi-party elections . 
But who will be included in this unity government ? 
Russia believes the original `` inclusive , Syrian led process '' mentioned in the six-point plan means the international community does not have the right to exclude anyone , not even President Bashar al-Assad and his most fervent supporters in the government . 
Mr Annan 's draft plan , however , reportedly suggests that a new transitional government `` could include members of the present government and the opposition , and other groups , but would exclude from government those whose continued presence and participation would undermine the credibility of the transition and jeopardise stability and reconciliation '' . 
Both the United States and Britain believe that implies that President Assad would indeed be excluded - a precondition , imposed as it would be by foreign powers , that Russia almost certainly will not accept . 
Behind Russia 's reluctance to abandon President Assad completely lie Moscow 's concerns that its considerable financial interests in Syria could , perhaps literally , go up in smoke in a power change that could be chaotic and violent . 
And , closer to home , Russia has its own problems in the Caucasus ; the republics of Dagestan and Ingushetia are restive . 
Various groups , including some Islamic extremists , are challenging Moscow 's power . 
Should this tension turn into something more violent , Russia does not want to see a precedent set by the situation in Syria , in which the international community is able to impose a solution which excludes the existing government . 
But in demanding that President Assad step down , Britain and the United States must also face questions that so far they can not answer . 
Who will take power in Syria ? 
The opposition is fragmented , and may not have the necessary unity to try to form a government . 
How would multi-party elections be organised ? 
Would UN peacekeepers be required ? 
If so , who would supply them ? 
Britain and the United States would be reluctant , given their long commitment to Afghanistan . 
Meanwhile , events on the ground in Syria seem to be overtaking the diplomacy in Geneva . 
The opposition has said it will not participate in any transition which includes the current government , while President Assad has said he will not accept any solution imposed from outside . 
And the fighting continues , with heavy shelling reported in the suburbs of Damascus . 
`` Both sides are still convinced they can win militarily , '' said one weary diplomat in Geneva . 
Until both sides are persuaded otherwise , the people of Syria are unlikely to get any relief . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
