Thinktank says war boosts al-Qaida Britain 's involvement in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan contributed to the terrorist attacks in London , a respected independent thinktank on foreign affairs , the Chatham House organization , says today . 
According to the body , which includes leading academics and former civil servants among its members , the key problem in the UK for preventing terrorism is that the country is `` riding as a pillion passenger with the United States in the war against terror '' . 
It says Britain 's ability to carry out counter-terrorism measures has also been hampered because the US is always in the driving seat in deciding policy . 
The report says the security services , diverted by fighting the IRA over Northern Ireland and the rise of animal activists committing terrorist acts , failed to give priority in the early 1990s to monitoring Islamist terror activists setting up in Britain , so `` the British authorities did not fully appreciate the threat from al-Qaida '' . 
In the most politically sensitive finding , Chatham House , which used to be known as the Royal Institute of International Affairs , concludes there is `` no doubt '' the invasion of Iraq has `` given a boost to the al-Qaida network '' in `` propaganda , recruitment and fundraising '' , while providing an ideal targeting and training area for terrorists . 
`` Riding pillion with a powerful ally has proved costly in terms of British and US military lives , Iraqi lives , military expenditure and the damage caused to the counter-terrorism campaign . '' 
This finding runs counter to the line from Downing Street , which has sought to detach Iraq from the London attacks . 
On Saturday , Tony Blair said the fanatics who struck in London and launched other attacks around the world were driven by an `` evil ideology '' rather than opposition to any policy , and that it would be a `` misunderstanding of a catastrophic order '' to think that if we changed our behavior they would change theirs . 
Amid the growing debate over proposed terror laws in Britain , the Tories will today offer Charles Clarke , the home secretary , the chance to speed up new laws , provided that the government delays until next year proposals to revise the control orders system for detaining suspect terrorists . 
David Davis , the shadow home secretary , will ask the government to bring forward full details of one of the most divisive parts of the legislation - the indirect incitement to terrorism offence - by a month to September , so MPs and human rights groups such as Liberty can study them properly before the bill is published in October . 
Mr Davis will make his offer during talks today with Mr Clarke , which will also be attended by Mark Oaten , the Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesman . 
Lord Falconer , the lord chancellor , indicated yes terday that the government might be prepared to speed up anti-terror measures if it could reach agreement with the opposition parties . 
He told BBC Radio 4 's Westminster Hour : `` We should not rush into things because these things need careful thought . 
But if the opposition parties and the police can reach a consensus with us , then we can do it very quickly . '' 
Azzam Tamimi of the Muslim Association of Britain told a rally in Russell Square , near the scene of the bus bombing , that the Muslim community would not suffer in silence for the crimes of the suicide bombers . 
`` We will continue to talk , we will continue to write and we will continue to challenge the government . 
I say to Muslims , do not bow to pressure to keep accepting those pointing fingers at you . 
`` Say , ` No , I 'm not responsible for what happened on July 7 . 
My heart bleeds , I condemn it , yes , but I did not make those boys angry . 
I did not send those bombs to Iraq . 
I do not keep people locked in Guantnamo Bay and I do not have anything to do with Abu Ghraib , except to denounce it . ' 
Politicians , see what you have done to this world ? '' 
Six people have been arrested in Leeds under the Anti-Terrorism Act , police said last night , but a police source in the capital said the arrests were not linked to the July 7 attacks . 
