The loving boy and murderous terrorist The cousin of Shehzad Tanweer describes her pain and disbelief on learning that he was the Aldgate bomber . 
Monday 18 July 2005 00.01 BST Eleven days ago I watched in horror and disbelief as , one by one , we heard of the four tragic explosions . 
I feared for the lives of friends and relatives in London . 
The following Monday morning , I was boarding a London bus in defiance , just like thousands of other commuters across the city . 
On Tuesday , I heard something beyond imagination . 
Something that would test my community and shatter my family . 
One of the bombers was my cousin . 
I had seen him days before the tragic event , but I had n't seen what was coming . 
Shehzad Tanweer is remembered by his family and friends as a gentle , loving boy who always had a smile on his face . 
By those who lost loved ones in the 7\/7 attacks in London , he is remembered as a murderous terrorist . 
This has come as a terrible blow to the family . 
Not only do they grieve the loss of their son , but they will have to face the atrocities his name has been linked to . 
Shehzad 's parents taught him that violence did n't solve anything , and that violence is not accepted in Islam . 
My parents would always remind me about the meaning of the word Islam - peace . 
I often heard Shehzad 's mother reminding all my cousins about the meaning of the word when they got into arguments with one another , as young siblings do . 
But Shehzad grew into a calm and peaceful young man . 
Nothing could anger him . 
I can not recall the last time I heard him even raise his voice . 
I do n't know why Shehzad did what he did . 
I 've had many a journalist attempt to put suggestions my way . 
Was it because of the Iraq war ? 
Was it the treatment of prisoners at Guantnamo Bay or the Palestine-Israel conflict ? 
I never discussed those issues with him . 
I 'm sure he would have felt very strongly about all those things , just as most Muslims in Britain do . 
I believe the Iraq war was not justified . 
I believe the treatment of alleged war criminals at Guantnamo Bay is a gross misconduct of human rights that every citizen on this planet should be ashamed of . 
And of course , there should be a fair two-state resolution in the Middle East . 
My beliefs are strong but I do not believe they are justification enough to kill innocent people . 
Whatever the reasons for Shehzad 's actions , he took them with him . 
Nobody will ever have the answer , not even his family . 
I have been disturbed by how the bombings have been reported in some parts of the media . 
I have watched how words have been twisted , strewn and bent into whole other shapes by parts of the media . 
I was present at a meeting between Shehzad 's uncle , Bashir Ahmad , and a reporter from the News of the World . 
I heard every word spoken be tween them . 
Three days later I read a conversation that did not take place . 
The entire British public , including the families of the bombers , showed their unity in the two-minute silence that marked the one week anniversary of the terrible 7\/7 bombings . 
Those who lost loved ones do n't want to see any more lives taken by murderous fanatics . 
And relatives of the bombers do n't want to see any more of their children being used as the tools of somebody else 's evil ideology . 
Together , we are looking within ourselves , and our communities , desperately searching for ways to prevent this ever happening again . 
The Sun branded George Galloway a `` traitor '' for questioning the role of the Iraq war in motivating Thursday 's attacks . 
In doing so , they sent a perilous message to every disillusioned Muslim in this country . 
They made it clear dialogue is not an acceptable way to vent our anger at the treatment of Muslims across the world . 
If you silence those who have grievances to air , what tools do you leave them with ? 
My heartfelt apologies go out to all those who lost someone in the attacks . 
If there was anything I could have done to prevent this , I would have done it . 
I know that goes for all my family . 
We did n't want to lose our Shehzad , we believe he was taken from us . 
I have no doubt in my mind that Shehzad was merely a tool of somebody else 's evil ideology . 
I am certain somebody got to him , and duped him . 
I will not rest until that person or group is caught and brought to justice . 
The writer 's name has been withheld at her request Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
