June 23 , 2010 : This image from video provided by BP shows oil gushing from the broken wellhead at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP NEW YORK -- As the Gulf oil spill gushed out of control , BP 's financial liabilities seemed big enough to sink the company . 
Cleanup , government fines , lawsuits , legal fees and damage claims will likely exceed the $ 40 billion that BP has publicly estimated , according to an Associated Press analysis . 
But they 'll be far below the highest estimates made over the summer by legal experts and prominent Wall Street banks , such as Goldman Sachs , which said costs could near $ 200 billion . 
BP will survive the worst oil spill in U.S. history for several key reasons : it has little debt ; its global businesses are forecast to generate $ 26 billion next year in cash flow from operations ; the environmental impact of the spill is n't as bad as feared ; and the government seems unlikely to ban BP from Gulf drilling . 
To bolster its finances , BP has cut its dividend , issued debt and sold more than $ 21 billion in assets . 
`` It could have been a lot worse , '' says Tyler Priest , a University of Houston petroleum historian who serves on President Obama 's oil spill investigation committee . 
`` BP is going to come back from this . '' 
Many influential investors appear to agree . 
According to Thomson Reuters , 23 firms with $ 1 billion or more invested in the stock market , including BlackRock Investment Management , Managed Account Advisors and Rydex Security Global Investors , more than doubled their holdings of BP stock from July through September . 
At $ 44.11 , BP 's stock price has risen 63 percent from its low of $ 27.02 on June 25 . 
It 's still down 27 percent from its close of $ 60.48 on April 20 , the day of the spill . 
The well was capped on July 15 . 
The AP analysis shows the company is likely to face $ 38 billion to $ 60 billion in spill-related costs . 
A settlement with the federal government could reduce that amount , while a successful class-action lawsuit could add billions more . 
-- The $ 10.7 billion that BP already has paid to plug its well , clean up the spilled oil and pay damage claims and other costs . 
-- A $ 20 billion fund that BP set up in August for individuals and private businesses that were affected by the spill . 
The fund , known as the Gulf Coast Claims Facility , pays for environmental damage , personal injury , cleanup and lost earnings . 
The fund so far has paid $ 2.7 billion to address nearly 168,000 claims . 
Nearly half a million individuals and businesses have filed claims , and those that settle with the fund give up their right to sue the company . 
If any of the $ 20 billion is left over , it goes back to BP . 
-- Fines : The Justice Department is suing BP for violating the Clean Water Act . 
Fines are based on how much oil was spilled . 
The government 's estimate of 4.9 million barrels means BP faces between $ 5.4 billion and $ 21.1 billion in fines . 
The upper limit applies if investigators conclude BP acted with gross negligence . 
The government has a history of settling with companies for as little as 50 cents on the dollar in order to avoid lengthy disputes , says Eric Schaeffer , former head of the Environmental Protection Agency 's enforcement division . 
-- Legal fees : BP has hired lawyers , engineers and geologists to defend the company . 
These experts could cost as much as $ 2 billion , according to Mitratech Inc. , a consulting firm that handles legal and trial logistics for Fortune 500 companies . 
-- Lawsuits : The toughest costs to estimate are future settlements and judgments from the hundreds of lawsuits filed against BP , including any class actions . 
Shrimpers , oystermen , charter-boat operators , restaurant workers and real-estate developers are suing BP for lost business . 
Oil rig workers and cleanup crews are making personal injury claims . 
And Gulf states and local governments are expected to sue for lost tax revenue and environmental damages . 
Alabama is seeking an initial $ 148 million from BP . 
Analysts at Citigroup say settlements , judgments and punitive damages from these suits will total as much as $ 6 billion . 
Legal experts caution that the unpredictability of juries makes it difficult to estimate the cost of losing a class-action lawsuit . 
A successful class-action could easily double the Citigroup estimate for total legal liabilities , says Alexandra Lahav , a University of Connecticut professor who studies such lawsuits . 
BP may be able to spread the spill 's costs around . 
Minority partners Anadarko Petroleum Corp. and MOEX 2007 LLC own 35 percent of the operation , and rig owner Transocean Ltd. also may be asked to pay . 
`` Companies have the incentive to settle with BP to put the matter behind them , '' FBR analyst Robert MacKenzie says . 
He expects BP to get as much as $ 2 billion from Transocean and as much as $ 4 billion from Anadarko . 
Since the spill , BP has moved aggressively to shore up its finances . 
The company suspended its quarterly dividend of 84 cents a share , which cost it $ 10.5 billion last year . 
It also raised $ 21 billion in asset sales that include : $ 7 billion for its stake in Pan American Energy ; $ 7 billion for oil fields in the U.S. , Canada and Egypt ; $ 1.9 billion for its Colombian exploration business ; and $ 1.8 billion for assets in Vietnam and Venezuela . 
BP also raised $ 3.5 billion in an Oct. 1 . 
From April through June , when BP 's stock was tanking , Fred Fromm , who manages a natural resources fund for Franklin Templeton Investments , scooped up 170,000 shares . 
Their value climbed by more than $ 2 million in the third quarter . 
A few weeks after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank , scientists worried the oil slick would reach the Gulf 's Loop Current , which sweeps around Florida and up the East Coast . 
Beaches would be damaged along the way . 
But BP got lucky . 
Gulf winds kept shifting , which kept the oil concentrated in the waters south of Louisiana , said David Hollander , a University of South Florida chemical oceanographer . 
And hurricanes mostly avoided the region . 
Scientists disagree about how much oil remains in the Gulf , but already the streaky sheens of oil on the surface are mostly gone . 
The more oil that remains , the greater the potential for environmental lawsuits . 
Whatever remains , `` it wo n't impact their long-term ability to do business , '' says Citigroup oil analyst Mark Fletcher . 
Exxon dealt with lawsuits for decades after its Valdez supertanker ran aground and spilled 11 million gallons of crude into Alaska 's Prince William Sound in 1989 . 
The spill cost Exxon $ 4.5 billion -- nearly half of which went to clean up the oil . 
The rest was spent on payments to residents and businesses , punitive damages and settlements with the government . 
Exxon never lost its perch among industry leaders , and BP wo n't either , says Citigroup 's Fletcher . 
BP remains among the top oil drillers in a world that runs on petroleum , and that may be the best way to judge the company 's lasting power . 
`` Did -LRB- Valdez -RRB- stop anyone from buying Exxon gasoline ? 
Exxon 's results are better than anyone 's on a multiyear basis , '' Fletcher said . 
