The hunt for Iraq 's lost treasure When thousands of antiquities were looted from Baghdad 's Iraq museum , US marine Matthew Bogdanos pledged to get them back . 
After two years of sleuthing , he has become a national hero . 
Julian Borger reports On April 15 , 2003 , in the Iraqi city of Basra , an enraged British journalist whose name has been lost to history stormed up to a US marine colonel and his men and denounced them as `` macho assholes '' . 
The colonel had been looking for weapons and cash left behind by the ousted Iraqi regime , but this reporter believed fiercely that he should be more concerned that `` the finest museum in the world has just been looted '' . 
By a peculiar turn of fate , she had stumbled on the one person in the whole of modern Mesopotamia who both cared deeply about the cultural calamity at Baghdad 's Iraq museum and possessed the expertise , determination and clout to do something about it . 
His name was Matthew Bogdanos - a Greek-American classics scholar and a New York prosecutor , whose toughness and tenacity had earned him the nickname `` pit bull '' even before he went off to fight the `` war on terror '' . 
Colonel Bogdanos can not remember the name of the reporter who vented her frustration at him , but she appears to have set off an extraordinary train of events . 
Five days after the encounter , he had overcome the objections of his superior officers and was at the gates of the Baghdad museum , heading a mixed bag of volunteer soldiers and investigators , ready to hunt down Iraq 's lost legacy . 
What followed over the next two years was an epic feat of wartime sleuthing which took Bogdanos along a trail from pitch-black underground chambers and submerged bank vaults in Baghdad to the sleek antiquity dealerships of Madison Avenue , in pursuit of lost treasures with Harry Potterish names , such as the Sacred Vase of Warka . 
Along the way , more than 5,000 artworks , including unique pieces from the first fluttering of civilisation , were recovered . 
Bogdanos left active duty in the marines last month , but he is still on the hunt for the thousands of objects still unaccounted for . 
When he returns to the Manhattan district attorney 's office , where he worked before the September 11 attacks , he has permission , he says , to set up a new arts and antiquities unit . 
The story so far is told in his new book , Thieves of Baghdad , the royalties from which will go back to the Iraq museum . 
It traces his path from poring over the Iliad while helping out at his father 's Greek restaurant as a boy , to prosecuting Puff Daddy in New York , to the turning point of September 11 . 
His apartment was a few hundred yards from the North Tower and his family was lucky to survive its collapse . 
As a marine reservist , he immediately volunteered for active duty and his investigative skills were rapidly put to use in Afghanistan , tracking down Taliban documents , including an all-important membership ledger . 
He followed the action to Iraq , his fateful meeting with the contemptuous British reporter and his present incarnation as a marine corps Indiana Jones . 
These days , Bogdanos is feted as a hero in Washington . 
Ten days ago , he was in the Oval Office where George Bush -LRB- `` appreciative and knowledgeable '' -RRB- awarded him the National Humanities Medal . 
All the acclaim notwithstanding , Bogdanos gives the impression of boiling with anger from the first hello . 
He launches into a tirade against media reports of the looting -LRB- including the Guardian 's account -RRB- which exaggerated the number of stolen objects , claiming 170,000 were missing . 
According to Bogdanos the figure was less than a tenth of that . 
And he is still infuriated by the suggestion that , as he puts it , `` Coalition forces stood idly by as looters ransacked the museum . '' 
That , he insists , `` is simply and undeniably factually inaccurate '' . 
Between April 10 and 12 2003 , when most of the thefts took place , Bogdanos says the museum was being used as a redoubt by Iraqi Special Republican Guard troops . 
`` It simply could not have been secured without a battle that would have been devastating , or blood loss that would have been criminal on the part of the commander on the ground , '' he says . 
On the other hand , and with an equal measure of outrage , Bogdanos holds the US forces responsible for taking four days to arrive at the museum after the management 's appeal for help on April 12 . 
`` It 's not sinister . 
It 's not evil . 
It 's inexcusable , '' he says . 
In those four days , he says , the museum 's Iraqi curators kept the thieves of Baghdad at bay themselves , but much of the damage had already been done . 
Half an hour into the interview , Bogdanos is still fighting mad , and it is clear that enraged bellowing is his default mode of communication . 
A truly accurate transcript of our interview would have to be entirely in capital letters , punctuated with multiple exclamation and question marks , and occasionally hyphenated to show where he slows down , as if instructing a raw teenage recruit . 
Is he always so hot under the collar ? 
`` Injustice always angers me , '' he replies . 
Bogdanos believes there were three classes of robber at work : looters who cleared museum shelves at random ; professionals who knew what they were looking for , perhaps taking orders from foreign dealers ; and inside operators - employees or ex-employees who knew where particular treasures were hidden , using the chaos of the war as a cover to grab them . 
The distinction between the second and third group is somewhat blurred , but Bogdanos presents compelling evidence that inside knowledge was involved . 
He followed the robbers ' footprints into an underground storage room that had been bricked off from the rest of the museum , where an acrid stench suggested they had had to work in darkness , burning improvised torches . 
Somehow the thieves had found their way to a hidden set of keys and used them to open lockers containing a unique collection of ancient cylindrical seals . 
By some fluke , however , the keys had been dropped halfway through the heist and the thieves had been unable to recover them in the smoke-filled murk . 
They fled before they found the collection of gold coins , which survives almost intact . 
Perhaps more surprising than the number of treasures stolen was the number brought back . 
One of the first steps decided upon , was when Bogdanos and the museum authorities declared an amnesty with no questions asked and a cup of tea for anything returned . 
The colonel and his men fanned out into the Baghdad bazaars and spread the word . 
Antiquities soon started turning up at the museum gates . 
One car delivered 94 artifacts . 
By the time Bogdanos left , 1,952 missing pieces had been handed back . 
`` There is n't one single reason for it , '' he says . 
`` You name it : fear of getting caught , conscience , recognition that they were no longer stealing from Hussein but stealing from themselves ... There are 1,952 reasons . '' 
The network of informants Bogdanos built up in the bazaar led his men to other finds . 
The Mask of Warka , a 3100BC limestone mask thought to be the earliest surviving naturalistic depiction of a human face , was found buried on a farm north of Baghdad . 
A precious statue was found wrapped and submerged in a septic tank . 
The most valuable pieces , however , are already likely to be tucked away in private collections in the US and Europe , but Bogdanos thinks there are still ways to get them back . 
`` If you are willing to spend $ 20 , $ 30 , $ 40m for a piece of alabaster with funny writing on it that you can never publicly acknowledge owning and never show off , the first thing you are going to want to know is if that piece is authentic , '' he says . 
`` Are you going to take the dealer 's word that it 's real ? 
Are you going to take a graduate student 's word for it ? 
No , you 're going to get the head of a department , the head of a museum or someone who is published in the field . '' 
So the focus of the hunt moves now from Baghdad to New York , where Bogdanos will set up his new investigative unit . 
Meanwhile , he is playing it cool , fielding offers from Hollywood for his story . 
Any film , he insists , would have to advance his central aim - getting the lost art back . 
`` If it 's going to be done in pure Indiana Jones style , then it 's not going to advance the ball . 
But if it 's going to be done seriously and intelligently , but as fun as well , then I 'm for it , '' he barks . 
`` I love movies . 
I loved Indiana Jones '' . 
