Syria 's ruling Baath party is facing one of the gravest crises in its history What prompted the protests in Syria ? 
Syrians have endured decades of economic hardship , political repression and corruption under the rule of the Assad family , in power since 1971 . 
President Bashar al-Assad - who inherited power from his father Hafez in 2000 - had moved to open up the country 's economy , but continued to jail critics of the regime and maintained a stranglehold on the internet and media . 
The country 's protests started in Deraa on 18 March Political parties and protests were banned and the emergency law - in place since 1963 - gave the authorities sweeping powers of arrest . 
The protests kicked off in mid-March , inspired by the revolutions that toppled the leaders of Tunisia and Egypt . 
They began in the southern town of Deraa , where several teenagers were jailed for spray-painting the popular revolution slogan , `` The people want the fall of the regime '' , on the wall of their school compound . 
Residents protested , calling for the release of the children and chanting `` God , Syria , Freedom '' . 
Security forces opened fire on the protesters , killing and wounding several . 
Days of unrest followed , with police shooting more people and protesters burning government buildings . 
The turmoil in Deraa quickly spread to other towns and cities , including the third-largest city of Homs and Baniyas on the Mediterranean coast . 
Protesters have been calling for greater freedom , an end to corruption , and increasingly - the toppling of President Assad . 
How has the government responded ? 
What is the extent of the crackdown ? 
Early on in the protests , President Assad , 45 , appeared on television promising to speed up reforms . 
In a major concession , he lifted the hated emergency law on 21 April . 
But days later , he resorted to overwhelming force to try to put down the protests . 
Opposition channels have been airing footage of alleged abuses The government has sent tanks and troops into at least nine towns and cities . 
In Deraa and Homs - where protests have persisted - the government has used tank fire to shoot down unarmed protesters , amateur video footage shows . 
Snipers fire from rooftops on residents who dare to venture outside . 
Men are rounded up and detained in house-to-house night-time raids . 
Electricity and communication lines are cut . 
Roads are blocked and hospitals raided . 
Journalists and UN observers are barred . 
Troops have now moved on the northern town of Jisr al-Shughour , after the government said 120 security personnel were killed there , prompting more than 2,000 people to flee to Turkey . 
Human Rights groups say about 1,100 civilians have been killed and thousands arrested since pro-democracy protests began on 18 March . 
Several hundred members of the security forces are also believed to have died . 
The government says it is pursuing `` armed gangs '' and `` terrorist groups '' . 
The government has also announced plans to draft a new election law , but critics have dismissed it as a cosmetic move . 
How close is Syria to the tipping point ? 
Correspondents say the protests have not reached the critical mass - as seen in Egypt , Tunisia , or even Yemen . 
The major cities of Damascus and Aleppo have seen small pockets of unrest , but confined to the suburbs or university campuses , due in part to a heavy security presence . 
And the protest epicentres of Deraa , Baniyas and Homs appear to have been silenced - for now - by a heavy military onslaught . 
But there are conflicting reports about the recent violence in Jisr al-Shughour , with opposition groups saying it was sparked by a desertion from military ranks . 
The deserters were then shot by loyal troops , they said . 
President Assad also has his supporters . 
There have been massive pro-Assad rallies in the capital , organised by the government in a show of force . 
Some of the smaller protests at university campuses have been met by rival pro-government demonstrators . 
How is Syria different from Egypt or Libya ? 
There are several factors that complicate the crisis in Syria . 
Mr Assad enjoys strong support within many segments of Syrian society , mostly among minorities , the middle class and the business elite . 
There are fears of a civil war if President Assad should fall . 
Syria is made up of a precarious mix of confessions - 74 % Sunni ; 10 % Christian , 10 % Alawite , 3 % Druze and 3 % Other Shia . 
Even among those who want to see serious reforms , many would prefer to give President Assad time to implement them . 
Unlike in Egypt , there is no daylight between the army and the regime . 
The armed forces are overwhelmingly made up of Alawites , so they too are in a fight to maintain their power and privilege . 
While there have been reports of low-level defections , the military command appears solid . 
Syria is a major regional power and any chaos here will cause knock-on effects in countries such as Lebanon and Israel , where it can use proxy groups such as Hezbollah and Hamas to cause trouble . 
It also has close ties with Shia power Iran - an arch foe of the US and Israel - which could potentially draw Western powers into a dangerous Middle Eastern conflict . 
How has the West responded and should more be done ? 
The US and EU have strongly condemned the Syrian government 's violence against its own citizens and slapped sanctions on a number of senior Syrian figures . 
On 18 May , the US imposed sanctions for the first time on President Assad himself , accusing him of human rights abuses . 
At the start of June , US Secretary of State , Hillary Clinton , called for President Assad to reform or `` get out of the way '' . 
However , the Obama administration has no real levers with which to influence the Assad regime . 
Western officials say they can not act robustly because - unlike with Libya - they do not have the backing of the Arab League , which has remained silent on the issue of Syria . 
The UN Security Council is also split , with France and the UK proposing a resolution to condemn the crackdown , but nations including Brazil , China and Russia voicing concern that such a resolution could inflame tensions . 
They also argue that they have no clear picture of Syria after Mr Assad . 
In the absence of any clear opposition leaders who could unite its rival political , religious and ethnic communities , there are fears the country would descend into chaos . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
