NEW YORK | Mon May 2 , 2011 6:56 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - International Criminal Court investigators have proof that Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's forces committed crimes against humanity , and the court 's chief prosecutor , Luis Moreno-Ocampo , said on Monday he would soon ask for up to five arrest warrants . 
The U.N. Security Council voted unanimously in February to refer Gaddafi 's violent crackdown against anti-government demonstrators to The Hague-based ICC and Moreno-Ocampo said his first recommendations for indictments should reach ICC judges within weeks . 
`` We have strong evidence on the beginning of the conflict , the shooting of civilians , '' he told Reuters in an interview , noting that killing unarmed civilians would qualify as a crime against humanity . 
`` Also , we have strong evidence of the crime of persecution , '' he said . 
This includes `` massive arrests and torture of people , and some forced disappearances ... -LRB- for -RRB- talking to journalists or going to demonstrations . '' 
Without giving precise details of his proof , Moreno-Ocampo said `` for these two crimes we have a lot of evidence . '' 
He plans to brief the Security Council on his probe on Wednesday . 
Once Moreno-Ocampo makes his recommendations to the ICC 's pretrial chamber , the judges must decide whether there are sufficient grounds to issue arrest warrants . 
Moreno-Ocampo said he would initially ask for up to five arrest warrants , but disclosed no names . 
It is not clear whether NATO would be involved in the implementation of any future warrants . 
The Security Council has a mandate to protect civilians and enforce a no-fly zone over Libya . 
Enforcing ICC warrants would require it to target individuals for capture and transfer them to The Hague . 
Permanent veto-wielding council members Russia and China have become increasingly critical of the U.N.-backed intervention to protect civilians in Libya . 
U.N. diplomats say Moscow and Beijing have complained privately and publicly that the operation is targeting Gaddafi and his family . 
The ICC is also looking at the rebel camp , which has been fighting Gaddafi 's forces since February in what is now a full-scale civil war that Western officials say is deadlocked . 
Moreno-Ocampo said the court was probing allegations that the rebels attacked black Africans in Libya , whom they assumed to be mercenaries aiding Gaddafi 's forces . 
Western officials and Libyan rebels have said that nationals from Chad , Niger and other African states have been among the mercenaries in Libya . 
The rebels have pledged to cooperate with the ICC , Moreno-Ocampo said , while Gaddafi 's government has not responded to the court 's requests for information . 
ICC investigators are also looking into allegations that Gaddafi 's forces have used rape as a weapon . 
As part of the investigation of alleged rapes , Moreno-Ocampo said , the ICC is looking at allegations that some of Gaddafi 's soldiers have been issued packets of the popular anti-impotence drug Viagra from Pfizer Inc. . 
U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice brought the Viagra charge up in a meeting of the Security Council last week , council diplomats said . 
If it were true that Gaddafi 's troops were being issued Viagra , diplomats said , it could indicate they were being encouraged by their commanders to engage in rape to terrorize the population in areas that have supported the rebels . 
`` We are trying to confirm this public announcement through evidence so it can stand in court , '' Moreno-Ocampo said . 
`` In some other conflicts you have had some battalions that are just devoted to rape . '' 
He said the ICC was investigating other alleged war crimes charges against Gaddafi 's forces , including the use of cluster bombs in civilian areas . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Last announcement came as potential dialogue for ceasefire was underway ... Plus , the ICC is not a credible entity . 
Not until the Iraq invasion is investigated . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
