BP was preparing to plug its well 50 miles off the Louisiana coast , and longtime technical adviser Jesse Gagliano was running computer models to finalize details . 
`` We have a potential problem here , '' the Halliburton employee told three colleagues he met in the hallway in BP PLC 's Houston headquarters . 
He said his computer model was predicting a `` serious gas flow problem '' with BP 's well abandonment plan . 
His idea for addressing the issue would never be carried out . 
BP decided it was n't necessary . 
Five days later , on April 20 , the well blew out , causing the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
In an internal report released Wednesday , BP stood by its decision , saying Gagliano 's plan would not have stopped the explosion . 
The disagreement was just one of several that emerged in the days and hours before the blast , according to BP 's report and e-mails , documents and testimony gathered by federal investigators . 
Confusion surrounded crucial tasks and frustration rose among people involved . 
The cause of the explosion , which killed 11 workers , remains under investigation by federal authorities . 
But as more information trickles out , the image of a high-stakes , high seas venture collapsing in disarray is sharpening . 
The mile-deep exploratory well was being capped with cement so it could be abandoned until a production phase later . 
BP operated the well , Transocean owned the rig and Halliburton carried out the cement job . 
They had to work together . 
Yet key plans kept changing . 
Critical tests meant to ensure the well would be safely cemented were not going smoothly . 
BP accepts some of the blame for decisions that led to the blowout , but its report also assigns fault to Transocean and Halliburton workers . 
Those companies , in turn , point the finger at BP 's well design . 
The head of the Deepwater Horizon rig , who was most familiar with its crew and operations , had left for training and was replaced by Bob Kaluza , who was less familiar with earlier problems surrounding the well . 
The operation was running 45 days late and millions of dollars over budget . 
Gagliano 's computer model exposed yet another possible problem . 
The longtime technical adviser concluded that the cementing operation needed more centralizers , devices designed to ensure that the casing -- or drilling pipe -- runs down the center of the wellbore to increase the chance for a perfect seal and prevent leaks . 
BP had planned to run six centralizers and had them onboard . 
After a corridor chat with BP 's senior drilling engineer , Gagliano worked up more models . 
By the evening of April 15 , Gagliano had a model with 21 centralizers that resolved the gas flow problem . 
The 15 additional centralizers were acquired and scheduled for delivery the next morning , in time for the Halliburton cementers to do the job . 
Still , the debate did n't end . 
BP drilling engineer Brett Cocales learned the next afternoon , April 16 , that his company 's engineers had decided against using the additional centralizers because of questions about their mechanical integrity . 
Members of a BP investigation panel said Wednesday that those concerns were unfounded because engineers were mistaken about which centralizers had been shipped . 
In an e-mail to fellow drilling engineer Brian Morel , Cocales explained the extra centralizers could help meet the goal of inserting the casing properly . 
Then he continued : `` But who cares ? 
We 'll probably get a good cement job , '' he wrote , frustrated it had taken so long to make a decision . 
A few hours later , Halliburton cementer Nathaniel Chaisson , who was already on the rig , also learned the additional centralizers would not be used and notified Gagliano , who he said seemed concerned . 
On April 19 , Gagliano 's models still showed that using only six centralizers raised the risk of a failed cement job . 
Still in Houston , he participated in the daily morning call with the rig . 
The centralizers were n't mentioned . 
He did n't raise the issue . 
`` BP made their decision , '' Gagliano recalled when testifying before a federal panel . 
He thought the worst-case scenario would be that they would have to go back to fix the cement job after it was completed . 
Months later , BP is defending the decision . 
In Wednesday 's report , the company said the decision not to use 21 centralizers likely did n't contribute to the cement 's failure . 
Meanwhile , the well lining job , known as casing , was completed . 
The casing , critical to ensuring no gas slips out of the wellbore uncontrolled , looked good , paving the way for that night 's cementing . 
The cement would essentially seal the gap between the well casing and the hole drilled in the seafloor . 
It would also shut in the well until the day BP was ready to extract oil and gas . 
At 9 p.m. April 19 , the Halliburton workers began the complicated cement job 5,000 feet below the surface . 
Sometime during the night , Chaisson , the Halliburton cementer , noticed a BP drilling engineer calling Houston headquarters . 
`` We may have blown something out higher in the casing , '' the engineer said , triggering a flurry of phone calls between the rig and Houston . 
Ultimately , they continued the job and Chaisson did not indicate there was ever discussion to halt the work . 
Since then , however , BP has said it found weaknesses in the design and testing of the cement . 
It said the weaknesses may have allowed hydrocarbons to escape from the wellbore , causing the blowout . 
Halliburton insists the problem was not in the cement but in BP 's design of the well . 
By 1 a.m. , on April 20 , the cement job was completed . 
`` We have completed the job and it went well , '' Chaisson wrote to Gagliano in an e-mail at 5:44 a.m. Confidence was up . 
Yet at the 11 a.m. meeting , rig leader Jimmy Harrell was unhappy . 
BP 's plan for shutting down operations did n't include a `` negative pressure test '' -- a procedure that reduces the fluid pressure in the well to ensure there are no gas leaks . 
Harrell learned a long time ago this was risky . 
He demanded the test . 
Meanwhile , in Houma , La. , a group of VIPs -- BP executives Pat O'Bryan and David Sims , and Transocean executives Daun Winslow and Buddy Trahan -- boarded a helicopter headed for the Deepwater Horizon . 
They were going for a 24-hour `` visibility '' visit to one of their best-performing Gulf rigs . 
They arrived on the rig floor as the negative test was going on . 
Winslow realized there was confusion over the pressures -- indicating there might be a leak somewhere in the wellbore -- and decided it was not a good environment for the group . 
`` Let 's let these guys get back to work , '' he said , taking the VIPs to the pontoon area . 
Harrell and a Transocean toolpusher , Randy Ezell , stayed to help with the test . 
Kaluza , the BP company man , was not satisfied . 
He got permission from Houston to run a second test . 
After dinner , Chris Pleasant , a Transocean subsea supervisor , went to the drill shack to begin his shift . 
He was told that 60 barrels of mud appeared to have been lost during the pressure test . 
Ideally , rig workers like to see little or no mud lost in the test . 
Losing too much mud can signal a leak in the casing -- which could cause an oil spill , or in the worst-case scenario , allow gas and highly explosive methane to seep through the casing , leading to a blowout . 
Wyman Wheeler , a Transocean toolpusher , said something was n't right . 
He ended his shift and was relieved by Jason Anderson . 
An argument erupted over how to do the second negative test . 
Anderson wanted it done as it had always been done on the Horizon , and finally persuaded the BP crew . 
By 8 p.m. , the test had ended . 
`` Go call the office , '' BP 's well site leader Don Vidrine told his counterpart , Kaluza . 
`` Tell them we 're going to displace the well '' -- a critical task in which the mud that keeps the oil and gas under control is replaced with seawater before the well is closed and abandoned . 
Vidrine 's decision to proceed may have been a fateful one . 
BP now believes that Transocean and BP supervisors misinterpreted the results of the negative-pressure tests . 
While workers removed mud from the well , the VIPs ended a meeting with the rig leadership and headed for the bridge . 
Capt. Curt Kuchta showed them the controls and the radar . 
David Sims of BP got in a video-game-like machine that simulates piloting the rig . 
Winslow went to have a cigarette . 
The phone on the rig floor rang . 
It was Ezell , who had reluctantly gone to dinner and was asking about the test results . 
`` It went good , '' Anderson responded . 
`` What about your displacement ? 
How 's it going ? '' 
`` It 's going fine , '' Anderson answered . 
But the rig crew apparently missed warning signs that oil and gas had entered the well . 
BP investigators suspect the rig crew was distracted by other `` end-of-well activities . '' 
It was 9:30 when Ezell followed Anderson 's instructions and went to his cabin . 
He chatted with his wife . 
Then he turned off the lights and laid down to watch TV . 
Eight minutes later , unbeknownst to Anderson , hydrocarbons started to shoot toward the rig . 
Three minutes later , rig workers started trying to control the well , but by then , mud was already flowing unchecked onto the rig floor . 
Pleasant , the Transocean subsea supervisor , was doing paperwork . 
He had the rig leader sign some documents . 
Senior toolpusher Randy Harrell closed out some permits and went to take a shower . 
On the bridge , Sims got out of the simulator . 
The phone rang in Ezell 's bunk . 
`` We have a situation , '' an assistant driller said . 
`` The well is blown out . 
We have mud going to the crown . '' 
`` Do y ' all have it shut in ? '' 
Ezell asked , horrified . 
`` Jason is shutting it in now , '' Curtis responded . 
`` Randy , we need your help . '' 
Ezell jumped into his coveralls , shoved his feet into boots , grabbed his hardhat and ran . 
In Pleasant 's office , a rig worker looked over . 
`` Chris , what 's that water ? '' 
he asked , apparently seeing the fluid rising from the well and onto the rig . 
`` They 're probably coming out the hole , '' Pleasant answered , fixated on the computer screen . 
`` I see mud , '' the worker said . 
He called the rig floor . 
`` We got to go , '' Pleasant said , and took off down the hall . 
It was nearly 10 p.m. O'Bryan was in the simulator . 
Sims was on the bridge . 
Harrell was in the shower . 
Ezell was running to the rig floor . 
The captain opened the portside door and saw fluid pouring onto the rig . 
Associated Press writer Michael Kunzelman in New Orleans contributed to this report . 
