The conflict has badly affected the country 's agricultural sector Some 1.5 million people in Syria will need urgent food aid over the next few months , according to an assessment by the UN and the Syrian government . 
Over the next year , up to three million people are expected to be in need of food , crop and livestock assistance . 
The report also says the agricultural sector has lost $ 1.8 bn -LRB- # 1.15 bn -RRB- this year as a result of the conflict . 
The UN says the economic losses are grave , but the humanitarian implications are far more pressing . 
The report findings are based on a Joint Rapid Food Security Needs Assessment mission , conducted in June 2012 , by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization -LRB- FAO -RRB- , the UN World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- and Syria 's Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform . 
`` The effects of these major losses are first , and most viciously , felt by the poorest in the country . 
Most of the vulnerable families the mission visited reported less income and more expenditure - their lives becoming more difficult by the day , '' said WFP Representative and Country Director in Syria Muhannad Hadi . 
Some of the findings include the following : Damage to the agricultural sector includes losses and damage to crops , livestock and irrigation systems Close to a million people need crop and livestock assistance such as seeds , food for animals , fuel and repair of irrigation pumps Strategic crops , such as wheat and barley , have been badly affected as well as cherry and olive trees , and vegetable production The crisis is due to the on-going insecurity , coupled with a prolonged drought Among those farmers needing immediate assistance - around one third of the rural population - 5 % -10 % are reported to be female-headed households Deforestation is on the rise with farmers turning to the forest for fire wood , due to unavailability of cooking gas and fuel . 
Some irrigation channels have also been clogged and damaged due to lack of labor and inaccessibility `` The most vulnerable families in Syria depend entirely or partly on agriculture and farm animals for food and income . 
They need emergency support , like seeds , repairs to irrigation systems , animal feed and health care , '' said Abdulla Bin Yehia , FAO representative in Syria . 
`` If timely assistance is not provided , the livelihood system of these vulnerable people could simply collapse in a few months ' time . 
Winter is fast approaching and urgent action is needed before then . '' 
As well as insecurity , the unavailability of labor , the lack of fuel and the rise in fuel costs , as well as power cuts affecting water supply are contributing factors to the crisis . 
The sharp drop in remittances to rural households was another blow to an already vulnerable population , the report said . 
As a result , families are cutting the size and number of meals , eating cheaper lower quality food , buying food on credit , taking children out of school in order to send them to work , selling livestock and other assets , and cutting back on medical and education expenses , the report says . 
Activists estimate some 20,000 people have died since anti-government protests erupted in March last year . 
Are you in Syria or do you have family there ? 
You can send us your experiences and comments using the form below . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
