A gas nozzle is used to pump petrol at a station in New York February 22 , 2011 . 
LONDON | Fri Aug 12 , 2011 3:55 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - If history is any guide , another oil-induced recession may be just around the corner , at least for the United States and some of the other developed economies . 
Every time that the cost of oil relative to global economic output has hit current levels -- and that 's even after sharp falls in spot prices this month -- it has heralded a slump . 
And while economists and analysts say a serious slowdown can still be avoided , many add that unless oil and energy prices fall much further and -- most important -- stay down , the world economy could be in serious trouble . 
`` We are in a danger area for the world economy , '' said Christophe Barret , global oil analyst at Credit Agricole . 
The warning signal flashing is what economists call the `` oil expense indicator '' : the share of oil expenses as a proportion of worldwide gross domestic product -LRB- GDP -RRB- -LRB- oil prices times oil consumption divided by world GDP -RRB- . 
Since 1965 , this has averaged roughly 3 percent of GDP , and it has only exceeded 4.5 percent during three periods : in 1974 , between 1979 and 1985 and in 2008 . 
Each period has seen severe global recessions . 
In 1973\/74 , during the first global `` oil shock , '' oil prices rocketed after an Arab oil embargo in response to an Arab-Israeli war disrupted oil flows and triggered panic buying . 
In 1979 , revolution in Iran knocked out much of the country 's oil output and was followed by a long Iran-Iraq war , bringing a second `` oil shock . '' 
In 2008 , propelled by a housing bubble , speculative buying of new debt instruments and a commodities boom , oil prices exceeded $ 100 per barrel for the first time and soared to a record high above $ 147 , helping trigger financial crisis and the worst slump since World War II . 
This time , oil prices have soared following the loss of around 1.6 million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- of Libyan oil , uprisings across the Middle East and North Africa and rapid economic growth in China , India and other developing economies . 
Using the oil expense indicator , economists say Brent crude , the international oil benchmark , would need to be in the low $ 90s per barrel to be under the 4.5 percent danger mark . 
In fact , Brent hit a two-and-a-half-year high of more than $ 127 per barrel in April and , with the exception of an intra-day dip Tuesday , has been over $ 100 for six months . 
Even after a fall of more than $ 20 from its early-August high on worries over a slowdown in the developed economies , Brent is still not far off $ 110 per barrel . 
Oil is a key global cost because it is crucial to every part of the economy , powering manufacturing and the production of food and other commodities , fuelling transport as well as being a building block for industries such as plastics and electronics . 
If it is too high for too long , the results are dramatic . 
`` The last two times that energy as a share of global GDP neared ... the current level , the world economy experienced severe crises : the double dip recession of the 1980s and the Great Recession of 2008 , '' Merrill Lynch analysts led by Francisco Blanch said in a note to clients . 
Economists reinforce their warnings over the possibility of an impending slowdown with data showing that oil demand has begun to shrink in some countries in response to high prices . 
Oil data lags , but the latest U.S. figures , for May , show a drop of 4.7 percent year-on-year in U.S. gasoline demand . 
Deutsche Bank analyst Adam Sieminski says he is concerned by a trend towards lower U.S. oil demand evident since last summer : `` The last time U.S. oil demand was falling was in 2007 and early 2008 , '' Sieminski said in a note written with analyst Michael Lewis . 
`` This was a leading indicator of the economic troubles that would hit the U.S. in the middle of 2008 . '' 
Analysts differ on exactly how high oil prices need to be and how long they need to stay up before they slow growth . 
Some economists argue the impact of oil prices has been exaggerated , and others note that not all recessions are caused by oil , such as slowdowns in the early 1990s and again a decade later . 
But most economists argue there is a level at which fuel input costs become incompatible with continuing economic growth . 
James Zhang , an analyst at Standard Bank , says the danger level comes with the oil expense indicator at around 5 percent : `` $ 100 per barrel represents about 5 percent for the ` oil expense indicator ' , which we think would be a threshold on an annual average level to potentially kill off global growth , '' he said . 
`` Absent any shocks , I do n't believe an oil price , say in the range of $ 100 to $ 130 , will necessary bring a recession itself , but a slower growth is almost ensured -- another sharp jump in oil prices could act as a shock , '' Zhang said . 
Barret said record high oil and commodity prices were putting unsustainable pressure on household expenditure , and while he like other economists is reluctant to predict recession , he thinks the warnings should be heeded : `` There is still a chance that oil prices will go down very significantly , and that could be a strong support to the economy . 
But if prices stay near $ 110 per barrel until the end of the year , we will have a major problem by the start of 2012 , '' he said . 
`` We either get sharply lower prices or a recession that will bring down prices . 
Either way , oil prices must come down . '' 
