LONDON | Fri Aug 12 , 2011 3:42 pm BST LONDON Aug 12 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rollercoaster financial markets and the worst riots Britain has seen in decades have made it quite a week for a time of year that is usually so dead the newspapers are filled with `` silly season '' tales of amusing pet antics . 
Everyone is pointing fingers -- at blundering politicians , hooded thugs , disaffected youths , bumbling police and greedy bankers -- but could the cause for all the madness really be the star at the center of our solar system ? 
There is n't a lot of evidence pointing to little green men involving themselves in Earthly affairs , but the sun has been throwing bursts of highly charged particles into space in a phenomenon known as coronal mass ejections or CMEs . 
Three large CMEs prompted U.S. government scientists to warn of solar storms that can cause power blackouts and the aurora borealis , or northern lights , caused by disturbances in the Earth 's atmosphere , have been spotted as far south as England and Colorado , NASA said . 
`` Earth 's magnetic field is still reverberating from a CME strike on August 5th that sparked one of the strongest geomagnetic storms in years '' , website SpaceWeather said . 
Some academics have claimed that such geomagnetic storms can affect humans , altering moods and leading people into negative behavior through effects on their biochemistry . 
Some studies have found evidence that hospital admissions for depression rise during geomagnetic storms and that incidents of suicide increase . 
A 2003 study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta found that such storms could affect the stock market , as traders were more likely to make pessimistic choices . 
`` Unusually high levels of geomagnetic activity have a negative , statistically and economically significant effect on the following week 's stock returns for all US stock market indices , '' the authors found in their report . 
It could of course be mere coincidence that this has been a rollercoaster week on the markets , and that Britain was rocked by a wave of ferocious rioting and looting . 
But market watchers may take comfort from the fact that the space weather forecast for Friday has gone quiet again . 
They should n't be too complacent though . 
The solar cycle is on an upswing due to peak in 2013 and there are likely to be more geomagnetic storms heading Earth 's way in the months to come . 
-LRB- Editing by Paul Casciato -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
