ANCHORAGE , Alaska | Tue May 25 , 2010 10:49 pm EDT ANCHORAGE , Alaska -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Trans-Alaska Pipeline , partly owned by BP , shut down on Tuesday after spilling several thousand barrels of crude oil into backup containers , drastically cutting supply down the main artery between refineries and Alaska 's oilfields . 
The accident comes at a difficult time for BP -- the largest single owner of the pipeline operator , holding 47 percent -- as it struggles to plug a gushing Gulf of Mexico oil well . 
The shutdown followed a series of mishaps that resulted from a scheduled fire-command system test at Pump Station 9 , about 100 miles south of Fairbanks , said Alyeska Pipeline Service Co , the operator of the 800-mile oil line . 
The power outage triggered opening of relief valves , causing an unspecified volume of crude oil to overflow a storage tank into a secondary containment . 
There were no injuries , but the approximately 40 people at the work site were evacuated , Alyeska spokeswoman Michele Egan said . 
North Slope oil producers have cut their flow into the pipeline 's Prudhoe Bay intake station to 16 percent of their normal rates , Egan said . 
There is enough storage capacity to allow the line to be shut down for 48 hours as long as producers maintain the 16 percent flow rate , she said . 
It is unclear how long the shutdown will last . 
`` We 're going to take as long as we need to make sure the site is safe before we start back up , '' Egan said . 
Supply problems in the pipeline potentially disrupt tanker shipments to refineries . 
The volume of spilled oil is unknown . 
`` We 've estimated the spill is several thousand barrels , '' she said . 
All has been held within the secondary containment , which has capacity to hold 104,500 barrels , she said . 
The amount spilled is `` nowhere near '' the containment area 's capacity , she added . 
Alyeska is a consortium owned by five oil companies . 
Major owners are BP , ConocoPhillips and Exxon Mobil . 
Unocal and Koch hold minor shares . 
The Trans-Alaska Pipeline , which runs from Prudhoe Bay to the tanker port of Valdez , normally ships about 667,000 barrels of oil daily . 
-LRB- Reporting by Bill Rigby ; Editing by Richard Chang and Carol Bishopric -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
If it 's all contained , then it would seem it 's not . 
You 're going all American in your news `` reporting , '' now . 
Never mind that the pipeline has 5 owners other than BP , and none of the owners , including BP , operate the pipeline . 
Then again , `` Alyeska Pipeline Service Co operated Alaska oil pipeline shut after spill '' would n't have gotten as many clicks , would it ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
