BP to cut production amid impact of Deepwater Horizon spill Analysts expect BP to pump about 3.6 m barrels of oil and gas a day this year , a tenth less than in 2009 Analysts expect BP to report $ 5bn profits for the final quarter in 2010 , on Tuesday . 
Photograph Kirsty Wigglesworth\/AP Bob Dudley , BP 's chief executive , will scrap the company 's production targets when he lays out his vision this week for a smaller , more exploration-focused company after last April 's Gulf of Mexico disaster . 
Analysts expect that BP will pump about 3.6 m barrels of oil and gas a day this year , a tenth less than in 2009 , when it overtook US group Exxon Mobil to produce more than any other non-state-controlled company . 
Sources close to the Environmental Protection Agency -LRB- EPA -RRB- also told the Observer that the US government is likely to agree to reduce its estimate of the size of the gulf spill , which would cut BP fines . 
Water samples from the gulf by US government scientists investigating the environmental damage caused by the spill are also understood to be showing a stronger than expected recovery in fish stocks , further limiting the damages payable by BP . 
Shell fish stocks remain severely affected however . 
In the last year , BP sold assets worth $ 20bn -LRB- # 17bn -RRB- , many of them mature oil and gas fields , partly to raise cash to pay for spill-related costs . 
The company had also banked on new fields in the gulf to help it achieve its target , set out weeks before the spill , of increasing production by 1 % 2 % from 4 million barrels per day until 2015 . 
But new regulations will increase the cost and time to develop them . 
Analysts at Liberum Capital expect limited production growth after 2012 , but more in the longer term as BP focuses on big new finds and unconventional gas . 
Peter Hitchens , an analyst from stockbroker Panmure Gordon , said that Dudley could outline plans to eventually increase production by 3 % each year , but starting from a lower base . 
Dudley is also expected to reassure investors that the $ 39bn provision it has made for spill-related costs will be more than enough . 
They are forecasting that BP will report a $ 5bn profit in the final quarter of last year when it unveils annual results on Tuesday , with analysts expecting a similar figure from Shell , which also reports this week . 
BP 's profits , and the progress in selling assets , should allow Dudley to restart dividend payments to shareholders but the predicted payout of 7 cents a share would be roughly half the pre-disaster level . 
Last month BP formally challenged the official estimate of the size of the spill , made by US government scientists , of 4.9 m barrels , making it the world 's largest offshore accident . 
BP argues that scientists have miscalculated the flow rate from the Macondo well , and that the actual spill size could be half the official estimate . 
It will also point to the number of different estimates of the flow rate made by the US government as evidence of their fallibility , and the EPA is understood to accept that no estimate can be 100 % accurate . 
BP is thought to be preparing to enter negotiations with the EPA on the issue , although it will be some months before a final estimate is agreed . 
