Oil spill crisis a setback for BP and its chief executive On the day he got news that the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig caught fire in the Gulf of Mexico , BP chief executive Tony Hayward received a series of crisis updates in his London offices . 
The rig belonged to Transocean , but BP had leased it to drill an exploration well and BP bore legal responsibility for any consequences . 
The grim updates were interspersed with long silences . 
One person there said that on several occasions , Hayward asked , `` What did we do to deserve this ? '' 
Twelve days later , Hayward is grappling with the widening oil slick from the damaged well -- an environmental crisis for the Gulf Coast states , a political crisis for U.S. offshore drilling and a corporate crisis for one of the world 's biggest oil giants . 
`` This accident not only sets back BP , but could hurt it for years , '' said Fadel Gheit , an oil analyst at Oppenheimer . 
On Sunday , the third anniversary of his becoming BP 's chief executive , Hayward began his day in Houma , La. , flew to a convention center in Mobile , Ala. , where a new oil spill command center has been set up , and then went on to Venice , La. . 
There , he planned to meet with local officials and others worried about the slick menacing the shore . 
On Monday , he will be in Washington , running the gantlet of federal officials and members of Congress , many of whom are eager to tar BP with blame for the incident . 
Before the accident , he had expected to be in the United States giving a speech and promoting a climate change bill . 
Now , he will face questions about whether BP underestimated the risk and consequences of a well failure . 
`` Whatever else this is , it 's a massive blow to confidence , '' said a senior BP insider who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was n't authorized to talk publicly . 
The price tag for the disaster increases day by day . 
The company says it is spending $ 6 million a day on response efforts . 
Drilling a relief well will probably cost more than $ 100 million . 
The Defense Department says it will hand BP the bill for paying Louisiana National Guard troops , and the Environmental Protection Agency says it will charge BP for air monitoring . 
Covering damages to coastal fishermen , tourism businesses and residents could cost billions more . 
BP will pay 65 percent of these costs ; its lease partners Anadarko Petroleum and Mitsui will pay 25 and 10 percent . 
BP 's share will come straight from its own pocket . 
`` We are self-insured as a matter of policy -- you can not insure these kinds of risks , '' a BP spokesman said . 
Alabama Attorney General Troy King said Sunday night that he told BP representatives to stop circulating agreements offering coastal Alabamians $ 5,000 if they give up the right to sue the company . 
A BP official said the offer was part of a `` standard waiver '' to fishermen that was `` inappropriate '' and was `` swiftly discontinued . '' 
The oil spill crisis is just the sort of thing Hayward had hoped to leave behind when he became BP chief executive . 
His predecessor , Lord John Browne , had been a brilliant deal maker and a friend of British Prime Minister Tony Blair 's , but BP was often accused of neglecting safety precautions and adding to risks through deep cost cutting . 
Under Browne , who resigned after revelations about his personal life in Britain 's tabloid news media , a fatal explosion took place at BP 's Texas City refinery , leaks sprang onto the tundra from a company pipeline in northern Alaska , and a BP production platform in the Gulf of Mexico suffered structural problems that delayed its start date . 
