On a stormy Sunday in the Gulf of Mexico , the one piece of good news -- the huge oil slick remains offshore -- was framed by ominous forecasts from government officials as the uncapped well nearly a mile below the surface continued to spew an unknown quantity of crude . 
President Obama flew in for a briefing about what he called `` a massive and potentially unprecedented environmental disaster . '' 
In the region 's beach towns and coastline parishes , people waited and floated more booms to try to block the rogue oil that threatens their fragile economy and delicate marshlands . 
`` The best-case scenario : It gets stopped today . 
Worst-case scenario : This thing could keep going on for 90 days , '' Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said as he made the rounds of the talk shows . 
With the oil patch growing , the federal government closed commercial and recreational fishing for at least 10 days in federal waters from the mouth of the Mississippi River to near Pensacola , Fla. . 
Obama met with a handful of fishermen during his short , rain-drenched tour of the Louisiana coast . 
Although the Obama visit was the capstone of a White House effort to convey full engagement , the most critical events are 42 miles from land and deep beneath the waves . 
Six robotic submarines , operated by engineers and technicians on ships at the surface , are circling and manipulating a balky 450-ton , four-story-tall structure called a `` blowout preventer '' that covers the wellhead and has devices designed to clamp the flow of oil in this kind of calamity . 
The blowout preventer has failed to live up to its name . 
`` This is like doing open-heart surgery at 5,000 feet in the dark with robot-controlled submarines , '' Lamar McKay , chairman and president of BP America , said on ABC 's `` This Week . '' 
At a low-slung Coast Guard station along a waterway in Venice , a town two hours southeast of New Orleans , Obama had a briefing on the efforts to cap the oil well and the economic and environmental implications for the region . 
`` BP is responsible for this leak . 
BP will be paying the bill , '' Obama said before taking a brief helicopter tour over the water . 
The Deepwater Horizon floating rig , which BP leases , found oil beneath 5,000 feet of water and 13,000 feet of rock when something went awry April 20 , causing an explosion and fire . 
Most of the workers on the rig abandoned ship and were rescued , but 11 were killed . 
The rig , larger than a football field , sank two days later and sits upside down on the bottom . 
Crumpled by the disaster was the `` riser , '' the 21-inch pipe that emerges from the well with the smaller drill pipe inside . 
The riser is kinked at a 90-degree angle about five feet above the blowout preventer , and oil is bleeding from an irregular crack , BP spokesman Bill Salvin said . 
A second leak is 460 feet away on a section of the riser that lies on the gulf floor . 
A third leak is from the end of the drill pipe , 810 feet from the blowout preventer . 
Barring a sudden triumph with the blowout preventer , BP plans to try to capture the oil with containment domes , also known as cofferdams . 
The idea is to lower the huge 74-ton steel domes over the blowout preventer and the other two leaks , then pump the captured oil to a barge capable of holding 250,000 barrels . 
But the domes are still being fabricated in Louisiana and will not be deployed for six to eight days , McKay said Sunday . 
It 's not a simple feat : A BP spokesman said this kind of emergency response has never been tried at such a depth . 
