Syria laying landmines along border : Human Rights Watch Hundreds of refugees a day are arriving in Turkey and Lebanon from Syria The New York-based group quoted accounts from witnesses and deminers . 
UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan is in Turkey and has met Syrian opposition figures during his peace mission . 
He says he expects Damascus to reply on Tuesday to his proposals on the crisis . 
Meanwhile , the UN says 230,000 Syrians have fled their homes in the past year . 
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees says 30,000 have fled abroad while 200,000 are displaced within Syria . 
The UN says more than 8,000 people - many of them women and children - have been killed since the anti-government protests erupted . 
Human Rights Watch -LRB- HRW -RRB- called on Syria to immediately cease laying landmines , calling them `` military ineffective '' weapons that will kill and injure mostly civilians for years to come . 
The group said it had been told by a 28-year-old former Syrian Army deminer that he and a group of friends removed around 300 mines from the Hasanieih area in early March , along routes used by refugees to reach Turkey . 
A 15-year-old boy described losing a leg to a landmine after trying to help a friend of a family , wounded in the government assault on the Baba Amr district of Homs , to cross the border into Lebanon . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Hatay , Turkey-Syria border Around 100 to 200 people a day are crossing the border , bringing with them harrowing stories of their escape . 
The Syrian army has been besieging the city of Idlib , not far across the border from here , for the last three days . 
They are also moving from village to village , pretty much destroying each one and forcing the people there to flee . 
The numbers of refugees would probably be higher if it was n't so difficult to get across the border , because of the minefields and numbers of Syrian soldiers in the area . 
We have seen people who have lost their limbs because of the mines . 
The refugee camps here are well run , but have become very crowded . 
Some people have been here for 10 months now . 
The Turkish authorities are having to make plans for a much bigger influx of refugees . 
`` I was less than 50-60m -LRB- 165-195ft -RRB- away from crossing the border when the landmine exploded , '' he said , adding that the friend died . 
`` Any use of anti-personnel landmines is unconscionable , '' Steve Goose , Arms Division director at HRW , said . 
`` There is absolutely no justification for the use of these indiscriminate weapons by any country , anywhere , for any purpose . '' 
Syria - which is not among the 159 nations signed up to the 1997 Ottawa Treaty banning the production , use and stockpiling of anti-personnel mines - has not publicly commented on the claims . 
The size and origin of Syria 's stockpile of landmines is not clear , HRW said , but is thought to consist mostly of Russian-made weapons - some Soviet-era - such as PMN-2 anti-personnel mines and TMN-46 anti-vehicle mines . 
Reports that Syrian troops were laying landmines first emerged last November , when a government official told the Associated Press news agency : `` Syria has undertaken many measures to control the borders , including planting mines . '' 
The BBC 's Jonathan Head , reporting from Hatay on the Turkish side of the border with Syria , says he has seen refugees arrive who have lost limbs because of the mines . 
He says the refugee camp at Hatay , run by the Turkish Red Crescent , is receiving up to 200 refugees a day as they flee the army assault on the city of Idlib and surrounding villages just across the border in Syria . 
Kofi Annan , the former UN chief who has been appointed by the UN and Arab League to find a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria , had what he called a `` useful meeting '' with the opposition Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague : ` The UN has failed on Syria ' He said they `` promised their full co-operation , which will be necessary if we are going to succeed '' . 
Mr Annan , who is on the second day of his visit to Turkey , said he expected a response from Damascus later on Tuesday to `` concrete proposals '' he put forward during his meeting in Syria with President Bashar al-Assad . 
`` Once I receive their answer we will know how to react , '' he added . 
Mr Annan has said his peace mission has three objectives ; to bring about a ceasefire , provide access for humanitarian aid and start political dialogue . 
But he admitted on Monday , after talks with Turkey 's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Ankara , that the diplomatic process would take time and described the situation in Syria as `` very complex '' . 
On Monday , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton urged the international community to speak with one voice on Syria . 
Mrs Clinton told the UN Security Council that Syria 's `` horrific campaign of violence '' had `` shocked the conscience of the world '' . 
`` We believe that now is the time for all nations - even those who have previously blocked our efforts - to stand behind the humanitarian and political approach spelled out by the Arab League . '' 
Russia and China have blocked resolutions condemning Mr Assad . 
Russia 's Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said the situation in Syria remained a `` grave concern '' but warned that change in the Arab world `` must not be achieved by misleading the international community or manipulating the Security Council '' . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Do you have friends or family in the region ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
At no time should you endanger yourself or others or take any unnecessary risks . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
