By Lina Sinjab BBC News , Damascus Women have been involved in the uprising in Syria since its very beginning Maya , a Syrian activist who uses a pseudonym , was arrested at her first demonstration at the start of the protests against President Bashar al-Assad . 
She was filming a group of Syrian women who had agreed to hold a silent protest at one of the busiest markets in the capital , Damascus , in support of pro-democracy demonstrators in the southern city of Deraa . 
`` This scene shocked people in the market , '' Maya says . 
`` As soon as we reached the central square , security forces arrested the young amongst us . '' 
Maya 's experience in prison helped her break through the barrier of fear . 
Since that day , she has become involved on a daily basis in the uprising . 
But she is now concerned about being arrested and has gone into hiding . 
`` I had to run one day from them and hide under a car in a car park . 
Today , I have a year of work as an activist against the regime and if they get me , it wo n't be easy , '' she explains . 
Maya 's mother was detained for a week by the security services and interrogated repeatedly . 
She was used as a tool to get her daughter . 
Now , Maya and her mother can only see each other in secret . 
Maya has long been involved in defending women 's rights in Syria , but she says her primary goal now is `` freedom '' . 
Many women and children have killed by security forces in the crackdown on dissent `` When you are under heavy gunfire , women 's rights are considered luxury . '' 
Almost everyone you ask among the opposition says Syria 's uprising started in reaction to what happened in Deraa last March . 
Locals took to the streets after 14 children were arrested and tortured for writing on the walls of their schools the slogan of the popular uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt : `` The people want the downfall of the regime . '' 
They wrote the graffiti because their school teacher was arrested for expressing her wish that the revolution would start in Syria . 
Since day one , women have been behind the dissemination of news about the protests in Syria and the state 's crackdown on them . 
Razan Zaitouneh , a human rights lawyer , has been among the main sources of such information . 
Her network of lawyers and human rights activists on the ground are telling the world what is happening in Syria . 
Ms Zaitouneh , along with many other activists , formed an opposition network that is now called the Local Co-ordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- . 
She is now in hiding in Syria , having been accused of being a foreign agent . 
In the search for her , security forces detained her husband and brother-in-law for weeks . 
Women have also sought to challenge critics of the uprising , who have said it is dominated by conservative Islamists and is sectarian in nature . 
In the suburbs , where women used to stay at home ... -LRB- they now -RRB- get out of their houses and speak out loud '' End Quote Rana Opposition activist Many have pointed to video and pictures of anti-government protests across the country , at which the faces of the majority of women are covered . 
Activists say this is not because the women are conservative Sunni Muslims , but because they need to hide their faces out of fear of arrest . 
`` Women from all parts of society are involved in the protest movement - Christians and Muslims , liberals and conservatives , '' says Rana , a 25-year-old secular Muslim who has been active in the protest movement along with her husband since the start of the uprising . 
Rana points to an example from Harasta , a suburb of Damascus , where women ignored the belief held by many conservatives that they should not sing in public and chanted : `` A woman 's voice is a revolution and a man 's silence is a sin . '' 
The women wanted to encourage more men to protest , Rana says . 
`` I am not that involved with women-specific groups , '' she adds . 
`` We work hand-in-hand , men and women , not only in organising , but also influencing the slogans that are coming out and always trying to criticise any violent actions . 
`` We also work in providing humanitarian aid to affected families . '' 
Rana 's liberal background allows her social freedom . 
Still , she says , women who are in conservative areas have proven to be strong and influential . 
Conservative Muslim women have defied social norms and taken to the streets `` When I go to affected areas where there has been a heavy crackdown by the regime , I see another layer of the revolution , '' she says . 
`` In the suburbs , where women used to stay at home , there is a social revolution on going . 
Women get out of their houses and speak out loud . '' 
Douma , another suburb of Damascus , is an example . 
Many Muslim women there wear the niqab , a full-face veil , live traditional lives dominated by family and led by men , and rarely engage in social activities . 
But when Salma 's brother was killed in the first month of the uprising , she took to the streets , and moved door-to-door urging women to come out with her . 
Salma often stands alongside other women in front of the state security building in Douma 's central square , holding banners calling for the release of their husbands and sons . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
