Sun May 30 , 2010 3:40 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - With the failure this weekend of BP 's `` top kill '' attempt to plug its leaking Gulf of Mexico oil well , fears are growing that the economic and environmental impact of the nearly six-week-old spill can only spread . 
Here are some facts about effects of the worst ever U.S. oil spill , triggered by the April 20 explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig : THE SCALE OF THE CATASTROPHE `` This is probably the biggest environmental disaster we have ever faced in this country , '' top White House energy adviser Carol Browner said on Sunday . 
`` There could be oil coming up 'til August . '' 
Browner told CBS 's `` Face The Nation , '' `` We are prepared for the worst . '' 
Louisiana , the nearest state to BP 's gushing undersea well that is 42 miles out in the Gulf of Mexico , has been the most impacted by the spill so far . 
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal said this week that more than 100 miles of Louisiana 's 400-mile coast had so far been impacted by the spilled oil . 
State officials have reported sheets of oil soiling wetlands and seeping into marine and bird nurseries , leaving a stain of sticky crude on cane that binds the marshes together . 
Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish , saw dying cane and `` no life '' in parts of Pass-a-Loutre wildlife refuge . 
`` Oil debris '' , in the form of tar balls and surface `` sheen '' , has also been reported coming ashore since the April 20 accident in outlying parts of coastal Mississippi and Alabama . 
In the week of May 17 , Coast Guard officials found tar balls on some beaches in the Florida Keys , raising fears that the so-called Loop Current that runs from the Gulf of Mexico through the Florida Straits may have already brought oil from the spill far to the southeast . 
But laboratory tests subsequently showed the tar balls were not from the BP spill . 
The U.S. government has declared a `` fishery disaster '' in the seafood-producing states of Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama due to the oil spill . 
This makes them eligible for federal funds to offset the impact on fisherman and their communities of the oil pollution in their fishing grounds . 
Louisiana 's $ 2.4 billion seafood industry supplies up to 40 percent of U.S. seafood supply and employs over 27,000 people . 
The state is the second-biggest U.S. seafood harvester and the top provider of shrimp , oysters , crab and crawfish . 
NOAA on Friday extended the area closed to fishing in the Gulf of Mexico as a result of the spill to 25 percent of Gulf U.S. federal waters , an area covering 60,683 square miles -LRB- 157,168 square km -RRB- , up from 20 percent previously . 
It is taking this step as a precautionary measure to ensure that seafood from the Gulf will remain safe for consumers . 
NOAA points out that approximately 75 percent of Gulf federal waters are still available for fishing . 
But the ban affects hundreds of thousands of commercial and recreational fishermen , hitting the livelihoods of shrimpers , oystercatchers and charter boat operators . 
Oil , some of it in thick sheets , but also in the form of sheen and tar balls , has already come ashore in Louisiana wildlife reserves like the Breton National Wildlife Refuge in the offshore Breton and Chandeleur Islands , and the Pass-a-Loutre refuge further to the south . 
Over the 40 days since the spill started , wildlife officials report that 491 birds , 227 turtles and 27 mammals , including dolphins , have been collected dead along the U.S. Gulf Coast , according to an update released on Sunday by the oil response unified command . 
Officials stress that not all of the deaths were necessarily caused by the BP spill , and that some will have been from natural causes . 
Of the 491 dead birds collected , only 28 were visibly oiled . 
A further 66 visibly oiled birds were rescued alive . 
Journalists and scientists have also reported seeing at least one shark , and other creatures like eels and turtles , swimming through surface oil . 
Wildlife officials say however they expect more marine creatures , birds and mammals will be affected . 
Scientists say they are also concerned about the unseen and unknown effects on the marine environment and food chain of underwater `` plumes '' of dispersed oil , some of them several miles -LRB- km -RRB- long , emanating from the deepwater spill site . 
Tourism operators in Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama -- from hotel owners to restaurateurs and boat charterers -- have reported cancellations as a result of the oil spill , although some are picking up other business from journalists , officials and cleanup workers who have flocked to the Gulf Coast . 
Amidst a scare involving tar balls found on Florida Keys beaches -- later declared not to have come from the BP oil spill , Florida 's $ 60-billion-a-year tourism industry is also losing millions as a result of the incident , a top state tourism marketing official said earlier this month . 
Of all the threatened states , Florida has the most to lose . 
Tourism is its economic lifeblood , its largest industry , generating $ 60 billion in spending from more than 80 million visitors a year , bringing in 21 percent of all state sales taxes and employing nearly 1 million Floridians . 
Officials say even the mere threat of oil pollution from the spill is enough to make a significant `` dent '' in the tourism industries of Florida and other Gulf states . 
Mississippi , Alabama and Florida are spending millions of dollars -- paid for by BP -- to get the message out that their beaches are , for the moment , free of oil . 
Major shipping channels and ports on the U.S. Gulf Coast remain open , although some industry sources have reported possible delays caused by the oil slick . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said on Friday it had begun work to survey a new ship anchorage site at the mouth of the Mississippi River for ships to undergo inspection and oil decontamination before entering ports . 
U.S. authorities are anxious to keep Gulf shipping operating to maintain vital U.S. exports and imports . 
NOAA says the Lower Mississippi River ports export over 50 million metric metric tones of corn , soybeans and wheat each year , more than 55 percent of all U.S. grains inspected for shipment . 
-LRB- Reporting by Matthew Biggin Venice , Louisiana , Steve Gorman in Los Angeles and Pascal Fletcher in Miami , Editing by Pascal Fletcher and Sandra Maler -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Whoever stops it first then they give BP the bill . 
Whoever can clean it up the quickest , BP gets their bill too . 
Everyone post and pass this message on . 
Finger point AFTER leak stopped and cleanup in progress . 
providing updated calculations of the percentage of the waters of Gulf of Mexico replaced by oil for given dates This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
