VENICE , Louisiana | Sun May 30 , 2010 7:23 pm EDT VENICE , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Lawmakers and local residents clamored on Sunday for BP and the Obama administration to do more to save the Gulf Coast from an out-of-control oil spill that has become the biggest environmental catastrophe in the country 's history . 
One congressman called the nearly six-week oil gush in the Gulf of Mexico an `` environmental crime , '' while a Louisiana senator demanded BP invest $ 1 billion immediately to protect the region 's treasured marshlands . 
The failure on Saturday of a `` top kill '' technique attempted by London-based BP to try to seal its leaking Gulf well has unleashed a surge of anger and frustration that poses a major domestic challenge for President Barack Obama . 
Obama , who has called the leaking BP well a `` man-made disaster , '' is trying to fend off criticism that his administration acted too slowly in its response to the spill , now known to be the worst in U.S. history . 
He is in a bind because it appears only BP can stop the leak , although he has made clear the government is in charge . 
But critics say he has not directed enough resources to the unfolding disaster and he has been present enough . 
The White House said on Sunday that the government will triple clean-up resources in areas affected by the spill , while the administration 's top energy and environment officials head back to the Gulf this week following Obama 's second visit on Friday . 
`` This is probably the biggest environmental disaster we have ever faced in this country , '' top White House energy adviser Carol Browner told NBC 's `` Meet the Press . '' 
BP , its reputation and market value already battered by the catastrophic spill , and the entire U.S. oil industry face more probing questions about why safety backups did not accompany their pursuit of oil in ever deeper offshore waters . 
`` I think without question if the word criminal should be used in terms of an environmental crime against our country , that what 's going on in the Gulf of Mexico is going to qualify , '' U.S. Representative Ed Markey told CBS ' `` Face the Nation . '' 
Department of Justice officials are part of an ongoing federal investigation into the April 20 rig explosion that triggered the spill , and the Obama administration has not ruled out the possibility of a criminal prosecution . 
In Louisiana , which has borne the brunt of the oil spill impact so far , local authorities demanded that BP and the federal government rush a plan to create a sand barrier to the oil by dredging and building up outlying sandbanks and islets . 
`` I 'm devastated ... We are dying a slow death , every time that oil takes out a piece of the marsh , a piece of Louisiana is gone forever , '' said Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish , where the oil has clogged wetlands . 
`` Even the government seems powerless and all the experts . 
If these people ca n't stop it , then who in the name of God can ? '' 
Father Gerry , a priest at St. Patrick Catholic Church in Port Sulphur , Louisiana , said , his voice heavy with emotion . 
` OIL COMING UP UNTIL AUGUST ' After giving up on Saturday an attempt to pump heavy fluids and blocking materials into the leaking well to `` kill '' it , BP is pursuing another option from its undersea toolbox . 
But BP warns that the new procedure , which will try to fit a containment cap over the leaking well , could take between four and seven days . 
Even then success is not guaranteed because it has never been attempted before at the depth -- a mile down -- where the oil is leaking . 
BP Managing Director Robert Dudley told NBC 's `` Meet the Press '' the company would know by the end of the week whether the new containment effort worked . 
The next BP step would involve undersea robots using diamond-rimmed saws to cut off a pipe over the well to put in place a containment device that would try to siphon off most of the leaking oil and gas up to a tanker ship on the surface . 
Dudley said he did not think BP CEO Tony Hayward , who has faced heavy criticism , should be forced to resign . 
A surer solution to the leak , a relief well already being drilled , is not expected to be finished until early August . 
This means crude oil continues to spew out daily , feeding a huge , fragmented slick that has already polluted marshlands teeming with wildlife and rich fisheries in Louisiana . 
`` There could be oil coming up until August . '' 
Browner told CBS 's `` Face The Nation , '' `` We are prepared for the worst . '' 
Louisiana Senator Mary Landrieu called on BP to immediately invest $ 1 billion to protect marshes , wetlands and estuaries across the region . 
`` While we may not be able to plug the leaking well right away , there is nothing that should stop us from getting help to the Gulf Coast immediately , '' she said . 
Gulf residents fear the spilled oil could be whipped further inshore by what promises to be the most active Atlantic storm season since 2005 , the year of Hurricane Katrina . 
That deadly storm proved a political disaster for President George W. Bush , who was accused of complacency in handling it , and Obama is fighting to prevent the Gulf spill from becoming his own `` Katrina '' ahead of the November congressional elections . 
Louisianans still recovering from Katrina 's devastation were frustrated by the oil spill response . 
`` It 's been a screw-up from day one . 
Nothing was at the ready and no one was in a position to respond , '' said Claude Marquette , a retired physician , 68 , speaking as he sat with his wife in his boat . 
BP 's Hayward had predicted that despite risks , the `` top kill '' had a 60 to 70 percent chance of success . 
He said he did not know why it failed to stop the gusher . 
The misstep is likely to drive his credibility lower , along with his company 's market value , which has dropped by 25 percent since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20 , killing 11 workers , and triggering the spill . 
The government estimated last week that 12,000 to 19,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 to 798,000 gallons\/1 .9 million to 3 million liters -RRB- a day are leaking from the well . 
At that rate , the government now knows that the Gulf disaster has surpassed the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill in Alaskan waters . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
-LRB- As I am trying to communicate to BP\/the US to see if it is legitimate -RRB- : 1 . 
Clear debris , rock , mud , etc from gushing pipe . 
Strong vice grips as wide as the pipe diameter squeeze the pipe shut as absolutely as much as possible . 
Solder and Meld the Pipe Shut , from one end of the crease to the other , and Reinforce the Closure . 
Do for all open pipes . 
Use it if it will work . 
I can not fathom why they have not just tried the procedure of getting tankers on the way and use the method they have mentioned to collect as much as possible . 
That done sooner seems it would have sharply reduced the spill magnitude . 
A small-yield nuke would melt a couple hundred feet of basalt on top of that tiny hole and compress a large portion of the sea bed below that as well . 
Its just a hole in the ground . 
Melt it shut with a nuke . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
