Sun May 30 , 2010 3:39 pm EDT May 30 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - With the failure this weekend of BP -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- 's `` top kill '' attempt to plug its leaking Gulf of Mexico oil well , fears are growing that the economic and environmental impact of the nearly six-week-old spill can only spread . 
Here are some facts about effects of the worst ever U.S. oil spill , triggered by the April 20 explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig : THE SCALE OF THE CATASTROPHE `` This is probably the biggest environmental disaster we have ever faced in this country , '' top White House energy adviser Carol Browner said on Sunday . 
`` There could be oil coming up 'til August . '' 
Browner told CBS 's `` Face The Nation , '' `` We are prepared for the worst . '' 
Louisiana , the nearest state to BP 's gushing undersea well that is 42 miles -LRB- 67 km -RRB- out in the Gulf of Mexico , has been the most impacted by the spill so far . 
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal said this week that more than 100 miles -LRB- 160 km -RRB- of Louisiana 's 400-mile -LRB- 644 km -RRB- coast had so far been impacted by the spilled oil . 
State officials have reported sheets of oil soiling wetlands and seeping into marine and bird nurseries , leaving a stain of sticky crude on cane that binds the marshes together . 
Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish , saw dying cane and `` no life '' in parts of Pass-a-Loutre wildlife refuge . 
`` Oil debris '' , in the form of tar balls and surface `` sheen '' , has also been reported coming ashore since the April 20 accident in outlying parts of coastal Mississippi and Alabama . 
In the week of May 17 , Coast Guard officials found tar balls on some beaches in the Florida Keys , raising fears that the so-called Loop Current that runs from the Gulf of Mexico through the Florida Straits may have already brought oil from the spill far to the southeast . 
But laboratory tests subsequently showed the tar balls were not from the BP spill . 
The U.S. government has declared a `` fishery disaster '' in the seafood-producing states of Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama due to the oil spill . 
This makes them eligible for federal funds to offset the impact on fisherman and their communities of the oil pollution in their fishing grounds . 
Louisiana 's $ 2.4 billion seafood industry supplies up to 40 percent of U.S. seafood supply and employs over 27,000 people . 
The state is the second-biggest U.S. seafood harvester and the top provider of shrimp , oysters , crab and crawfish . 
NOAA on Friday extended the area closed to fishing in the Gulf of Mexico as a result of the spill to 25 percent of Gulf U.S. federal waters , an area covering 60,683 square miles -LRB- 157,168 square km -RRB- , up from 20 percent previously . 
It is taking this step as a precautionary measure to ensure that seafood from the Gulf will remain safe for consumers . 
NOAA points out that approximately 75 percent of Gulf federal waters are still available for fishing . 
But the ban affects hundreds of thousands of commercial and recreational fishermen , hitting the livelihoods of shrimpers , oystercatchers and charter boat operators . 
Oil , some of it in thick sheets , but also in the form of sheen and tar balls , has already come ashore in Louisiana wildlife reserves like the Breton National Wildlife Refuge in the offshore Breton and Chandeleur Islands , and the Pass-a-Loutre refuge further to the south . 
Over the 40 days since the spill started , wildlife officials report that 491 birds , 227 turtles and 27 mammals , including dolphins , have been collected dead along the U.S. Gulf Coast , according to an update released on Sunday by the oil response unified command . 
Officials stress that not all of the deaths were necessarily caused by the BP spill , and that some will have been from natural causes . 
Of the 491 dead birds collected , only 28 were visibly oiled . 
A further 66 visibly oiled birds were rescued alive . 
Journalists and scientists have also reported seeing at least one shark , and other creatures like eels and turtles , swimming through surface oil . 
Wildlife officials say however they expect more marine creatures , birds and mammals will be affected . 
Scientists say they are also concerned about the unseen and unknown effects on the marine environment and food chain of underwater `` plumes '' of dispersed oil , some of them several miles -LRB- km -RRB- long , emanating from the deepwater spill site . 
Tourism operators in Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama -- from hotel owners to restaurateurs and boat charterers -- have reported cancellations as a result of the oil spill , although some are picking up other business from journalists , officials and cleanup workers who have flocked to the Gulf Coast . 
Amidst a scare involving tar balls found on Florida Keys beaches -- later declared not to have come from the BP oil spill , Florida 's $ 60-billion-a-year tourism industry is also losing millions as a result of the incident , a top state tourism marketing official said earlier this month . 
Of all the threatened states , Florida has the most to lose . 
Tourism is its economic lifeblood , its largest industry , generating $ 60 billion in spending from more than 80 million visitors a year , bringing in 21 percent of all state sales taxes and employing nearly 1 million Floridians . 
Officials say even the mere threat of oil pollution from the spill is enough to make a significant `` dent '' in the tourism industries of Florida and other Gulf states . 
Mississippi , Alabama and Florida are spending millions of dollars -- paid for by BP -- to get the message out that their beaches are , for the moment , free of oil . 
Major shipping channels and ports on the U.S. Gulf Coast remain open , although some industry sources have reported possible delays caused by the oil slick . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said on Friday it had begun work to survey a new ship anchorage site at the mouth of the Mississippi River for ships to undergo inspection and oil decontamination before entering ports . 
U.S. authorities are anxious to keep Gulf shipping operating to maintain vital U.S. exports and imports . 
NOAA says the Lower Mississippi River ports export over 50 million metric tonnes of corn , soybeans and wheat each year , more than 55 percent of all U.S. grains inspected for shipment . 
-LRB- Reporting by Matthew Biggin Venice , Louisiana , Steve Gorman in Los Angeles and Pascal Fletcher in Miami , Editing by Pascal Fletcher and Sandra Maler -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Some have mentioned that the dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico may increase in size , what if a tipping point is reached and the entire Gulf of Mexico flashes into a dead zone ? 
Let me push this danger to it 's possible extremes and see what the worst case scenario may become . 
All life in the Gulf of Mexico dies including algae and plankton . 
Algae\/plankton symbiotic relationship creates 80 % of all oxygen on Earth . 
Couple this with vapors rising from the chemical soup mixture that is being created from the petro chemical spill as well as the dispersant interactions with the oil and air breathing creatures -LRB- humans -RRB- could start dying in large numbers in nearby land areas . 
Just how big this spill continues to grow would effect how far toxic vapors could spread , but again let 's go worst case ; Land areas near Gulf including parts of Mexico , Texas , Louisiana , Alabama , Mississippi , Florida , and Cuba may need to be evacuated . 
In the case of Florida with prevailing winds entire state may become effected . 
Remember people are already being sickened by the fumes . 
I have no doubt now that there will be fatalities amongst those people with lung disease eventually , even in a best case scenario if the oil leak stopped today . 
Enough oil has already contaminated the Gulf waters , `` greatest environmental disaster in US history '' is how some are now reporting this event . 
Beyond environmental considerations are financial considerations . 
Many retirement funds are heavily invested in BP worldwide , and the value of BP has certainly fallen on stock exchanges , hence retirements worldwide will shortly have less returns than expected by the retired , of course all other investors worldwide will be effected as well , just that many investment funds do not inform the retired where their investments are made . 
Much has been made of the loss of revenue by local fishermen , tourism , restaurants , and seafood distributors on down the line . 
But this may all be just the start of financial dominoes that likely will effect everyone on Earth eventually . 
In the hard economic times faced by the worldwide economy this could be far more than the proverbial last straw , there are too many people on Earth to supply with food than greatly reduced food sources will be able to feed . 
Under such conditions the danger of worldwide war is a factor that can not go unconsidered , humans are not always logical creatures , and fear of starvation is motivation enough for a real worst case scenario , ie ; Human Extinction ! 
I know I am pushing this to horrible extremes , but some if not all is possible and needs consideration especially if the flow is not stopped very soon . 
There have also been revelations that this chemical soup may soon be reaching the Gulf Stream and that may take dangerous chemicals up the entire eastern coast of North America . 
From there the ocean currents will carry portions of this soup to Europe and who knows how far beyond . 
We are realizing that we have a worldwide economy , and so too the environment of the entire Earth is eventually interconnected . 
How many people out of desperation to survive will allow toxin contaminated materials and foods to be shipped to locations worldwide ? 
Deaths are inevitable even if never tracked back to the cause . 
Why am I pushing all these dangers to the extremes ? 
Not for fear mongering ! 
Quite the opposite actually , `` To be forewarned is to be forearmed '' Something needs to be done very soon to stop this oil flow . 
This is an EMERGENCY ! 
Extreme action is warranted ! 
Every nation on Earth should be concerned . 
Something can be done ! 
This flow can be stopped somehow , there are literally thousands of concepts out there to deal with this disaster , yet far too long a period of time is being spent between attempts . 
If a hundred tons of concrete was dumped on the site that would likely stop the flow , but if it took a million tons of concrete it would still be needed to be done some way or another ! 
Perhaps even pumping volcano ash -LRB- which we seem to have in abundance at moment -RRB- into the well would seal it forever . 
Much is being made of drilling the side shafts near the well to take off some of the pressure and slow the flow , but these side shafts can also be used to pump concrete or V ash into area and seal off the leak permanently . 
To use these shafts only as a siphon to slow the flow makes it look like we are more concerned with getting the oil rather than stopping the flow from the leak . 
We need to stop this oil flow very soon ! 
I have laid out some of the possible worst case scenarios , but I could be wrong about any of these points , however there are bound to be other worst case possibilities that I am not considering . 
Enough with this real life horror show , we gotta stop the flow ! 
If a war broke out would we wait for a private company to fight the war because they somehow may have caused the conflict ? 
It 's become abundantly clear what is going on with the current oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Here are some steps you can take on your own to recover your property losses . 
Take pictures of everything and document everything . 
Most of your state officials can go on the Internet and find information about the Migratory Bird Treaty and the Clean Water Act . 
The residents with property loss can Google the Bouchard B-120 oil spill in Buzzards Bay , Massachusetts . 
Be sure to review the current class action litigation going on even today over the 2003 oil spill . 
The oil spills have to stop ! 
On April 27 , 2003 , eight years ago the Bouchard Barge B-120 hit an obstacle in Buzzards Bay , Massachusetts creating a 12-foot rupture in its hull and discharging an estimated 100,000 gallons of No. 6 oil . 
Remember everyone must ask how likely are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons -LRB- PAHs -RRB- in crude oil to cause cancer ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
