\* Central Asia rich in resources but landlocked \* New transit link could be part of North-South project By Marat Gurt ASHGABAT , April 25 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan agreed on Monday with Iran , Qatar and Oman to create a transit rail route linking energy-rich but landlocked Central Asia to the Gulf . 
The new transport corridor will run from Uzbekistan across Turkmenistan and then to the Gulf via Iran , bypassing chronically unstable Afghanistan next door . 
`` This is a legally binding agreement ... which allows us to start creating a new geo-economic space , '' Turkmen Foreign Minister Rashid Meredov said before signing the agreement on establishing the transport and transit corridor . 
He signed the document with his counterparts from Uzbekistan , Iran , Oman and a deputy foreign minister from Qatar . 
`` This is a historic document ... -LRB- it -RRB- is in the interests of the Central Asian region and the Gulf , '' Uzbek Foreign Minister Elyor Ganiyev told journalists . 
Officials declined to disclose the length and the cost of the project , or to say when it could be implemented . 
An official close to the talks said that besides railway transport communication , the five sides are also discussing ways to simplify customs procedures to facilitate trade . 
Turkmenistan is Central Asia 's No. 1 producer and exporter of natural gas , holding the world 's fourth-largest reserves of the fuel . 
It also aims to boost its crude oil output more than sixfold to 67 million tonnes by 2030 . 
Its neighbor Uzbekistan is a major producer of cotton and gold and is also estimated to hold ample hydrocarbon reserves . 
A Turkmen official said the new transit link could be part of the planned 934-km -LRB- 585-mile -RRB- North-South railway corridor , already being developed to improve Turkmenistan 's access to northern neighbor Kazakhstan and further northwards to Russia . 
That rail line is due for completion by September 2012 . 
Last month Turkmenistan secured a $ 125-million loan from the Asian Development Bank to improve infrastructure along a third of the North-South link . 
-LRB- Reporting by Marat Gurt ; Writing by Dmitry Solovyov ; editing by Jason Neely -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
