WASHINGTON | Mon Apr 25 , 2011 7:32 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The United States is considering sanctions against Syrian government officials to increase pressure on President Bashar al-Assad to end a violent crackdown on protesters , a U.S. official said on Monday . 
The measures , which could freeze the officials ' assets and ban them from doing business in the United States , would likely come in an executive order signed by U.S. President Barack Obama , the U.S. official said on condition of anonymity . 
But a final decision has yet to be made and there was no word on whether Assad might be a target , the official said . 
Sanctions would mark a more assertive approach by the Obama administration , which has been criticized by human rights groups for not doing more to curb Assad 's efforts to crush a monthlong uprising against his autocratic 11-year rule . 
Obama 's response to the Syrian crisis has been limited compared to Washington 's role in a NATO-led air campaign against Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's forces and its call for his ouster . 
Obama spoke by phone with Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan and the White House said they expressed deep concern about the violence in Syria . 
`` The leaders agreed that the Syrian government must end the use of violence now and promptly enact meaningful reforms that respect the democratic aspirations of Syrian citizens , '' the White House said . 
Washington is mindful of its limited ability to influence Damascus , which is already under a set of U.S. economic sanctions and is closely allied with U.S. foe Iran . 
The Obama administration is also worried about stoking instability on U.S. ally Israel 's borders and wants to avoid another military entanglement in the Muslim world , where it is involved in wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
Despite that , U.S. officials were looking for new pressure points with Assad as his tanks poured into Deraa , where a human rights activist said at least 18 people were killed . 
White House spokesman Jay Carney said the administration was `` pursuing a range of possible policy options , including targeted sanctions ... to make clear that this behavior is unacceptable . '' 
But he declined to say whether measures might be imposed against Assad himself , if Syria 's oil industry might be targeted or whether there might be a broader push for U.N. sanctions . 
Even as he heaped criticism on Syria 's actions , Carney kept a mostly cautious line on Assad 's fate and stopped short of urging him to step down . 
`` It is up to the people of Syria to decide who its leader should be , '' he told reporters . 
Obama , sharpening his tone in a statement on Friday , said Syria 's crackdown `` must come to an end now '' and accused Damascus of seeking Iranian help to repress its people . 
Assad lifted a 48-year state of emergency on Thursday but activists say violence the following day , when 100 protesters were killed , showed he was not serious about reform . 
Questions have been raised whether new U.S. sanctions against Assad and his aides -- like the steps taken against Gaddafi and his loyalists -- would have much tangible impact . 
The United States and other Western powers have been trying for two years to woo Assad away from Tehran and encourage the British-trained eye doctor to reach a peace deal with Israel . 
The Obama administration sent an ambassador back to Damascus this year . 
Even while maintaining support for Lebanese Hezbollah and Palestinian Hamas militants , Assad has kept Syria 's border with Israel quiet . 
Western sanctions could push Syria more tightly into Tehran 's embrace and risk further regional instability by stoking sectarian strife . 
-LRB- Editing by Deborah Charles and Doina Chiacu -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
And he told us it was for humanitarian reasons because Gadhafi had threatened innocent civilians . 
Well the regime in Syria is far worse than in Libya . 
It supports terrorism , threatens Israel , and has been killing off politicians that oppose its interference in Lebanon . 
And of course we are reading every day how it is slaughtering hundreds or thousands of democracy protestors . 
Yet Obama does nothing , except think of maybe imposing some sanction on some people in the Syrian regime ? 
I honestly ca n't make sense of Obama 's foreign policy . 
I 'm beginning to think he gets up in the morning and consults a Magic 8 ball ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
