Full text : George Bush 's Iraq speech Full text of President George Bush 's speech at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , as provided by the White House Wednesday 29 June 2005 03.07 BST Thank you and good evening . 
I am pleased to visit Fort Bragg , home of the Airborne and Special Operations Forces . 
It is an honor to speak before you tonight . 
My greatest responsibility as president is to protect the American people , and that is your calling as well . 
I thank you for your service , your courage and your sacrifice . 
I thank your families , who support you in your vital work . 
The soldiers and families of Fort Bragg have contributed mightily to our efforts to secure our country and promote peace . 
America is grateful and so is your commander in chief . 
The troops here and across the world are fighting a global war on terror . 
This war reached our shores on September 11 2001 . 
The terrorists who attacked us and the terrorists we face murder in the name of a totalitarian ideology that hates freedom , rejects tolerance and despises all dissent . 
Their aim is to remake the Middle East in their own grim image of tyranny and oppression by toppling governments , driving us out of the region and exporting terror . 
To achieve these aims , they have continued to kill in Madrid , Istanbul , Jakarta , Casablanca , Riyadh , Bali and elsewhere . 
The terrorists believe that free societies are essentially corrupt and decadent , and with a few hard blows they can force us to retreat . 
After September 11 , I made a commitment to the American people : This nation will not wait to be attacked again . 
We will take the fight to the enemy . 
We will defend our freedom . 
Iraq is the latest battlefield in this war . 
Many terrorists who kill innocent men , women and children on the streets of Baghdad are followers of the same murderous ideology that took the lives of our citizens in New York , Washington and Pennsylvania . 
There is only one course of action against them : to defeat them abroad before they attack us at home . 
The commander in charge of coalition operations in Iraq , who is also senior commander at this base , General John Vines , put it well the other day . 
He said , `` We either deal with terrorism and this extremism abroad , or we deal with it when it comes to us . '' 
Our mission in Iraq is clear . 
We are hunting down the terrorists . 
We are helping Iraqis build a free nation that is an ally in the war on terror . 
We are advancing freedom in the broader Middle East . 
We are removing a source of violence and instability and laying the foundation of peace for our children and our grandchildren . 
The work in Iraq is difficult and dangerous . 
Like most Americans , I see the images of violence and bloodshed . 
Every picture is horrifying and the suffering is real . 
Amid all this violence , I know Americans ask the question : Is the sacrifice worth it ? 
It is worth it , and it is vital to the future security of our country . 
And tonight I will explain the reasons why . 
Some of the violence you see in Iraq is being carried out by ruthless killers who are converging on Iraq to fight the advance of peace and freedom . 
Our military reports that we have killed or captured hundreds of foreign fighters in Iraq who have come from Saudi Arabia , Syria , Iran , Egypt , Sudan , Yemen , Libya and other nations . 
They are making common cause with criminal elements , Iraqi insurgents and remnants of Saddam Hussein 's regime who want to restore the old order . 
They fight because they know that the survival of their hateful ideology is at stake . 
They know that as freedom takes root in Iraq , it will inspire millions across the Middle East to claim their liberty as well . 
And when the Middle East grows in democracy , prosperity and hope , the terrorists will lose their sponsors , lose their recruits and lose their hopes for turning that region into a base for attacks on America and our allies around the world . 
Some wonder whether Iraq is a central front in the war on terror . 
Among the terrorists , there is no debate . 
Hear the words of Osama Bin Laden : `` This Third World War is raging '' in Iraq . 
`` The whole world is watching this war . '' 
He says it will end in `` victory and glory or misery and humiliation . '' 
The terrorists know that the outcome will leave them emboldened or defeated . 
So they are waging a campaign of murder and destruction . 
And there is no limit to the innocent lives they are willing to take . 
We see the nature of the enemy in terrorists who exploded car bombs along a busy shopping street in Baghdad , including one outside a mosque . 
We see the nature of the enemy in terrorists who sent a suicide bomber to a teaching hospital in Mosul . 
And we see the nature of the enemy in terrorists who behead civilian hostages and broadcast their atrocities for the world to see . 
These are savage acts of violence but they have not brought the terrorists any closer to achieving their strategic objectives . 
The terrorists , both foreign and Iraqi , failed to stop the transfer of sovereignty . 
They failed to break our coalition and force a mass withdrawal by our allies . 
They failed to incite an Iraqi civil war . 
They failed to prevent free elections . 
They failed to stop the formation of a democratic Iraqi government that represents all of Iraq 's diverse population . 
And they failed to stop Iraqis from signing up in large numbers with the police forces and the army to defend their new democracy . 
The lesson of this experience is clear : The terrorists can kill the innocent but they can not stop the advance of freedom . 
The only way our enemies can succeed is if we forget the lessons of September 11 , if we abandon the Iraqi people to men like Zarqawi and if we yield the future of the Middle East to men like bin Laden . 
For the sake of our nation 's security , this will not happen on my watch . 
A little over a year ago , I spoke to the nation and described our coalition 's goal in Iraq . 
I said that America 's mission in Iraq is to defeat an enemy and give strength to a friend , a free , representative government that is an ally in the war on terror and a beacon of hope in a part of the world that is desperate for reform . 
I outlined the steps we would take to achieve this goal : We would hand authority over to a sovereign Iraqi government ; we would help Iraqis hold free elections by January 2005 ; we would continue helping Iraqis rebuild their nation 's infrastructure and economy ; we would encourage more international support for Iraq 's democratic transition ; and we would enable Iraqis to take increasing responsibility for their own security and stability . 
In the past year , we have made significant progress : One year ago today , we restored sovereignty to the Iraqi people . 
In January 2005 , more than 8 million Iraqi men and women voted in elections that were free and fair and took place on time . 
We continued our efforts to help them rebuild their country . 
Rebuilding a country after three decades of tyranny is hard and rebuilding while at war is even harder . 
Our progress has been uneven but progress is being made . 
We are improving roads and schools and health clinics and working to improve basic services like sanitation , electricity and water . 
And together with our allies , we will help the new Iraqi government deliver a better life for its citizens . 
In the past year , the international community has stepped forward with vital assistance . 
Some 30 nations have troops in Iraq , and many others are contributing nonmilitary assistance . 
The United Nations is in Iraq to help Iraqis write a constitution and conduct their next elections . 
Thus far , some 40 countries and three international organizations have pledged about 34 billion dollars in assistance for Iraqi reconstruction . 
More than 80 countries and international organizations recently came together in Brussels to coordinate their efforts to help Iraqis provide for their security and rebuild their country . 
And next month , donor countries will meet in Jordan to support Iraqi reconstruction . 
Whatever our differences in the past , the world understands that success in Iraq is critical to the security of all our nations . 
As German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder said at the White House yesterday , `` There can be no question a stable and democratic Iraq is in the vested interest of not just Germany , but also Europe . '' 
Finally , we have continued our efforts to equip and train Iraqi security forces . 
We have made gains in both the number and quality of those forces . 
Today Iraq has more than 160,000 security forces trained and equipped for a variety of missions . 
Iraqi forces have fought bravely helping to capture terrorists and insurgents in Najaf , Samarra , Fallujah and Mosul . 
And in the past month , Iraqi forces have led a major anti-terrorist campaign in Baghdad called Operation Lightning , which has led to the capture of hundreds of suspected insurgents . 
Like free people everywhere , Iraqis want to be defended by their own countrymen , and we are helping Iraqis assume those duties . 
The progress in the past year has been significant and we have a clear path forward . 
To complete the mission , we will continue to hunt down the terrorists and insurgents . 
To complete the mission , we will prevent al-Qaida and other foreign terrorists from turning Iraq into what Afghanistan was under the Taliban - a safe haven from which they could launch attacks on America and our friends . 
And the best way to complete the mission is to help Iraqis build a free nation that can govern itself , sustain itself and defend itself . 
So our strategy going forward has both a military track and a political track . 
The principal task of our military is to find and defeat the terrorists and that is why we are on the offense . 
And as we pursue the terrorists , our military is helping to train Iraqi security forces so that they can defend their people and fight the enemy on their own . 
Our strategy can be summed up this way : As the Iraqis stand up , we will stand down . 
We have made progress but we have a lot more work to do . 
Today Iraqi security forces are at different levels of readiness . 
Some are capable of taking on the terrorists and insurgents by themselves . 
A larger number can plan and execute anti-terrorist operations with coalition support . 
The rest are forming and not yet ready to participate fully in security operations . 
Our task is to make the Iraqi units fully capable and independent . 
We are building up Iraqi security forces as quickly as possible , so they can assume the lead in defeating the terrorists and insurgents . 
Our coalition is devoting considerable resources and manpower to this critical task . 
Thousands of coalition troops are involved in the training and equipping of Iraqi security forces . 
Nato is establishing a military academy near Baghdad to train the next generation of Iraqi military leaders , and 17 nations are contributing troops to the Nato training mission . 
Iraqi army and police are being trained by personnel from Italy , Germany , Ukraine , Turkey , Poland , Romania , Australia and the United Kingdom . 
Today dozens of nations are working toward a common objective : an Iraq that can defend itself , defeat its enemies and secure its freedom . 
To further prepare Iraqi forces to fight the enemy on their own , we are taking three new steps : First , we are partnering coalition units with Iraqi units . 
These coalition-Iraqi teams are conducting operations together in the field . 
These combined operations are giving Iraqis a chance to experience how the most professional armed forces in the world operate in combat . 
Second , we are embedding coalition `` transition teams '' inside Iraqi units . 
These teams are made up of coalition officers and noncommissioned officers who live , work and fight together with their Iraqi comrades . 
Under US command , they are providing battlefield advice and assistance to Iraqi forces during combat operations . 
Between battles , they are assisting the Iraqis with important skills such as urban combat and intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance techniques . 
Third , we are working with the Iraqi Ministries of Interior and Defense to improve their capabilities to coordinate anti-terrorist operations . 
We are helping them develop command and control structures . 
We are also providing them with civilian and military leadership training , so Iraq 's new leaders can more effectively manage their forces in the fight against terror . 
The new Iraqi security forces are proving their courage every day . 
More than 2,000 members of the Iraqi security forces have given their lives in the line of duty . 
Thousands more have stepped forward and are now in training to serve their nation . 
With each engagement , Iraqi soldiers grow more battle-hardened and their officers grow more experienced . 
We have learned that Iraqis are courageous and that they need additional skills . 
That is why a major part of our mission is to train them so they can do the fighting and our troops can come home . 
I recognize that Americans want our troops to come home as quickly as possible . 
So do I. Some contend that we should set a deadline for withdrawing US forces . 
Let me explain why that would be a serious mistake . 
Setting an artificial timetable would send the wrong message to the Iraqis , who need to know that America will not leave before the job is done . 
It would send the wrong message to our troops , who need to know that we are serious about completing the mission they are risking their lives to achieve . 
And it would send the wrong message to the enemy , who would know that all they have to do is to wait us out . 
We will stay in Iraq as long as we are needed and not a day longer . 
Some Americans ask me , if completing the mission is so important , why do n't you send more troops ? 
If our commanders on the ground say we need more troops , I will send them . 
But our commanders tell me they have the number of troops they need to do their job . 
Sending more Americans would undermine our strategy of encouraging Iraqis to take the lead in this fight . 
And sending more Americans would suggest that we intend to stay forever , when we are in fact working for the day when Iraq can defend itself and we can leave . 
As we determine the right force level , our troops can know that I will continue to be guided by the advice that matters : the sober judgement of our military leaders . 
The other critical element of our strategy is to help ensure that the hopes Iraqis expressed at the polls in January are translated into a secure democracy . 
The Iraqi people are emerging from decades of tyranny and oppression . 
Under the regime of Saddam Hussein , the Shia and Kurds were brutally oppressed and the vast majority of Sunni Arabs were also denied their basic rights , while senior regime officials enjoyed the privileges of unchecked power . 
The challenge facing Iraqis today is to put this past behind them and come together to build a new Iraq that includes all its people . 
They are doing that by building the institutions of a free society , a society based on freedom of speech , freedom of assembly , freedom of religion and equal justice under law . 
The Iraqis have held free elections and established a transitional national assembly . 
The next step is to write a good constitution that enshrines these freedoms in permanent law . 
The assembly plans to expand its constitutional drafting committee to include more Sunni Arabs . 
Many Sunnis who opposed the January elections are now taking part in the democratic process , and that is essential to Iraq 's future . 
After a constitution is written , the Iraqi people will have a chance to vote on it . 
If approved , Iraqis will go to the polls again to elect a new government under their new , permanent constitution . 
By taking these critical steps and meeting their deadlines , Iraqis will bind their multiethnic society together in a democracy that respects the will of the majority and protects minority rights . 
As Iraqis grow confident that the democratic progress they are making is real and permanent , more will join the political process . 
And as Iraqis see that their military can protect them , more will step forward with vital intelligence to help defeat the enemies of a free Iraq . 
The combination of political and military reform will lay a solid foundation for a free and stable Iraq . 
As Iraqis make progress toward a free society , the effects are being felt beyond Iraq 's borders . 
Before our coalition liberated Iraq , Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons . 
Today the leader of Libya has given up his chemical and nuclear weapons programs . 
Across the broader Middle East , people are claiming their freedom . 
In the last few months , we have witnessed elections in the Palestinian territories and Lebanon . 
These elections are inspiring democratic reformers in places like Egypt and Saudi Arabia . 
Our strategy to defend ourselves and spread freedom is working . 
The rise of freedom in this vital region will eliminate the conditions that feed radicalism and ideologies of murder and make our nation safer . 
We have more work to do , and there will be tough moments that test America 's resolve . 
We are fighting against men with blind hatred and armed with lethal weapons who are capable of any atrocity . 
They wear no uniform ; they respect no laws of warfare or morality . 
They take innocent lives to create chaos for the cameras . 
They are trying to shake our will in Iraq just as they tried to shake our will on September 11 2001 . 
The terrorists do not understand America . 
The American people do not falter under threat and we will not allow our future to be determined by car bombers and assassins . 
America and our friends are in a conflict that demands much of us . 
It demands the courage of our fighting men and women , it demands the steadfastness of our allies and it demands the perseverance of our citizens . 
We accept these burdens because we know what is at stake . 
We fight today because Iraq now carries the hope of freedom in a vital region of the world , and the rise of democracy will be the ultimate triumph over radicalism and terror . 
And we fight today because terrorists want to attack our country and kill our citizens , and Iraq is where they are making their stand . 
So we will fight them there , we will fight them across the world and we will stay in the fight until the fight is won . 
America has done difficult work before . 
From our desperate fight for independence , to the darkest days of a Civil War , to the hard-fought battles against tyranny in the 20th century , there were many chances to lose our heart , our nerve or our way . 
But Americans have always held firm , because we have always believed in certain truths . 
We know that if evil is not confronted , it gains in strength and audacity and returns to strike us again . 
We know that when the work is hard , the proper response is not retreat , it is courage . 
And we know that this great ideal of human freedom is entrusted to us in a special way and that the ideal of liberty is worth defending . 
In this time of testing , our troops can know : The American people are behind you . 
Next week , our nation has an opportunity to make sure that support is felt by every soldier , sailor , airman , Coast Guardsman and Marine at every outpost across the world . 
This Fourth of July , I ask you to find a way to thank the men and women defending our freedom by flying the flag , sending letters to our troops in the field or helping the military family down the street . 
The Department of Defense has set up a website , AmericaSupportsYou . 
You can go there to learn about private efforts in your own community . 
At this time when we celebrate our freedom , let us stand with the men and women who defend us all . 
To the soldiers in this hall , and our servicemen and women across the globe : I thank you for your courage under fire and your service to our nation . 
I thank our military families ; the burden of war falls especially hard on you . 
In this war , we have lost good men and women who left our shores to defend freedom and did not live to make the journey home . 
I have met with families grieving the loss of loved ones who were taken from us too soon . 
I have been inspired by their strength in the face of such great loss . 
We pray for the families . 
And the best way to honor the lives that have been given in this struggle is to complete the mission . 
I thank those of you who have re-enlisted in an hour when your country needs you . 
And to those watching tonight who are considering a military career , there is no higher calling than service in our Armed Forces . 
We live in freedom because every generation has produced patriots willing to serve a cause greater than themselves . 
Those who serve today are taking their rightful place among the greatest generations that have worn our nation 's uniform . 
When the history of this period is written , the liberation of Afghanistan and the liberation of Iraq will be remembered as great turning points in the story of freedom . 
After September 11 2001 , I told the American people that the road ahead would be difficult and that we would prevail . 
Well , it has been difficult . 
And we are prevailing . 
Our enemies are brutal , but they are no match for the United States of America and they are no match for the men and women of the United States military . 
And may God bless America . 
