School girls wear masks as preventive measures against the H1N1 flu , while walking through a food market in Yangon on June 30 , 2009 . 
GENEVA | Tue Jun 30 , 2009 1:58 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The first H1N1 infection found to be resistant to the antiviral drug Tamiflu represents an isolated case with no current implications for public health , the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- said on Tuesday . 
The United Nations agency has declared a global pandemic is underway from the virus known as swine flu which has so far been treatable with Tamiflu , made by Roche . 
WHO spokesman Dick Thompson said that the discovery of a patient in Denmark whose infection did not respond to the drug , revealed by the Swiss company and Danish officials on Monday , did not amplify the severity of the virus . 
`` This is an isolated case . 
At this time , there is no public health implication . 
But we must remain alert as the virus can change at any time and we must not be complacent , '' he told Reuters . 
Officials say the patient is now well and no further contagion with the resistant virus was detected . 
Resistance to Tamiflu has been previously documented in the deadly bird flu virus H5N1 and seasonal H1N1 flu , Thompson said . 
`` We need to monitor the virus -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- continuously , '' he said , adding that the WHO 's global influenza surveillance network linking laboratories in 97 countries would keep monitoring it . 
`` WHO is not changing its recommendations for the use of antivirals , '' Thompson added , referring to the global body 's advice to its 193 member states . 
The WHO has previously said that the H1N1 virus is sensitive to a class of antiviral drugs which includes Tamiflu , known generically as oseltamivir , and Relenza by GlaxoSmithKline , known generically as zanamivir . 
Denmark 's State Serum Institute said , when making the announcement on Monday , that it was expected that the strain would at some point show resistance to Tamiflu . 
It said that while the patient was found to be infected with a virus strain that had mutated to a form resistant to Tamiflu , the alternative drug Relenza , which is inhaled , remained an effective treatment . 
The WHO on June 11 raised its pandemic flu alert to its highest level of 6 , signifying that the first influenza pandemic since 1968 was under way -LRB- ID : nLC321991 -RRB- Flu viruses mutate regularly and can develop resistance to drugs at any time . 
The WHO has said Tamiflu was working against strains of the new H1N1 flu but some health experts have expressed concern that it might be less effective than Relenza , since there have been widespread reports in the past year of resistance to Tamiflu by seasonal H1N1 flu , a distant cousin of the new swine flu virus . 
David Daigle , a spokesman for the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , said that the isolated case in Denmark did not merit a change in the recommended use of Tamiflu . 
`` The resistance has not changed the capability of the virus to transmit or cause disease , and the assessment is still that this is a relatively mild influenza , '' he said on Monday . 
At least 20 companies make flu vaccines , including Novartis , Sanofi-Aventis , GlaxoSmithKline , Baxter International , Solvay , Australia 's CSL and nasal spray maker MedImmune , now part of AstraZeneca . 
French drugmaker Sanofi-Aventis , which has estimated it makes 40 percent of the world 's supply of flu vaccine , said this month that it had begun large-scale production of a H1N1 vaccine through its Sanofi-Pasteur unit . 
Novartis has said it expects a vaccine to be available by autumn and Baxter International has said it is in full-scale production of a vaccine that could be ready for commercial use as early as July . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
