Rahman Ali -LRB- L -RRB- and Khak Hussain , both deaf and mute villagers , use sign language to communicate with each other at Dadhkai Village in the Doda district , 260 km -LRB- 162 miles -RRB- north of Jammu , June 18 , 2009 . 
DADHKAI , India | Tue Jun 30 , 2009 9:33 am EDT DADHKAI , India -LRB- Reuters Life ! -RRB- 
- Silence reigns in the sleepy village of Dadhkai , nestled high up in the Himalayan mountains in northern India and where the majority of residents are either deaf or mute . 
Each of the 47 families in this village in Jammu and Kashmir state have a least one member who can neither hear nor speak . 
The first reported case dates back to 1931 and now the numbers have swelled to 82 . 
`` The birth of a child is a very happy occasion , meant to be celebrated . 
But here the birth of a child leads to harassment not only for the parents but for the entire village , '' said Hashmiddin , a village elder who only goes by one name . 
`` A deaf and mute child only aggravates problems and increases miseries , '' he told Reuters Television . 
The village with a picture-postcard setting stands in isolation from the rest of the region , as there are no roads , and no transport connecting it to the outside world . 
A river cuts it from the neighboring region . 
Three years ago , a team of scientists and doctors came from an Indian health institute to study the village 's case , but no conclusive findings have been made public so far . 
Some villagers blame it on pollution in the water or air , while others believe they could be cursed , as adjoining villages have not reported any similar disorders . 
But an age-old custom of marrying within the community , coupled with lack of access to medical facilities and immunization , probably led to the large number of deaf and mute cases , says Jan Mohammed , an instructor for the deaf . 
`` I think it is because of a genetic problem , '' Mohammed said . 
`` Close relatives marry here . 
In the past there was no immunization given and also there is a lack of iodine and salt . '' 
Lack of education , and hearing aids , has left many locals disillusioned about the future . 
`` These days it is so difficult to find matches for well educated normal girls , how will I get my deaf and dumb daughters married , '' says Lal Hussain , who has two daughters . 
But there have been a lucky few . 
Bano Begum , who is not hearing impaired , was married to a deaf and mute man and said their relationship was initially a huge struggle as they could not communicated with each other . 
But the couple gave birth to three normal children and learned to communicate with each other through sign language . 
Some experts say the locals should be forced to marry outside their village , which the community rejects . 
India 's Health Minister Ghulam Nabi Azad recently said another health team would be sent to the village soon . 
-LRB- Editing by Bappa Majumdar and Miral Fahmy -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
