More than 160 miles -LRB- 257km -RRB- of protective booms had been deployed The oil company , BP , has encountered problems with the containment device it is trying to put over a blown-out well on the seabed of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Chief operating officer Doug Suttles said the 98-tonne concrete-and-steel box had to be moved , after ice-like crystals began accumulating inside it . 
He said BP 's engineers hoped they could find a solution to the problem . 
The aim is to contain as much as 85 % of the escaping oil and then funnel it into a waiting tanker on the surface . 
US officials have closed the Breton National Wildlife Refuge to the public after the slick caused by the leak reached islands off Louisiana . 
Some 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day has been leaking for 19 days from the well , 50 miles -LRB- 80km -RRB- offshore , since an explosion destroyed the Deepwater Horizon rig last month , killing 11 workers . 
We believe that it 'll probably take the next two days to look for opportunities to overcome this challenge Rescued workers who were on the rig earlier described how a bubble of methane gas escaped from the well and expanded as it shot up the drill column before exploding . 
Some complained that safety devices had not worked . 
On of them , Micah Sandell reportedly said : `` There was people screaming and hollering . 
There was people jumping off the side . '' 
Another , Dwayne Martinez , stated : '' -LRB- There were -RRB- no kind of alarms . 
We did n't hear any kind of alarms until there was one explosion . '' 
Although the rig was operated by Transocean , it was leased by BP , which is responsible for cleaning the 3 million gallons that have so far leaked , creating a slick covering about 2,000 sq miles -LRB- 5,200 sq km -RRB- . 
The company hopes the 98-tonne containment device , once operational , will allow it to collect oil leaking out of the well while it attempts to stop the leak altogether by drilling relief wells nearby . 
On Friday , remote-controlled submersibles guided the 40ft -LRB- 12m -RRB- funnel above the wellhead , 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- below the surface . 
The technology has only ever been used a few times in shallow waters . 
HOW THE OIL FUNNEL WORKS The funnel is a 40ft tall iron box , weighing 98 tonnes It will be placed over the leak , 5,000 ft down on the seabed BP hopes it will collect 85 % of the leaking oil and pipe it to the surface BP initially said everything appeared to be going as planned , but on Saturday it said flammable gas hydrates - crystalline water-based solids physically resembling ice - had accumulated inside the device . 
`` As we were placing the dome over the leak source a large volume of hydrates formed inside the top of the dome , requiring us to move the dome to the side of the leak point , '' Mr Suttles told reporters in Robert , Louisiana . 
`` The dome is currently sitting on the seabed while we evaluate options to deal with the hydrate issue . 
We believe that it 'll probably take the next two days to look for opportunities to overcome this challenge . '' 
These could include using hot water to heat up the hydrates at the ocean floor , or using hydrocarbons like methanol to thin them out . 
Doug Suttles , BP , explains the problem with the ` funnel ' `` I would n't say it 's failed yet , '' Mr Suttles added . 
`` What I would say is what we attempted to do last night did n't work . '' 
If the funnel fails to work , BP faces the prospect of drilling a relief well nearby to cut off the leaky oil well , which could take two to three months . 
In the meantime , residents of Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , and Florida await news of when the massive oil slick will reach their shores . 
A sheen of oil began arriving on barrier islands off the coast of Louisiana last week , and crews have been laying inflatable booms , spraying chemical dispersants and setting fire to the slick to try to keep it from coming ashore . 
The US Coast Guard and BP said on Saturday that about 2.1 million gallons of an oil-water mix had been collected , about 10 % of which was oil . 
More than 160 miles -LRB- 257 km -RRB- of booms had been put out and crews had used nearly 275,000 gallons of dispersants , they added . 
Fears are growing that sea life may have been severely affected in the area , which includes vital spawning grounds for fish , shrimp and crabs . 
Some environmentalists are calling for a ban on offshore drilling . 
