Swine flu spreading faster in UK than anywhere else in European Union Britain is the only member state where more people have caught the disease at home than abroad , raising concerns about the effectiveness of public health measures Friday 29 May 2009 16.55 BST The swine flu information leaflet produced by the UK Department of Health . 
Photograph : Tim Ireland\/PA Swine flu is spreading more rapidly in Britain than anywhere else in the European Union , according to the latest figures on the outbreak . 
European health officials confirmed that as of this morning , 456 people had caught the H1N1 virus across 21 EU member states , with almost half of those infected living in the UK . 
More concerning is that the virus appears to be spreading more quickly from person to person in Britain than elsewhere , raising questions over public health measures to contain it . 
Most European cases of swine flu are people who have flown home after picking up the infection in Mexico or the US . 
Britain is the only member state where more people have caught the disease at home than abroad . 
Figures from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control show that of 203 confirmed cases of swine flu in Britain , 146 people caught the virus without leaving the country . 
In Spain , which has 143 confirmed cases , only 43 people caught the infection at home . 
Sheila Bird , professor of biostatistics at Cambridge University , criticised Britain 's Health Protection Agency for failing to publish the information , which emerged only in a European report on the epidemic . 
`` When you see a big difference in the rate of person-to-person transmissions between the UK and other countries , the immediate questions are is this due to better surveillance in the UK , or is it due to poorer public health measures ? '' 
`` It 's not just scientists who need to know this information . 
In the prevention of a new infectious disease , part of the work is done by the public , and they need to know what to be alert to , '' she added . 
A spokeswoman for the Health Protection Agency said outbreaks at schools in London and Birmingham had contributed `` significantly '' to the spread of the disease within Britain . 
Yesterday , the Department of Health reported 12 new cases in England , bringing the UK total to 215 . 
The new cases include 10 children from Welford Primary School in Handsworth , Birmingham , where 60 cases have already been confirmed . 
The other two cases include a child in London and an adult in the north-west , who caught the infection from an unknown source . 
On Thursday , a seriously ill 37-year-old man was admitted to the Victoria Infirmary in Glasgow with the infection . 
Eton College in Berkshire was closed for a week from yesterday after a 13-year-old pupil was diagnosed with swine flu . 
There have been 8,585 probable and confirmed US cases of the the new H1N1 strain , with 12 deaths and 507 hospitalisations . 
Work has begun on a swine flu vaccine , which is expected to go into clinical trials in the next few months . 
But it is unlikely to be ready for widespread use until October . 
A spokesman for the Health Protection Agency said : `` The agency is committed to keeping the public and health professionals up to date with the current situation on swine flu . 
We publish figures every day to provide the latest on confirmed cases and have lots of guidance and advice on our website - hpa.org . 
uk - including information on whether the infections were acquired here or abroad , what age groups are being affected and other important epidemiological data . '' 
cents This article was amended on Friday 29 May 2009 . 
In the article above a quote from the Health Protection Agency was added to clarify their current position on the swine flu issue . 
