Ben Bernanke , Fed Chairman and Newly Minted Radical Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke works the room at the National Press Club . 
-LRB- By Brendan Smialowski -- Bloomberg News -RRB- Ben Bernanke had n't yet sampled his dessert -- a dollar-sign cookie atop chocolate cake -- when his hostess at yesterday 's luncheon rose to deliver a brutal assessment of his tenure at the Fed . 
`` Since Ben Bernanke became chairman of the Federal Reserve two years ago , '' USA Today 's Donna Leinwand told the crowd at the National Press Club , `` the S&P index has declined 35 percent , unemployment rose to 7.6 percent , the highest rate since 1992 , and the economy has sunk into a deep recession . '' 
Bernanke nodded and smiled . 
`` I 've actually been chairman for three years , '' he said when his turn came at the microphone , `` so those statistics are not quite as good as you made them out to be . '' 
True enough : The drop in the S&P has been closer to 40 percent since Bernanke took over . 
History will no doubt judge Bernanke as the man left holding the bag when maestro Alan Greenspan left the Fed . 
But the economic collapse seems to have had a salutary effect on Bernanke : The academic known for his bland answers and brown socks has been liberated in both word and deed . 
This student of the Great Depression has taken extreme and unprecedented actions to avert a modern-day sequel , and he 's taken the Fed chairman 's lexicon well beyond basis points and LIBOR and M1 and M2 . 
`` I think we can break the back of this thing , '' he told the luncheon crowd yesterday . 
He did n't hesitate to say that economic indicators `` have been dismal '' and that unemployment , now 7.6 percent , will go `` above 8 for sure . '' 
`` Extraordinary times call for extraordinary measures , '' the radicalized Fed chairman said . 
To prove that , he 's dropped interest rates to near zero and has the Fed lending directly to corporations and buying mortgage securities . 
Yesterday , Bernanke left the door wide open to the most radical step of all : nationalizing the banks . 
President Obama over the weekend said a `` good argument '' could be made for Sweden 's temporary nationalization of banks . 
And no less a free-market authority than Greenspan , in an interview with the Financial Times this week , said `` it may be necessary to temporarily nationalize some banks , '' calling this the `` least bad solution '' to the financial crisis . 
When Bernanke was asked at lunch about his predecessor 's sentiments , he voiced no opposition to the idea . 
While discouraging government ownership of banks `` for a protracted period , '' he offered no such objection to short-term nationalization . 
`` Whatever actions may need to be taken , at one point or another , I think there 's a very strong commitment , on the part of the administration , to try to return banks or keep banks private or return them to private hands as quickly as possible , '' he said . 
It would have been hard to imagine Bernanke giving a green light to nationalization when he was an economist in the Bush White House . 
He was , after all , an architect of some of the policies that created the housing bubble and collapse . 
He bristled when asked yesterday `` what should be done about regulators who simply fail to regulate , like the Fed 's hands-off stance toward subprime mortgages ? '' 
`` I 'll drop the innuendoes and the slurs and not get into that part , '' replied Bernanke , who was on the Fed 's board of governors earlier in the decade . 
He maintained that the Fed `` had no direct supervisory authority over what was happening in most subprime lenders . '' 
Even now that he has a security detail , Bernanke still has the affect of an economics professor . 
At yesterday 's lunch , he put his index finger in his mouth to dislodge food from a molar . 
His trim white beard , corresponding to a similarly shaped band of black hair around the sides and back of his head , caused his profile to resemble a sort of yin-and-yang symbol as he sat at the dais yesterday , picking at his Press Club lunch . 
But while he still retained the language of his trade , the `` temporary bilateral liquidity agreements '' and the `` Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility , '' Bernanke displayed a newly acquired talent for straight talk . 
He acknowledged that policymakers have n't `` stopped the bleeding . '' 
He said plainly that the huge stimulus package just enacted wo n't `` lead to a sustained recovery '' if the banking system is n't stabilized . 
And he volunteered that the Fed 's usual responses `` have proven insufficient '' to halt the fall . 
This time , the old professor came equipped with a personal anecdote to supplement his data . 
`` The unemployment rate in the small town in South Carolina where I grew up has risen to 14 percent , '' he said , `` and I learned the other day that what had once been my family home has been recently put through foreclosure . '' 
He was armed with sharp rejoinders , too . 
Asked whether it was a mistake to let Lehman Brothers fail , he shot back : `` Well , the word ` mistake ' implies choice or an option . '' 
And he even indulged in a bit of economist humor when talking about the paradox of encouraging people to spend even though overspending caused the problem : `` Somebody once called this the Augustinian principle , which says something like , ` Let me be moral , but not quite yet . ' '' 
A Fed chairman who talks like a normal person ? 
To paraphrase Ben Bernanke , extraordinary times call for extraordinary measures . '' 
