MESA , Ariz. , Feb. 18 -- President Obama unveiled a foreclosure-prevention package Wednesday that would pour more than $ 75 billion into arresting one of the root causes of the nation 's economic spiral by helping as many as 9 million homeowners obtain more affordable mortgage terms . 
The package , part of the Obama administration 's multibillion-dollar effort to jolt the nation out of its deepening recession , goes beyond what some analysts had expected and was welcomed by many of the nation 's top lending institutions . 
But it also drew criticism from some housing experts and consumer advocates , who argued that it does not go far enough in addressing some critical aspects of the foreclosure crisis . 
Many key details of the plan will not be released until early next month . 
Speaking to a crowd packed into a high school gymnasium here , Obama said the mortgage plan would help all Americans confronted with rapidly eroding property values by helping those in danger of losing their homes . 
`` The plan I 'm announcing focuses on rescuing families who have played by the rules and acted responsibly , by refinancing loans for millions of families in traditional mortgages who are underwater or close to it , '' he said . 
The three key elements of the proposal include a program that would allow 4 million to 5 million homeowners with little equity in their homes to refinance into cheaper mortgages ; a $ 75 billion program to keep 3 million to 4 million homeowners out of foreclosure ; and a doubling of the government 's commitment to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to $ 400 billion . 
It is the largest federal foreclosure-prevention package in decades , and it would rely on a series of incentives to jump-start fledgling efforts to keep millions of distressed borrowers in their homes . 
It is the first major government program aimed at homeowners who are current on their loans , and it would require large banks that have received government bailout money to abide by industry standards for loan modifications established by the Obama administration . 
About one in 10 homeowners were delinquent on their mortgages late last year , and as many as 6 million homes could go into foreclosure during the next three years without this program , said Shaun Donovan , secretary of housing and urban development , adding : `` We believe we can help a very large share of these . '' 
The administration estimates that simply by reducing foreclosures , the plan could stop the slide in home prices by as much as $ 6,000 per property . 
`` The effects of this crisis have also reverberated across the financial markets . 
When the housing market collapsed , so did the availability of credit on which our economy depends , '' Obama said . 
`` As that credit has dried up , it has been harder for families to find affordable loans to purchase a car or pay tuition , and harder for businesses to secure the capital they need to expand and create jobs . '' 
While some of the measures Obama announced can be implemented by government regulators , others will require congressional approval . 
For example , a key part of the package includes legislation that would bankruptcy law to allow judges to modify the mortgages of distressed homeowners , including by reducing the principal of the loan to the property 's current market value . 
While broad , the package does not tackle some key issues , critics said , noting that it does not include a plan for dealing with second mortgages , which often become a stumbling block for mortgage-modification programs . 
Others pointed out that for many lenders , the program would be voluntary . 
`` This is a major step forward to addressing the foreclosure crisis , '' said John Taylor , president of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition . 
`` But the plan may not be aggressive enough . 
While the plan offers sweeteners to encourage lenders and homeowners to participate , its voluntary nature may blunt its impact . '' 
