Boats are seen spraying water on an oil and gas platform that exploded in the Gulf of Mexico , off the coast of Louisiana . 
, Thursday , Sept. 2 , 2010 . 
All 13 crew members were rescued . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- Unlike the blast that led to the massive BP spill , the latest oil platform fire in the Gulf of Mexico killed no one and sent no crude gushing into the water . 
The Mariner Energy-owned platform that erupted in flames Thursday was just 200 miles west of the spill site , but everything from the structures to the operations to the safety devices were different . 
Click here for more on this story from Fox News ' LIVESHOT coverage . 
Yet when word of the latest mishap spread , residents along the coast could think only of the three-month spill that began after the drilling rig Deepwater Horizon exploded on April 20 , killing 11 workers . 
`` It 's unbelievable , '' said Sophie Esch , 28 , a Tulane graduate student from Berlin . 
`` They should finally stop drilling in the Gulf . 
They should shut down all the drilling out there and not give permission to do any more . 
They 've shown that it 's just unsafe . '' 
The Coast Guard initially reported that an oil sheen a mile long and 100 feet wide had begun to spread , but hours later said crews were unable to find any spill . 
Coast Guard Petty Officer Steve Lehmann in New Orleans said Friday morning that an 87-foot Coast Guard cutter patrolling the area has not reported any signs of leaks . 
A helicopter was to survey the site later in the day . 
Houston-based Mariner did not know what caused the fire . 
The 13 workers who were pulled from the water told rescuers that there was a blast on board , but Mariner 's Patrick Cassidy said he considered what happened a fire , not an explosion . 
Platforms are vastly different from oil rigs like BP 's Deepwater Horizon . 
They are usually brought in after wells are already drilled and sealed and the oil is flowing at a predictable pressure . 
A majority of platforms in the Gulf do not require crews on board . 
`` A production platform is much more stable , '' said Andy Radford , an API expert on offshore oil drilling . 
Many platforms , especially those in shallower water , stand on legs that are drilled into the sea floor . 
Like a giant octopus , each spreads numerous pipelines and can tap into many wells at once . 
The Deepwater Horizon was drilling a well a mile beneath the sea , which made trying to plug it after it blew out an incredible challenge , with BP trying techniques never tested . 
The platform that caught fire , meanwhile , was operating in 340 feet of water in a shallow area of the Gulf known as a major source of gas . 
Responding to any oil spill in such a shallow spot would be much easier than in deep water , where crews depend on remote-operated vehicles to access equipment on the sea floor . 
Platforms do not have blowout preventers like deep water rigs that are supposed to shut down wells if there is problem . 
But they are usually equipped with a series of redundant valves that can shut off oil and gas at different points along the pipeline . 
Mariner Energy officials said there were seven active production wells on its platform , and they were shut down shortly before the fire broke out . 
The platform was still intact and a small portion appeared burned , Cassidy said . 
Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said the company told him the fire began in 100 barrels of light oil condensate . 
Photos showed at least five ships floating near the platform . 
Three were shooting great plumes of water onto the machinery , an image similar to when the Deepwater Horizon exploded . 
Crews decided to let that blaze burn itself out , and the rig sank into the Gulf two days after the blast . 
On the Mariner Energy platform , the fire was out less than 12 hours . 
A Homeland Security update obtained by The Associated Press said the platform was producing 58,800 gallons of oil and 900,000 cubic feet of gas per day . 
The platform can store 4,200 gallons of oil . 
The workers aboard the platform were found huddled together , holding hands and wearing life jackets . 
A captain of the Crystal Clear , a 110-foot boat that rescued them , said his craft was 25 miles away when it received a distress call . 
When Capt. Dan Shaw arrived at the scene , the workers had been in the water for two hours and were thirsty and tired . 
`` We gave them soda and water , anything they wanted to drink , '' Shaw said . 
`` They were just glad to be on board with us . '' 
Shaw said workers told him the blast was so sudden that they did not have time to get into lifeboats . 
They did not mention what might have caused it . 
`` They just said there was an explosion , there was a fire , '' Shaw said . 
`` It happened very quick . '' 
Crew members were flown to a hospital and released by early Thursday evening . 
Environmental groups and some lawmakers said the newest problem showed the dangers of offshore drilling , and urged the Obama administration to extend a temporary ban on deepwater drilling to shallow water . 
`` How many accidents are needed and how much environmental and economic damage must we suffer before we act to contain and control the source of the danger : offshore drilling ? '' 
said Rep. Frank Pallone , a New Jersey Democrat . 
Associated Press writers Harry R. Weber , Michael Kunzelman and Janet McConnaughey in New Orleans , Chris Kahn in New York , Eileen Sullivan , Matthew Daly , Gerry Bodlander and Dina Capiello in Washington , Garance Burke in Fresno , Calif. , and researcher Monika Mathur in New York contributed to this report . 
