In this image taken from video provided by BP PLC at 12:23 a.m. EDT , Saturday Sept. 4 , 2010 shows the blowout preventer that failed to stop oil from spewing into the Gulf of Mexico being raised to the surface . 
The blowout preventer was n't expected to reach the surface until Saturday , at which point government investigators will take possession of it . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- BP crews worked Saturday to slowly raise the 300-ton blowout preventer that failed to stop oil from spewing into the Gulf of Mexico , careful not to damage or drop a key piece of evidence in the spill investigation . 
When the blowout preventer reaches the surface after its mile-long journey , government investigators will take possession of it and eventually examine it , hoping to gain insight into why the device failed . 
A BP PLC spokesman said in an e-mail to The Associated Press that the 50-foot device was detached from the wellhead Friday afternoon . 
Another blowout preventer had successfully been placed on the blown-out well , the government said later . 
The April 20 explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon killed 11 workers and led to 206 million gallons of oil spewing from BP 's undersea well . 
Investigators know the explosion was triggered by a bubble of methane gas that escaped from the well and shot up the drill column , expanding quickly as it burst through several seals and barriers before igniting . 
But they do n't know exactly how or why the gas escaped . 
And they do n't know why the blowout preventer did n't seal the well pipe at the sea bottom after the eruption , as it was supposed to . 
While the device did n't close -- or may have closed partially -- hearings have produced no clear picture of why it did n't plug the well . 
Lawyers will be watching closely , as hundreds of lawsuits have been filed over the oil spill . 
Future liabilities faced by a number of corporations could be riding on what the analysis of the blowout preventer shows . 
The raising of the blowout preventer followed Thursday 's removal of a temporary cap that stopped oil from gushing into the Gulf in mid-July . 
No more oil was expected to leak into the sea , but crews were standing by with collection vessels just in case . 
The government wanted to replace the failed blowout preventer first to deal with any pressure that is caused when a relief well BP has been drilling intersects the blown-out well . 
Once that intersection occurs sometime after Labor Day , BP is expected to use mud and cement to plug the blown-out well for good from the bottom . 
