Real BP Gulf oil disaster is still to come Hurricane season could bring petroleum-filled storms but what if oil is belched out for another hundred years ? 
BP is yet to predict the worst-case scenario over the oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Dave Martin\/AP Despite BP fighting valiantly to keep reporters and photographers away from the affected areas , the oil is still erupting out of the sea bed , making the waters of the Gulf of Mexico heavy with petroleum and smearing the coastline with black goo . 
So what is going to happen now the hurricane season has arrived ? 
The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration claims there wo n't be any oil droplets in any hurricane 's precipitation . 
But Jeff Masters , the founder of Weather Underground , from the University of Michigan , disagrees . 
In fact , he claims that the oil droplets in the hurricane-force winds might actually cause '' explosive deepening '' of hurricanes in the Gulf . 
What will happen when an oil-powered hurricane hits New Orleans and splatters its streets and buildings with crude oil ? 
What will happen when it 's not just pelicans and turtles that are plastered in black stuff but people ? 
What about when rice and sugarcane are covered in oil ? 
How will BP keep the reporters and photographers out of it then ? 
But BP is aware of the possibility of impending disaster a hurricane might bring . 
On the BP oil leak response website , Mike Utsler , the BP incident commander , based in Houma , tells us : `` It 's an area that we 've put tremendous planning and preparation , from everything in terms of how we would respond to moving people , first and foremost , to safety , but how we would also protect and manage the equipment that 's so vital to our operations '' So that 's all right then . 
BP is going to move everybody out of the way of any carcinogenic , petroleum-filled storms that hit the mainland . 
But wait a minute ! 
Mike Utsler is n't talking about the people of Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
He 's only talking about the people and equipment involved in the cleanup . 
`` How do we do and manage our people , '' he says `` in such a way that their safety is paramount . '' 
In fact , BP apparently has a weather team working in conjunction with `` the area command weather experts , as well as of course the hurricane center , and our NOAA colleagues '' so when a hurricane hits New Orleans and plasters the streets and buildings with crude oil , at least BP will have predicted it . 
But what it 's not predicting , at the moment , is the worst-case scenario . 
BP does n't actually know how big the oil field they drilled into is . 
They 're drilling into lower tertiary -LRB- Paleogene -RRB- rock that was laid down at the same time mammals and birds were coming into being : 65-23m years ago . 
It is one of the deepest wells ever drilled by the oil and gas industry , so as you can imagine , they 're feeling their way in all this . 
Appearing before a House subcommittee in Washington , Tony Hayward , the CEO of BP , estimated that there might be a modest 2bn gallons down there , which could mean it could go on belching out oil for another four years . 
On the other hand , when BP originally announced their discovery of the '' giant '' find at its Tiber Prospect , experts estimated the size at 42bn gallons . 
And since they were talking about `` recoverable oil '' -LRB- which could be only 20 % of the actual oil in the site -RRB- it would mean the site may hold as much as 210bn gallons . 
In other words , it could go on belching out oil for another hundred years . 
Could that be enough time for the oil slick to reach the Mediterranean ? 
Or , heaven forbid , Brighton ? 
But we should n't blame poor old BP . 
After all BP did n't know the Deepwater Horizon was going to explode , otherwise there would be 11 oil workers who would still be alive today . 
And it did n't know -LRB- apparently -RRB- that it was unsafe to replace the heavy drilling mud in the pipes with lighter seawater , as the rig 's chief driller advised them . 
And of course once it happened , BP did n't know how to stop the oil coming out . 
But then they 've got more important things to think about , such as the return to their shareholders . 
And if the Gulf oil spill goes on for another hundred years , polluting the world 's entire ocean system , and the company going into liquidation as a result , that really is something to worry about . 
Time for a ban . 
