Even as they work together to kill the Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico , the oil giant BP and the deep-water drilling rig company Transocean are in an increasingly bitter battle over what went wrong on April 20 to trigger America 's worst oil spill . 
The conflict flared Thursday when Transocean fired off a scathing letter accusing BP of hoarding information and test results related to the Deepwater Horizon blowout that killed 11 people , including nine Transocean employees . 
Signed by Transocean 's acting co-general counsel , Steven L. Roberts , the letter says that Transocean 's internal investigation of what went wrong has been hampered by BP 's refusal to deliver `` even the most basic information '' about the event . '' 
-LRB- I -RRB- t appears that BP is withholding evidence in an attempt to prevent any entity other than BP from investigating the cause of the April 20th incident and the resulting spill , '' the letter states , and it demands a long list of technical documents and lab tests . 
BP 's associate general counsel , James Neath , responded late Thursday by blasting the Roberts letter as `` nothing more than a publicity stunt evidently designed to draw attention away from Transocean 's potential role in the Deepwater Horizon tragedy . '' 
Neath said BP had turned over more than 100,000 documents to Transocean , and demanded , in turn , that Transocean make the results of its own internal investigation public . 
The stakes are high for both companies . 
They potentially are targets of a Justice Department criminal probe . 
Both have sent a string of witnesses before an investigatory panel jointly led by the Coast Guard and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -LRB- formerly the Minerals Management Service -RRB- . 
A presidential commission is also looking into the blowout , and BP is expected to produce its report on the accident in the coming weeks . 
Throughout these events , BP continues to lease two Transocean drilling rigs and a Transocean ship in the effort to plug and kill the well . 
The endgame has become more complicated . 
After extensive deliberations , government scientists and BP engineers have decided to remove the infamous blowout preventer atop the well -- if , that is , BP can assure the government that it can retrieve the massive contraption without creating new problems with the well that has been plugged since early this month . 
The decision to remove the blowout preventer and replace it with a new one is likely to delay until after Labor Day the final bottom-kill of the well using mud and cement from a relief well , retired Adm. Thad Allen , the national incident commander , said Thursday . 
That new well has been drilled to within a few feet laterally of BP 's Macondo well , with only about 50 feet of vertical drilling still to go . 
But with the final termination of Macondo close at hand , government officials and BP engineers have been hedging their bets , trying to figure out ways to minimize the risk of something going wrong at the last moment with a well that already has nearly a mile of cement in its central casing . 
`` We are very close to putting this well away . 
None of us wants to make a mistake at this point , '' Allen said . 
The primary concern has been that , in pushing more mud into the `` annulus '' of the well -- the narrow space between the steel casing and the rock wall of the well -- oil trapped in that space might become more highly pressurized and burst through a seal at the top of the well . 
That would let some oil back into the gulf , and it could potentially damage the blowout preventer , the most crucial piece of evidence for investigations into what went wrong . 
Before the blowout preventer is removed , BP will finish an `` ambient pressure test , '' which began Thursday morning . 
The blowout preventer and capping stack on the well have been flushed out and filled with seawater . 
The idea is to see if the pressure of seawater is enough to keep the well from flowing . 
Next , engineers will conduct a `` fishing experiment '' in which they will open up the capping stack and blowout preventer and try to retrieve the drillpipe that is believed to be dangling in the well . 
As much as 3,500 feet of drillpipe may still be in the well , BP Senior Vice President Kent Wells said Thursday . 
Once that is accomplished , the capping stack and blowout preventer can be sequentially removed , and a new blowout preventer placed on the well . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
