Five years after Hurricane Katrina destroyed New Orleans , the city 's mayor said Thursday that its recovery will take at least another five years . 
Katrina and the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico brought the Louisiana coast `` to its knees , '' New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu -LRB- D -RRB- told those attending a luncheon at the National Press Club . 
Landrieu urged the audience to visit Louisiana . 
He also emphasized the need to lift the federal moratorium on deepwater drilling . 
He said he would discuss the issue with President Obama when he visits the gulf Aug. 29 to mark the fifth anniversary of Hurricane Katrina 's devastating hit . 
The Obama administration banned such drilling after the BP oil spill disaster . 
Although BP has been negligent and irresponsible , he said , drilling oil is necessary to let the Gulf coast continue providing energy and food to the rest of the country . 
`` We are not limited to ` drill , baby , drill ' or stop drilling forever . 
We can do better , '' Landrieu said . 
`` We must drill and restore . '' 
The city 's transformation will be slow and dependent on resources , but Landrieu said there will be more immediate transformation in the city 's safety , schools and job market . 
New Orleans is also facing a $ 79 million hole in its $ 460 million budget . 
Landrieu said cuts have included 14 furlough days for city employees and reorganizing usage of overtime . 
Still , he 'd like to see New Orleans back on its feet in time for the city 's 300th anniversary in 2018 . 
As New Orleans builds from the ground up , Landrieu said , the city is already seeing a revival in volunteerism and nightlife . 
Student test scores have also gone up in the past three years . 
New Orleans , he said , is a city ripe for innovation . 
`` Our future is not just about survival , '' Landrieu said . 
`` It 's about resurrection . 
It 's about redemption . '' 
Landrieu was elected in February to replace term-limited C. Ray Nagin -LRB- D -RRB- , becoming the majority-black city 's first white mayor since 1978 , the year his father , former New Orleans mayor Maurice `` Moon '' Landrieu , left office . 
