BP chief executive Tony Hayward , left , listens to chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg speak outside the White House . 
Photograph : Brendan Smialowski\/Getty It may have taken 57 days since the start of the disastrous Gulf oil spill , but for Barack Obama and BP today 's events may mark the `` inflection point '' to use current White House jargon in their twin battles to convince the American public the crisis is being managed with competence . 
Like it or not , BP and Obama are joined at the hip over the Gulf oil spill . 
Right now , neither can really succeed without support of the other . 
The only surprise is that the two groups left it this long to get together and discuss their shared interest in the White House 's Roosevelt Room . 
Although oil continues to spew in vast quantities into the Gulf of Mexico from the Deepwater Horizon rig 's shattered well , today 's meeting between the administration and BP executives injected a fresh tone of assurance , that the victims of the spill would be compensated for their loses and that both BP and the US government grasped the scale of the task facing them . 
So what changed today ? 
The sight and sound of the major actors , President Obama and BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg , talking openly about the plans for compensation and damages including a new , independently administered $ 20bn fund paid for by BP as well as the suffering being keenly felt in the Gulf of Mexico . 
For the first time , Svanberg stepped before the cameras this afternoon and took questions from journalists , saying : `` I would like to take this opportunity to apologise to the American people on behalf of all of the employees of BP , many of whom live on the Gulf coast . 
And I do thank you for your patience at this time . '' 
Svanberg 's command of English may have let him down slightly in his attempts to make further apologies : `` I hear comments that large oil companies are greedy companies that do n't care but that is not true with BP . 
We care about the small people . '' 
More importantly , Svanberg pledged that `` we will repair the damage to this region and the economy '' . 
For Obama , his aim was to reinforce his concern and to show that the issue of compensation was being treated with top priority : As I traveled across the Gulf , I heard growing frustration over the pace at which claims have been paid . 
And I also heard concerns about whether BP will make resources available to cover legitimate claims resulting from this disaster . 
So this discussion today was essential . 
It helps , too , that BP surrendered to the inevitable and announced that its shareholders will not be receiving any further dividend pay-outs this year . 
That decision alone will deflect some of the anger directed at the company , as will BP 's agreement to fund the $ 20bn compensation scheme and its administration by the respected mediation lawyer who handled claims arising from the 9\/11 attacks . 
Obama 's more aggressive response brought rare praise today from a senior Republican . 
Iowa Senator Chuck Grassley said while Obama had been `` too late taking charge '' of the crisis , `` it looks to me like , based on his speech last night , his meeting with BP right now , that he 's doing that . '' 
Following his address to the nation on Tuesday , President Obama emerged after today 's meeting and said that two issues had been discussed : the continuing struggle to halt the oil spill at its source , and BP 's ability to meet the massive claims against it . 
But money alone is not the only requirement . 
`` During a private conversation with Chairman Svanberg , I emphasized to him that for the families that I met with down in the Gulf , for the small-business owners , for the fishermen , for the shrimpers , this is not just a matter of dollars and cents , '' Obama said . 
His measure of BP 's response would be how the company dealt with what Svanberg would later call the `` small people '' . 
While Obama promised once again to make the Gulf whole , it was Svanberg who voiced the most over-optimistic thought of the day : `` In the long term , I hope we will regain your trust . '' 
