The BP chief executive , Tony Hayward , faces a congressional committee tomorrow . 
Photograph : Suzanne Plunkett\/Reuters The ritual flogging will shortly commence . 
After intensive coaching in crisis communications , BP 's chairman and chief executive will face hostile questioning tomorrow from 35 members of a congressional committee about the catastrophic oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
BP 's low-profile Swedish chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , and much-maligned chief executive , Tony Hayward , would be well-advised to adopt a supine posture according to experts , who say that such hearings are more of a theatrical forum than a true attempt to extract fresh information . 
`` They 've just got to sit there and take it , '' said Dan McGinn , a communications adviser at TMG Strategies who has coached business bosses for similar hearings . 
`` They 've got to express deep regret and genuine humility . 
Hayward needs to say he accepts responsibility , that this happened on his watch . '' 
Trying to deflect any portion of blame onto other companies would only inflame political anger , as would any public quibbling over the $ 20bn likely to be set aside for a clean-up . 
But the examination requires a tricky balancing . 
Svanberg and Hayward also need to look in command of the situation to avoid any further erosion of confidence among investors . 
`` I would tell him -LRB- Hayward -RRB- that this is n't about you you 're a prop , '' said McGinn . 
`` The theatrics , the setup if you 're looking for deep substance , forget it . 
They 'll just want to pummel and hit BP , to demonstrate to the public and to their districts that they 're tough . '' 
Members of the congressional subcommittee on energy and environment include Henry Waxman , a notoriously combative Californian who once confronted Lehman Brothers 's boss Dick Fuld with the robust question : `` Your company is bankrupt . 
You keep $ 480m . 
Is that fair ? '' 
Two Louisiana congressmen , Charlie Melancon and Steve Scalise , are likely to be particularly severe , given the environmental damage to the beaches of their home state . 
US cable news networks have been urging the White House to be angrier towards BP and thehearing , which could go on for much of the day , is the biggest opportunity so far for a showdown . 
Carl Messineo , organiser of a `` seize BP '' campaign that calls for the company 's assets to be ringfenced , said he wanted to see Svanberg and Hayward brought to book for their `` lies '' in understating the size of the spill , which has risen from early estimates of 5,000 barrels per day to as much as 60,000 . 
`` I would want to know why they misled the public , '' said Messineo . 
`` I would like Hayward to explain to the people of the Gulf coast directly why they -LRB- ca n't -RRB- feed their families this week and why they -LRB- ca n't -RRB- make their rent payments . '' 
Congress has a history of coming down hard on the bosses of scandal-hit companies . 
In 1994 , the heads of America 's leading tobacco companies were dubbed the `` seven dwarfs '' as they told aghast lawmakers , under oath , that they did not consider nicotine to be addictive . 
Two years ago , the heads of General Motors and Chrysler were pilloried by congressmen for flying to Washington on corporate jets to plead for a taxpayer-funded bailout . 
More recently , Goldman Sachs 's chief executive , Lloyd Blankfein , was obliged to explain why his employees had dubbed a contentious mortgage transaction as a `` shitty deal '' in an embarrassing internal email . 
Charles Maxwell , an oil analyst at stockbroker Weeden & Co , said BP 's chief executive should expect no sympathy in Congress : `` They 're going to pillory BP because they have to take Tony -LRB- Hayward -RRB- down to get their political agenda accepted . '' 
Did you cut costs and risk danger on the Deepwater Horizon platform ? 
Running late on its drilling project , BP has been accused of using low-grade concrete and of pumping its well with water , rather than drilling mud , to limit financial overruns , overruling the doubts of contractors including Transocean and Halliburton . 
Why did n't you come clean earlier on the extent of the spill ? 
Initial estimates suggested that fewer than 5,000 barrels of oil were gushing into the Gulf of Mexico . 
But experts now put the figure at anything between 35,000 and 60,000 barrels a day . 
BP has been accused of wilfully misleading the public . 
Will you suspend dividend payouts to shareholders ? 
Barack Obama has sharply criticised BP for paying out returns to investors while the cost of the clean-up mounts . 
BP 's board is yet to decide on what to do about a $ 2.4 bn -LRB- # 1.6 bn -RRB- dividend due to be paid on 27 July . 
Are you willing to foot the broader cost of a six-month halt in deepwater drilling ? 
The White House has suggested BP may be held liable for wages lost by workers laid off by rival oil companies because of a moratorium on drilling following the spill . 
BP insiders see this as an example of compensation claims running out of control . 
BP 's CEO Tony Hayward , variously dubbed `` toxic Tony '' and `` wayward Hayward '' , is likely to face demands for his departure from lawmakers enraged by various gaffes , including his remark two weeks ago that he wanted the spill to end so that he could have his `` life back '' . 
