Havana calls in Venezuelan experts to combat potential environmental disaster as tarballs spotted off island 's coast Wednesday 16 June 2010 17.37 BST A slick of oil from the Deepwater Horizon oil floats near a boat off Grand Isle , Louisiana . 
Photograph : Lee Celano\/Reuters Cuba is steadying itself for an ecological and tourism crisis as the Deepwater Horizon oil spill appears to be heading towards its pristine northern coast . 
Authorities are preparing coastal communities to respond to the first sign of black slicks and have brought in Venezuelan experts to advise on damage limitation . 
Patches of oil were reportedly spotted 100 miles north-west of the island , prompting concern that gulf currents will add Cuba to the list of casualties from the April 20 Deepwater Horizon rig explosion . 
Should oil reach Cuba it will be the latest twist to decades of toxic diplomatic relations between Havana and Washington . 
`` In Cuba , we have had small spills involving tankers on our coasts , but we 've never had to confront anything of this magnitude , '' General Ramon Espinosa , vice-minister of the armed forces , told reporters at a government meeting on natural disaster preparedness . 
`` Nonetheless we are documenting and studying . 
We are preparing with everything in our power . '' 
It would be a disaster for Cuba if the spill hit , he added . 
A relative lack of economic development has kept the north Cuban coast just 90 miles from Florida a haven for manatees , migratory sea turtles and sharks . 
White sand beaches are an important draw for tourists who provide an economic lifeline to the communist state . 
Ramon Pardo , head of Cuban civil defense , said Havana was taking all precautions . 
`` The preparation of the coast , vigilance , creating all necessary conditions , preparing the people who live on the coasts that could be impacted . '' 
Officials said Cuba would rely on expertise from Venezuela , an ally that has long experience of offshore oil drilling and its environmental consequences , but that it was also willing to talk to the US . 
Analysts said `` oil diplomacy '' could gift Washington and Havana a rare chance to co-operate but details remain sketchy . 
The BP spill may give Cubans pause over plans to develop northern offshore deposits estimated at 5bn barrels of oil and 10tn cubic feet of natural gas . 
The Spanish company Repsol YPF is due to drill exploration wells later this year or early in 2011 . 
