Barack Obama used his first Oval Office address last night to try to wrest control over the oil spill catastrophe in the Gulf , laying out what he called a `` battle plan '' to tackle the crisis . 
The 18-minute speech was seen as critical to the credibility of Obama 's presidency after criticism that the White House has been slow to grasp the enormity of America 's worst environmental disaster . 
`` We will fight this spill with everything we 've got for as long it takes . 
We will make BP pay for the damage their company has caused , '' Obama said . 
`` And we will do whatever 's necessary to help the Gulf coast and its people recover from this tragedy . '' 
But he admitted : `` There will be more oil and more damage before this siege is done . '' 
The bleak acknowledgement was reinforced by the government sharply raising its estimates for the flow of oil to 35,000-60 ,000 barrels a day . 
The new estimate is the equivalent of an Exxon Valdez every four days , and the sixth increase in the government 's oil flow estimates since the Deepwater Horizon crisis 58 days ago . 
`` We have directed BP to mobilise additional equipment and technology . 
In the coming days and weeks , these efforts should capture up to 90 % of the oil leaking out of the well , '' said Obama . 
`` This is until the company finishes drilling a relief well later in the summer that is expected to stop the leak completely . '' 
Obama 's priority was to persuade Americans that he is up to the challenge of dealing with the environmental disaster , as well as softening the economic impact for the tens of thousands who make a living from affected industries . 
The key message in the speech was his promise to ensure that BP follows through on its obligations to compensate locals and businesses who have lost revenue because of the spill . 
`` I will meet the chairman of BP and inform him that he is to set aside whatever resources are required to compensate the workers and business owners who have been harmed as a result of his company 's recklessness , '' Obama said . 
`` This fund will not be controlled by BP . '' 
But administration officials briefing reporters before the speech admitted BP has yet to sign on to Obama 's plan . 
Lamar McKay , the president of BP 's US subsidiary , was also noncommittal about the plan during testimony before Congress earlier yesterday . 
Obama 's two-day swing through Gulf states was his fourth visit to date . 
It came as executives from BP and other oil giants were subjected to a grilling on offshore oil drilling by a congressional committee . 
But Obama 's claim to have a plan to capture 90 % of the oil from the gusher in the Gulf was undermined by a stroke of bad luck . 
A lightning strike on the vessel collecting the oil from the well forced the suspension of operations for nearly five hours yesterday . 
BP had only been able to collect about 15,000 barrels of oil a day with the containment cap a fraction of the oil flowing from the well according to the newest estimates . 
Obama is to meet BP 's chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg today to discuss setting up the independently-managed fund to pay those claims . 
White House officials also moved to allay concerns in the wake of BP 's plummeting share price that the company has the resources to cover the costs . 
The credit rating agency Fitch yesterday downgraded BP 's debt to just two levels above junk status as its liabilities from the disaster continue to escalate . 
Obama is planning to order the company to deposit up to $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- into a ringfenced fund to pay for the clean-up operation and damages . 
Fitch is the first major rating agency to downgrade BP 's credit worthiness from AA , one of the best ratings . 
Yesterday , traders reported that the cost of insuring BP 's debt against default soared as a result of the downgrade , while shares in London closed almost 4 % down . 
Sky News also reported yesterday that BP has been talking to banks about securing an extra # 5bn in funding to ensure it can meet White House demands to set up the clean-up fund . 
Supporters of climate change legislation had been looking to Obama to use his speech to make a strong push for energy reform . 
But while Obama did call for passage of a climate change law , he did not push for putting a price on carbon as they had been hoping . 
The speech was seen as a last chance to try to push through climate change proposals , which were left behind by epic battles in Congress over health care earlier this year . 
cents This article was amended on 16 June 2010 . 
The word chance was mis-spelt in the original . 
This has now been corrected . 
