BP oil spill : Kevin Costner 's oil-water separation machines help with clean-up The devices , developed with a team including his scientist brother , leave water 99 % free of crude Wednesday 16 June 2010 13.15 BST Kevin Costner 's latest role is to help the clean-up after the BP oil spill . 
Photograph : Bryan Bedder\/Getty Images As Robin Hood , Kevin Costner stole from the rich to give to the poor . 
As an unnamed , be-gilled seafarer in Waterworld , he fought with outlaw `` smokers '' for a greater cause . 
The actor 's latest role , as savior of the Gulf of Mexico , goes some way towards combining the two , after his oil-water separation machines , in which he has personally invested $ 20m -LRB- # 13.5 m -RRB- , were contracted by BP to help in the Gulf clear-up effort . 
The 32 centrifuge machines , which a Costner-funded team of scientists have spent the past 15 years developing , are to be deployed to help tackle the spill , now believed to be gushing 40,000 barrels a day into the Gulf . 
The devices , manufactured by Ocean Therapy Solutions , are carried to the spill area by barges before separating the oil and water . 
The largest of the machines , the V20 , can clean water at a rate of 200 gallons a minute , according to the company 's website . 
Once separation has occurred , the oil is stored in tanks . 
The water is then more than 99 % clean of crude . 
`` This is the key , '' Costner told CNN on Tuesday . 
`` It 's certainly a way to fight oil spills in the 21st century . '' 
The actor has been developing the machinery since the early 1990s with the help of a team including his brother , a scientist . 
`` It may seem an unlikely scenario that I 'm the one delivering this technology at this moment in time , but from where I 'm sitting , it is equally inconceivable that these machines are not already in place , '' he said . 
The actor gave testimony to the house of representatives science and technology committee last week , when he urged members to force oil rigs to have clean-up equipment on site . 
`` We 've legislated life preservers . 
We legislated fire extinguishers , '' Costner said . 
`` We legislated lifeboats and first aid kits . 
It seems logical that as long as the oil industry profits from the sea , they have the legal obligation to protect it , except when they find themselves fighting for life and limb . '' 
BP spokesman Bill Salvin confirmed the company has contracted with Costner and Ocean Therapy Solutions to use the machines . 
`` We recognized they had potential and put them through testing , and that testing was done in shallow water and in very deep water and we were very pleased by the results , '' Salvin said . 
