Ibrahim Med Khaled , a 24-year-old taxi driver shows the wounds caused by anti-Gaddafi fighters who beat him with an electrical cable , at the displaced persons camp in Benghazi October 15 , 2011 . 
BENGHAZI , Libya | Mon Oct 17 , 2011 3:25 pm EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - After weeks on the run , thousands of black Libyans driven from their homes during the revolt against Muammar Gaddafi have resurfaced across the country , finding refuge in a squalid camp they hope is only temporary . 
Once residents of Gaddafi 's stronghold of Tawergha , the families now wander a dusty compound ringed with garbage and staffed by a handful of volunteers from the city of Benghazi struggling to prevent the spread of disease as numbers swell . 
The group 's eastward flight began last summer , when anti-Gaddafi forces overran Tawergha and vengeance-seeking crowds ransacked it , leaving a ghost town behind . 
`` They chased us with guns and knives , '' said Ibrahim Med Khaled , a 24-year-old taxi driver recently arrived at the former construction site after spending weeks dodging hostile crowds across the country 's west before being captured by armed men . 
`` They brought me to a house and beat me with electrical cable to make me confess I worked for Gaddafi , even though I told them I never carried a gun , '' he said , lifting his shirt to reveal shoulders criss-crossed with fresh wounds from flogging . 
Throughout the uprising against Gaddafi 's 42-year rule , his opponents have accused him of hiring fighters from neighboring African countries which led to reports of mistreatment of blacks , including Libyans . 
The camp has grown since opening from 400 to nearly 3,000 people in just two weeks , despite disrepair and lack of sufficient sanitation and electricity evidenced by raw sewage pooling behind some of the housing blocks . 
Aid workers say overcrowding is forcing hundreds to set up makeshift settlements near by . 
Some of the men at the camp , guarded by troops loyal to the interim government which ousted Gaddafi , still wear camouflage trousers they may have donned last summer in support of Gaddafi . 
One little girl could be seen eating spilled food off the ground . 
`` We have a big heath problem here , '' said Randa Muftah Salem-Oun , a 23-year-old medical student now head doctor at the site , where her day begins at dawn and ends after midnight . 
`` We need many supplies , wound dressings and medicine , '' she said , adding that many at the camp suffered from gastroenteritis - a telltale sign of contaminated food or water - and that hepatitis was also discovered among the sick . 
However dire the conditions may be , the camp 's residents say they are torn between desire to return , and fear of reprisals from heavily armed locals still bitter from one of the bloodiest episodes in Libya 's civil war . 
Many accuse men from Tawergha of committing atrocities in the siege of the city of Misrata , and tales of raping sprees by sub-Saharan African mercenaries - fueled in one version by Viagra doled out by Gaddafi - abound in Libya , leaving dark-skinned people suspect to some of their countrymen . 
Another former Tawergha resident , a 38-year-old mother of four named Rabha Mouftah , said there was no doubt as to the intentions of the mob that stormed into her town last summer . 
`` They came to kill black people , '' she said in a room with no lighting she now shares with her family off an alley strewn with debris . 
`` We were scared to go outside , so we hid in different houses for seven weeks , then came here . '' 
The Tawergha displaced add yet another delicate task to the growing workload of Libya 's interim rulers , the National Transitional Council , -LRB- NTC -RRB- as they try to reunify the country and impose the rule of law amid renewed opposition from Gaddafi loyalists , who launched attacks in the capital Tripoli last week for the first time since it fell in August . 
It also highlights a potential future division in the post-Gaddafi era as leaders strive to integrate a legion of factions , such as the Tuarag , a black tribe of nomads some of whom still support the ousted leader . 
Some groups have reported arbitrary arrests across the country on suspicion of collusion with the former leader , believed to be somewhere in Libya 's vast southern desert . 
While the NTC favors the return of Tawargha 's residents , it admits this will take time . 
But resolving the issue remains a test of its leadership to come . 
Much of the city lays in ruins and people in neighboring Misrata say tensions are still too high to allow a return that could spark more violence . 
`` In the end it 's another ghost of Gaddafi -- he paid many of the tribes to fight for him , so now people see black people and immediately assume they support him , even if they do n't , '' said Imad Eddin , an anesthesiologist volunteering at the camp . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
These people were able to live there without all this happening to them until Barack Obama , the French , and British too their racist little pin heads to Africa and did this to them . 
Those countries should do everything , I mean everything it takes to stop this . 
If they have to OCCUPY WALL STREET in Libya that 's fine but do something about this mess Obama has made . 
Michelle must have made all the decisions in their family while he was sitting around drinking bear and smoking . 
The West supports mob uprisings and then acts surprised when the mobs start ethnic\/racial\/religious cleansing . 
All these governments and rebels should have been pressed to have democratic transitions before one dollar or euro was provided , one bullet fired , or one bomb dropped , by Western assets . 
They need to turn off the spigot until these acts cease . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
