Mexico City lowers swine flu alert Situation under control , relax , there 's no need to wear masks , says mayor Days of mask-wearing in Mexico City could be over . 
Photograph : Reuters\/Eliana Aponte Mexico City lowered its swine flu alert level from yellow to green late last night as the mayor , Marcelo Ebrard , claimed residents could `` relax '' as there had been no new infections for a week . 
Ebrard said the change meant the risk of contagion was low , the situation was under control and the images of countless people wearing blue surgical masks around the city could be consigned to history . 
There 's no longer any need to wear masks , Ebrard said , adding : `` Now you can come to the city without any risk . '' 
With fears of an immediate global pandemic fading , Japan , where there have been almost 300 swine flu cases , also relaxed rules amid fears that the strict regulations could harm the economy and put needless restrictions on the public . 
`` It is important to make it possible for the local government to respond flexibly , depending on the situation of the region , '' the prime minister , Taro Aso , said . 
Under the new guidelines , suspected patients in areas where the number of cases are rapidly increasing would be allowed to go to regular medical clinics rather than only designated `` fever centres '' set up to deal with swine flu , the health minister , Yoichi Masuzoe , said . 
The World Health Organisation today said that 42 countries had recorded 11,168 cases of swine flu , including 86 deaths , since the outbreak was first noticed in Mexico last month . 
In Italy , two secondary schools in Rome have been ordered to close for a week after four students caught the H1N1 flu virus on a trip to New York . 
In Mexico , where 75 swine flu deaths have occurred , the health authorities said no one had been taken to hospital with respiratory infections in the past three days . 
There have been no confirmed swine flu cases since May 14 . 
`` We are seeing a 96 % drop in cases and that 's why we are dropping the alert level to green today , '' the Mexico City health secretary , Armando Ahued , said . 
Since the outbreak was declared on 23 April , Mexico City has spent 4.5 bn pesos -LRB- # 217m -RRB- on medicine and antibacterial gel and to provide incentives for businesses to shut their doors and to clean public spaces . 
A total of 4,008 people have been infected in Mexico . 
The country 's confirmed toll has been rising as scientists test a backlog of samples from patients . 
Ebrard urged Mexicans to remain vigilant , to maintain sanitary conditions in places where crowds gather such as the metro system and schools , and to support a `` culture of health '' . 
`` The big lesson is that we understand what the scientists have been saying for a decade : that we have to be prepared for any possible virus that can appear , '' the mayor said . 
Nearly 80 % of those who died were between 20 and 54 , according to the health department . 
However , many suffered from underlying medical conditions . 
Almost 30 % were obese or had other metabolical problems , and 13 % had cardiovascular problems . 
New test results from the US Centres of Disease Control show that people in their 60s and older have signs of greater immunity to the new swine flu virus . 
Scientists think that is because older people have been exposed to other viruses that are more similar to swine flu than more recent seasonal flu . 
