Current US megalomania is rooted in the Puritan colonists ' certainties Saturday 25 June 2005 00.37 BST Three continuities link the global US of the cold war era with the attempt to assert world supremacy since 2001 . 
The first is its position of international domination , outside the sphere of influence of communist regimes during the cold war , globally since the collapse of the USSR . 
This hegemony no longer rests on the sheer size of the US economy . 
Large though this is , it has declined since 1945 and its relative decline continues . 
It is no longer the giant of global manufacturing . 
The center of the industrialised world is rapidly shifting to the eastern half of Asia . 
Unlike older imperialist countries , and unlike most other developed industrial countries , the US has ceased to be a net exporter of capital , or indeed the largest player in the international game of buying up or establishing firms in other countries , and the financial strength of the state rests on the continued willingness of others , mostly Asians , to maintain an otherwise intolerable fiscal deficit . 
The influence of the American economy today rests largely on the heritage of the cold war : the role of the US dollar as the world currency , the international linkages of US firms established during that era -LRB- notably in defence-related industries -RRB- , the restructuring of international economic transactions and business practices along American lines , often under the auspices of American firms . 
These are powerful assets , likely to diminish only slowly . 
On the other hand , as the Iraq war showed , the enormous political influence of the US abroad , based as it was on a genuine `` coalition of the willing '' against the USSR , has no similar foundation since the fall of the Berlin wall . 
Only the enormous military-technological power of the US is well beyond challenge . 
It makes the US today the only power capable of effective military intervention at short notice in any part on the world , and it has twice demonstrated its capacity to win small wars with great rapidity . 
And yet , as the Iraq war shows , even this unparalleled capacity to destroy is not enough to impose effective control on a resistant country , and even less on the globe . 
Nevertheless , US dominance is real and the disintegration of the USSR has made it global . 
The second element of continuity is the peculiar house-style of US empire , which has always preferred satellite states or protectorates to formal colonies . 
The expansionism implicit in the name chosen for the 13 independent colonies on the east coast of the Atlantic -LRB- United States of America -RRB- was continental , not colonial . 
The later expansionism of `` manifest destiny '' was both hemispheric and aimed towards East Asia , as well as modelled on the global trading and maritime supremacy of the British Empire . 
One might even say that in its assertion of total US supremacy over the western hemisphere it was too ambitious to be confined to colonial administration over bits of it . 
The American empire thus consisted of technically independent states doing Washington 's bidding , but , given their independence , this required continuous readiness to exert pressure on their governments , including pressure for `` regime change `` and , where feasible -LRB- as in the mini-republics of the Caribbean zone -RRB- , periodic US armed intervention . 
The third thread of continuity links the neo-conservatives of George Bush with the Puritan colonists ' certainty of being God 's instrument on earth and with the American Revolution - which , like all major revolutions , developed world-missionary convictions , limited only by the wish to shield the the new society of potentially universal freedom from the corruptions of the unreconstructed old world . 
The most effective way of finessing this conflict between isolationism and globalism was to be systematically exploited in the 20th century and still serves Washington well in the 21st . 
It was to discover an alien enemy outside who posed an immediate , mortal threat to the American way of life and the lives of its citizens . 
The end of the USSR removed the obvious candidate , but by the early 90s another had been detected in a `` clash '' between the west and other cultures reluctant to accept it , notably Islam . 
Hence the enormous political potential of the al-Qaida outrages of September 11 was immediately recognized and exploited by the Washington world-dominators . 
The first world war , which made the US into a global power , saw the first attempt to translate these world-converting visions into reality , but Woodrow Wilson 's failure was spectacular ; perhaps it should be a lesson to the current world-supremacist ideologists in Washington , who , rightly , recognize Wilson as a predecessor . 
Until the end of the cold war the existence of another superpower imposed limits on them , but the fall of the USSR removed these . 
Francis Fukuyama prematurely proclaimed `` the end of history '' - the universal and permanent triumph of the US version of capitalist society . 
At the same time the military superiority of the US encouraged a disproportionate ambition in a state powerful enough to believe itself capable of world supremacy , as the British Empire in its time never did . 
And indeed , as the 21st century began , the US occupied a historically unique and unprecedented position of global power and influence . 
For the time being it is , by the traditional criteria of international politics , the only great power ; and certainly the only one whose power and interests span the globe . 
It towers over all others . 
All the great powers and empires of history knew that they were not the only ones , and none was in a position to aim at genuinely global domination . 
None believed themselves to be invulnerable . 
Nevertheless , this does not quite explain the evident megalomania of US policy since a group of Washington insiders decided that September 11 gave them the ideal opportunity for declaring its single-handed domination of the world . 
For one thing , it lacked the support of the traditional pillars of the post-1945 US empire , the state department , armed services and intelligence establishment , and of the statesmen and ideologists of cold war supremacy - men like Kissinger and Brzezinski . 
These were people who were as ruthless as the Rumsfelds and Wolfowitzes . 
-LRB- It was in their time that a genocide of Mayas took place in Guatemala in the 1980s . -RRB- 
They had devised and managed a policy of imperial hegemony over the greater part of the globe for two generations , and were perfectly ready to extend it to the entire globe . 
They were and are critical of the Pentagon planners and neo-conservative world supremacists because these patently have had no concrete ideas at all , except imposing their supremacy single-handed by military force , incidentally jettisoning all the accumulated experience of US diplomacy and military planning . 
No doubt the debacle of Iraq will confirm them in their scepticism . 
Even those who do not share the views of the old generals and proconsuls of the US world empire -LRB- which were those of Democratic as well as Republican administrations -RRB- will agree that there can be no rational justification of current Washington policy in terms of the interests of America 's imperial ambitions or , for that matter , the global interests of US capitalism . 
It may be that it makes sense only in terms of the calculations , electoral or otherwise , of American domestic policy . 
It may be a symptom of a more profound crisis within US society . 
It may be that it represents the - one hopes short-lived - colonisation of Washington power by a group of quasi-revolutionary doctrinaires . 
-LRB- At least one passionate ex-Marxist supporter of Bush has told me , only half in jest : `` After all , this is the only chance of supporting world revolution that looks like coming my way . '' -RRB- 
Such questions can not yet be answered . 
It is reasonably certain that the project will fail . 
However , while it continues , it will go on making the world an intolerable place for those directly exposed to US armed occupation and an unsafer place for the rest of us . 
Eric Hobsbawm is author of The Age of Extremes : The Short 20th Century 1914-1991 . 
This is an edited extract from his preface to a new edition of VG Kiernan 's America : The New Imperialism Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
