How dead is the Gulf of Mexico ? 
It is perhaps the most important question of the BP oil spill -- but scientists do n't appear close to answering it despite a historically vast effort . 
In the 21\/2 months since the spill began , the gulf has been examined by an armada of researchers -- from federal agencies , universities and nonprofit groups . 
They have brought back vivid snapshots of a sea under stress : sharks and other deep-water fish suddenly appearing near shore , oil-soaked marshes turning deathly brown , clouds of oil swirling in deep water . 
But , with key gaps remaining in their data , there is wide disagreement about the big picture . 
Some researchers have concluded that the gulf is being spared an ecological disaster . 
Others think ecosystems that were already in trouble before the spill are now being pushed toward a brink . 
`` The distribution of the oil , it 's bigger and uglier than we had hoped , '' said Roger Helm , a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service official and the lead scientist studying the spill for the Interior Department . 
`` The possibility of having significant changes in the food chain , over some period of time , is very real . 
The possibility of marshes disappearing ... is very real . '' 
Helm said that his prognosis for the spill had worsened in the past week -- as the amount of oily shoreline increased from Louisiana to Florida , despite cleanup efforts . 
`` This just outstrips everybody 's capability '' to clean it up , he said . 
This research has mainly occurred in the background , as public attention has focused on the `` open-heart surgery '' at BP 's leaking wellhead . 
The patient is a 600,000-square-mile sea , which contains swirling currents , sun-baked salt marshes and dark , cold canyons patrolled by sperm whales . 
Complicating matters is that even before the spill began in late April , the patient was already sick . 
In recent years , Louisiana has been losing a football field 's worth of its fertile marshes to erosion every 38 minutes . 
In the gulf itself , pollutants coming from the Mississippi 's vast watershed helped feed a low-oxygen `` dead zone '' bigger than the entire Chesapeake Bay . 
Measuring the spill 's damage , then , requires distinguishing it from the damage done by these other man-made problems . 
So far , even the simplest-sounding attempts to measure the spill 's impact have turned out to be complex . 
The official toll of dead birds is about 1,200 , a fraction of the 35,000 discovered after the Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 . 
But this , too , has been called into question . 
Officials can only count the birds they can find , and many think a number of oily birds have sought refuge in the marshes . 
`` It 's an instinctive response : They 're hiding from predators while they recover , '' said Kerry St. P , head of a government program that oversees Louisiana 's Barataria Bay marshes . 
`` They plan to recover , of course , and they do n't . 
They just die . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
