WASHINGTON | Thu Mar 24 , 2011 6:29 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The White House rejected criticism of President Barack Obama 's decision to attack Libya , saying on Thursday he had briefed Congress and the public extensively before military action began last weekend . 
Four senior administration officials , including Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Defense Secretary Robert Gates , will also brief House members on Libya next Wednesday , a House leadership aide said on Thursday . 
The aide said the closed-door , classified briefing , which will also involve Director of National Intelligence James Clapper and Admiral Mike Mullen , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , came at the request of House Speaker John Boehner , who asked Obama in a letter on Wednesday how he would measure success in Libya and whether Muammar Gaddafi had to depart as its leader before the U.S. military involvement ends . 
White House Press Secretary Jay Carney told reporters the administration had consulted repeatedly with Congress and read off a long list of meetings and briefings that the administration had already held for lawmakers . 
`` It 's part of his responsibility as president on an issue like this to consult with members of Congress , and he has done that . 
He has instructed senior staff here to do that , and we have in a very substantial way consulted with Congress and will continue to do that , '' Carney said . 
He refused to let reporters interrupt him , saying , `` It 's important that the American people understand how much consultation there has been . '' 
Obama would be commenting publicly on Libya `` with relative frequency and relatively soon , '' Carney added . 
Criticism of Obama for not consulting more with lawmakers before launching the Libyan operation has come from across the political spectrum . 
Many liberals in Obama 's Democratic Party oppose a third war in the Muslim world on top of U.S. troop commitments in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
Republicans say the White House did not adequately explain the mission before it began . 
Carney said Obama could not have waited for Congress to return from a recess because he needed to act quickly to prevent a massacre of Gaddafi 's opponents in Benghazi . 
`` American military action , international military action has saved an enormous number of lives in the past five days , and that is something that Americans should be very proud of , '' Carney said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
`` American military action , international military action has saved an enormous number of lives in the past five days , and that is something that Americans should be very proud of , '' Carney said . '' 
Sorry Carney , the law says that the congress must approve US military action . 
The only exception is if the US is under attack , or faces an imminent attack . 
Libya 's civil war posed no threat to the United States . 
Kucinich even said this is an impeachable offense . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
