Demonstrators march through the streets in Hajar al-Aswad in Damascus July 17 , 2011 . 
BEIRUT | Mon Jul 18 , 2011 2:07 pm BST BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - At least 30 people were killed at the weekend in clashes between residents in Homs , a rights group said , in the first factional fighting since protests against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad erupted in March . 
Rami Abdelrahman , head of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights , said on Monday that clashes between pro- and anti-Assad residents started on Saturday after the bodies of kidnapped Assad supporters were returned to their relatives dismembered . 
Homs has been a focal point of the uprising since the military stormed it two months ago to try to crush street protests calling for Assad to quit after 11 years in power . 
The central city is a microcosm of Syria 's religious schism with a Sunni Muslim majority living alongside minority groups , including Christians and Alawite Muslims , Assad 's own sect . 
`` At least 30 civilians were killed ... they fell after civil fighting between pro- and anti-regime -LRB- residents -RRB- started on Saturday , '' the Observatory said in statement . 
`` These clashes are a dangerous development that undermines the revolution and serves the interests of its enemies who want to turn it into a civil war , '' he said . 
Mohamad Saleh , an activist and a resident of Homs , said the there was no more fighting on Monday but residents were tense . 
He said a group of Alawite men , including four policemen , went missing on Thursday . 
The bodies of four of them were found on Saturday with their eyes gouged out . 
Six more were found on Sunday . 
`` Immediately some people from their neighborhood -LRB- in the Alawite area -RRB- went to the street and torched , robbed and destroyed at least 12 shops belonging to Sunnis , '' he told Reuters by telephone . 
`` The security forces were watching and did not do anything . 
Then shooting started and we did not know where it was coming from and people started dying from both sides . '' 
Saleh said that residents of Homs blame Sunni and Alawite `` thugs '' for the violence . 
`` This is very dangerous , we are trying to calm things down . 
Nobody in Homs accepts this , the people do not want these -LRB- sectarian -RRB- divisions , '' he said . 
The anti-Assad protests started in Syria 's poorer Sunni rural areas , but quickly spread to cities which have more of a sectarian mix . 
At least 1,400 civilians have been killed since the uprising began , human rights organizations say . 
Syrian authorities blame armed groups with Islamist links for the violence and say at least 500 policemen and soldiers have been killed since March . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
When are the International arrest warrants going to be issued for Assad and his government ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
