Fareed : -- This may be off this week 's topic , but I urge your to read an article that appeared in 2003 in the Guardian that profiles one of your frequent guests - Bernard-Henri Levy . 
I hope that it will serve to discourage any further appearances of this hollow pedant on your superb program . 
Evidently he does not represent any serious opinions expressed by anyone , even the French . 
July 9 , 2011 at 5:17 pm | Reply Bernard Henri-Levy is a champagne socialist , a wannabe revolutionary and a political charlatan . 
He should stick to philosophy and can talk about anything and everything and one would get hurt , if he talks nonsense . 
I doubt if his name would be as well remembered as Alexis de Tocqueville 's . 
July 10 , 2011 at 5:59 pm | Reply Just read your comment to Fareed about Bernard Henri Levy and I could not agree with you more . 
He is so full of himself The obsequiousness of French politicians and media to this political ` Hanger on '' beggars belief . 
In fact , he is being credited here in France with having convinced Sarkozy to take on Qadhaffi in Libya ; an effort that embroiled the US . 
True or not , I 'm certain he loves basking in the limelight , any limelight . 
Preferably under a street gas lamp , at night . 
July 25 , 2011 at 9:20 am | Reply AS A MAN WHO HAS VISITED SUDAN MANY TIMES I WISH TO SAY THAT THE PRESENT SITUATION IN SUDAN HAS THE BLESSINGS OF AMERICA THAT BELIEVES THAT IT IS A GLOBAL POWER AND ENONOMIC POWER HOUSE -- NO LONGER TRUE . 
July 10 , 2011 at 7:24 am | Reply What a painfully anti-African approach to examining a continent that continues to be ravished and pillaged by the West . 
How is that your choice of guests to explore painful realities in Africa are both Anglo ? 
What is more , footage used throughout this piece are visuals of seemingly destitute , Black Africans . 
This is an affront to critical journalism , and absolutely imbalanced , GPS chase producers need to do better . 
Is it too much to ask producers to balance this panel out with the presence of scholars , public intellectuals and thought leaders who are indigenous Black Africans ? 
Peter Godin 's book , and Nicholas Kristof 's trip with students , may lend perspective , but do these acts render either of these men `` authorities '' on a continent - absolutely not . 
Violence , torture , corruption , crisis in leadership , poverty , and other crimes against humanity , sadly , are pervasive globally . 
Bad governance is not unique , but the disproportionate attention to Black leaders and their wrong-doing is , and has become its own brand of racism . 
This segment amounts to a narrative built on biased and lazy journalism . 
July 10 , 2011 at 11:05 am | Reply oh , Fareed , i am so very disappointed in this week 's show . 
peter godwin is the epitomy of the hypocrisy that has enveloped parts of Africa over the decades . 
He rattled on about crimes against humanity in his country of Zimbabwe and about somewhat free municipal elections in South Africa without once asking why no white was ever tried for all of the crimes against humanity committed in both countries over the past few decades . 
Or why bringing western style democracy has been such a challenge -LRB- i mean , really . 
if you had been brutalized for decades by whites claiming to be implementing democracy , would you trust them now ? -RRB- 
Zimbabwe did not get their independence from colonial brutality until when ? 
And yet into the 1990s 85 % of the fertile , money producing lands were owned by 40 000 whites . 
That alone is a crime against humanity . 
And let 's not even talk about South Africa , who didnt come out from under brutal oppression until well into the 1990s . 
And who has ever been tried in the Hague for the evils that happened there at the hands of the white minorities ? 
Yet mr. godwin wants to talk about crimes against humanity . 
It seems to me that he is not yet aware of what that term really means . 
July 10 , 2011 at 11:06 am | Reply I was very disappointed this morning to tune in and find that the subject matter for discussion was the Strauss-Kahn hotel maid scandal . 
Although the issue does have some implications for international relations , the ongoing press coverage of this issue is a reflection of our nation 's love of gossip . 
There are so many other global issues that would benefit from an intelligent discussion -- why choose the gossipy topic ? 
I look forward to future discussions of weightier issues from the GPS folks . 
July 10 , 2011 at 11:09 am | Reply I appreciate the global perspective of your program . 
However , I have never seen people of African\/Black descent on your program . 
For example , you recently highlighted some current issues about Africa , yet you had two caucasions speak on these issues on your program . 
Surely , you could have found some intelligent people of African\/Black descent to speak on these issues . 
Furthermore , people of African\/Black descent are intelligent enough people to speak on any global issue . 
It is disturbing to watch your program and `` never '' see anyone of African\/Black descent . 
I READ THAT ERITREAS ECONOMY IS PREDICTED TO BE THE NUMBER TWO ECONOMIC GROWTH NOT ONLY IN AFRICA BUT IN THE WORLD . 
BUT IN YOUR SHOW YOU NEVER MENTION OR YOUR GUESTS IS IT YOU DONT KNOW OR OTHER REASONS . 
SINCE YOU WERE TALKING ABOUT AFRICA , ERITREA IS LOCATED IN EAST AFRICA AND THERE IS SUCCSECE STORY IN ALL ASPECTS OF LIFE . 
July 10 , 2011 at 11:17 am | Reply You REALLY erred !!! 46 nations do have troops in Afghanistan but not in combat . 
Most are forbidden to serve in combat roles ! 
After 10 years of REAL combat and hundreds of casualties , including over 10 % from US friendly fire , Canada is leaving Kandahar to join them in training and policing -LRB- \* R&R -RRB- roles . 
I regret seeing you stoop to the kind of deceiptful , disparaging and or ignorant reporting on Canada that we are used to seeing in other US media . 
As your largest trading partner , oil supplier and fighting ally in valid wars , it 's hard not to resent such arrogant ignorance ? 
Just imagine how other nations feel ! 
Surely , you are n't still smarting from the ass kicking that we gave your invading armies in 1812 or the fact that we 've created a uniquely respected separate parliamentary democracy ? 
July 10 , 2011 at 12:21 pm | Reply I agree with most of the critical comments above on the discussion of the African situations . 
We all need real help to truly understand especially the positive possibilities and futures for some or any of the countries . 
I am dumb about it all . 
On the other hand , thank you very much for keeping the roundtable , especially Krista Friedland , under control and engaged in civil discussion . 
That 's the way it needs to be -- Fox can do shouting matches . 
I appreciated Krista 's comment that at least part of the Greek situation was caused by the German and French banks . 
Yes , Greece borrowed them selves into a deep hole , but someone had to lend them the money . 
And no small part of the crisis now is to rescue those banks -- to heck with the Greeks . 
We 're at it again . 
Will Too Big to Fail ever become Too Big a Problem that we will put a stop to it ? 
July 10 , 2011 at 1:03 pm | Reply I generally enjoy the broadcast immensely , but I was put off by the Africa and DSK segments because they lacked balanced points of view . 
July 10 , 2011 at 1:31 pm | Reply great panel this week . 
hope this means ann coulter is history July 10 , 2011 at 1:34 pm | Reply on the segment regarding african countries , as a congolese immigrant , i apreciate a discussion about the african continent , Can you please tell your guests and yourself to talk about countries more instead of just calling it ` africa ' as a whole . 
you are not educating the public that way . 
And the other guest talkin about how he went to ` africa ' -LRB- where ? -RRB- 
in the 80 's , can he instead say the location he went to , it was obviously not a city but a remote village . 
please be detailed about the country u went to instead of callin it ` africa ' July 10 , 2011 at 1:52 pm | Reply I agreed with Levy that there was something very fishy about the whole episode . 
But why did no one on the panel including Levy ask the obvious question : was this a setup and if so who did it , why and how ? 
I have some suggestions . 
DSK was going to run against Sarkozy for President of France , and was expected to win . 
We have now learned that Sarkozy had spies folling DSK who were watching him so closely that they were able to inform him of the incident even before DSK was even arrested . 
How likely is it that they were not only `` watching '' him , they also set up the whole scene using this mob-commected hooker . 
I 's be willing to bet on it , . 
July 10 , 2011 at 1:52 pm | Reply I just ca n't figure out why there was not one Black African on the show to discuss Africa . 
The commentators are out there . 
Do what you need to invite them . 
There are many well equipped Black skinned people to speak on Africa . 
At least one person would have been acceptable . 
This is not a racist comment and I hope the intent is understood . 
July 10 , 2011 at 1:54 pm | Reply I have to agree with the above comment on the discussion of Africa . 
Interestingly , I have nothing against Nicholas Kristof But was he really the best you could do ? 
Was this decision based on economic considerations or was there some reason that you really felt that he was the best thinker for the show ? 
Was it not possible to find an African ? 
In addition Kristof 's comments on certain things was borderline offensive . 
Problems of disease left him with '' `` a bad taste about West Africa . '' 
I think an African might have offered more productive and insightful commentary . 
I 'm a fan of the show and I hope that future shows can maintain a better selection standard for guests . 
I teach International Communications and while I regularly pan the shallow theater of cable news I sometimes assign your show as part of my course curriculum . 
So I have an investment in keeping the show at a certain level . 
Since I 'm mentioning it I 'm also worried about the underlying question that seems to drive so much of the show which is `` what will make America great ? '' 
I 'm worried about the ways that jingoistic and romantic narratives about American exceptionalism and innovation can creep into otherwise critical and serious journalism . 
July 10 , 2011 at 1:55 pm | Reply I have recently become a regular viewer of GPS because of its content , particularly its different perspectives than the other Sunday shows . 
Today , however , in viewing the 1:00 PM airing , I was annoyed by the amount of time used for commercials , everything from Shirley Temple to Funeral Services . 
While I did not time them , the one hour show must have had 15-20 minutes of commercials . 
This is too much ! 
July 10 , 2011 at 2:05 pm | Reply I concur with most of the comments about Africa above , but I am most concerned about the patronizing , disingenuous manner in which you and your guests characterize some African countries as successful , especially Ghana . 
Free and fair elections does n't a nation build . 
It is easy to visit Ghana for a while , and be fawned over by the `` natives '' , knowing that you will eventually return to your cozy quarters in the West . 
Your comments will have more relevance if you lived there permanently and had to deal with the open sewers , the bad roads , the lack of amenities , and the decadent corruption , corruption so vicious that high officials vie for office to claim it thereby embedding it in institutional structures . 
Such laudatory comments appear to be designed to pacify and patronize , a sentiment evidenced by the lack of representation on your show . 
Ghana is a mess and the seeming relative progress vis-a-vis other countries in Africa is a sham . 
With more than 30 % of GDP in foreign debt , and a pittance 10 % of GDP in revenue from offshore oil discoveries , it is only a matter of time before all the citizens and land resources are held for ransom . 
If Ghana is a success , then Africa as a whole is in big trouble . 
July 10 , 2011 at 2:40 pm | Reply I wanted to add my voice to the outrage expressed so well by Shea , Khadijah and others here . 
Fareed , you more than any other talking head on TV , should have enough common sense to have INDIGENOUS AFRICANS participating in a discussion of countries on the African continent ! 
Failing to do this undercuts your credibility . 
How can you provide a viewpoint any different from the rest of the disinterested western media when it comes to Africa if you talk to a couple of white guys about a very diverse , and yes , black continent . 
A representative from the African Union would have been a good , and obvious start at balancing your panel . 
I mean , really ! 
July 10 , 2011 at 3:20 pm | Reply I could n't help but disagree with Bernard Henri-Levy 's objection to the housekeepers defense lawyer 's press conference . 
In an American court all the details of her alleged rape would have to be revealed . 
Up to now the prosecution has divulged\/leaked all details of the case to the public . 
Giving the details of her side of the story is only fair . 
If the case is going to be played out in public then the public should hear both sets of details . 
BHL 's point that it was humiliating and an invasion of her privacy only helps to perpetuate a one-sided view of the case . 
Revelations about past lies in her life may put her credibility on the line , but she still could have been raped . 
July 10 , 2011 at 3:54 pm | Reply I agree that some measures were not proportionate . 
Yet DSK has himself to blame for . 
However good he is professionally he is a sleazebag . 
His sex drive was or will always be his stumbling block . 
July 11 , 2011 at 7:43 am | Reply Your guest Ms. Freeland said she was angry that the media brought up DSK 's reputation for having affairs as if being sexually promiscuous made him more likely to commit the crimes of rape and sexual assault . 
Although I agree with her that the distinction is very important especially to women who if they are victims should not be less credible if they have an active sex life . 
However , as an American living in France reading the press on both sides of the Atlantic , I would like to point out that Mr. Strauss-Kahn reputation went far beyond that of being a playboy . 
To the point that female journalist were warned not to interview him alone . 
As Ms. Freeland wishes to defend women who are victim of sexual aggression , she should recognize that many women are either afraid to object or to report incidents especially when the agressor is a powerful person . 
If DSK has a history of sexual harassment it is relevant to this case . 
And it is my impression from what I have read and watched in France since his arrest that there were numerous incidents that were `` winked '' at in France that would have had consequences for a man in his position in the US . 
So as to Ms Freeland 's hope that this attitude not be exported to France , if so-called `` affairs '' are cases of sexual harassment , I fervently hope that this incident HAS led to the exportation to France of the attitude that men who use their power to abuse women should be exposed not excused . 
July 10 , 2011 at 5:23 pm | Reply This is a great post for such a hard topic to discuss . 
I look forward to reading more excellent posts like this one . 
Something to think about ... Just as a man 's history as a skirt-chaser does n't mean he 's a rapist , a woman 's history of shady dealings does n't mean that she ca n't be a victim of a sexual assault . 
The public should n't be quick to convict DSK nor should we be quick to exonerate him . 
July 10 , 2011 at 7:40 pm | Reply Fareed you make no sense Fareed is the kind of guy with many colors . 
He can explain you why the sun is revolving around the earth when everybody believe so , and then explain you the complete opposite when it is proven than the earth is in fact revolving around the sun . 
July 10 , 2011 at 8:32 pm | Reply Hi Fareed , what was the name of the recommended book this week and the author , I 'd love to see if it 's available in South Africa . 
July 11 , 2011 at 10:18 am | Reply I enjoy watching your show , i enjoy the discussion about African but will appreciate it if there are some Africans there to discuss it later in the future , i always look forward to watching you , thanks July 17 , 2011 at 4:28 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
