BP CEO Reveals Plan B and Beyond for Gulf Oil Spill Disaster This is a rush transcript from `` On the Record , '' May 10 , 2010 . 
This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated . 
GRETA VAN SUSTEREN , FOX NEWS HOST : Well , it simply will not stop . 
Oil is continuing to pour into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Crews are working frantically 24\/7 to try and stop it . 
Now , plan A has just failed , and now crews are moving on to plan B. British Petroleum CEO Tony Hayward goes `` On the Record . '' 
VAN SUSTEREN : Mr. Hayward , thank you for joining us . 
TONY HAYWARD , BP CEO : Thank you very much for the opportunity . 
VAN SUSTEREN : I know that this is both a catastrophe and an emergency . 
Tell me , where do you stand right now in trying to contain that leak ? 
HAYWARD : Well , we are working this , as you know very aggressively in three ways , in the subsea to eliminate the leak , on the surface to contain the spill to the greatest extent possible in the area of the leak , and thirdly to defend the shoreline and prevent any oil from getting to the shore . 
In terms of the subsea interventions , we are pursuing multiple occupy shuns in parallel . 
So we tried the large dome over the weekend . 
It was n't successful . 
Too much hydrate formation , a consequence of there being much greater gas in the flow of hydrocarbons than we had anticipated . 
So we are now moving to deploy over the next 72 hours , a smaller containment device , a so-called top hat , which is described like that because it looks like a top hat , put in the water , on the end of a piece of drill pipe to fit over the leak . 
We 'll be doing that over the next 72 hours . 
In parallel there are a series of other operations being planned on the blow-out preventer , most importantly the so-called top kill or junk shot whereby we would pump into the blowout preventer material to clog it up and stop the flow . 
VAN SUSTEREN : Where the hydration is , is n't that ineffective because it blocks it ? 
Is that why that 's been ineffective ? 
And why has n't that effective in containing the leak ? 
HAYWARD : The issue is the quantity of gas and seawater in the large dome . 
That is a difficult combination . 
So , by moving to a smaller dome we 'll have less seawater and , hopefully , a better chance of minimizing the hydrate formation and being able to get in sort of system to work . 
VAN SUSTEREN : Are you getting everything you need ? 
I realize BP is scrambling . 
I think it is too early to start blaming . 
We have a catastrophe with we need to contain . 
But are you getting assistance from around the world in terms of scientific assistant from the government , man power ? 
Do you need anything at all at this point ? 
HAYWARD : This is now an oil and gas industry task force with significant input from government scientists and technologists from the Department of Energy , the Navy , Department of Defense . 
So there is gathered in Houston , which is where I 'm talking to you from , a team of nearly 1,000 people , many of them technologists and scientists grappling with this problem . 
This is , if you like , the oil and gas industry now focused on an oil and gas industry global problem . 
VAN SUSTEREN : What the odds this smaller dome is going to work ? 
I realize we do n't know you are just implementing it . 
But the bigger dome did n't work . 
When you talked to the scientists the people in Houston , are they hopeful , or is this also a high-risk operation ? 
HAYWARD : I think we need to recognize that none of this has been done in 5,000 feet of water . 
That is the reality . 
We are working on the absolute frontier of the industry . 
It is -- a number of people have made this analogy , I think it is not unreasonable -- this is a lot like the Apollo 13 moon shot . 
We have the piece as assembled on the table and we are trying to figure out what is the right intervention . 
An important thing is that we are learning all the time . 
We are learning all the time about what is likely to work from the interventions that we are making . 
So , we ca n't be overly confident that this next intervention will work . 
But it will not have the same scale of hydrate problem that we had with the first go . 
VAN SUSTEREN : Let 's say Plan A failed , the bigger dome , Plan B is the smaller dome , hoping less of a hydrate problem . 
In the horrible , awful event that Plan B does n't work , what is Plan C ? 
HAYWARD : So Plan C is the so-called junk shot , top kill , where we connect two flexible hoses to the top of the blowout preventer and pump material to block up the blowout preventer . 
Plan D is to remove what is called the riser with which is sitting above the blowout preventer and put in place another blowout preventer . 
There 's a Plan E and a Plan F. So we are working through a whole series of options that are being developed and engineered in parallel and deploying them in time sequence . 
VAN SUSTEREN : Any idea the estimate of how much oil is being pumped - - how much is that leak right now ? 
I 've seen lots of estimates . 
HAYWARD : There is no accurate way of estimating this , I 'm afraid . 
There is not a meter on the sea bed . 
You have to estimate what is on the surface , which itself is something of an estimation , and then back calculate based on the amounts of oil that evaporates and is dispersed as it travels up through the sea column . 
So the numbers are genuinely guesstimates at this point . 
But what we can say that the containment efforts of subsea dispersant , on the surface , skimming on the surface , and booming on the surface is retaining the vast majority of the oil in the vicinity of the leak . 
VAN SUSTEREN : In terms of other drilling rigs are there any other ones right now at risk in the Gulf of Mexico ? 
There 's a lot of attention on this one . 
But as you look around the Gulf , should we be worried tonight ? 
HAYWARD : BP has no other drilling operations ongoing at the current time . 
The MMS , regulatory agency has put out a series of safety alerts to other rigs that are drilling requiring them to make additional safety measures and assessments . 
VAN SUSTEREN : As I understand , I 'm sure it is obvious I 'm not an expert in this , but the blowout preventer failed us in this particular instance , leading to this catastrophe . 
Did it not have redundancy ? 
And in terms of the MMS , the department of interior in Washington that is supposed to regulate safety , did they have requirements that it have a redundancy ? 
HAYWARD : The blowout preventer had three levels of redundancy . 
They 've all failed . 
We do n't understand why that is the case . 
That will clearly be something that the investigation focuses on very significantly . 
I think that -- this is a terrible accident , and , as you say , something that is very , very serious . 
We need to understand what has happened here . 
It is the first time in 20 years of drilling in the deep water globally that we 've had an incident of this sort to deal with . 
And clearly the investigation will make findings which , I would expect , would change in a significant way industry practices and regulation over this sort of equipment . 
VAN SUSTEREN : Sir , there 's no question that everyone wants a full and thorough investigation so that never happens again . 
There are some congressional hearings that are starting this week . 
And I 'm all in favor of your company being grilled and looked at to see what did wrong or right or whatever . 
But I 'm curious , are these hearings coming too soon so some of your resources that should be diverted or some of you attention to stopping this leak is being distracted by the hearings ? 
Are these hearings creating a time problem for you at all ? 
HAYWARD : I think it is reasonable and right that Congress should take a very active interest in this . 
And we have found a way of managing to deal with their concerns while not interrupting our ongoing operations . 
VAN SUSTEREN : Good luck , sir . 
We sure hope that gets contained soon , thank you sir . 
HAYWARD : Thank you very much for the opportunity . 
Content and Programming Copyright 2010 Fox News Network , Inc. . 
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced , distributed , transmitted , displayed , published or broadcast without the prior written permission of Roll Call . 
You may not alter or remove any trademark , copyright or other notice from copies of the content . 
