WILMINGTON , Delaware | Tue Oct 19 , 2010 10:28 am EDT WILMINGTON , Delaware -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc told a court it was committed to waiving the legal cap on its liability from the Gulf oil spill , which could have limited the cost to the oil giant to $ 75 million plus clean-up costs . 
`` BP has chosen to waive the statutory limitation on liability under OPA , '' BP said in a court filing on Monday . 
OPA is the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 . 
BP has already paid out hundreds of millions of dollars to fisherman , retailers , charter boat captains and property owners who suffered from the spill , the largest in U.S. history . 
The company has publicly committed to pay clean-up costs and all `` legitimate claims , '' rather than applying the cap . 
Under pressure from the Obama administration , the company also has established a $ 20 billion compensation fund , but a slew of lawsuits also have been brought against the company and its business partners . 
At a court hearing on the lawsuits on Friday , BP created confusion about its stance on the liability cap . 
It did not commit to waiving the cap at the hearing , as many plaintiffs ' attorneys had expected , and said in a statement on Friday that the cap `` is not relevant . '' 
`` BP lawyers would n't say on the record they would waive the cap , '' said Steve Herman , a Louisiana attorney who is leading the hundreds of lawsuits against BP and its partners . 
`` It certainly took everyone by surprise . '' 
In Monday 's court filing , BP said it would waive the liability cap . 
BP also urged other defendants in the case , including rig owner Transocean Holdings LLC , Anadarko Petroleum Corp and MOEX Offshore 2007 LLC , also to waive the liability cap , according to the filing . 
BP also said it reserved the right to seek reimbursement from the other defendants and denied engaging in grossly negligent conduct , which would open the door to potentially huge punitive damages . 
The case in U.S. District Court , Eastern District of Louisiana is In re Oil Spill by the Oil Rig `` Deepwater Horizon '' in the Gulf of Mexico April 20 , 2010 , No. 10-MDL-2179 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Hals , editing by Dave Zimmerman -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
