BP steps up image rebuild by linking pay to safety LONDON | Tue Oct 19 , 2010 4:31 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- Chief Executive Bob Dudley has stepped up his battle to rebuild the troubled oil giant 's reputation , declaring safety is so core to the group that it would be the sole measure for staff bonuses in the last quarter of this year . 
Dudley needs to restore investor confidence in the oil group following its Gulf of Mexico oil spill and other disasters in recent years , and to fend off threats to BP 's ability to operate in the United States . 
Some U.S. lawmakers have argued the oil spill , a refinery blast in 2005 , and Alaskan oil spills in 2006 , reflect a corporate culture that encouraged managers to put profits before safety . 
Dudley disputes this claim and to emphasize BP 's commitment to safety he told staff in an email , seen by Reuters , that : `` The sole criterion for performance reward for our operating businesses in the fourth quarter of 2010 will be performance in safety , compliance , silent running and operational risk management . '' 
`` We are taking this step in order to be absolutely clear that safety , compliance and operational risk management is BP 's number one priority , well ahead of all other priorities , '' he added in the email which was sent on Monday . 
A BP spokesman confirmed the email 's contents . 
Last month , ahead of his official October 1 start date , Dudley said he was reviewing BP 's system of incentives , to ensure that employees never to feel pressured or tempted to sacrifice safety for other goals . 
The spokesman said this review would be concluded early next year and that the fourth-quarter bonus move was aimed at instilling a stronger safety culture in BP as soon as possible . 
He denied it was a publicity stunt . 
Rival Royal Dutch Shell Plc -LRB- RDSa . 
L -RRB- has long linked staff bonuses to safety , while Exxon Mobil -LRB- XOM . 
N -RRB- is famous in the industry for insisting upon compliance . 
Some U.S. leaders and commentators have called for BP to be barred from drilling in the country in future . 
With 40 percent of its assets located in the U.S. , such a move could cripple the company . 
Analysts said that in addition to reassuring investors that another disaster was not around the corner , Dudley 's prime task was to preserve BP 's U.S. position . 
BP shares traded down 0.2 percent at 431.5 pence at 0753 GMT , against a 0.4 percent drop in the STOXX Europe 600 Oil and Gas index . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin , by Louise Heavens -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
