Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Friday , April 30 , 2010 ; 2:30 PM A huge spreading oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico washed up to coastal Louisiana wildlife and seafood areas on Friday and the U.S. government and military struggled to avert what could become one of the nation 's worst ecological disasters . 
Harrisburg , Pa. : How does this oil spill directly affect aquatic life ? 
What immediate and direct damage does this do to what species of fish and other aquatic life , which move but are displaced , and what are some of the ecosystem changes that can result from this ? 
Jacqueline Savitz : There are a lot of marine life at risk . 
Sea turtles , fish , marine mammals , birds , you name it . 
Oil is extremely toxic to marine life of all kinds . 
Many fish spawn in the Gulf including Atlantic blue fin tuna which are under severe pressure from overfishing . 
Their larvae are very sensitive and the spill could affect their populations . 
Also snapper and grouper , all of those are important commercially . 
There are also 4 species of sea turtles in the Gulf and they are all endangered or threatened . 
They can be exposed to oil when they come up to breath , and end up being coated by oil and even swallowing some of it . 
This can interfere with their digestion , respiration , and a variety of other functions . 
Sea birds are the classic poster child for oil spills . 
Coating can leave them unable to keep warm and cause hypothermia . 
Calgary , Alberta : This paper reported that `` That inquiry will likely focus on the blowout-preventer , which like the sunken drilling rig , was owned by Transocean . 
In Norway , for example , blowout preventers are required to have a device known as an acoustic valve that can help assure activation in the event of an accident , but that device is n't required in the United States and was n't part of the blowout preventer used on this well . 
BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward said Wednesday that the blowout preventer had been inspected 10 days before the accident . '' 
Lock Haven , Pa. : Do you think this spill will have long-term effects on President Obama 's efforts to build up our offshore drilling ? 
Jacqueline Savitz : I think the spill is making a lot of people rethink their views on offshore drilling . 
We have been told by the industry that drilling is safe , and it 's clearly not . 
We were told it would lower gas prices , and make us energy independent , which the Energy Information Agency says it will not do -LRB- government agency -RRB- . 
So it becomes hard to see the benefits of expanding offshore drilling . 
Tampa , Fla. : What is the best site on the Internet to view current satellite photographs of the oil slick ? 
If the spill continues unabated at its present rate for several months , what will be the approximate rate of change of the area of the slick ? 
What would be the maximum size after three months ? 
Washington , D.C. : I agree with you that there should n't be any additional offshore drilling , but what are the chances of that actually happening ? 
Even in the face of a disaster like this , I do n't think the oil companies will just give up . 
What can we do to help stop this drilling ? 
Brooklyn , N.Y. : The U.S. does n't require offshore rigs to have a remote shut-off that a few other countries do , apparently due to lobbying by BP and the other major oil companies . 
Any idea how much it would have cost to add this functionality to a rig compared to how much BP spent on lobbying against that regulation -LRB- and compared to the billions that this disaster is going to cost -RRB- ? 
It is unfathomable to me that this is just going to spurt oil for weeks until the pocket of oil is dry , and that they are n't required to build in a remote failsafe . 
Jacqueline Savitz : I know . 
I ca n't fathom it either , no pun taken . 
I do n't know for a fact , but the costs that are being discussed are as follows : `` An acoustic trigger costs about $ 500,000 , industry officials said . 
The Deepwater Horizon had a replacement cost of about $ 560 million , and BP says it is spending $ 6 million a day to battle the oil spill . '' 
Amherst , Mass. : President Obama on April 2nd when opening up new parcels for oil drilling said `` It turns out , by the way , that oil rigs today generally do n't cause spills . '' 
This is clearly false as this most recent incident demonstrates . 
He has again today committed to open up new parcels for oil drilling . 
What does this say about the quality of the advice that the President gets ? 
Or does the president just ignore the advice ? 
Greenbelt , Md. : Can you tell me what groups I can contact to volunteer to help with the cleanup ? 
I do n't have formal training but would be willing to fly out there for a few days to help however if they need people . 
Newport Beach , Calif. : How do the currents move and how will those currents affect states like MS , AL , TX and FLA ? 
Will there be permanent harm ? 
Charlotte , N.C. : How will the cost for the cleanup be assessed ? 
Is there really a price for ecological damage ? 
What about the potential loss of future-earnings for fisheries ? 
Jacqueline Savitz : This is a very good question . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- does have a method for estimating the value of natural resources . 
It 's not perfect , but it 's a good program that tries to get our natural resources covered , and even replaced after a disaster . 
Obviously we never really get the full value back , but they try . 
Columbia , Md. : What can an individual do to help ? 
Is there a volunteer program to go and clean the birds ? 
Or should we just give money ? 
Eastport , Md. : One of the big factors in BP 's inability to cap the leak is the fact that they drilled in over 5000 feet of water . 
Have there been restrictions on the depth of drilling , and is this likely to be a restriction in the future in the approval process for new drilling permits ? 
Jacqueline Savitz : Good point . 
The technology has improved for the drilling but this event shows the safety and cleanup technology has not kept pace . 
A depth restriction would make sense but we would go further . 
We need to shift our energy economy to clean energy and away from fossil fuels . 
We are going to keep drilling where we are already drilling , but if we are serious about that shift , we should not expand drilling to places that were previously protected . 
We think the President should put a moratorium in place on all new drilling , even for exploration . 
Tampa , Fla. : Will BP reimburse the Navy -LRB- funded by the taxpayer -RRB- for its assistance ? 
Or is this the typical scenario of privatized profits and socialized costs ? 
Harrisburg , Pa. : It would seem to me that prior to any oil rig being put in any waters , that there would be enough scientific knowledge and understanding as to how to cap any oil well , no matter where it is . 
Do n't the government . 
people realize that many calamities can take place ? 
Hurricanes , tornadoes , quakes to name a few -- and which are happening more and more . 
What about the rest of the oil rigs in the Gulf . 
And it should not take long at all to contain this stuff . 
Where have the scientists been all these years after the the Valdez problem . 
This is a total catastrophe with no decent responses -LRB- as usual for the government -RRB- . 
Jacqueline Savitz : Secretary of Homeland Security also is pledging to make every effort on behalf of the Obama administration and use all the resources at their disposal , and they are even planning for a worst case scenario . 
Jacqueline Savitz : Thanks for all the great questions ! 
I am going to have to sign off now . 
Please keep the pressure on to avoid letting this happen again , and you can follow our work at Oceana and my tweets at @jackiesavitz . 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . 
To Refresh Page : Press the F5 key on your keyboard or click here . 
: Christless Christianity Guest : Dr. Michael S. Horton Viewpoint is a paid discussion . 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
