With the final vote coming late in the night , Congress yesterday approved a $ 787 billion stimulus package that aims to spur millions of jobs through massive new investments in energy , transportation , education and health-care projects , while reviving social safety-net programs that have been shrinking for nearly three decades . 
The bill passed the House 246 to 183 and , in a vote held open for several hours , the Senate 60 to 38 , both largely along party lines . 
President Obama is expected to sign it into law early next week . 
The legislation represents the start of a new ideological era that places the federal government at the center of the nation 's economic recovery . 
It also provides a down payment on much of President Obama 's domestic agenda , including his pledges to upgrade the nation 's aging roads , bridges and electricity grid ; overhaul health-care record-keeping and invest billions in alternative energy research to reverse climate change and wean the country from foreign oil . 
The passage is an early triumph for Obama , even though he was able to attract only three Republican senators to sign on to an effort that he once hoped would pass with large majorities from both parties . 
Nevertheless , the White House and Democratic congressional leaders were able to move what became an 1,100-page bill from first draft to final passage in less than a month , keeping to the ambitious timetable they set . 
The package combines tax cuts with new spending , and three-quarters of the money is planned to reach state capitals , businesses and individual taxpayers by the end of September 2010 . 
Its virtues and limitations will remain uncertain until the money is paid out in the form of road projects , unemployment checks and energy-efficient building improvements , but its reach is already clear . 
The New Deal of the 1930s equaled no more than 2 percent of the nation 's gross domestic product . 
The new legislation represents over 5 percent and is probably no more than an opening bid -- Obama and his congressional allies will next turn to the foreclosure crisis , the reform of financial markets and an overhaul of federal budget practices . 
`` Passing this plan is a critical step , '' Obama said at the White House yesterday morning . 
`` But as important as it is , it 's only the beginning of what we must do to turn our economy around . '' 
Republicans were scornful of the legislation , depicting it as pork-laden and ineffective . 
`` This bill is supposed to be about jobs , jobs , jobs , and it 's turned into nothing more than spend , spend , spend , '' said House Minority Leader John A. Boehner -LRB- R-Ohio -RRB- . 
White House officials predict the measure will create 3.5 million jobs over the next year and a half , easing the effects of the worst economic downturn in a generation . 
Some private analysts said the slimmed-down measure is likely to fall well short of that goal , creating fewer than 2.5 million jobs and leaving the unemployment rate over 9 percent through 2010 . 
They also cautioned that even if the package boosts economic activity , conditions are likely to continue to deteriorate unless the administration finds a way to thaw frozen credit markets and revive the paralyzed banking system . 
`` The financial crisis we 're battling against is extreme , and if we ca n't start to get the financial crisis under control , then whatever we do on the fiscal side is n't going to help that much , '' said Nigel Gault , chief U.S. economist at the private consulting firm Global Insight . 
Among the stimulus 's chief beneficiaries are people who are unemployed or otherwise struggling through the downturn . 
Its hefty investments in Medicaid and education troubled even some moderate Democrats for their degree of federal intervention and helped to mobilize a group of Senate centrists to cut $ 100 billion from the bill . 
