When the United States drew England last December as its opening round competition in the World Cup , it should have set the stage for a friendly rivalry of English superstars against American upstarts . 
But the BP oil spill and the subsequent American outrage against one of Britain 's most prominent industrial giants has turned the match into somewhat of a proxy battle for the finger-pointing over the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
President Obama plans to speak with British Prime Minister David Cameron on Saturday in what will surely be a diplomatic dance as Cameron faces pressure from his electorate to push back on the BP browbeating . 
Thousands of miles away , that dance will be a stomp as the U.S. team squares off against England in South Africa . 
Tensions in both countries have flared over BP , injecting the soccer face-off with an added layer of competition . 
The opportunity for revenge and shin-kicking has not gone unnoticed . 
On the U.S. side , director Spike Lee -- who 's been on the vanguard of outrage over the spill -- reportedly told a gathering of New York bloggers the U.S. team should wear shirts that say `` BP Sucks '' on Saturday . 
A Facebook page calling for BP `` payback '' hopes against hope that `` our boys will get some retribution in South Africa . '' 
In Britain , newspapers and politicians on Friday slammed the Obama administration 's treatment of the company . 
The timing of the match fed the fire . 
The Times of London ran a cartoon that showed soccer player Obama `` booting '' a ball with a BP logo on it . 
His uniform showed the president was sponsored by `` Mid Term Elections Inc. '' Facing public pressure , Obama has taken a tougher tone toward BP in recent days . 
He said earlier in the week that he 'd fired BP CEO Tony Hayward and claimed that he was scouting for an `` ass to kick . '' 
U.S. senators called on BP to stop dividend payments , and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi echoed that call on Friday . 
Times Editor James Harding told Fox News it sends a troubling signal when the president is in `` ass-kicking mode . '' 
`` It does n't help anyone when you start getting personal , '' he said . 
Officials insist things are n't that bad . 
Martin Longden , a spokesman for the British Embassy in Washington , said there 's a `` huge amount of understanding for where the administration is here '' and that the match is unrelated . 
`` I do n't think the two do play into each other in any meaningful way , '' he said . 
Does that mean there 's no sense of rivalry ? 
The Embassy is opening up its doors to staff members , families and a few `` football aficionados '' to watch the game Saturday -- the American staff members are invited , but only so they can be shamed . 
`` They want them to be there to witness England 's triumph , '' Longden said . 
Nile Gardiner , director of The Heritage Foundation 's Margaret Thatcher Center for Freedom , said the BP issue has developed into a `` major confrontation '' between London and Washington . 
But he said the rage is mostly political and that the relationship between the American and British people will remain strong . 
`` You are going to see that in the aftermath of tomorrow 's World Cup match , no matter what the result , '' he said . 
Gardiner , who came to the United States from Britain eight years ago , will be rooting for England . 
