Has Volkswagen discovered the Holy Grail of carmakers ? 
Full Article Libyan forces push into Gaddafi bastion NORTH OF BANI WALID , Libya | Sun Sep 11 , 2011 9:57 pm IST NORTH OF BANI WALID , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan forces who have launched an assault on the last holdout towns of Muammar Gaddafi 's loyalists were still meeting resistance in one desert town on Sunday , and said they had edged towards the ousted ruler 's birthplace Sirte . 
`` We are inside Bani Walid , we control big chunks of the city . 
There are still pockets of resistance , '' one fighter named Sabhil Warfalli said as he drove away from the front line in the town 150 km -LRB- 95 miles -RRB- southeast of Tripoli . 
He said pro-Gaddafi forces were now concentrated in the central market area -- an account backed up by a resident named Khalifa Telisi who had telephoned a family in the town . 
`` There is still resistance from the central market . 
All other parts of Bani Walid have been liberated , '' Telisi said . 
`` Another revolutionary battalion is coming in from the south . 
Gaddafi forces are scattered . 
It is a matter of hours now . '' 
A pro-Gaddafi local radio station appealed for the city 's 100,000 people to fight to the death . 
`` We urge the people of Bani Walid to defend the city against the rats and armed gangs . 
Do n't back down . 
Fight to the death . 
We are waiting for you . 
You are just a bunch of gangsters . 
God is on our side , '' an announcer said in language that echoed that used by Gaddafi in recent broadcasts . 
Libya 's National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- is trying to capture Gaddafi 's last bastions and find the fugitive leader to assert its grip over the vast North African oil-producer and begin a countdown to elections and a new constitution . 
Gaddafi troops firing rockets and mortars have fought back against fighters trying to push into Bani Walid for two days . 
`` There has been ferocious resistance from them at Bani Walid , '' Jalil al-Galal , an NTC spokesman in Tripoli said . 
The NTC sent experienced reinforcements to join the fight , but fighters said they were awaiting a go-ahead from NATO , whose warplanes hit Gaddafi positions in the area on Saturday . 
`` Yesterday we set up checkpoints in Bani Walid but had to leave after NATO told us to do so . 
Today we 're waiting for their green light to go back in again , '' said a 42-year-old fighter named Abdenabi Abdulrahman outside the town . 
NATO says it has no contacts with the NTC , but confirmed its aircraft had been in action the day before . 
Gaddafi 's loyalists also control Sirte , which sits on the main east-west coastal highway , effectively cutting Libya in two . 
Advancin NTC troops said the front line was now about 90 km east of the city . 
Fighters were firing tanks and howitzers amid the sound of heavy machinegun fire and the roar of NATO warplanes overheard . 
`` There were clashes this morning and Gaddafi forces were firing Grad rockets , but we managed to advance a little bit and we will enter Sirte very soon , '' said fighter Salah al-Shaery . 
The pro-Gaddafi towns still holding out , as well as the uncertain loyalties of the vast desert interior , undermine the NTC 's efforts to show it is firmly in control of the country . 
NTC chairman Mustafa Abdel Jalil , a former Gaddafi justice minister who has run the council from the eastern city of Benghazi , arrived in Tripoli on Saturday for the first time since bands of anti-Gaddafi rebels captured it on Aug. 23 . 
`` Brotherhood and warmth -- that 's what we will depend on to build our future . 
We are not at a time of retribution , '' Abdel Jalil declared . 
`` This is the time of unity and liberation . '' 
The NTC has said it will complete its move to Tripoli this week , although previous timelines for this have slipped . 
Establishing a credible interim government in the capital would mark an important step for Libya , where regional and factional rivalries among forces united only by contempt for Gaddafi could trouble efforts to reshape the country . 
The NTC also promised to resume oil production , virtually stalled since the civil war began six months ago , within days . 
But Abdel Jalil said Libya could not yet be declared `` liberated '' from the man who ruled it for 42 years . 
`` Gaddafi still has money and gold , '' he said . 
`` These are the fundamental things that will allow him to find men . '' 
The NTC had given the main pro-Gaddafi towns -- Sirte , Bani Walid and the remote desert outpost of Sabha -- until Saturday to surrender or face attack . 
Fighting around Sirte and Bani Walid erupted a day before the deadline . 
Anti-Gaddafi fighters believe one or two of the ousted leader 's sons may be holed up in Bani Walid . 
Some NTC officials have even suggested Gaddafi might be there . 
Others say he may be hiding deeper in the Sahara . 
Several former Gaddafi officials and generals have fled across the vast desert to neighbouring Niger . 
The toppled leader 's wife and three of his children found sanctuary in Algeria last month . 
Some civilians managed to flee Bani Walid on Sunday . 
`` We live right in the center . 
We are leaving because we want to be on the side of the revolution , '' said a man in a car with his wife , children and other relatives . 
`` For six months I could n't get out . 
There is no food . 
People are trying to bring us food and medicine but Gaddafi gangs turn them away , '' he said , referring to efforts by civilians to bring supplies into the besieged town . 
The original plan was for local fighters to enter Bani Walid to reassure residents and to encourage Gaddafi fighters to lay down their weapons and stay indoors . 
But NTC officials , who first estimated they were facing only 150 Gaddafi loyalists , now say their opponents number about 1,000 after an influx of extra men from other Gaddafi strongholds such as Sirte and Sabha . 
`` Last night the enemy fired many Grad rockets and mortars . 
We were under a hail of Grads . 
We do n't know what we 're going to do now . 
I have to admit , they have more experience than us , '' said Mohammed Ibrahim , a local anti-Gaddafi fighter . 
