AMMAN | Wed Sep 28 , 2011 1:14 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tanks pounded a Syrian town that has become a refuge for army deserters for a second day on Wednesday , residents said , in the first major battle with defecting soldiers since a six-month-old revolt against President Bashar al-Assad began . 
At least 1,000 deserters and armed villagers have been fighting tank - and helicopter-backed forces trying to regain control of Rastan , a town of 40,000 , in central Syria . 
`` They have got a foothold in the southern part of Rastan , but the Free Syrian Army is fighting back and has destroyed three armored vehicles , '' said one resident by satellite phone . 
`` Buildings have caught fire in several neighborhoods from tank fire , '' he said from the town , which lies about 180 km -LRB- 112 miles -RRB- north of Damascus , among farmland and wheat fields on the Orontes River and on the northern highway leading to Aleppo . 
Syrian authorities have not commented on the assault , but in the past they have denied any army defections , blaming `` foreign meddling '' for the turmoil in the country of 20 million . 
`` They have got a foothold in the southern part of Rastan , but the Free Syrian Army is fighting back and has destroyed three armored vehicles , '' said one resident by satellite `` highly possible '' that defectors were holding their ground . 
After months of mostly peaceful anti-Assad protests , army deserters unwilling to shoot at demonstrators have formed themselves into rebel units , of uncertain size , mostly in Syria 's agricultural heartland around the city of Homs . 
The area is a recruiting ground for Sunni conscripts who provide most of manpower in the military , which is dominated by officers from Assad 's minority Alawite sect , and in better equipped core units commanded by his younger brother Maher . 
Homs and its environs have seen some of the biggest street protests against Assad , as well as some of the heaviest assaults in a crackdown that has killed 2,700 people , by a U.N. count . 
`` The -LRB- army -RRB- defections are occurring in the regions where the killings are most severe . 
For every Syrian the regime kills , it is creating 10 opponents , '' one activist said . 
`` The problem is that the defectors have nowhere to go . 
There is no safe haven or outside backing for them , '' he said . 
The bulk of the armed forces has remained nominally loyal , with tight surveillance by Alawite secret police . 
Soldiers who disobey orders to crush protests risk being shot . 
Peter Harling , regional project director at the International Crisis Group , said army desertions were not a countrywide trend . 
Elsewhere , he said : `` People have been preparing themselves -LRB- to take up arms -RRB- but continue showing restraint . '' 
`` There has been a lot of talk from the opposition about militarization , but this is for now an expression of frustration more than a definite shift in strategy , '' Harling told Reuters , Citing residents , the Syrian Revolution General Commission , which groups several activist organizations , said Rastan neighborhoods had been under fire since early morning from anti-aircraft guns , tanks and armored personnel carriers . 
`` Two mosques were hit . 
Homes and clinics have been damaged , '' it said . 
With communications cut in the area , there were no firm reports on casualties . 
One local activist said on Tuesday that five civilians and rebel soldiers had been killed . 
In another outbreak of armed opposition to Assad , people in the nearby city of Homs said rebel soldiers had hit a government tank with a rocket-propelled grenade on Tuesday . 
The attack occurred in the Bayada district , home to desert tribesmen who are among Assad 's fiercest foes in the city of one million . 
Activists in Homs , Syria 's third largest city , said at least six inhabitants were killed in raids by security forces . 
Several doctors and professor have been assassinated in Homs in the past few weeks by what the authorities call `` terrorists . '' 
The Local Coordination Committees and other activist groups , said the authorities were behind the killings to stoke sectarian strife in the city , which has a significant Alawite minority . 
Syrian authorities say `` armed terrorist groups '' are responsible for civilian deaths in the past six months of unrest and have also killed 700 members of the security forces . 
Turkey is preparing sanctions against Syria , a former ally , in a policy shift that aligns Ankara more closely with the West and complements a Turkish arms embargo already in place . 
Ankara has said the sanctions , expected to be unveiled within days after Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan visits border camps sheltering more than 7,000 Syrians who have fled the violence , will target Assad 's government , not the Syrian people . 
Officials say the measures will affect military , banking and energy ties between the formerly friendly countries . 
`` Turkey is reverting to the U.S. and European line on Syria , '' said foreign policy expert Semih Idiz . 
`` The relationship with Syria has collapsed and it is heading for a freeze . '' 
Britain , France , Germany and Portugal plan to circulate a draft U.N. resolution that condemns Syria , but drops calls for immediate sanctions against it , diplomats said on Tuesday . 
The scaled-back resolution , aimed at breaking a deadlock on the Security Council , will threaten future sanctions if Assad 's government does not halt military attacks on civilians . 
