LONDON | Wed Sep 28 , 2011 2:06 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Britain 's productivity is at its lowest ebb in more than a decade , confounding the conventional wisdom about what should happen following a deep recession and giving a headache to both the Bank of England and government . 
The jury is out on what exactly has caused productivity to flatline for the past three years . 
But if the trend persists , then future quantitative easing from the Bank of England may serve only to keep inflation at more than double its two percent target , rather than boost anaemic growth . 
Moreover , the government might have to impose extra spending cuts or tax rises in order to slash its sky-high deficit , which weaker productivity and medium-term growth would render even less sustainable . 
British productivity grew by about 2.5 percent a year in the run-up to the start of the financial crisis in 2007 . 
In the three years since then , growth has been close to zero . 
Output per worker in Britain is now 13 percent below the average for other members of the G7 group of industrialised countries , the biggest shortfall since 1999 . 
Only Japan has a worse story to tell . 
This is not what economists would expect after a normal recession , during which uncompetitive businesses typically go bust and others cut costs , leaving leaner firms behind . 
But Britain 's recession has not been normal . 
Unemployment has gone up less than in other countries and in past recessions , and fewer firms have gone bankrupt . 
This would not necessarily be a bad thing for longer-term productivity if firms were simply holding on to staff , waiting for demand to pick up . 
But in a speech last week , BoE chief economist Spencer Dale said businesses were not reporting much spare capacity , and had been adding jobs despite weak growth . 
`` Firms in some parts of our economy are having to work flat out just to generate the same amount of business . 
Estate agents , for example , trying to match buyers and sellers in a thin housing market . 
Or M&A teams pitching for new business , '' he said . 
Financial services as a whole -- a major driver of productivity growth in Britain until 2007 -- are unlikely to be as significant in future , both because of their reduced size in the British economy , and because of tougher regulation that reverses the past decade 's liberalisation . 
Another previously highly productive sector , North Sea oil and gas , is also suffering as increasingly scarce resources become more costly to extract . 
And a newly conservative banking sector makes it harder for entrepreneurs to start or expand businesses . 
This last point was emphasised by Dale 's fellow Monetary Policy Committee member Ben Broadbent in a speech at Thomson Reuters ' London headquarters on Monday . 
`` As long as ... capital remains misallocated , productivity , national income and the share of it paid out as wages will all be lower than they otherwise would be , '' Broadbent said . 
These concerns contributed to Dale 's decision to call for higher interest rates in the first half of this year . 
Slow productivity growth implies that the economy has less room to grow before it starts generating excess inflation . 
In economists ' language , there is a smaller output gap and this may be a partial explanation for Britain 's unexpectedly sticky inflation after the credit crunch . 
Since then , prospects for global demand have weakened markedly , and economists polled by Reuters see a three in four chance that the Bank would start a second round of asset purchases with newly-created money . 
Britain 's productivity outlook will not determine that decision but it does have potential implications for QE 's effectiveness if the economy is already closing in on full capacity . 
`` If the patient 's in intensive care , you tend not to worry about the longer term implications of the medicine , '' said Adam Chester , an economist at Lloyds Corporate Markets . 
`` There is a risk that further QE is ineffective in boosting growth . 
It could just be effective in boosting nominal asset prices . '' 
Adam Posen , the most long-standing advocate of more asset purchases on the MPC , would not disagree that QE would be more effective if Britain 's banking system functioned efficiently , and has recently proposed a new state-backed bank to lend to small businesses . 
Other economists concerned about Britain 's productivity , such as Citi economist Michael Saunders , are more relaxed about QE 's effect on inflation , arguing that there is still sufficient spare capacity in Britain 's economy to allow growth without excess price pressures . 
Where weak productivity growth may pose a trickier problem is for Britain 's public finances . 
A central pledge of the coalition government is to eliminate the structural budget deficit within five years . 
Lower productivity growth translates directly into lower trend growth for Britain 's economy -- meaning a bigger chunk of Britain 's 10 percent budget deficit-to-GDP ratio must be counted as a long-term , structural issue . 
The government 's independent fiscal watchdog estimated in March that about a quarter of the deficit this year is down to short-term cyclical factors , and does not need specific government attention . 
But if the Office for Budget Responsibility decides the output gap is smaller than thought , then the structural element of the deficit would be bigger . 
OBR head Robert Chote hinted that this might be the case in a speech last week , when he noted that productivity was growing much slower than the 2 percent annual rate assumed in the Office for Budget Responsibility 's March fiscal forecasts . 
According to David Tinsley , an economist for BNP Paribas , a 1 percent productivity growth rate would be more realistic for the next 5-10 years . 
However , he expected the OBR to avoid dropping a political bombshell by revising down its productivity growth estimates that much -- making it easier for the government to credibly defer any extra spending cuts until the economy is on a stronger footing . 
`` There are a lot of gray areas in the numbers so I do n't think it will want to prompt the government into doing anything particularly drastic , '' he said . 
`` If it does do anything it will be a question of -LRB- the government -RRB- doing some extra implied spending restraints in 2014 and 2015 . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by David Milliken , editing by Mike Peacock -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It is n't the same as production . 
Productivity is raised by getting more from existing resources , not just getting a higher output . 
If a factory wants to produce more by buying more machines and getting more workers in , that 's an increase in production but not productivity . 
If it gets more from its original resources -LRB- with a bit of FW Taylor 's Work Study , say -RRB- then it 's upped production and increased productivity . 
Still , I suppose it 'll be made clear in due time ! 
You could give my co more loans but it would n't boost exports as the European markets have dried up . 
The domestic market is slow due to inflation and folk ` pulling their horns in ' as a result . 
Our best hope is for inflation to drop quickly . 
How about a stronger sterling ? 
It would make little difference to exports but could cut imported inflation . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
