DUBAI | Wed Sep 28 , 2011 6:47 pm BST DUBAI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Saudi Arabia , the world 's number one oil exporter and home to Islam 's holiest places , has long cast itself as a natural leader of the Arab world . 
But on some of the most urgent issues facing the Middle East today -- Palestinian statehood and turmoil in Yemen and Syria -- the kingdom 's ageing rulers have so far abdicated a lead role and the chance to shape the region shaken by Arab uprisings . 
Middle Eastern diplomats have long described Saudi foreign policy as working like a searchlight : able to focus sharply on a single dominant issue , but lacking the capacity to follow up its interest when attention has moved elsewhere . 
`` The Saudis have historically not been grand-standers , '' said Robert Jordan , a former U.S. ambassador to Riyadh . 
`` They have not made grand proclamations and have preferred to work under the radar and quietly . 
This is still very much their style . '' 
Now analysts fear the growing frailty of the kingdom 's most senior leadership has diminished its diplomatic agility in a political system that relies on sustained interest from the top . 
The conservative Islamic state is at odds with its key U.S. ally over how to respond to Arab pro-democracy movements and appears to have ceded some regional leadership to Turkey , which has taken a strong line against Israel and the Syrian president . 
Used to working back channels and shunning the limelight , the kingdom has employed pocketbook diplomacy , pledging billions of dollars to Egypt and the Palestinian Authority . 
Underpinning Saudi concerns are its fears that the fall of established rulers after popular revolts has created strategic opportunities for Middle East rival Iran , while instability , especially in Yemen , has gifted openings to al Qaeda . 
`` Saudi Arabia is a status quo power in a region where the majority of Arabs oppose the status quo , '' said Shadi Hamid , director of research at Brookings Doha Centre . 
`` So to the extent that democratic change provides an opening for hostile forces , they oppose democracy . '' 
Nowhere was that more evident than in Bahrain , where Saudi forces intervened in March to help the island 's Sunni rulers crush pro-reform demonstrations backed by the Shi'ite majority . 
The Saudis had already been upset with the United States for failing to prevent the overthrow of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , whom they had seen as a vital ally against Iran . 
King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz al-Saud , who is in his 80s , is in poor health and can not work a full day , while Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz al-Saud is abroad for medical treatment . 
The next most senior man , Interior Minister Prince Nayef bin Abdulaziz al-Saud , weighs in on foreign policy , but has been unwell himself and has a different approach on some international issues , especially with veteran Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal , who is also unwell . 
`` King Abdullah 's the central figure and ultimately calls the shots , but he 's not in perfect health and neither are the people around him , '' said Ghanem Nuseibeh , a political analyst and partner at Cornerstone Global consultants . 
`` It 's not contributing to the Saudis ' ability to create a coherent policy and establish facts on the ground . 
The Saudi state is becoming an inactive , passive player . '' 
Although both King Abdullah and Foreign Minister Prince Saud have backed the Palestinian statehood claim in prepared texts released to journalists , neither read out their remarks , which could be a sign they are not pushing the matter forcefully . 
Indeed the king only said Riyadh would join others in support of the Palestinian bid , according to published remarks . 
By contrast , in 2002 King Abdullah proposed a peace plan offering Israel pan-Arab recognition in return for a Palestinian state . 
It was rejected by Israel , but remains the corner-stone of Arab policy on the region 's most stubborn impasse . 
Instead of a fresh diplomatic offensive to coincide with the request for the U.N. Security Council to recognize a Palestinian state , the kingdom has worked mostly behind the scenes . 
This month a senior Saudi prince wrote an opinion piece in the New York Times warning that Washington 's promised veto of the resolution would make its relationship with Riyadh `` toxic . '' 
Prince Turki al-Faisal , a former intelligence chief and ambassador to Washington and London , has no formal role , but his words were widely interpreted as a message from King Abdullah . 
Jordan , the former U.S. envoy , said the Saudis were unlikely to risk the basic relationship with the United States over any U.N vote , suggesting their leverage on that issue was limited . 
`` They recognize how closely vital Saudi interests are tied to vital U.S. interests on a whole range of issues from counter-terrorism to Iran and maintaining a balanced price of oil , '' he said . 
`` It would be almost unthinkable for there to be a major rupture such that the two countries fail to cooperate . '' 
Saudi policy on Yemen , where more than 100 people have been killed in a week of clashes between opponents and supporters of President Ali Abdullah Saleh , also lacks force , say analysts . 
Saleh spent three months in Riyadh recuperating from an assassination attempt before returning to Sanaa on Friday . 
Any expectation that Saleh would bow out to end the crisis roiling Yemen since protests erupted in January fell flat . 
He offered no concessions and no clear path to transfer power . 
Saudi princes have strong networks of influence throughout Yemen , which the kingdom regards as its top security risk , and have spent freely on their unruly neighbor in the past . 
However , while Riyadh has backed a Gulf-brokered plan for Saleh to step down , it has failed to pressure the veteran Yemeni leader to implement an orderly transfer of power . 
`` Yemen is a clear example of where the Saudi regime is unable to make a decision on what they want , '' said Nuseibeh , arguing that top Saudi figures supported rival Yemeni factions and did not know what to do with Saleh when he was in Riyadh . 
Saudi policy on Syria has also seemed half-hearted . 
In August , King Abdullah demanded an end to the bloodshed against protesters and withdrew his ambassador to Damascus , but has not followed through , for example by pushing for Arab League measures against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . 
-LRB- Editing by Reed Stevenson and Alistair Lyon -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
