April 21 , 2010 : Fire boat response crews battle the blazing remnants of the offshore oil rig Deepwater Horizon , off Louisiana . 
Reuters Aug. 3 : In this image taken from video provided by BP PLC , the new 75-ton cap sits atop the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP WASHINGTON -- Tests performed before the deadly blowout of BP 's oil well in the Gulf of Mexico should have raised doubts about the cement used to seal the well , but the company and its cementing contractor used it anyway , investigators with the president 's oil spill commission said Thursday . 
It 's the first finding from the commission looking into the causes of the April 20 explosion that killed 11 workers and led to the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
And it appears to conflict with statements made by Halliburton Co. , which has said its tests showed the cement mix was stable . 
The company , which has blamed BP 's well design and operational decisions for the disaster , acknowledged in a six-page statement released late Thursday that it never tested the final mixture of cement for stability after BP made a last-minute change to the mix . 
The cement mix 's failure to prevent oil and gas from entering the well has been identified by BP and others as one of the causes of the accident . 
BP and Halliburton decided to use a foam slurry created by injecting nitrogen into cement to secure the bottom of the well , a decision outside experts have criticized . 
The panel said that of four tests done in February and April by Halliburton , only one -- the last -- showed the mix would hold . 
But the results of that single successful test were not shared with BP , and may not have reached Halliburton , before the cement was pumped , according to a letter sent to commissioners Thursday by chief investigative counsel Fred H. Bartlit Jr. . 
Halliburton said Thursday that that successful test was performed on a mixture different than the one eventually used . 
While some tests were conducted on the new formulation requested by BP , those tests did not include a foam stability test , the company said . 
According to the panel , BP at the time of the blowout had in hand results from only one of the tests -- a February analysis sent to BP by Halliburton in a March 8 e-mail that indicated the cement could fail . 
The slurry tested in that case was a slightly different blend , and assumed a slightly different well design , but there is no indication that Halliburton flagged the problem for BP , or that BP had concerns , the letter said . 
`` Halliburton -LRB- and perhaps BP -RRB- should have considered redesigning the foam slurry before pumping it at the Macondo well , '' Bartlit wrote . 
Independent tests conducted for the commission by Chevron on a nearly identical mixture were also released Thursday . 
The results concluded that the cement mix was unstable , raising questions about the validity of Halliburton 's test showing that the near-final mixture was stable . 
The company said the `` significant differences '' between its internal tests and the commission 's were caused by the use of different materials . 
BP , as part of its internal investigation , also conducted independent tests that showed the cement mix was flawed , but its analysis too was criticized by Halliburton , which said it was not the correct formula . 
BP 's report also mentioned a cement test Halliburton performed in mid-April , but it appears BP obtained the results after the accident and considered its methods flawed . 
By contrast , the commission obtained proprietary additives from Halliburton as well as a recipe to re-create the slurry that was used on the well . 
One and a half gallons of the actual mix used on the rig remain , but it is being held as evidence in criminal and civil investigations . 
Halliburton rejected the commission 's claims that the February tests were conducted on a cement that was similar to the one used . 
`` Contrary to the letter ... the slurry tested in February was not ' a very similar foam slurry design to the one actually pumped , '' ' the statement reads . 
The company also says there were significant differences in how the cement was tested . 
Halliburton shares dropped from near $ 34 to below $ 30 in New York trading in the half hour after the commission released its finding . 
The shares recovered a bit , and closed at $ 31.68 , down $ 2.74 , or 8 percent . 
BP shares rose from $ 40.38 to $ 41.28 , then quickly reversed course and fell to $ 40.28 . 
The shares finished trading with a gain of 49 cents at $ 40.59 . 
The independent investigators do not address other decisions that could have contributed to the cement 's failure and the eventual blowout , such as BP 's decision to use fewer centralizers than recommended by Halliburton . 
Centralizers make sure the well 's piping is centered inside the well so the cement bonds correctly . 
BP has also been criticized for not performing a cement bond long , a test that checks after the cement is pumped down whether it is secure . 
There are also questions about whether BP pumped down enough cement to seal off the bottom of the well , which was located more than three miles below sea level . 
