\* Obama , lawmakers want lots of extras in war funding bill \* U.S. Congress bogged down on provisions on IMF , photos WASHINGTON , June 8 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A $ 100 billion bill to fund U.S. wars in Iraq and Afghanistan is rapidly accumulating extra items such as money for military aircraft the Pentagon does n't want and possibly a scheme to jump-start sagging auto sales . 
The cars and planes are not directly linked to the U.S. war effort . 
But they are typical of Congress ' penchant for loading bills with unrelated spending in hopes the funds will sail through on the strength of the main legislation . 
President Barack Obama originally sought $ 83.4 billion for the two wars and more foreign aid for countries like Pakistan . 
But then he too sought more -- $ 4 billion extra to combat H1N1 swine flu and $ 5 billion to back credit lines to the International Monetary Fund , which is trying to help developing countries weather the global economic downturn . 
The unrelated provisions have slowed the bill down , especially for the IMF because Republicans have argued the extra items should be vetted through the normal congressional process rather than jammed into an emergency spending bill . 
Fights have also erupted about add-ons for the U.S. prison at Guantanamo Bay , Cuba and an attempt to bar the release of photos of detainee abuse . 
While Republicans do not have the votes to block the bill , they have said they will oppose it and that forces Democrats to ensure most of their members back it . 
`` This supplemental was supposed to be about providing funding for our troops , '' one House Republican aide said . 
Instead , it has become a mish-mashed , taxpayer funded ` Christmas tree ' bill that will propagate bad policies and unnecessary spending . '' 
Some 51 anti-war House Democrats had opposed the bill but now are under pressure to switch to give Obama a victory . 
But a House Democratic leadership aide said Republicans will have to answer to constituents for opposing a war funding bill . 
The House and Senate are working out differences between the two versions of the war funding bill they each approved last month and hope to pass a final , single version this week . 
Congress was on the verge of giving Pakistan roughly $ 1 billion in the bill , but Obama last week sought another $ 200 million for Islamabad as it fights Taliban militants crossing its border from Afghanistan . 
And lawmakers are also considering adding money for a plan to spur domestic car sales by offering up to $ 4,500 in vouchers for buyers to trade in their less fuel-efficient vehicles for ones that get better mileage , known as `` cash for clunkers '' . 
The White House declined to directly address adding in extra provisions , but said officials continue to work with lawmakers `` about the core priorities in the legislation and hope that it can get to the president soon . '' 
When the House and Senate originally approved their separate versions of the war bill , the White House praised lawmakers for not inserting their own pet projects in the legislation -- though some pet priorities were included . 
Democratic Representative John Murtha , who heads the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee , managed to get $ 3.1 billion for eight C-17 and 11 C-130 military transport planes included . 
However , that has been pared back by four C-130s . 
The Pentagon did not request the aircraft but lawmakers want them to preserve jobs in their home states and Murtha disputes the military 's contention that they are not needed . 
A senior Democratic House aide said the requests for flu and Pakistan money were appropriate to include in the bill because they were emergency needs Obama cited . 
The aide also noted that Republicans in the past backed items like the IMF funds . 
`` This is a dangerous game Republicans are playing by jeopardizing the well-being of our soldiers to score political points , '' the aide said . 
`` The supplemental will be passed , but they will have to answer for their actions if they oppose it . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Eric Walsh -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
