A nice number 4.25 , seems to sit easy on the eye , or should do except its 4:25 a.m. and the numbers are from my digital clock . 
As Reuters chief photographer in Asia , I have a lot on my mind . 
The threat of conflict on the Korean peninsula after Pyongyang s nuclear tests , fighting in Pakistan and Afghanistan , floods in India and Bangladesh , a bogus trial of Suu Kyi in Myanmar , crashing economies , H1N1 , claims and counter-claims of corruption and racism , insecurity in Nepal and Sri Lanka , global warming , the risk of unrest in Tibet and of course , China , where just about anything can happen at any time . 
With the decline of the traditional news market , however , I sometimes wonder who still cares about news pictures and why should they be paid for . 
How can you put a value to a news picture ? 
You can t eat it . 
A picture doesn t move financial markets , so you can t make money from it like you can on a news story . 
We hear the news through word of mouth , on the radio or even on the television . 
Most pictures have a lifespan of no more than 24 hours anyway , and everyone can take them these days -LRB- or so they think -RRB- . 
Simple answer : when it comes to integrity , honesty and trust , seeing is believing . 
It is rarely understood that people are smart and should be left to come to their own conclusions . 
A still picture shot by a Reuters news photographer gives the viewer time to see the truth . 
Take as an example when Sri Lanka declared that it had beaten the Tamil Tigers and a quarter-century war was over . 
A counter claim was made : No its not , we are fighting on , said the Tamil Tigers . 
The government said that rebel leader Vellupillai Prabhakaran was dead . 
Oh no he s not , countered the Tamil Tigers . 
A day later Reuters News Pictures get exclusive pictures of Prabhakaran s corpse being carried through a crowd of government soldiers . 
A close-up image of his face told the indisputable truth Prabhakaran is dead . 
A colleague , who works in the financial news section of Reuters and was born in Sri Lanka wanted to study the picture for quite some time . 
His response after a few minutes of close scrutiny was Oh my God ! 
It s really him . 
That man has impacted my life for over 20 years and now he is dead . 
No-one can ever tell my colleague different , it s a fact . 
The story in a news picture taken by a Reuters photographer is irrefutable , unbiased and will form part of history for others to believe in too . 
This truth , like integrity , can not be bought but has to be earned and then maintained at all costs once lost it can never be replaced . 
My fear , at 4.25 am , is that not enough people value this precious commodity maybe I should get back to sleep and not worry . 
The Reuters Financial colleague who got ` awe struck ' by the picture can not be an official endorser , as the article implies , since even most journalists have not met Prabhakaran in real life . 
However , since this is the first time an `` open-wound '' picture was published it generates more questions . 
- The real Prabhakaran have thick straight hair with no receding hairline -LRB- refer to recent hat-less pictures -RRB- . 
The picture implies him having curls and a receding hairline around forehead - The picture implies that the corpse is clean shaven - There are no trauma in the face from the fatal attack and that could imply that the wound was caused by a post-death -LRB- using a machete -RRB- act . 
Also there are no blood stains beyond and aorund the wound . 
Was someone kind enough to clean him up and shave before photographers arrived ? 
I understand these are theories that 'll go unanswered , unless the real man himself declare his demise or comes alive one day . 
Major Newspapers , magazines , websites , and many government agencies have proclaimed about Mr. Prabhakaran ! 
s death by massive ways . 
Till today , some political bodies says that He is alive . 
When all well known news , media net work team are not able to say correctly , what happened to him , whether he is alive or died by shooting , or suicide . 
I think that , in one day or other , we will come to know about his history . 
I have a habit of seeing these Photographers-Blog Ar , then i came to arrive lot of proper conclusions of happenings in and around the world . 
These above photos are very touchy and appreciable . 
Thanks for publishing of these updates . 
Who sees , view of these photos are debatable topic . 
As far as i am concerned , i used to see all natural , technical , innovative products , historical monuments , and any latest taken photos from all media networks . 
Yesterday , night , i discussed about world Top 25 cities photos with my wife and with my known friends . 
All your pictures are worth to see , worth to comment and worth to save for further brainy works . 
There was a lot of doubt earlier when loads of media networks started reporting that the terrorist leader was dead . 
Most people said that he was not dead & that the violance which shook the country will still continue even after the war . 
However after looking back a long time after the war it is evidant that it is over for good & that the terrorist leader is dead . 
I guess this pictures would really be the evidence for the future to show the end of horrors . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
