Fed 's Expanded Market Role Fuels Fierce Debate The Federal Reserve has used unconventional , aggressive means during the crisis . 
-LRB- By Jay Mallin -- Bloomberg News -RRB- For 95 years , the Federal Reserve has been the nation 's lender of last resort . 
Now it 's becoming the lender of first resort . 
Since the onset of the financial crisis , the Fed has used new , unconventional programs to indirectly make hundreds of billions of dollars available to people buying a house or a car or using a credit card , and to businesses large and small . 
The central bank , for instance , has pledged to make half a trillion dollars available for mortgages by buying packages of loans known as mortgage-backed securities . 
To Fed Chairman Ben S. Bernanke and the economists who embrace his strategy , the central bank is using creative approaches to try to contain the worst financial crisis in generations , exercising its authority to restart lending in a world in which private markets have all but shut down . 
Central banks around the world are starting to mimic the approach . 
But the Fed is also now deciding how vast amounts of capital are deployed in the economy . 
Its actions so far have favored home buyers and consumers while doing much less prop up lending for businesses seeking to make long-term investments . 
Even analysts who support the Fed 's actions say they have distorted investment decisions and emboldened elected officials to pressure the central bank in ways that undermine its independence . 
`` The Fed is socializing the capital markets , '' said Ethan Harris , an economist at Barclays Capital , who nonetheless said he believes the Fed 's steps have been necessary . 
`` You 're creating a new class of welfare recipients . 
That 's why it 's extremely important that there be rules around transparency and lobbying , because the potential for abuse is high . 
And they have to exit out of this as quickly as markets allow them to . '' 
Deciding how to allocate capital is one of the most important functions in the economy . 
In modern capitalist societies , it happens as investors and lenders try to find businesses and loans that offer the highest possible returns relative to their risks . 
These markets make mistakes sometimes -- take , for example , the vast overinvestment in housing in the middle of this decade . 
But they have generally proven better at deploying capital toward useful purposes than any other system . 
The fall of the Soviet Union had a lot to do with the government 's failure to deploy capital efficiently , as did the economic stagnation of post-World War II Britain , when the government played an outsize role in business investment decisions . 
The U.S. government is nowhere near taking such a massive role . 
In the view of Bernanke and his allies , private markets are failing to do their job , so policymakers are essentially propping them up until they repair themselves . 
For centuries , central banks have bolstered banks during financial crises , these policymakers argue , adding that in an era when banks account for only a modest portion of all lending , it makes sense for the Fed to update its role as the lender of last resort . 
Critics , however , point out that the government is now deciding to help certain sectors and firms but not others . 
Stanford economist John B. Taylor , in a recent paper , argued that the Fed 's strategy amounts to a form of `` industrial policy . '' 
`` If we are to have an extensive industrial policy , it should be approved by the Congress with the purposes stated and debated transparently , '' Taylor wrote in the paper , presented at the American Economic Association 's annual meeting . 
`` Will such interventions only take place in recessions , or will Fed officials use them in the future to try to make economic expansions stronger or to assist certain sectors and industries for other reasons ? '' 
`` The Fed has sacrificed its independence , and I think it 's a disaster , '' said Allan H. Meltzer , an economist at Carnegie Mellon University and a leading historian of the central bank . 
`` It is creating a system of credit allocation , and if the government is going to do that , it should be done through fiscal policy , not as part of monetary policy . '' 
Other economists vehemently disagree . 
The Fed 's independence would be far more threatened if it were to stand by while the economy entered the worst downturn in 80 years , they argue . 
Moreover , the Fed is pushing more money into broad categories of lending , not deciding exactly how much cash goes to individual industries , let alone companies or individuals . 
