BENGHAZI , Libya | Thu Aug 4 , 2011 3:51 pm EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - `` The rebels '' is a handy phrase -- but in reality there are about 40 different rebel groups and freelance militias fighting to end the long reign of Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi , and it shows . 
Some fight Gaddafi 's troops on the front line while others handle security in rebel-held cities . 
And , in a country flooded with weapons , some gunmen are simply helping themselves to whatever they want , members of the armed opposition say . 
The still unexplained killing of top rebel commander General Abdul Fattah Younes last week raised doubts about the loyalty to the rebel cause of some fighters . 
Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Islam has done his best to exploit differences within the opposition , telling the New York Times he had made contact with Islamists among the rebels , and that a government-Islamist alliance would be announced within days . 
He said he had been in contact with an Islamist rebel leader , Ali Sallabi -- who was quoted by the New York Times as acknowledging the contacts but as saying he remained allied with the liberal rebels trying to oust Gaddafi . 
`` Now the brigades and armed groups are too many . 
Every neighborhood has one , '' said rebel fighter Yasser . 
`` Some people use the weapons for crime and theft . '' 
`` Everyone knows how to use a gun , '' he said . 
`` The Libyans are an armed people . 
Even my mother knows guns . '' 
Yasser 's brigade is officially recognized by the higher rebel authorities . 
It was raised in Benghazi by a handful of young men who took up guns to protect the neighborhood against Gaddafi forces and criminals , and now numbers over 100 fighters . 
As the civil war enters its sixth month , armed groups roam the streets in the rebel stronghold , raising fears of creeping lawlessness . 
They drive around in pickups , firing their assault rifles into the air . 
It is not always clear to which group they belong or whether it is approved by the National Transitional Council , recognized by some Western powers as Libya 's legitimate government . 
`` In my neighborhood there are groups who guard the area , they are not officially organised , but they have guns , '' said a rebel official . 
`` Anybody can go to the front and fight . 
It is easy to get a gun . 
If I take my AK-47 and want to fight on the front line , no one can stop me . '' 
Benghazi resident Essa , a steel worker before the war , proudly shows a video of 7 rocket-propelled grenade launchers made in his workshop from army weapons parts . 
The RPGs were used against Gaddafi 's troops on the western front in Misrata . 
Others put their military loot to questionable use . 
Dull explosions echo round Benghazi harbor as fishermen detonate explosives in the sea for a quick catch . 
U.S. officials say they are worried about reports that al Qaeda may already be smuggling arms and explosives out of Libya . 
A United Nations official draws a parallel with the mayhem in Iraq after the 2003 U.S. invasion and the fall of Saddam . 
`` We kept telling them in Iraq that they have to secure the -LRB- weapons -RRB- stores , but no one listened , '' he said . 
`` Next we would see these weapons being smuggled across the border to Iran . '' 
The Mahdi Army of anti-American Shi'ite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr started as a neighborhood protection force , but grew quickly in strength and was later blamed for much of the 2006-07 sectarian slaughter that drove Iraq to the brink of civil war . 
The killing of Younes has raised similar concerns here . 
Some rebel sources say it was the work of Islamist militiamen in the rebel ranks , and exposed the opposition to the risk of a split that could spark a tribal feud . 
Armed groups such as Obaida Ibn Jarrah and Okbah Ibn Nafih brigades have been named as possible perpetrators . 
Both are named after companions of the Prophet Mohammad . 
Some say Gaddafi loyalists were obviously behind the killing of Younes , who defected after holding top government posts for 40 years -- including that of interior minister , which would have put him at odds with Islamist opponents of Gaddafi . 
Younes 's tribe has sworn to get justice itself if the rebel leaders fail to investigate his death and catch his killers . 
His death was followed by a prison break by some 300 Gaddafi loyalists and a battle between rebels and the militia who helped the prisoners to escape in the center of Benghazi . 
The militiamen belong to a group called Nedaa Libya , or Libya 's Call , which is not an official force under rebel authority . 
Fighters in Benghazi who know them never thought they might be Gaddafi loyalists until the prison break . 
`` We heard about them before but did n't know they were fifth columnists , '' said Faraj al-Sharif , a rebel fighter from the Martyrs of February 17th brigade . 
He estimates their number at 1,000 fighters , many of them still at large . 
`` Every time we ask them to surrender , they stop for a while then they start firing at us and shout Allah , Muammar , Libya and that 's all , '' he said . 
Benghazi residents now talk of Gaddafi `` sleeper cells '' in guerrilla ranks and mistrust is spreading among the locals , who treat everyone with suspicion . 
Rebel leader Mustafa Abdul-Jalil , trying to soothe public anger and avert a feud , urged militias to lay down their arms or come under the orders of the Defense or Interior ministries . 
It remains unclear how he can follow up such exhortations . 
-LRB- Editing by Douglas Hamilton and Tim Pearce -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
