\* EPA cuts cellulosic ethanol target for second year \* Cellulosic ethanol costs much more than corn-based fuel \* Study says price-viable cellulosic ethanol years away -LRB- Recasts , adds more details about cellulosic ethanol -RRB- By Timothy Gardner and Tom Doggett WASHINGTON , June 21 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The dream of making a green motor fuel from switchgrass or wood chips got kicked down the road for a few more years after the U.S. government on Tuesday slashed its proposed mandate for next-generation biofuels . 
For the second year in a row , the Environmental Protection Agency cut the amount of cellulosic ethanol that must be mixed into motor fuel . 
Next year , only 3.45 million to 12.9 million gallons of cellulosic biofuel will have to be mixed into the country 's gasoline pool by fuel blenders , far below the original goal of 500 million gallons . 
EPA slashed the target for this year to 6 million gallons from the 250 million gallons required in the renewable fuels standard Congress passed in 2005 . 
Cellulosic ethanol is made from grasses , wood chips and agricultural waste , which environmentalists and consumer groups say is better than using a food crop such as corn to make the fuel . 
Cellulosic has been envisioned as a key part of boosting the amount of renewable fuels used in the United States . 
Congress had mandated that 36 billion gallons of biofuels should be used in the United States by 2022 . 
Congress has mandated corn ethanol would top out at 15 billion gallons by 2015 , and that is on track . 
The EPA on Tuesday proposed increasing the use of corn-based ethanol to 13.2 billion gallons next year , matching what Congress required . 
But cellulosic is supposed to keep growing every year until it reaches 16 billion gallons by 2022 . 
So far it has failed to live up to expectations . 
The revised mandate could affect companies working to develop cellulosic including Solazyme -LRB- SZYM . 
O -RRB- , CleanTech Biofuels CLTH . 
PK , Coskata Inc , and KiOR Inc , which recently filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to go public . 
The main problem is the cost of producing cellulosic is still high and it may be years before that can brought down to compete with corn-based ethanol . 
Second-generation biofuel producers must rely on expensive enzymes . 
So the ethanol industry must depend largely on the corn crop , fueling criticism the business is driving up food prices worldwide . 
`` They 've been looking for the magic formula for a cheap enzyme that will break down the cellulose but they 're still far from it , '' said Rick Kment , an ethanol analyst at Telvent DTN . 
Enzymes used to make cellulosic can cost up to $ 2 per gallon . 
When the costs of building and maintaining biorefineries , labor , and transportation are added to the enzyme costs , cellulosic is far more expensive than gasoline . 
In addition , the available amount of research and development money for advanced biofuels has fallen . 
A new study this month concluded there is an 11-year gap between wood-based biofuels production and its commercial viability . 
`` Major technical hurdles will likely disrupt commercialization for most of the technologies under development , '' said Bruce Schiamberg of the Schiamberg Group , the co-author of the study . 
But the EPA was hopeful . 
`` The agency remains optimistic that the commercial availability of cellulosic biofuel will continue to grow in the years ahead , '' EPA said . 
About 11 percent of all motor fuel used in 2012 will come from biofuels , up sharply from about 8 percent this year , the EPA said . 
With ethanol output this year expected to total 13.5 billion gallons , ethanol producers already exceed the 2012 target of 13.2 billion gallons . 
This year 's corn-based ethanol use target is 12.6 billion gallons . 
U.S. senators voted overwhelmingly last week for an amendment to end the support payments and the tariff wall that protects the ethanol sector . 
The amendment is far from coming law , however . 
The EPA will take public comment on its proposal through Aug. 11 , and then finalize the renewable fuel standard in November . 
