Analysis : Assad offers no sign of easing grip over Syria A supporter wears a T-shirt with a picture of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in al-Umawiin square in Damascus June 21 , 2011 , as several large government rallies take place across the country to support him . 
BEIRUT | Tue Jun 21 , 2011 12:20 pm EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian President Bashar al-Assad 's pledges of political reform offer little sign that he is prepared to ease his family 's four-decade grip on power and deliver Syria from its most serious crisis in decades . 
Breaking a two-month silence on Monday to tackle the wave of protests against his rule , Assad promised new laws on political parties and elections and a review of the constitution which enshrines the ruling Baath Party at the center of politics . 
But his speech was met with a chorus of angry disappointment from world leaders and activists , who said it was too little , too late , and too vague . 
Criticism predictably poured in from Washington and the European Union , which had already imposed sanctions on Assad and his top officials in response to a military crackdown in which rights groups say 1,300 civilians have been killed . 
Even neighboring Turkey , which has cultivated close ties with Assad , indicated it was losing patience after repeatedly urging him to implement swift and decisive reform . 
`` Assad should clearly and precisely say : ` Everything has changed . 
We 're transforming the system into a multi-party one , '' President Abdullah Gul said . 
A Syrian activist group dismissed Assad 's speech as `` a repetition of unrealized promises -LRB- and -RRB- veiled threats '' which failed to address the crisis in Syria or the aspirations of tens of thousands still demonstrating in defiance of the crackdown . 
While accepting that Syria faced a grave crisis and acknowledging criticism over the slow pace of change , Assad repeated themes of his two previous speeches in March and April -- that the country faced a foreign conspiracy and that the violence was the fault of criminals and religious extremists . 
He made no mention of any role security forces played in the bloodshed and sought to distinguish between people with rightful demands and `` saboteurs '' he said were behind unrest . 
`` He did not give any indication on the core issue that he is willing to facilitate a genuine transition away from the continued monopoly on power of his family and the ruling Baath Party , '' said analyst Julien Barnes-Dacey of Control Risks . 
`` He is following the failed path of the other regional leaders by seeking to delegitimize the opposition while simultaneously resorting to a harsh security crackdown . '' 
A Damascus-based analyst , who declined to be named because of the sensitivity of the issue in Syria , said Assad had missed another opportunity to stake out a credible way forward . 
`` He failed to address the two fundamental issues that have come to shape the crisis in the eyes of many Syrians , namely the dismal behavior of the security services and his own lack of decisive leadership , '' he said . 
Assad said more than 100 people `` from different sections of society '' would be invited within days to consultative meetings to discuss the framework of a national dialogue promised by the government more than a month ago . 
Opposition figures have yet to formulate a response to any invitation to join the meetings , but several have said that no dialogue can succeed while the security crackdown continues and thousands of political detainees remain in jail . 
Even were they to attend , it is not clear what impact that would have on street protests which initially called for greater freedom but which for weeks now have demanded Assad 's overthrow . 
`` It is hard to see a simple pathway to implementing this reform program , '' said Ayham Kamel , an analyst at Eurasia Group . 
`` Military force will still be utilised to confront at least part of the opposition . 
This would make it hard for many opposition figures to enter a negotiation process with the regime or join the national dialogue committee . '' 
Kamel said the speech was likely to polarize Syrian society , with Assad loyalists seeing it as proof that the president was ready for tangible concessions , while opponents dismiss it as inconsequential . 
Those tensions were visible in several Syrian cities on Tuesday , as tens of thousands of Assad supporters rallied in cities across the country , leading to clashes with protesters in which activists said security forces shot dead seven people . 
`` There are fractures that run through Syrian society , and the regime is seeking to play on those to cement its hold on power , '' Barnes-Dacey said . 
`` If this conflict becomes militarized there is a real prospect of some form of civil war . '' 
He said that while security forces could help Assad maintain his grip in the short term , the deadlock with protesters and the deteriorating economy -- hit by a collapse in tourism and a likely halt in foreign investment -- meant his prospects over the coming months and years were less certain . 
Assad himself acknowledged that the most dangerous prospect was `` the weakness or collapse of the Syrian economy , '' urging people to work together to `` restore confidence '' in the economy . 
`` The economics as much as the politics mean it will be very hard for Assad to survive , '' Barnes-Dacy said . 
One activist said he hoped for a more immediate result , noting that Assad had now made three speeches since the protests broke out -- the same number as the Tunisian and Egyptian leaders before they were ousted . 
`` Just as Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and Hosni Mubarak fell after the third speech we are hopeful this will be the speech that will bring his downfall , '' said Abdullah Aba Zaid , a civic leader from the southern city of Deraa where the uprising erupted in March . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
