As the environmental catastrophe in the Gulf continues , beleaguered international oil firm BP is beefing up its communications apparatus and turning to some of Washington 's best known lobbyists and public relations pros . 
The latest addition : the bipartisan corporate communications firm of Purple Strategies . 
Helmed by former Bush strategist Alex Castellanos and Democratic media consultant Steve McMahon -LRB- whom some may recall from his days cutting ads for former Vermont governor Howard Dean -RRB- , the company is behind BP CEO Tony Hayward 's Thursday advertisement seeking to repair the company 's image -- and his own -- according to a report in CNN , where Castellanos is also an on-air contributor . 
BP approached Purple Strategies last week about taking on the work , ABC reports . 
Hayward calls the spill a `` a tragedy that should never have happened '' and apologizes to those affected by it in the Gulf region in the ad -LRB- above -RRB- . 
`` I 'm deeply sorry , '' he says and promises , `` We will make this right . '' 
Other Purple Strategies clients have included PhRMA and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce . 
Also handling public relations for BP in Washington is its long-time firm the Brunswick Group , whose District office is helmed by Hilary Rosen , another CNN contributor . 
The Feehery Group , led by John Feehery -- who was for six years chief spokesman for Speaker of the House J. Dennis Hastert -LRB- R-Ill . -RRB- 
and now appears often on CNN -- is also doing work for BP , CNN said . 
BP 's new head of U.S. media relations has political ties , as well ; Anne Womack-Kolton , the 2004 campaign press secretary for Vice President Dick Cheney , stepped into the post Tuesday from her position as a director at Brunswick Group . 
As previously reported by The Post , lobbyists doing work for BP include `` a Who 's Who of the profession , from Democratic powerhouse Tony Podesta to former Reagan aide Kenneth Duberstein . '' 
By Garance Franke-Ruta | June 4 , 2010 ; 11:06 AM ET Where is the outrage ? 
The outrage is directed at the President of the United States from people who do n't like him no matter what he says or does . 
The outrage from day one has been towards President Obama even when most Americans know that this had nothing to do with the President . 
People immediately gave cover to BP and they continue to do so by continuing to vilify President Obama and making this all about Obama . 
The media is guilty by perpetuating the outrage against the President . 
Is n't it interesting that people have been vilifying President Obama because of his outrage that BP is spending millions with commercials talking about how great BP is ? 
Read the comments from people blaming the President and vilifying everything he says or does regarding the oil spill . 
Notice what is missing ? 
Nothing being said about BP and what they have done or have n't done . 
Yep , where exactly is the outrage ? 
That BP , to save costs , as keeping the rig any longer in its present location was over budget , has potentially destroyed the livlyhoods of thousands of people . 
That because the project was already weeks beyond schedule , and was threatening the completion of another drilling project before hurricane season , BP inadvertantly destroyed much of the wildlife in the Gulf of Mexico and possibly beyond . 
None of this has anything to do with the quality of the people in charge at BP , nor does it accurately reflect the value that BP truly represents to humankind . 
BP must hire these people to help the public to see this sometimes not so obvious truth . 
I hope these PR people rot in hell . 
Even with a Democratic administration bug business wins and Main Street gets screwed . 
We are as corrupt a country as Russia and China . 
