FILE - In this June 1 , 2010 file photo , workers collect oil that washed ashore from last month 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion on Fourchon Beach Port Fourchon , La. . 
Few studies have examined long-term health effects of oil exposure . 
But some of the workers trolling Gulf Coast beaches and heading out into the marshes and waters have complained about flu-like symptoms _ a similar complaint among crews deployed for the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Patrick Semansky , File -RRB- -LRB- Patrick Semansky - AP -RRB- Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Friday , June 4 , 2010 ; 1:00 PM Synte Peacock : Hi , this is Synte Peacock from the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder , Colo. . 
I 'm one of the three collaborators on the computer simulations . 
It explains many of the details of what we have done . 
How bad can this get ? 
: In a worst-case scenario , how bad can this oil gush get ? 
What will happen if BP can NEVER get this fixed completely ? 
Oil keeps coming up . 
Currents move the water . 
Oil covers all of the Gulf and then moves up the East Coast . 
Then the currents take the oil to other continents . 
Eventually our entire ecosystem is ruined , starting with all the oceans of the world . 
People die because of a ruined ecosystem . 
Is this possible , or have I just read too many science fiction books ? 
Synte Peacock : How bad it will get will depend on the total amount of oil released . 
It 's unclear now how much this will be . 
Our results are formulated not to depend on this number . 
Instead , we report results in terms of a dilution factor . 
-LRB- see the NCAR URL for details : Ocean currents likely to carry oil along Atlantic coast -LRB- UCAR -RRB- -RRB- Worried about the Keys : I have gone to the Florida Keys many times with my family , from here in the D.C. area . 
We tow our small center-console boat down and enjoy boating , fishing , and scuba diving , keeping the boat docked at our hotel . 
I love the Keys . 
As you can imagine , I am now feeling very worried , sad , and anxious about what may happen to all the people down there , the reefs , and the fish , even though they are okay so far . 
How likely is it that the BP oil spill will damage this fun , beautiful , but delicate area , which includes the nation 's only underwater national park and a lot of protected coral reefs ? 
I know you do n't have a crystal ball but I do n't have any sense of the probabilities at this point . 
Synte Peacock : If and when the oil gets caught in the Loop Current , and fed to the Florida Current , it is possible that the Keys will be affected . 
But the impact on reefs and fish and coastlines will depend both on local winds and ocean currents -LRB- that we ca n't predict more than a few days into the future -- as others are trying to do -RRB- and of course on the total amount of oil released . 
Fairfax , Va. : People were saying on the news that some reports said the spill could reach Europe . 
How long would that take ? 
Florida coast : I have vacation plans on the Panhandle in two weeks -- do you think I should cancel\/resked ? 
Washington , D.C. : Over time , will the damage the oil causes reduce itself ? 
In other words , will the oil become less dense , less thick and even out and not be such a danger to wildlife and the environment ? 
Have you seen the pictures of pelicans this morning ? 
It 's really disturbing . 
Synte Peacock : Our understanding that there will be significant dilution of the oil as time goes by , and this undoubtedly will help . 
How long it will take until the oil concentrations cease to be a danger to wildlife is something we do have an answer to at the moment . 
Arlington , Va. : The conservative take on the spill has been that the sun and the surf will break down the oil fairly quickly and this wo n't be a problem in a few months -- is that really the case ? 
Synte Peacock : What we 've shown with our simulations is that the currents can potentially move the oil very fast very fast , even out into the interior Atlantic within a few months . 
So if it does n't break down on this timescale , there could be widespread impacts . 
It would really help to have firm numbers on the timescale over which this oil can break down , but we do n't know that . 
Washington , D.C. : I do n't know if this is your area but let me ask . 
What 's keeping the oil coming ? 
Is there any chance it will stop on its own ? 
Where is all the pressure coming from ? 
And does n't the fact that it 's so far down in the ocean floor with so much water above pressing down , I ca n't imagine how much force the gushing has . 
Can you enlighten us ? 
Synte Peacock : This is a question for geologists . 
But you are right , it is internal pressures that are keeping it flowing . 
Washington , D.C. : Will the oil eventually rinse out of the water ? 
When you say `` over time , '' how much time would it take ? 
Crimping : Earlier this week , I think it was Bill Nye who mentioned that crimping and bending was n't a viable option . 
The metal pipe is too brittle and would crack into pieces rather than crimp together . 
Synte Peacock : Thanks very much ! 
Washington , D.C. : By rinse , I mean become diluted and therefore less harmful , poisonous . 
Synte Peacock : Yes , with time the oil will become more diluted . 
We have modeled the effects of dilution due to ocean currents and stirring , and our simulations show that the oil becomes significantly more diluted as it is transported further from the source . 
By the time the oil reaches the interior Atlantic in our simulations , we estimate that it will be roughly 2000 more dilute than it is at the source . 
Annandale , Va. : Can you explain how the tides affect the flow of oil ? 
Is the gulf pretty calm ? 
Is most of the oil staying there ? 
How much of a threat is there that it will spread worldwide or at least way beyond the Gulf ? 
Synte Peacock : We find that it is very likely that on a timescale of months -LRB- not years -RRB- , the oil will spread far beyond the Gulf . 
Note that it is likely to be much more dilute than it is at the spill site by the time it reaches the Atlantic . 
We have avoided trying to model near-shore processes such as tides and local winds because we do n't know what the winds will be weeks to months from now . 
San Diego , Calif. : They say they are now siphoning oil into tankers . 
How much will this impact the containment of the oil ? 
Or is this just a thumb in the `` Dutchman 's dike wall '' ? 
Synte Peacock : The more that is siphoned , the less will enter the Atlantic , and the less that has to be contained from hitting the coast . 
Bel Air , Md. : Can you basically explain the Loop Current in simple terms and how it will affect the spread of the oil spill ? 
Synte Peacock : Yes ! 
The Loop Current is part of the persistent ocean Western boundary current system -LRB- which includes the Gulf Stream -RRB- . 
But the Loop Current is unique because there is no coast between Yucatan and Florida , and so it forms a clockwise loop which protrudes into the Gulf . 
The Loop Current is quite chaotic and unpredictable . 
For example , sometimes it extends all the way up to Louisiana , sometimes it hovers far to the south , sometimes it pinches off a `` Loop eddy '' which travels west , and then grows again . 
McLean , Va : Could this impact the normal function of plate techtonics ? 
Silver Spring , Md. : Does your model take into account temperature fluctuations with depth and over the vast topography of the Gulf ? 
Do you consider the changing current patterns that will come as a result of changing seasons and temperatures ? 
Did you use the accepted macro and micro currents mapped by NOAA , or did you make generalizations ? 
Synte Peacock : Yes , our model has temperatures what vary with depth . 
We used an ocean model , and it was forced with `` typical '' weather conditions -LRB- no-one knows what the actual weather will be over the coming months -RRB- . 
We did n't use any previous assumptions about currents from NOAA or anyone else ; the model computes what the currents will be based on the physics , and on what the atmosphere is doing . 
Park Ridge , N.J. : Do you expect the oil to travel up the east coast ? 
If so , how far up the eastern seaboard could it reach ? 
Synte Peacock : I 'm going to have to sign out now . 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . 
To Refresh Page : Press the F5 key on your keyboard or click here . 
: Christless Christianity Guest : Dr. Michael S. Horton Viewpoint is a paid discussion . 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
