LONDON -- As BP shares take a pounding and oil continues to spew into the Gulf of Mexico , Britons are starting to see the crisis not only as a disaster off America 's shores , but also one with reverberations here . 
For those about to retire , the leaking pipeline may mean leaking wallets . 
Thousands of Britons are invested in the British oil giant through pension funds -- analysts estimate that about 1 pound in every 7 pounds paid in dividends to British pension funds comes from BP . 
Investors are eager for the crisis to be resolved . 
BP is a major player on the FTSE 100 , London 's main stock index , meaning that blows to its share price have significant effects on portfolios designed to track the index 's performance , such as certain pension funds and insurance policies . 
The National Association of Pension Funds estimates that BP shares represent 1.5 percent of the total assets of pension funds in the United Kingdom . 
Alan Smith , chief executive of Capital Asset Management , a London-based financial planning firm , said that `` pretty much every pension fund in the country owns BP shares , '' but up until recently , `` people looked at this as an environmental disaster rather than a man-on-the-street disaster . 
But now they are starting to think , ` This might affect me more than I think . ' '' 
Smith estimated that if BP were to lose half its market value , a Briton about to retire could reasonably expect a decline of up to 3 percent in annual pension payments . 
`` Those considering retirement in the next six months might be disappointed people when they realize the final amount of their retirement is less than hoped , '' he said . 
On Thursday , credit-rating agencies Fitch Ratings and Moody 's downgraded BP 's debt and said further downgrades could follow . 
Since the Deepwater Horizon oil well explosion , the company 's shares have fallen more than 30 percent . 
BP 's financial woes are also troubling for the British government , which is grappling with a ballooning deficit and could use a healthy tax return from the company to help replenish the public coffers . 
In a statement , BP said that last year it paid corporate income taxes of $ 6.3 billion , $ 1.1 billion of which went to Britain . 
In addition , the company said it expects to pay about $ 4 billion in 2009 production taxes globally , $ 200 million of which will go to Britain . 
While BP faces an uphill battle globally to restore its reputation during one of the worst environmental disasters in history , the climb seems less steep here , where the company is headquartered , is a flagship of the economy and has worked hard in the past decade to drive home an image of a green-friendly company . 
`` BP is a great British company , for long a byword for good management and successful performance on an international scale , '' the Express newspaper said in an editorial . 
`` It is depressing to see its name become synonymous with environmental disaster , at least for the foreseeable future . '' 
The Daily Mail said President Obama 's rebukes to BP resemble `` a judge who , having sentenced a penitent offender , demands again and again that he be brought up from the cells to receive another dressing down for the same crime . '' 
David Buik , an analyst at BGC Partners in London , said BP 's reputation in Britain had not plunged to the depths it has in the United States . 
`` No one blinks at the gas station when filling up -- BP , Shell , it does n't matter , '' he said . 
Shareholders , he said , had confidence in chief executive Tony Hayward 's management . 
`` To say the BP management is not doing all it can is not fair -- maybe it 's not enough , but they seem to be doing everything they can , '' Buik said . 
BP employs about 80,000 people worldwide , with slightly more than 10,000 in Britain . 
The employees in Britain are `` shocked and horrified , just like everyone else '' by the disaster , though few are taking seriously the swirling rumors of a takeover or breakup , Buik said . '' 
