Vice-president accused of backing torture Claims on BBC by former insider add to Bush 's woes Vice-president Dick Cheney 's burden on the Bush administration grew heavier yesterday after a former senior US state department official said he could be guilty of a war crime over the abuse of prisoners . 
Lawrence Wilkerson , who served as chief of staff to secretary of state Colin Powell from 2002 to 2005 , singled out Mr Cheney in a wide-ranging political assault on the BBC 's Today program . 
Mr Wilkerson said that in an internal administration debate over whether to abide by the Geneva conventions in the treatment of detainees , Mr Cheney led the argument `` that essentially wanted to do away with all restrictions '' . 
Asked whether the vice-president was guilty of a war crime , Mr Wilkerson replied : `` Well , that 's an interesting question - it was certainly a domestic crime to advocate terror and I would suspect that it is ... an international crime as well . '' 
In the context of other remarks it appeared he was using the word `` terror '' to apply to the systematic abuse of prisoners . 
The Washington Post last month called Mr Cheney the `` vice-president for torture '' for his demand that the CIA be exempted from a ban on `` cruel , inhuman and degrading '' treatment of detainees . 
Mr Wilkerson , a former army colonel , also said he had seen increasing evidence that the White House had manipulated pre-war intelligence on Iraq to make its case for the invasion . 
He said : `` You begin to wonder was this intelligence spun ? 
Did , in fact , the American people get fooled ? 
I am beginning to have my concerns . '' 
Mr Cheney has been under fire for his role in assembling evidence of weapons of mass destruction . 
Mr Wilkerson told the Associated Press that the vice-president must have sincerely believed Iraq could be a spawning ground for terrorism because `` otherwise I have to declare him a moron , an idiot or a nefarious bastard '' . 
Such charges have kept the Bush administration on the defensive for several months . 
Mr Bush yesterday repeated his earlier assertion that the US `` does not torture and that 's important for people around the world to realize '' . 
He is also due to make the first of a series of speeches today , outlining his plan to defeat the insurgency and pave the way for US withdrawal . 
The White House will also publish a declassified version of its war plan . 
But it has now emerged that two justice department memos listing permissible interrogation methods have been kept secret by the White House , even from the Senate intelligence committee . 
The New Yorker recently quoted a source who had seen a memo as calling it `` breathtaking '' . 
`` The document dismissed virtually all national and international laws regulating the treatment of prisoners , including war crimes and assault statutes , and it was radical in its view that in wartime the president can fight enemies by whatever means he sees fit , '' the magazine reported . 
One technique allegedly used by the CIA in questioning suspects is `` waterboarding '' -LRB- strapping a detainee to a board and submerging it until the prisoner believes he or she is drowning -RRB- . 
The White House is accused of defining `` torture '' so narrowly as to exclude such methods . 
But James Ross , a legal expert at Human Rights Watch said such a narrow definition was at odds with international norms . 
`` Waterboarding is clearly a form of torture . 
It has been used since the Inquisition . 
It was a well-known torture technique in Latin America , '' Mr Ross said . 
Human Rights Watch this year called for a special counsel to investigate any US officials - no matter their rank or position - who took part in , `` ordered , or had command responsibility for war crimes or torture , or other prohibited ill-treatment against detainees in US custody '' . 
The report focused on the defense secretary , Donald Rumsfeld , for his alleged command responsibility for abuses at Abu Ghraib , but Mr Wilkerson argued Mr Cheney was ultimately responsible . 
The US is a signatory to the 1984 UN Convention Against Torture , which bans inflicting `` severe pain or suffering , whether physical or mental '' . 
Such practices are also a crime under US federal law . 
