Seb Beloe examines whether investors could have predicted BP 's latest oil disaster A protester shouts slogans during a demonstration in front of a BP petrol station in Los Angeles . 
Photograph : Gabriel Bouys\/AFP\/Getty Images Who would have thought when the original accident happened on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig on the 20th April 2010 that the oil spill would still be in full spate over a month later ? 
We would n't have counted ourselves in that group , but nonetheless have for many years been unconvinced as to BP 's ability to manage environmental , health and safety issues effectively . 
Henderson 's retail Sustainable and Responsible Investment -LRB- SRI -RRB- funds sold out of BP shares in 2003 on the basis of our views about the company 's ability to deliver strong environmental , health and safety -LRB- EHS -RRB- performance across the business . 
We were concerned about performance in some of the company 's businesses - for example in January 2002 the company was fined # 1 million following a prosecution by the Health and Safety Executive at its Grangemouth refinery in the UK . 
In Alaska too , a 2001 review found a serious backlog of safety-critical maintenance , followed by an outbreak of ` whistleblowing ' by concerned employees , including testimony to Congress in March 2002 . 
These events , while remarkable -LRB- the Grangemouth fine was one of the largest safety fines at the time -RRB- , were not so significant to raise concerns across the market more broadly . 
However , as SRI investors , we did take notice - seeing them as symptomatic of underinvestment more broadly in the company 's aging assets . 
Of course in retrospect these events presaged the calamitous events at Texas City in 2005 when 15 people lost their lives , and perhaps of the events that are now unfolding in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The US Government for example announced at the beginning of June that it will investigate alleged infringements of EHS regulations at the Horizon oil rig . 
Perhaps a more direct indicator of the likelihood of an accident was the fact that the company has for some time been increasingly focused on operations in highly complex and difficult environments including deep-water -LRB- such as in the Gulf of Mexico -RRB- , the Arctic and of course unconventional resources such as the Canadian oil sands . 
The ` easy ' oil is now more or less the exclusive domain of national oil companies such as Saudi Aramco , with international oil companies like BP relegated to extreme environments where they operate at the limit of their technical capacities . 
The specific events in the Gulf of Mexico were clearly unpredictable , but perhaps it was inevitable that an accident like this was going to happen . 
What is more , underlying demand for oil is not likely to weaken in the short to medium term , and so we can expect international oil companies to continue to exploit difficult to access resources in frontier environments with the inevitable challenges that this will continue to pose . 
Seb Beloe is head of sustainable and responsible investment research at Henderson Global Investors Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Some of our specialist hubs within these sites are supported by funding from external companies and organizations . 
All editorial content is independent of any sponsorship , unless otherwise clearly stated . 
We make Partner Zones available for sponsors ' own content . 
Guardian Professional is a division of Guardian News & Media 
