Barack Obama finding out ` whose ass to kick ' over oil spill US president defends his handling of Gulf oil spill , telling NBC he would have already sacked BP chief Tony Hayward Tuesday 8 June 2010 13.19 BST The chief executive of BP is already coping with the worst oil spill in US history and a clean-up operation approaching $ 1bn , but the worst may be yet to come : US president Barack Obama is on a factfinding mission in an attempt to discover `` whose ass to kick '' . 
Interviewed on US television yesterday , Obama also suggested that if Tony Hayward had been working for him , the BP figurehead would have been relieved of his duties by now . 
The president was appearing on NBC 's Today Show in an apparent attempt to show active engagement in dealing with the Gulf oil spill , while distancing the US government from responsibility for the leak . 
Polls have shown mostAmericans believe Obama has handled the crisis poorly . 
Hayward 's past comments include : '' I want my life back '' ; asserting that the Gulf was '' a very big ocean '' ; and that `` the environmental impact of this disaster is likely to be very , very modest '' , . 
The president was unequivocal when asked about such comments by the show host , Matt Lauer , saying : `` He would n't be working for me after any of those statements . '' 
The interview , snippets of which were released last night by NBC , is due to air in the US later today . 
The president defended his talks with Gulf fishermen and oil spill experts , saying their purpose was not academic rather , they were an exercise in asserting where the presidential boot should be administered , `` so I know whose ass to kick '' . 
Yesterday , Obama met with Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen and the president 's cabinet for a briefing on the oil spill , which began with the Deepwater Horizon explosion that killed 11 workers . 
After the meeting , Obama sought to reassure the nation that the Gulf coast would `` bounce back '' from the spill , but not without time , effort and reimbursement from BP . 
In the NBC interview , Obama strongly defended his role in dealing with the crisis , including his three visits to the region since the spill began . 
`` I was down there a month ago before most of these talking heads were even paying attention to the Gulf , '' Obama said , adding he has talked to a variety of `` experts '' on the oil spill , as well as the fishermen . 
`` I do n't sit around just talking to experts because this is a college seminar , we talk to these folks because they potentially have the best answers so I know whose ass to kick , '' the president said . 
