Swine flu is officially a pandemic . 
But do n't worry ... not yet , anyway Out of 30,000 global cases , only 145 deaths have been reported and development of a vaccine is well under way . 
But scientists will not relax : the virus could mutate and grow stronger over the summer - and what happens if it mixes with bird flu ? 
It was the final surge in numbers that forced the World Health Organisation to act . 
With confirmation last week that swine flu cases had risen above 1,000 in Australia , it was clear the disease was now spreading freely around the world . 
Thousands of cases had already been reported in the United States , Mexico and Chile . 
Officials at the World Health Organisation simply had no choice . 
On Thursday , they announced swine flu had achieved pandemic status , the first strain of influenza to reach this mark for 41 years . 
It seems an alarming prospect . 
Are we again set to face a disease that can kill millions as happened with the pandemics of 1918 , 1957 and 1968 ? 
Margaret Chan , the World Health Organisation 's director general , was confident , however . 
The disease is only a `` moderately severe '' risk , she announced . 
Out of 30,000 cases worldwide , only 145 deaths have been reported . 
Development of a vaccine - the world 's main anti-flu weapon - is already under way while stockpiles of anti-viral drugs such as Tamiflu are also available , at least for developed nations . 
It would be premature to assume complete security , however . 
Before the world vanquishes swine flu , many hurdles will have to be cleared . 
In particular , every stage of the development of a swine flu vaccine , our key hope of fighting the disease , could be disrupted , scientists warned last week . 
`` We must be prepared for something that is more severe than is currently observed , '' said Dr Alan Hay , director of the World Influenza Centre , in London . 
`` We can not be complacent . '' 
For a start , swine flu vaccine production is still at a very early stage . 
Indeed , the artificial strain that will form the core of a vaccine has only just been created , with researchers in Britain , Australia and the US having produced almost identical versions . 
These have only just been passed to pharmaceutical firms to see if they can quickly produce the vaccine on a mass scale . 
The British version of the vaccine strain - known as RG121 - was created two weeks ago at the National Institute for Biological Standards Control near London . 
Like its US and Australian counterparts , it is made of bits of several flu viruses but specifically stimulates immunity against swine flu . 
Unlike swine flu , however , it can be grown easily in hens ' eggs . 
Eggs are used throughout the drugs industry as incubators in which viruses - the basic components of vaccines - are grown . 
`` Hens ' eggs remain the bulwark for vaccine production , '' said Professor Peter Dunnill , of the Centre for Biochemical Engineering at University College London . 
`` It is a pretty ponderous business , however . 
Each egg has to be looked after carefully and you have to beware lest infections kill them off . '' 
This point was backed by Dr James Robertson , leader of the team that created the RG121 strain . 
`` Different strains behave differently in eggs and produce varying amounts of virus particles . 
In the case of our swine flu vaccine strain , we simply do not know yet how much virus you will get from each egg , At present , pharmaceutical companies ' estimates of the amounts of virus particles they will get from their eggs are optimistic . 
This could be a mistake , warn scientists , and companies could find they get less than a third or a quarter as many viral particles as they hoped for , a reduction that would , in turn , limit the number of vaccine doses available to the public . 
Once viruses are extracted from eggs they are broken into pieces including bits of their protein coats . 
These protein pieces are important because they stimulate immune responses in humans and can be used to make a vaccine . 
`` Coat proteins raise antibodies in the blood so that a person , coming across the real live virus , will be prepared to launch an immune attack against it , '' said Robertson . 
But sometimes , it takes more than one dose of a vaccine to stimulate full protection . 
The current seasonal flu vaccine requires only a single shot but other vaccines require two inoculations , a point stressed by Dr Hay . 
`` It may require two doses to provide significant immunity against swine flu , '' he told the Observer . 
And if a swine flu vaccine requires a double dose , this would also limit numbers of doses available to provide full protection as quickly as possible . 
Even if viral production in eggs goes to plan , manufacturers such as GlaxoSmithKline will be stretched to meet demands and have decided to add chemicals known as adjuvants to their vaccines . 
Adjuvants stimulate immune systems and so reduce amounts of vaccine needed to create antibody protection in an individual . 
`` We will be using adjuvants in our vaccines , '' said Stephen Rae of GlaxoSmithKline . 
`` This will be the first time we have used them for a flu vaccine but we are confident they will work . '' 
However , Professor Dunnill again warned that care should be taken with such predictions . 
`` It remains to be seen if pharmaceuticals can rely on using adjuvants and still produce a single dose vaccine against swine flu , '' he said . 
And then there is the issue of timing . 
At present , only a limited number of people have succumbed to swine flu in the UK with the Health Protection Agency putting the figure at 1,121 confirmed cases yesterday . 
But most scientists now predict a second wave of the disease is likely to strike later in the year . 
Exactly when and how it hits will have profound consequences for Britain , as Hay explained . 
`` The key issue is how the virus mutates in the southern hemisphere over the next few months during the winter there . 
That is far more important than its behavior in the northern hemisphere during our spring and summer . '' 
The virus is more likely to spread through populations during the southern hemisphere in winter and the more it does so , the more it is likely to mutate , possibly into a new , more virulent form . 
There is also the issue of the timing of that return . 
If a reinvigorated , more virulent forms appears late in the year , health and pharmaceutical workers could have enough time to prepare reasonable supplies of vaccine . 
`` However , if it returns earlier in the year , in September , say , there is not much chance we will have enough vaccine ready by then , '' Dr Hay warned . 
`` It is undoubtedly a problem . 
Certainly , there is no doubt the big issue here is time . '' 
Should vaccine supplies be low when the second wave strikes , health workers will then face a problem of deciding which members of the public should be rated as priority targets . 
Health and utility workers , police and security staff , will be obvious choices . 
But selecting the elderly - a key choice for seasonal flu vaccine - as priorities for swine flu vaccines would be a mistake , Hay said . 
`` Around 75 per cent of people who have succumbed to swine flu have been under age of 30 and very few have been over 60 . 
It is very likely that people of 60 and above may well have some immunity . '' 
Intriguingly swine flu is of the same basic type , called H1N1 , as the virus that caused the 1918 pandemic , the world 's worst outbreak of flu which killed up to 100 million people across the globe . 
`` That basic strain circulated round the world for another four decades until 1957 when it was replaced by a new type , known as H2N2 , which was responsible for the Asian flu epidemic of that year , '' Hay said . 
In other words , people who were children or young adults before 1957 may well be carrying immune protection to an old virus that is a distant descendant of the 1918 flu strain and which is giving them protection against swine flu . 
Hence the relatively robust response of those over 60 to the current pandemic - though these individuals will still need protection from standard seasonal flu with vaccines that are now being stockpiled by pharmaceutical firms . 
Vaccines are not our only protection against flu , of course . 
Anti-viral drugs - in particular , Tamiflu - block the spread of the flu virus between cells in the body and offer another line of defense against the disease . 
`` Vaccines are our real hope but there is no doubt Tamiflu will help , '' said Dunnill . 
`` But we should note resistance to the drug is spreading . 
The normal seasonal flu virus has acquired Tamiflu resistance over the past year and we will have to monitor , very carefully , how swine flu behaves . 
We can not take the drug for granted , that is certain . '' 
And finally scientists point to the disturbing scenario in which swine flu spreads to countries such as Indonesia and infects animals or humans who are already affected by bird flu . 
The latter disease is difficult to acquire but is highly virulent if caught . 
By contrast , swine flu is easy to pass on although , at present , it rarely produces serious symptoms . 
In a person who becomes infected by both strains , however , it is possible that there will be an exchange of genetic material resulting in the creation of an easily transmissible but highly virulent virus . 
`` It is a nightmare vision which , fortunately , remains only a remote prospect at present , '' said Dunnill . 
All these issues make it difficult for doctors and scientists to be certain how they will cope if swine flu , as expected , returns to Britain with renewed vigor later this year . 
Or it may return in a relatively non-virulent form and pharmaceutical companies may suffer no vaccine production problems . 
Alternatively , things could go wrong . 
`` We can anticipate many things and that , in the end , is all we can do , '' said Hay . 
`` We must prepare as best we can for all these scenarios and then deal with the ones that unfold . 
It will probably be a long battle , however . '' 
But do n't worry ... not yet , anyway This article appeared on p22 of the Main section section of the Observer on 00.01 BST on Sunday 14 June 2009 . 
