BANGALORE | Wed May 5 , 2010 3:51 pm EDT BANGALORE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Shares of companies playing a part in tackling the Gulf of Mexico oil spill are likely to retreat further after an initial rally , as gains from the clean-up operations will likely fall short of expectations . 
Shares of waste management services firm Clean Harbors -LRB- CLH . 
N -RRB- soared more than 25 percent to a 20-month high in the wake of the April 21 explosion at the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , while shares in water treatment services company Nalco Holding NLC . 
N rose nearly 20 percent to a year high . 
Even though it is still unclear how much gains the companies can book , analysts say the revenue potential from the spill does not justify the sharp rise in share prices . 
Wedbush Securities analyst David Rose said the Nalco share move was exaggerated . 
`` The stock was getting ahead of itself based on these expectations , '' he said . 
`` The impact should be relatively minimal . '' 
Wunderlich Securities analyst Michael Hoffman was similarly skeptical of the Clean Harbors share move . 
`` While the Gulf oil spill may represent a large clean-up opportunity , we do not believe it warrants Clean Harbors ' recent price move , '' he said . 
`` No question , the stock over-reacted . '' 
Both stocks have pulled back more than 15 percent from their initial gains , suggesting that investors were reassessing their initial optimism . 
`` They -LRB- Clean Harbors -RRB- were being appropriately reserved on the call . 
As a result , the stock fell as much as it did today , '' Hoffman said . 
Clean Harbors shares fell as much as 6 percent on Wednesday in intra-day trade . 
In a similar scenario , five years ago , Clean Harbors ' stock shed more than 20 percent , after the company 's dour outlook on gains from clean-up following Hurricane Katrina disappointed investors . 
Since the Transocean RIGN . 
N -RRB- rig exploded and sank last month , claiming 11 lives , hundreds of thousands of gallons of crude have been gushing into the Gulf from the ocean floor with no easy solution in sight . 
That has boosted demand for products that can contain or dissipate the oil , such as oil booms , detergents and emulsifiers . 
Naperville , Illinois-based Nalco said it is working with BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- to apply one of its proprietary chemicals that breaks down oil into small parts that can be eaten and dissolved by naturally occurring bacteria . 
The rig was contracted to BP , which will bear the cost of clean-up from an ever widening oil spill , while Anadarko Petroleum Corp -LRB- APC . 
N -RRB- had a 25 percent interest in the well . 
`` Assuming a clean-up effort on par with -LRB- the 1989 Exxon -LRB- XOM . 
N -RRB- -RRB- Valdez spill is awarded to Clean Harbors , the inflation adjusted non-recurring profit would be an estimated $ 50 million to $ 60 million , or $ 2.00 to $ 2.50 per share , '' Wunderlich 's Hoffman said . 
So far , efforts to plug the oil leak have failed . 
If unchecked , it will take about 50 days to eclipse the Exxon Valdez spill , the worst U.S. oil spill , which sent 10.8 million gallons of crude into Alaska 's Prince William Sound . 
On a conference call with analysts , Clean Harbors ' executives said it would be premature to speculate on the revenue potential at this time . 
`` We are participating in the cleanup , but the extent of our involvement has yet to be determined , '' they said . 
Estimates for Nalco 's profits are also modest . 
Earlier this week , Nalco CEO Erik Fyrwald said sales related to the spill , till date , had not had a material financial impact . 
`` We look at anywhere between a penny to 2 cents in potential positive impact , between now -LRB- the second-quarter -RRB- and the third , '' Wedbush analyst Rose said . 
`` On the whole , we do not expect a significant impact . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Adveith Nair and Krishna N. Das , with additional reporting by Vinay Sarawagi ; Editing by Gopakumar Warrier -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
