MIAMI | Fri Jul 16 , 2010 6:27 am EDT MIAMI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The BP Plc oil leak contaminating the Gulf of Mexico will muck up for years the governmental finances and economies of America 's Gulf coast region . 
Beyond directly sea-related sectors such as fishing and offshore energy production , the gushing oil leak is fouling other drivers of the economy like lodging , casinos , real estate and governments as the overall U.S. economy emerges from the worst recession since the 1930s . 
As BP 's heavy spending to stop the leak , company compensation payouts and its $ 20 billion escrow fund blunts some immediate financial damage , policy makers , executives , business owners and economists are beginning to gauge the disaster 's long-term consequences . 
The spill and its consequences , such as the federal government 's deepwater-drilling moratorium , threatens coastal property values , thousands of energy sector jobs and tourism businesses reliant on pristine beaches and sparkling waters . 
`` Right now tax revenues are a secondary issue to the economic growth over the long term , '' said economist Mark McMullen of Moody 's economy.com . 
`` What 's scary is : when will it bounce back ? 
And what will be the lasting damage to the economy and government coffers ? '' 
Looking at those questions , Mississippi 's governor last week ordered economists , state tax officials , business leaders and marine experts to put aside current finance pressures and spend a year studying the ramifications of the April 20 catastrophe . 
`` We need a clear grasp on how this oil spill will impact the State of Mississippi and local communities for years to come , '' Mississippi Governor Haley Barbour said . 
Even before the disaster , in the first three months of 2010 , the revenue of states in the Gulf region shrank , according to a report this week from the Rockefeller Institute of Government . 
While all 50 state governments across America had an overall 2.5 percent rise in revenues , Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , Florida and Texas all showed declines in year-over-year comparisons . 
A scramble for revenue will remain feverish for the foreseeable future . 
The Center for Budget and Policy Priorities last month forecast states face revenue shortfalls of $ 140 billion in the coming fiscal year . 
The projected fiscal 2011 budget gaps for Gulf states total at least $ 11 billion , including ones for Florida of $ 4.7 billion , Texas of $ 4.6 billion , and Louisiana at $ 1 billion , according to the center . 
Beyond hiking taxes , lifting fees and cutting spending , some governments look to tax medical marijuana and sugared drinks . 
Others such as Florida are clearing the way for more gambling or casinos , at least in part to raise revenue . 
In Louisiana , the Gulf state most reliant on energy businesses , the economic costs of the federal moratorium on deepwater oil drilling , in place through November 30 , will be severe and long lasting , according to Eric Smith , associate director of Tulane University 's Energy Institute . 
Smith estimated the moratorium affects dozens of deepwater rigs that ordinarily employ as many as 10,000 crew making about $ 100,000 each annually , with most of those wages spent in Louisiana and nearby states . 
The ripples from the moratorium may take the number of lost jobs in Louisiana to 24,000 , according to Michael Hecht , head of Greater New Orleans Inc , an economic development agency . 
`` The economic impact from the oil spill itself , however broad and long-lasting , will likely be dwarfed by the impact from the moratorium , '' Hecht this week told a presidential panel investigating the disaster . 
Many of the rigs , their high-paying jobs and supply requirements will move elsewhere , Smith said , and slow the region 's economy for years . 
One big driller , Diamond Offshore Drilling , has already announced it is moving two of its five rigs in the Gulf to other regions . 
The likelihood of tougher U.S. regulations after the BP disaster for Gulf offshore drilling may drive operators to send rigs to Brazil and other regions , Standard & Poor 's said . 
`` This is a case of the regulators not understanding the business they are regulating , '' Smith said . 
`` They do n't understand the contracts . 
These things cost $ 500 million to $ 600 million to build . 
They have to operate . '' 
In west Florida 's Panhandle , an area with many tourist businesses , officials in Escambia County worry that property prices already hit by the prolonged U.S. housing market slump will fall further . 
The county 's property last year was appraised a total 6 percent less than a year earlier at $ 27.6 billion . 
That meant lower property tax revenue and a $ 24-million reduction in county spending . 
Florida 's tourist-dependent coastal economies stand to lose as much as 39,000 jobs and $ 2.2 billion or more in business because of the BP oil spill , according to University of Central Florida economist Sean Snaith . 
`` The idea that a great environmental disaster could become a great economic one is n't inconceivable , but neither is it a certainty , '' S&P said last week in a report that concluded state and local governments were so far managing the BP leak ably . 
