HOUSTON\/WASHINGTON | Fri Jul 16 , 2010 7:20 pm EDT HOUSTON\/WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc 's stricken Gulf of Mexico oil well showed no signs of leaking on Friday after a new cap stopped the flowing crude , but President Barack Obama warned that more needed to be done before it was fixed . 
BP began pressure tests on the well after choking it off on Thursday for the first time since the April 20 rig explosion that triggered the leak . 
Underwater robots scanned the sea floor for signs the undersea well was damaged . 
`` We 've seen no negative evidence of any breaching there , '' said Kent Wells , BP 's senior vice president of exploration and production . 
The tests showed the cap was building pressure in the well , meaning it was strong enough to contain the oil without leaking . 
The Coast Guard confirmed pressure was high enough to allow BP to test through Friday evening . 
Obama , speaking at the White House , cautiously welcomed the news . 
`` We wo n't be done until we actually know that we 've killed the well and that we have a permanent solution in place . 
We 're moving in that direction , but I do n't want us to get too far ahead of ourselves . '' 
The U.S. leader is under fire to push BP to permanently plug the leak and clean up an environmental and economic mess across five U.S. Gulf states . 
The spill has cut into multi-billion dollar fishing , tourism and drilling industries . 
The offshore spill , the worst in U.S. history , has spewed millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf . 
Several previous attempts to plug the leak did not work , and investors remained cautious on BP 's latest effort . 
The British energy giant 's shares , which fell about 50 percent in the first two months of the crisis but have gained 40 percent since late June , fell nearly 5 percent as part of a broader sell-off on the New York Stock Exchange . 
They inched higher in London . 
BP began pressure tests on the well Thursday afternoon and expected them to last up to 48 hours . 
It then aims to siphon up to 80,000 barrels of oil a day using a seal installed earlier this week and send it a mile up to waiting ships . 
Estimates had put the spill rate at between 35,000 barrels -LRB- 1.47 million gallons\/5 .56 million liters -RRB- and 60,000 barrels -LRB- 2.5 million gallons\/9 .5 million liters -RRB- a day . 
The tests will show whether the cap is strong enough to contain the oil if the ships must disconnect from the well during a hurricane or other emergency . 
BP still expects to complete drilling a new well by early August to intersect the ruptured well and seal it with mud and cement . 
The capping of the well came nearly three months after an oil rig explosion ruptured the well and killed 11 men . 
But some residents in battered coastal communities remained skeptical . 
`` This is only the second day . 
I am not celebrating anything yet , '' Cindy Nelson of Biloxi said . 
Under pressure from Obama , BP has established a $ 20-billion fund to cover the costs of the spill . 
Three analysts surveyed by Reuters Insider television forecast the company will pay between $ 63 billion to $ 100 billion over the next 15 years in fines and cleanup and legal costs . 
Peter Hutton , an analyst at NCB Securities in London , pegged the total cost at $ 40 billion . 
`` It 's relief all around to see that -LRB- undersea -RRB- camera with no oil coming out , '' said Hutton . 
`` But people recognize that they 're not completely out of the woods . '' 
Investors welcomed reports that BP was moving closer to sealing the first deal in its planned $ 10 billion of non-core divestments to help pay cleanup costs . 
The company and bankers were finalizing details of the asset sales , including some U.S. interests to Apache Corp , said CNBC and the Financial Times . 
The crisis has complicated U.S. relations with close ally Britain . 
Many Britons believe Washington is treating BP too harshly , to the detriment of British pension funds and other investors who have big stakes in the company . 
The U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee plans to ask BP officials to testify after the company said it had lobbied the British government in 2007 over a prisoner transfer agreement with Libya . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told Britain 's foreign minister in a phone call on Friday that Britain may want to communicate with the U.S. Congress about Libyan intelligence officer Abdel Basset al-Megrahi release . 
The Scottish government denied on Friday it had any contact with BP before its decision last year to release the Libyan . 
U.S. lawmakers also are considering a range of new rules that could impose tougher safety regulations on offshore drilling or bar companies like BP from new offshore exploration leases . 
The Obama administration issued a revised offshore drilling moratorium this week after a previous six-month ban was struck down by the courts . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Anyway , Those who think that BP is going to sink and troll up and down , They are unaware of the facts that BP will go up to cross $ 158 marks as this stock will stay advance with multiple interests . 
Those interest will provide quadrpulet fsi to the gauge while the problems follow it in the background and pay off every single claim . 
what the bloody hell are you saying ? 
do you speak english ?? does n't sound like American either ... it 's not Australian that 's for sure This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
