WASHINGTON | Sat Sep 24 , 2011 1:13 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian President Bashar al-Assad will be ousted `` sooner or later '' by his own people as the time of dictatorial rule fades around the world , Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan said . 
Erdogan , in an interview on CNN 's `` Fareed Zakaria GPS '' to be aired on Sunday , maintained his stern tone toward Israel and warned relations may `` never become normal again '' but he had warm words for U.S. President Barack Obama as Turkey rises as a diplomatic power in the Middle East . 
`` You can never remain in power through cruelty . 
You can never stand before the will of the people , '' Erdogan said in a transcript released by CNN on Saturday . 
`` This process might be extended a little bit more but sooner or later in Syria , if people take a different decision , that decision is going to be catered to . 
Such as in Egypt , such as in Tunisia , such as in Libya . 
People want to be free . '' 
Democracy is overtaking autocracy , he said , and `` dictatorial systems are burning down to the ground . '' 
Turkey , a NATO member and aspirant to join the European Union , is viewed as a bridge between the Western and Islamic worlds . 
Erdogan has had unprecedented access to Obama , holding nine phone calls with the U.S. president this year . 
`` Personally , Barack Obama is someone I really like . 
And vis-a-vis his policies and his implementations , I want him to be much more successful , '' Erdogan said , wishing him luck in the November 2012 elections . 
But the United States and Turkey differ greatly on the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians as a showdown looms over Palestinian statehood at the United Nations . 
Ankara 's once-friendly ties with Israel crumbled over the killing of Turkish activists on a Gaza-bound aid convoy by Israeli forces last year . 
`` In this situation , no matter who we are speaking about , democracy , rights and freedom should be defended , '' Erdogan said . 
`` We gave our warnings to Israel . 
This is the reason for war . 
This is something you can not do in international waters . 
But as a great state , we have been very forgiving . 
That 's why we have been very patient . '' 
Turkey has demanded Israel apologize , pay compensation and lift the Gaza embargo . 
`` If these demands are not met , the relations between Turkey and Israel will never become normal again . 
We have got nothing against the people of Israel but against the attitude adopted by the administration of Israel , '' Erdogan said . 
`` And if you are insistent on creating a source of unrest , you are bound to become lonelier and lonelier . 
They used to be great friends of ours . 
And this solitude is Israel 's fate under these circumstances . '' 
Turkey has embraced Palestine 's position for statehood , while Obama has said he would block any Palestinian bid for full recognition at the U.N. Security Council . 
`` SO FED UP WITH WARS '' Erdogan sought to address perceptions that Turkey is moving toward a more Islamic foreign policy , abandoning a history of pro-Western sentiment . 
`` We seek out knowledge from whichever part of the world that is most advanced , '' he said . 
`` We do n't want to see the clash of civilizations in this world . 
We want to see the alliance of civilizations . 
The world is so fed up with wars . '' 
The prime minister tried to calm concerns over plans for a missile defense base in Turkey , saying the installation is a NATO concept and not a factor in Iran 's tensions with Israel . 
`` We do n't think Iran should get offended when there 's no reason . 
We do n't want to see Israel coming up with different interpretations from what is actually the reality , '' he said . 
He questioned why Iran should be banned from having nuclear technology while Israel is allowed to be the only country in the region with nuclear weapons . 
`` Iran says that its only purpose is to generate affordable energy through nuclear power . 
We do not want to act on presumptions , and no sanctions based on presumptions are acceptable by Turkey , '' Erdogan said . 
He also addressed reports he had taken holidays with Assad , whose crackdown on protests in Syria has led to U.S. calls for the long-time leader to step aside . 
Erdogan said Assad was invited to a popular holiday locale but it was to discuss relations between the two countries and the two leaders never took a vacation together . 
He said he finally lost patience with Assad . 
`` If you 're going to act against the fundamental rights , liberties and the law , you will lose your position in my heart as my brother and my friend , '' Erdogan said . 
`` I was very patient . 
Patience , patience , patience . 
And then I cracked . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Jasmin Melvin ; Editing by John O'Callaghan -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
