Monday 16 May 2005 15.43 BST The BBC has been forced to defend Jeremy Paxman 's bad-tempered interview with MP George Galloway on election night , insisting the presenter 's questioning was not insensitive despite more than 100 complaints . 
Paxman 's encounter with Mr Galloway in the early hours of Friday May 6 , following the latter 's shock victory over Labor 's Oona King in Bethnal Green and Bow , became one of the main talking points of the night after the victorious Respect candidate ripped off his microphone and stormed out of the interview . 
More than 100 viewers complained that Paxman was too aggressive and did not focus sufficiently on the Iraq war issue on which Mr Galloway campaigned . 
The BBC man kicked off the interview by asking : `` Mr Galloway , are you proud of having got rid of one of the very few black women in parliament ? '' 
The BBC head of political programs , Sue Inglish , defended Paxman , saying that he opened the Galloway interview with a question about Ms King 's race because a studio guest , former Labor MP Tony Banks , had just raised it . 
`` Some people found Jeremy Paxman 's line of questioning insensitive but , having reviewed the interview in the cold light of day , I do not agree , '' Ms Inglish said . 
`` Jeremy Paxman is renowned for his vigorous questioning and so the directness of the question can hardly have come as a surprise to Mr Galloway . 
That Mr Galloway chose not to take the opportunity he was being offered to say that neither race nor religion nor sex was the issue is a matter for him , but it was a pertinent question to ask . 
`` It was Mr Banks who brought up questions of ethnicity and gender ... When Jeremy Paxman very shortly afterwards had a chance to interview George Galloway , the question he asked was one that many in the audience must at that point have had at the front of their minds ; did Mr Galloway feel uncomfortable about unseating one of the few black women MPs ? 
`` The interview only became bogged down on this issue because George Galloway preferred not to answer the question and move on to other matters . 
However , Jeremy Paxman did explore the issue of Labor unpopularity as a result of the Iraq war in comparative depth in his interview with Labor 's David Lammy , immediately after the abortive exchange with George Galloway . '' 
During the interview , Mr Galloway , speaking on a link from the Bethnal Green and Bow constituency in east London , repeatedly refused to answer Paxman 's opening question and instead challenged the Newsnight presenter to congratulate him on his victory . 
Eventually he retorted : `` All those New Labor MPs who voted for Mr Blair and Mr Bush 's war have on their hands the blood of 100,000 people in Iraq , many of them British soldiers , many of them American soldiers , most of them Iraqis . 
`` That is a more important issue than the color of her skin . 
So do n't try and tell me I should feel guilty about one of the most sensational election results in modern electoral history . '' 
He accused Mr Paxman of `` insulting '' his new constituents by ignoring the result . 
`` They chose me . 
Ca n't you find it within yourself even to congratulate me ? '' 
he asked , before terminating the interview . 
With that the MP stormed off , to which Paxman responded with a bout of his trademark eye-rolling . 
The BBC has also admitted it had too many under-35s in the audience for the Question Time election special on Thursday April 28 , in which Tony Blair , Michael Howard and Charles Kennedy were quizzed in turn by people in the studio . 
More than 70 people called the BBC to complain that there were too many young people in the audience for it to be representative . 
`` Looking back at the program I think that we got most of the balances pretty well right . 
However , I think we were probably under-representative among older people , I accept that , '' said Ric Bailey , the Question Time executive editor . 
`` But I think we did achieve a very lively program in which there was lots of young people who contributed their views and a few older people as well . '' 
To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or phone 02072399857 If you are writing a comment for publication , please mark clearly `` for publication '' . 
