GENEVA | Sat May 16 , 2009 6:41 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Health negotiators from rich and poor countries failed on Saturday to clinch a full deal on virus sharing to produce vaccines , but expressed satisfaction that they had closed gaps on some tough political issues . 
The H1N1 influenza outbreak which has spread around the world from Mexico and the United States , leading the World Health Organisation to declare a flu pandemic is imminent , has given added urgency to the work of the intergovernmental meeting , set up two years ago by the WHO . 
The meeting agreed late on Saturday after a good-humored two-day session to forward a framework agreement on sharing influenza viruses and on access to vaccine benefits -- including its gaps to next week 's World Health Assembly -LRB- WHA -RRB- at the WHO . 
The assembly can then decide how to work further on the agreement , either during its meeting -- truncated because of the swine flu outbreak -- or later . 
Jane Halton , the top official in Australia 's Health and Aging Department , who chaired the meeting , told delegates they had achieved a significant amount of work . 
`` Yes , we acknowledge here that there are matters we have not resolved , and yes , they are difficult , but I do think a good body of material has been produced , '' she said . 
The meeting was set up in 2007 amid a scare about H5N1 influenza , or bird flu , which is often fatal to humans , as part of the WHO 's efforts to prepare for a pandemic . 
The WHO wanted to ensure that virus samples would be circulated to laboratories and drug firms around the world so that they could produce a vaccine against the disease . 
Poor countries argued they should have access to the resulting vaccines , especially if the samples came from the developing world . 
But rich countries led by the United States wanted pharmaceuticals companies to be able to claim the vaccines as intellectual property and earn royalties on them . 
In 2006 the U.S. Centers for Disease Control -LRB- CDC -RRB- lodged a patent application for a new flu vaccine , and filed it with the World Intellectual Property Organisation in 2007 . 
The new vaccine incorporated genes from an H5N1 strain isolated from an Indonesian victim of bird flu in 2005 . 
But in 2007 Indonesia refused to share H5N1 virus samples without guarantees that any vaccines derived from them would be made available to poorer countries at an affordable price . 
The main sticking point remains the wording of a standard agreement on transferring material , and some intellectual property questions . 
Developing countries wanted a comprehensive material transfer agreement , while rich countries were against any agreement but eventually settled for a simple one . 
Abdulsalami Nasidi , a senior Nigerian health ministry official , told reporters the meeting had cleared up many unresolved issues . 
Delegates virtually agreed to free biological material moving through the WHO network from intellectual property rules , he said . 
WHO Director-General Margaret Chan has already implemented some things agreed in the meeting 's two years , on traceability of material and benefit-sharing , Halton told reporters . 
`` The reality is the system can and will happen and in fact the work that 's been done in a number of these areas has been adopted , '' she said . 
GlaxoSmithKline , Sanofi-Aventis , Novartis , Baxter International and other drug makers are awaiting WHO guidance about whether to start mass-producing vaccines to fight H1N1 , which may force them to cut production of seasonal flu shots . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
