\* Two cases of H1N1 flu confirmed in Turkey \* Virus detected in travellers from the United States -LRB- Updates with details on second case -RRB- ISTANBUL , May 16 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey on Saturday confirmed its first two cases of H1N1 influenza after tests showed the mother of the first victim , an American male , had also contracted the virus , a Health Ministry official said . 
The man , traveling with his family from the United States via Amsterdam , was diagnosed after arriving at Istanbul 's Ataturk Airport en route to Iraq on Friday , Turkish Health Minister Recep Akdag said at a news conference . 
Six family members traveling with the man were also quarantined at a Turkish research hospital , where they were being given anti-viral medication , Akdag said . 
Tests showed the man 's mother was also infected with the H1N1 virus , Harun Celik , the Health Ministry 's spokesman , told Reuters . 
Local media had reported earlier the man 's wife was suffering from the disease , but Celik denied those reports . 
`` His mother also tested positive for swine flu . 
None of the other family members have any health issues , '' Celik said . 
The entire family will be held for observation until May 21 to determine whether they may have contracted swine flu , because the virus takes up to a week to manifest itself , Akdag said . 
India on Saturday also reported its first victim of the H1N1 virus . 
The spread of the disease has led the World Health Organisation to declare a pandemic is imminent . 
India and Turkey are the 37th and 38th countries to confirm cases of H1N1 virus . 
The WHO said on Saturday 72 people had died from the disease or its complications . 
The Iraqi-American family was traveling on a KLM aircraft to Istanbul that was carrying 163 passengers , most of whom are now being monitored for signs of the flu , Akdag said . 
`` We know of the existence of a few -LRB- passengers -RRB- whom we 've been unable to contact , '' Akdag said . 
`` They need to be alert so that they can be given preventative medicine and in order to protect others . '' 
Thermal cameras set up at the Istanbul airport had detected the man had a high fever , and tests at the national laboratory revealed he was carrying the H1N1 virus , Akdag said . 
`` Everything is under control , '' Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan told reporters when asked about the diagnosis of the country 's first H1N1 case . 
`` Everything is being monitored closely . '' 
The WHO has said there were 8,451 confirmed cases of infections with the influenza strain that is a mixture of swine , bird and human viruses . 
-LRB- For a WHO map of the spread of cases , go to : here -RRB- -LRB- For more Reuters swine flu coverage , please click here : here -RRB- -LRB- For WHO information on swine flu , go to : here -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
