The Guardian profile : Lord Steyn He 's woven the Human Rights Act into our legal system . 
He has a terrier-like tenacity and the courage of a lion Free from judicial shackles , the retired law lord is speaking his mind as the new chairman of Justice In his 10 years as a law lord , Johan Steyn never opened his mouth in the chamber of the House of Lords . 
He thinks judges should play no part in parliament . 
Throughout his years on the bench , his strongly held views on democracy , basic human rights , free speech and the rule of law made themselves heard , but only through his court judgments , lectures to lawyers and fellow judges , and articles in academic journals . 
This week , at the age of 73 , he cast off his judicial shackles and , as the newly installed chairman of the human rights group Justice , branded as `` a fairy tale '' Tony Bair 's insistence that the war in Iraq has not made London and the world more dangerous . 
He recalled the prime minister 's pronouncement - heralding new terrorism laws - that after July 7 , `` the rules of the game are changing '' : Steyn 's response was `` to state without equivocation that the maintenance of the rule of law is not a game . 
It is about access to justice , fundamental human rights and democratic values . '' 
He went on to attack the `` flood '' of criminal justice legislation . 
`` Year after year , half-baked ideas are adopted in haste , puffed up to be the ideal solution and routinely abandoned a year later . '' 
He agreed with his predecessor as Justice chairman , Lord Alexander of Weedon , that the Iraq war was unlawful and `` in its search for a justification in law for war the government was driven to scrape the bottom of the legal barrel '' . 
And , finally , the coup de grce : `` After the dreadful bombings in London we were asked to believe that the Iraq war did not make the world a more dangerous place . 
Surely , on top of everything else , we do not have to listen to a fairy tale . '' 
Retirement frees judges to speak their mind , but few have been so outspoken . 
And Steyn made headlines even as a serving judge . 
Take November 2003 , when the media picked up a lecture to lawyers in which he branded the US regime at Guantnamo Bay `` a monstrous failure of justice '' , and the system of trial by military tribunal `` a kangaroo court which makes a mockery of justice '' . 
His words went round the world . 
Two years before that , when Britain introduced executive detention without trial , his response was to deliver another of his trenchant lectures to lawyers and judges . 
He expressed the view that the UK opt-out from the European convention on human rights , which the government had to do to bring in the legislation , was `` not , in the present circumstances , justified '' . 
It was enough to get him removed , at the government 's insistence , from the panel of law lords hearing a challenge by Belmarsh detainees to the lawfulness of the opt-out . 
Steyn is a leading advocate of the principle that judges should not defer to parliament and ministers simply because politicians are accountable to the electorate . 
Judges too have a duty to the public , he argues , and should not simply take ministers ' word for it , but should probe and seek evidence . 
His judgments had the same flavor . 
Of the extension of `` special advocates '' - who can see secret evidence but not discuss it with the `` client '' they represent , from terrorism to parole cases - he said : `` The special advocate procedure strikes at the root of the prisoner 's fundamental right to a basically fair procedure . '' 
His reverence for the rule of law and basic human rights springs from his experience of growing up and practising as a lawyer in apartheid South Africa . 
The son of an eminent law professor at Stellenbosch , he grew up a bookish child and went to Oxford as a Rhodes scholar . 
He returned to South Africa and established a practice at the bar in 1958 , leaving in 1973 because of his opposition to apartheid . 
He was surprised to be appointed a high court judge in 1985 by the Tory lord chancellor Lord Hailsham . 
He wonders whether Hailsham got the wrong chap , because when they met later he repeatedly called him Charles . 
Jeffrey Jowell , professor of public law at University College London , says that in the appeal court and Lords , Steyn 's judgments in cases involving prisoners and asylum seekers `` were paradigm shifts in thinking at the time '' . 
Anthony Lester , the human rights QC and Liberal Democrat peer , agrees . 
`` He has woven the Human Rights Act into the fabric of our legal system . 
He has a terrier-like tenacity , deeply-held convictions and the courage of a lion . 
He 's going to be extraordinarily difficult to replace . '' 
Born Cape Town , August 15 1932 Family Married Susan Leonore in 1977 , with whom he has a stepson and stepdaughter . 
Has two sons and two daughters by a previous marriage Education Jan van Riebeeck school ; Stellenbosch University , South Africa ; won a Rhodes scholarship to read English at University College , Oxford . 
Career Started practice at South African bar in 1958 . 
Senior counsel of supreme court of South Africa 1970 . 
Was in line for a judicial appointment when he left because of his dislike of the regime . 
Started practice at English bar in 1973 , international commercial lawyer for 12 years . 
Became a QC in 1979 . 
High court judge 1985-91 . 
Presiding judge , Northern Circuit 1989-91 . 
Lord justice of appeal , 1992-95 . 
In 1995 joined House of Lords as a law lord . 
