Call it what you like - this is hell Mark Danner exposes the double speak that underpins Bush 's ` war on terror ' in Torture and Truth . 
Peter Conrad on how America 's response to 9\/11 unleashed an obscene nightmare Five days after 9\/11 , Vice-President Cheney emerged from the fortified burrow in which he 'd been awaiting Armageddon and - glowering as blackly as the oil he no doubt dreams of - explained how the government intended to respond to the terrorists . 
President Bush was already babbling about a crusade and remembering the ` dead or alive ' posters that used to be displayed in the Wild West . 
But Cheney did not invoke the chivalric idealism of Arthurian knights and sheriffs with tin badges . 
The fictions that helped him to deal with these new political facts were demon-haunted and apocalyptic . 
He had cast himself as Darth Vader : he therefore explained to an NBC interviewer that the administration from now on would ` work through , sort of , the dark side ' . 
That meant , as it turned out , the suspension of habeas corpus and of the Geneva conventions that regulate the treatment of prisoners of war . 
Alberto Gonzalez , Bush 's legal counsel -LRB- since promoted to attorney general -RRB- , supplied him with a ` new paradigm ' for conducting a campaign against rogue killers from failed states who targeted civilians : since terrorists ignored the laws , why should America and its raggle-taggle band of allies bother about humane niceties ? 
Last year , when the photographs of detainees at Abu Ghraib being sexually shamed or threatened by dogs were published , the ` dark side ' was placed on view in bright , brash color . 
An investigation revealed that torture was being used to obtain confessions . 
One zealous American soldier , symbolically outfitted in his full uniform , had even sodomised a prisoner ; unfortunately the man was too busy screaming to divulge any information of value . 
Other Americans did their anal interrogating with broomsticks or chemical lights , or brought in dogs to do the job for them . 
Bush , testily insisting that his henchmen had been instructed to do nothing illegal , said : ` We have laws on the books . ' 
What this meant was expensive lawyers were busy devising methods of circumventing those laws . 
An article in a recent New Yorker describes the vogue for outsourcing torture . 
Suspects abducted by the CIA are loaded in shackles onto executive jets , and delivered to countries such as Egypt , Syria and Jordan whose secret police have robust ways of asking questions . 
Mark Danner - toiling through official reports and transcripts of interviews with prisoners and witnesses , as well as conducting his own investigation in Iraq - has exposed the false piety in disavowals of responsibility by Bush and Donald Rumsfeld , and established official complicity in the abuse . 
The moral corruption began , of course , from the obfuscation of language . 
It 's easy to lie if you muddle up the definition of truth ; abominable acts can be made defensible if you call them by another name . 
No one in Apocalypse Now tells Willard to murder Kurtz . 
They simply say that the colonel 's command must be ` terminated ' , and when the assassin blinks uncomprehending they add that the termination must occur ` with extreme prejudice ' . 
The military bureaucrats on whom Danner eavesdrops employ the same elevated , evasive diction . 
A colonel justifies the use of ` sleep deprivation ' at Guantnamo by saying that such measures are ` probably within the lexicon ' . 
That mental torment thus becomes a mere word , a quaint lexical curio . 
From there it 's a short step to the paraphrase employed at Abu Ghraib , where keeping cells lit 24 hours a day is called ` sleep adjustment ' , as if it were therapeutic . 
The CIA specialises in such neologisms . 
Beatings , for instance , are glossed as ` enhanced interrogation techniques ' : imagine how your life would be enhanced by a battery of fists , whips and cattle prods . 
Such enhancement is a privilege , lavished only on guests whom the agency classifies as its ` high value detainees ' . 
Jargon is anesthetic ; it stops your ears to the cries of your victims , and like a beta blocker suppresses whatever humane sensitivity you may still possess . 
Thus the torturers , theorising about ` prisoner-guard interactions ' , could describe themselves as artists who competed with each other to devise more ` creative ' forms of aggression . 
Danner 's documents reveal what that creativity entailed . 
It had become banal , when ` fearing up ' detainees , to see them piss themselves in terror . 
Such victories were facile , so a prize was awarded to whoever could make a man defecate by threatening him . 
Detainees were handcuffed together , then ordered them to crawl on the floor while being choked or hosed down or pummelled . 
The thugs who supervised the revels imagined they were making music : a report on one such session names the soldiers by whom it was ` orchestrated ' . 
Latinate terminology is useful because it remains unintelligible . 
Slang also comes in handy , since it 's a terse shorthand whose precise meaning is unfixed , not yet inscribed in the lexicon . 
A lieutenant-colonel , taking delivery of four Iraqi generals , ordered a corporal to ` Strip them out and PT them ' . 
Did stripping out mean denuding them , or placing them in isolation ? 
PT is physical training : did that prescribe gymnastics or a punch-up ? 
The vagueness of the order , as a report concluded , ` could have led to any subsequent abuse ' . 
But it could hardly be abusive , since its purpose was to ` soften up ' the detainees . 
Is n't softness synonymous with clemency and kindness ? 
Accusations of wrongdoing lose their force because words have been so bled of meaning . 
A report decides that ` the use of nudity was sanctioned at some level within the chain of command ' . 
But ` sanction ' gestures towards sanctity . 
Used to approve torture , it ca n't help sanctifying the torturer . 
Half way through 500 pages of such brain-befuddling gobbledegook , Danner inserts eight pages of photographs - the cheery holiday snaps of Private Lyndie Englund and her gloating , sadistic cronies , who have piled up naked Iraqis into pyramids ` for the fun of it ' or smeared them in shit or paraded them so that their fearfully shrivelled penises can be laughed at . 
James Schlesinger , the former defense secretary , disposed of this obscene album by referring to a comic film : Abu Ghraib , he said , was ' Animal House on the nightshift ' . 
But these were not the frat-house rampages of John Belushi and his swinish , beer-swilling buddies . 
Danner prefers a loftier cultural reference , and says that the detainees were put through a ` Dantesque nightmare journey ' . 
For me , it all looks less like Dante 's inferno than the coprophiliac hell imagined by Bosch : a pornotopia where bowel movements are the answers to barked questions , and prisoners after being half-drowned in vats of urine are told to lap up meals that have been dumped in the toilet . 
The images , foul as they are , come as a relief after so much verbose hypocrisy . 
Bush may prate about the gospel of freedom , but Danner quotes an Iraqi who says that the American liberators have merely brought ` the freedom of rape , the freedom of nudity and the freedom of humiliation ' . 
Torture was supposed to extract truth from the captives . 
Truth , however , was the first casualty of this unending and ineffectual war . 
