Melissa Bell anchors BlogPost , The Washington Post 's sounding board for news and conversation that 's reverberating in your world -- online , on TV , and in your community . 
Send Melissa your tips and suggestions via e-mail , Facebook or Twitter . 
More on this blog Daily Catch Trawling the day 's web trends . 
You have to click it to believe it . 
Your Take Get in on the conversation . 
Picture Shows Photos and videos that move us BP sued for violating rights of nature An overall view of a massive fish kill in the Bayou Chaland area taken Sept. 10 . 
The cause of the fish kill has not yet been determined , but the area they were discovered in was impacted by the BP oil spill . 
-LRB- P. J. Hahn\/Plaquemines Parish Coastal Zone Management\/Reuters -RRB- A suit filed in Ecuador charges the oil giant BP with '' violating the rights of Nature '' for the gulf oil spill , Democracy Now reports . 
Filed by a group of environmentalists , the suit charges BP with harming the ocean . 
The Ecuadorian constitution recognizes the rights of nature across the globe . 
An NPR report shows that of the 4 million barrels that flowed into the ocean , much of it sunk to the bottom of the gulf , where it remains today . 
In other BP news , the company is venturing into film-making with a new feature length film about the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
The company told the New York Times it was for an internal audience at BP -- and not to burnish their tarnished reputation . 
BP has already made about 190 short documentaries for its Web site . 
Ms. Bell , how can we teach our children correct English when reporters for the Post violate the simplest rules of grammar ? 
In reference to the oil , you say `` much of it sunk to the bottom of the gulf , where it remains today . '' 
The past tense here would be `` sank , '' not `` sunk . '' 
My third grade teacher would have flunked you . 
User reviews and comments that include profanity or personal attacks or other inappropriate comments or material will be removed from the site . 
Additionally , entries that are unsigned or contain `` signatures '' by someone other than the actual author will be removed . 
Finally , we will take steps to block users who violate any of our posting standards , terms of use or privacy policies or any other policies governing this site . 
Please review the full rules governing commentaries and discussions . 
