The judge told Dr Murray he must not administer anesthetic Michael Jackson 's former doctor has denied a charge of involuntary manslaughter over the singer 's death , at a court in Los Angeles . 
Dr Conrad Murray was bailed for $ 75,000 -LRB- # 48,000 -RRB- after pleading not guilty to `` unlawfully , and without malice , killing Michael Joseph Jackson '' . 
A judge must decide whether to proceed to trial . 
A conviction could bring a jail term of up to four years . 
Jackson died at his home on 25 June last year at the age of 50 . 
His death was ruled as homicide , mainly caused by the anesthetic Propofol . 
A cocktail of drugs - including sedatives midazolam and diazepam , the painkiller lidocaine and the stimulant ephedrine - were also detected in his body , a coroner confirmed . 
Members of the Jackson family arrive at court for Dr Murray 's hearing Prosecutors had filed one count of involuntary manslaughter . 
Dr Murray stood straight and spoke softly as he addressed the judge . 
After entering his plea , Dr Murray surrendered his passport . 
He was then taken to have his fingerprints and a mugshot processed . 
He is allowed to continue to practice medicine , but can not use certain drugs . 
Judge Keith Schwartz told Dr Murray : `` You may not under any circumstances use any anesthetic agents , specifically Propofol . 
`` You are not to be using that , you 're not to prescribe that , you 're not to have it in any manner whatsoever ... and you are not to give any other heavy sedative medications like that . '' 
The bail of $ 75,000 was three times the standard figure for involuntary manslaughter , but a quarter of the sum prosecutors had been seeking . 
The next hearing has been set for 5 April . 
Members of Michael Jackson 's family - father Joe , mother Katherine , brothers Jermaine , Tito , Jackie and Randy and sister LaToya - were in court for the hearing . 
When asked by a reporter as he arrived what he thought about Dr Murray being charged with involuntary manslaughter , Jermaine said simply : `` It 's not enough '' . 
Joe Jackson said only `` looking for justice '' . 
A lawyer for the family , Brian Oxman , speaking to CBS television , said of the involuntary manslaughter charge : `` I do n't think it would satisfy anybody , the millions of fans around the world . '' 
A number of the singer 's fans had shouted `` justice for Michael '' as Dr Murray arrived at court . 
Mark Lester , who is godfather to one of Michael Jackson 's children , told the BBC 's Newshour someone should be punished . 
`` At the end of the day it 's not going to bring Michael back . 
There has to be some punishment meted out if only to prevent a further occurrence of this happening . 
`` It 's just the most horrible , horrible scenario . 
There are no winners here . '' 
Dr Murray had been hired to be Jackson 's personal physician last spring as the singer prepared for his comeback concerts in London . 
We 'll make bail , we 'll plead not guilty and we 'll fight like hell But he has always maintained he neither prescribed nor administered anything that should have killed the singer . 
After a week of speculation over the manslaughter charge , Dr Murray had been expected to surrender to authorities last Friday . 
But a spokeswoman for the Los Angeles district attorney said the office had decided to delay action until Monday . 
The statement came after several days of negotiations , where Dr Murray 's lawyers tried to arrange for him to surrender to prosecutors in an attempt to avoid him being handcuffed and arrested . 
Dr Murray was not handcuffed as he arrived in court . 
Speaking before the charges were filed , the physician 's defense lawyer , Ed Chernoff , said the doctor was prepared for the legal battle ahead . 
`` We 'll make bail , we 'll plead not guilty and we 'll fight like hell , '' he said . 
The charge follows months of careful investigation , with prosecutors said to be keen to avoid an unsuccessful high-profile prosecution like that of former football star OJ Simpson . 
Originally from Grenada , Dr Murray moved to the US and trained as a doctor . 
In 2000 , he opened his own practice in Las Vegas , expanding with a second clinic in Houston in 2006 . 
However , he encountered financial difficulties and reports suggest he filed for bankruptcy in 2002 while living in California . 
Jackson hired the physician on a salary of more than $ 150,000 -LRB- # 96,000 -RRB- a month in May 2009 . 
