Plan to cap Gulf of Mexico oil leak with dome delayed BP says the new dome should be working later on Thursday or Friday A new attempt by BP to control the main leak at the Gulf of Mexico oil well disaster site with a steel dome has been put back by a `` few days '' . 
Earlier , the British oil giant said it hoped the `` top hat '' , which is now on the seabed , would be deployed by Thursday at the broken pipeline . 
An attempt to use a larger containment dome failed on Sunday when it became clogged with ice and gas . 
The well is spewing out some 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day . 
The `` top hat '' is meant to siphon oil into container ships but there is no guarantee that the plan will work , the BBC 's Andy Gallacher reports . 
The first of two relief wells being drilled is not expected to be ready for some three months . 
Emergency teams are using several methods in their attempts to deal with the oil at the surface . 
Thousands of clean-up crews , soldiers and volunteers have all been deployed to keep the expanding oil slick from damaging the coastlines of four states . 
Around 1.5 m ft of floating booms are being used as part of the efforts to stop oil reaching the coast , Reuters reports . 
A US charity is even making booms out of nylon tights , animal fur and human hair . 
Hair donations have been sent from around the world to help make the special booms , which will be laid on beaches to soak up any oil that washes ashore . 
Eleven people died when an explosion - thought to have occurred after a surge of methane gas from deep within the well - destroyed the Deepwater Horizon rig on 20 April . 
The huge oil spill has so far cost BP - which is in charge of the clean-up operation - $ 450m -LRB- # 300m -RRB- . 
The total bill could be as high as $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.6 bn -RRB- , analysts say . 
`` Estimates run from between $ 3bn to $ 20bn . 
Certainly , there 's the clean-up costs . 
`` And the associated lawsuits , which at this stage looks like it could be one of the largest class actions in US history '' , oil analyst Greg Smith of stock market research house Fat Prophets told the BBC . 
`` From our point of view , we would think somewhere mid-range - around the $ 10bn mark , '' he adds . 
Underwater efforts to cap oil leak Initially , BP tried to lower a 125-tonne , 18-metre -LRB- 59 feet -RRB- high container dome over the main leak on the sea floor . 
However , this failed when gas leaking from the pipe mixed with water to form hydrates , ice-like crystals , that blocked up the steel canopy . 
Instead , engineers have lowered a smaller device onto the site . 
Dubbed the Top hat , it will sit over the tear in the pipe and partially stop the leak . 
To prevent the build up of hydrates , methanol is pumped into the top hat to disperse the water and gas . 
The top hat is 1.5 m -LRB- 5 feet -RRB- high and 1.2 m in diameter . 
Two special side lines are used to pump methanol into the top hat to displace water and gas leaking from the broken oil pipe . 
This should prevent the build-up of hydrates . 
Once in place , oil can be pumped up to the surface . 
BP plan to lower the original subsea containment dome over the top hat to provide a better seal over the leaking site and pump oil up to the surface . 
This time , it will be attached to a pipe that can pump warm water into the dome to prevent the build-up of hydrates . 
