Johnson Beharry was last week awarded the Victoria Cross for his acts of bravery during the Iraq war . 
Peter Beaumont and Jason Burke ask what factors - physical , psychological and moral - create a heroic act The following correction was printed in the Guardian 's Corrections and clarifications column , Sunday March 27 , 2005 In the article below we said Colonel Herbert ` H ' Jones and Sergeant Ian McKay were awarded the VC for their role in the attack on Goose Green . 
In fact , Sergeant McKay 's VC was awarded for his bravery during an attack on an enemy position on Mount Longdon , an objective in the battle for Port Stanley . 
` Heroism ' , wrote Ralph Waldo Emerson , ` is an obedience to a secret impulse of an individual 's character . ' 
It is a mystery , war 's great enigma - what is it that makes one man run , another stand his ground , and an exceptional few display unusual courage . 
That conundrum - of what makes a hero - was posed again last week as a young Grenadan-born private from the 1st Battalion of The Princess of Wales 's Royal Regiment , Johnson Beharry , was presented with the Victoria Cross , Britain 's highest award for military gallantry , for the bravery he showed in two separate actions in Iraq last year . 
He is only the 1,354 th recipient since the medal was instituted in 1854 - and only the 11th since the end of the Second World War . 
And what underlies that question of heroism is not simply the details of his extraordinary valor as they were detailed last week , but by the pictures of Beharry himself . 
They showed an open , easy and smiling face - comfortable , perhaps even a little shy - reinforcing his humanity . 
They were pictures that insisted that we ask : what was it that made this ordinary man do such extraordinary things ? 
It is a question , in truth , as old as writing and humanity itself - and one that only now scientists are beginning to understand . 
Homer took it as his theme in the Iliad , his depiction of the characters of two great and flawed warriors - Achilles and Hector - while Plato and Aristotle dissected what it meant for the citizen soldier . 
The Old Testament authors presented their own archetypes for heroism , none more powerfully described than David 's struggle against Goliath . 
In the last century , however , biologists and social scientists , physiologists and psychologists began to attempt to define Emerson 's ` secret impulse ' and the core nature of heroism itself . 
It is a question that has been muddied by the fact that the idea of heroism at any time is defined by broader social values and shifting cultural perceptions . 
The traditional meaning that accrued to it in the field of military endeavor was , perhaps , best expressed by Churchill 's physician , Lord Moran , who took two views of courage in his book , The Anatomy of Courage - as a ` true virtue ' , and as a special case of self-control . 
He rejected , too , the idea of courage as a constant . 
Instead he took the view that it was inevitably exhaustible . 
Most of all , believed Moran , it had to involve a conscious decision . 
` Courage is a moral quality , ' wrote Lord Moran . 
` It is not a chance gift of nature like an aptitude for games . 
It is a cold choice between two alternatives , the fixed resolve not to quit ; an act of renunciation which must be made not once but many times by the power of the will . ' 
It is a definition that could have been written for Johnson Beharry . 
The story of Beharry 's heroism , however , is doubly meaningful because his story transcends the traditional idea of martial valor - that its function is violence alone - and incorporates more modern civil notions that real heroes are just those ordinary people who put themselves at risk to help others . 
The 24-year-old armored vehicle driver was at the head of a five-vehicle convoy that came under attack on the outskirts of the central Iraqi city of Amara on the night of 1 May last year . 
The vehicle Beharry was driving was hit by a barrage of rocket-propelled grenades , leaving the platoon commanding officer unconscious and presumed dead , and engulfing the vehicle in flames . 
Beharry , determined to get the casualties to safety and create a path for the other vehicles to follow , rammed a barricade and drove on through thick smoke and a mile-long ambush with his protective hatch blasted open . 
He eventually delivered the troops to a secure area , twice returning to the vehicle under fire to carry the wounded inside a compound . 
Weeks later , his Warrior was ambushed again and a rocket exploded six inches away from him , causing serious head injuries . 
He managed to reverse the Warrior and its occupants out of danger before collapsing into a coma . 
They were actions that meant Beharry would become the first living recipient of a Victoria Cross -LRB- VC -RRB- since 1965 , and the first to get the medal since the 1982 Falklands conflict when Colonel Herbert ` H ' Jones and Sergeant Ian McKay were awarded the VC posthumously for their role in the attack on Goose Green . 
Indeed , military experts believe that the award of the VC to Beharry signalled a recognition of the change in the army 's role . 
` For a long time the feeling was that the Victoria Cross should be reserved for gallantry in conventional war rather than the `` low-intensity conflicts '' that the British Army has primarily been involved in recently , ' said Andrew Dorman , a lecturer in Defense Studies at King 's College London . 
Dorman said last week 's VC showed a recognition both that ` extreme gallantry is the same whatever ' , a belief recognized by Beharry 's fellow soldiers , who launched the campaign for him to be given the Victoria Cross after senior officers recommended him for honors . 
But was there something in Beharry 's background that conditioned him for courage ? 
The son of a Grenadan brickmaker who came to the United Kingdom in 1999 , Johnson grew up in a wooden hut without running water that he shared with his parents and seven brothers and sisters . 
In interviews last week , his parents said that Johnson , who had enjoyed playing childhood war-games with his friends , had always dreamed of joining the British Army , leaving school at 14 . 
Beharry 's modest upbringing is one that he shares with other soldiers who have displayed the highest gallantry in war , including Audie Murphy , America 's most decorated soldier of World War Two , whose parents were dirt-poor sharecroppers , and Albert Jacka VC , the Australian hero of Gallipoli , a forestry labourer who rose rapidly through the ranks . 
Yet none of this explains why some people are predisposed to be courageous , and in a way the majority are not . 
This question has obsessed military commanders from the first decade of the last century onwards as they enlisted the new social sciences to try to find ways of persuading soldiers to be more aggressive - courageous in the traditional military sense . 
It is the search for the roots of courage that was chronicled by Joanna Bourke of Birkbeck College in her book An Intimate History of Killing . 
` There was a problem : the instinct of self-preservation was as liable to lead to `` flight '' as to `` fight '' , ' wrote Bourke about the early attempts to understand valor . 
` To overcome this , military psychologists coupled instinct theory with the crowd psychology of men like Gustave Le Bon and his English populariser , Wilfred Trotter . 
` Humans were herd animals , with strong gregarious impulses . 
In a crowd - and the army was only a trained crowd - the `` group mind '' would take over , endowing the individual with a sense of almost limitless power and immortality . ' 
That was the theory for a while at least . 
But it still did not explain why some soldiers were prepared to take more risks than others . 
By the Fifties , research was hinting at other explanations . 
The British psychologist , Hans Eysenck , developed a scale to measure the personality trait of extroversion , now regarded by psychologists as one of the most consistent predictors of risk-taking . 
Other physical studies , meanwhile , were beginning to reveal that the brain not only craved arousal , but somehow could regulate that arousal at an optimal level . 
Over the next three decades , researchers extended these early findings into a host of theories about risk-taking . 
It led scientists , including Frank Farley in the US , to identify risk-takers as a whole new ` personality type ' - Type-A - which he subdivided into T-negative and T-positive , to distinguish between productive and destructive risk-taking : between the heroic tendency and the nihilistic . 
Biologists too were making critical breakthroughs in explaining those predisposed to risk-taking behavior , discovering the action of an enzyme called monoamine oxidase -LRB- MAO -RRB- in regulating arousal in the brain , with scientists discovering low levels of the enzyme in the brains of those dubbed High Sensation Seekers . 
All of which suggests that military courage , of the kind understood by Moran , is a deeply complex coincidence of the physical , social and the moral ; of nature and nurture ; of instinct and that which is learned . 
But for all the mystery of what courage is and where it comes from , one thing about it is immutable : it is the use of valor to reinforce what a society feels about its values , from Homer 's celebration of the valor of Greek and Trojan warriors , to Australia 's lionisation of Albert Jacka and the mythologising in the public mind of Colonel Herbert ` H ' Jones . 
The soldier 's story is being seen as a magnificent public relations opportunity for the army , which has been hit by scandals involving the abuse and death of recruits at Deepcut Barracks and the mistreatment of prisoners in Iraq . 
Though the army is only 500 men below its ideal strength of 104,000 , an initial surge in recruitment that followed the war in Iraq has now fallen away and , as is usual after a war , experienced soldiers are leaving . 
` Beharry was incredibly brave , incredibly competent and incredibly committed . 
His story is a great advertisement for today 's army and everyone 's very pleased about that , ' one retired senior officer told The Observer . 
And Beharry 's heroism can help in other ways . 
The forces have made repeated efforts to reach out to minorities . 
Last week the head of Britain 's armed forces made a direct appeal to the country 's Islamic community to encourage more Muslims to join up . 
General Sir Michael Walker , the chief of defense staff , said he was personally committed to ` creating armed forces which reflect more fully the society we serve ' . 
Beharry , his great smiling face appearing on the front of newspapers , can mean far more to the creation of an image of the army as a diverse organization than any set of new statistics or new policies . 
For the soldiers themselves it is a different state of affairs . 
For them heroism is best summed up by the speech of Clearchos to his soldiers in Xenophon 's Anabasis . ' 
I will go with you and suffer whatever I must suffer . 
For I consider that you are my country and my friends and comrades ; and with you , I think I shall be honored wherever I may be , but without you I think I am not able either to help a friend or hurt an enemy . 
Where you go , there I will go also : that is my resolve . ' 
Victoria Cross , Military Cross and Bar , First World War ` Great battle at 3am . 
Turks captured large portion of our trench . 
Lieutenant Hamilton shot dead . 
I led a section of men and recaptured the trench . 
I bayoneted two Turks , shot five , took three prisoners and cleared the whole trench . 
I held the trench alone for 15 minutes against a heavy attack . ' 
With these words acting lance-corporal Albert Jacka , 22 , described the circumstances of his nomination for a VC , the first awarded to an Australian in the Great War for his actions at Gallipoli . 
American , Congressional Medal of Honour , Distinguished Service Cross , Second World War One of 12 children of a poor sharecropper in Texas , Murphy was initially rejected by the Marines and Paratroopers after lying about his age . 
Only 5ft 5ins , when he finally enlisted in the army at 17 , he became a rifleman - and would become America 's most decorated soldier in the Second World War . 
In one extraordinary action near Ramatuelle , France , in 1944 , he single-handedly destroyed several German positions - earning him the Distinguished Service Cross . 
British , OBE , Victoria Cross awarded posthumously , Falklands Lieutenant-Colonel Jones was commanding 2nd battalion The Parachute regiment in the Falklands when they were held up by a resilient enemy position on an important ridge . 
Seizing a sub-machine gun , Jones charged the nearest enemy position . 
As he ran up a short slope he fell , but picked himself up . 
He was hit from another trench which he outflanked and fell dying . 
A short time later a company of the battalion attacked and the enemy quickly surrendered . 
