Foreign workers from other African countries scramble to board a truck trying to leave the besieged city of Misrata April 18 . 
EU reveals it would launch military operation in Libya for humanitarian assistance Troops would `` contribute to the safe movement and evacuation of displaced persons '' City of Misrata under attack on three sides by forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The deployment of foreign troops on the ground in Libya could boost the NATO-led mission to protect civilians , though opponents of such a scenario from within the coalition may be difficult to convince , leading analysts say . 
On Tuesday the European Union revealed that it would be prepared to launch a military operation for humanitarian assistance in the war-torn North African country if it is supported by the United Nations . 
The mission , featuring `` definitely less than 1,000 '' troops , would `` contribute to the safe movement and evacuation of displaced persons '' and support humanitarian agencies in their activities , The Council of the European Union said in a statement . 
Separately , Britain , France and Italy also confirmed they would be sending military officers to Libya to advise the rebels , though French Defense Minister Grard Longuet ruled out sending ground troops to fight alongside them . 
EU boots on Libyan ground ? 
Forces loyal to the embattled Libyan leader have been shelling the rebel-held city of Misrata with artillery , resulting in the deaths of at least 27 people , according to an opposition spokesman . 
The city is surrounded by Gadhafi 's forces on three sides , with the port area the only lifeline for humanitarian aid -- and escape . 
Hundreds of migrant workers have been evacuated from the stricken city on charter boats . 
According to Alexis Crow , of London-based think tank Chatham House , air power can only do so much to protect civilians on the ground in these situations . 
`` The examples of Mogadishu in Somalia , Rwanda , Bosnia and Kosovo will have played quite heavily in the minds of European policymakers , '' she told CNN . 
`` In trying to stop a humanitarian disaster one thing that has been learned from these experiences is that you have got to have a ` hammer and anvil strategy , ' which is airpower combined with a compliment of ground troops in order to stop things like ethnic cleansing happening . '' 
NATO has said Gadhafi 's forces have also started hiding resources in civilian areas , making airstrikes more difficult to carry out without harming civilians . 
`` Troops on the ground would be able to get a more accurate fix on targets and call in what is known as ` close air support . ' 
This would make the air strikes more effective , '' said Paul Smyth , an ex-RAF Tornado navigator and former analyst with the Royal United Services Institute -LRB- RUSI -RRB- . 
While admitting his surprise that an organization he described as a little `` timid '' militarily had proposed the plan , he said the use of ground troops is bound to raise questions about the original UN mandate in Libya , in terms of what is or is not meant by occupying force . 
`` Some countries have been open in saying there should be no boots on the ground , though I think this EU force would be acceptable under the current mandate as it is not an incursion . 
`` But it would be interesting if they wanted to make this a permanent move in terms of creating a safe haven for carrying out humanitarian assistance . 
This is similar to what was created to protect the Kurds from Saddam Hussein 's forces in northern Iraq in the 1990s . 
`` It would then become a peace enforcement operation . 
To do that there might be a case for underlining it with an additional mandate from the UN . '' 
Resolution 1973 was approved by the UN Security Council in March and authorized member states `` to take all necessary measures to protect civilians under threat of attack in the country , including Benghazi , while excluding a foreign occupation force of any form on any part of Libyan territory . '' 
However the prospect of sustaining casualties on the ground from snipers or roadside bombs -- threats that can not always be neutralized from the air -- would make governments nervous about contributing to this force , said Smyth . 
`` So many nations appear to have gone public already , adamant that they are not putting any boots on the ground in Libya . '' 
He said it would also be politically difficult domestically for these governments to change their mind and perform a U-turn , even if their aim is a humanitarian mission . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron told Sky News over the weekend that the UN-backed mission was clear : to enforce a no-fly zone and destroy Moammar Gadhafi 's ability to threaten civilians . 
`` We are very clear we must stick to the terms of the UN Security Council resolution . 
We must keep the support of the Arab world and I think that is very important to make sure this is done the right way , '' he said . 
Crow said the EU plan was also constrained by two things : the burden of responsibility and time . 
`` It 's the age-old question of burden sharing , '' she said . 
`` Who supplies the troops ? 
And if you 're sending them using the term ` humanitarian assistance , ' how long do you give it ? 
`` There is no stomach for long-term campaigns among the voting public in coalition countries . 
It could easily turn into a conflict resolution or stabilization mission as the line between objectives becomes blurred . 
If this is the case , how long do you leave troops there ? 
This makes me nervous . '' 
