BENGHAZI Middle Eastern autocrats routinely warn their people of rivers of blood , Western occupation , poverty , chaos , and Al Qaeda if their regimes are toppled . 
Those threats were heard in Tunisia , Egypt , Yemen , Bahrain , Syria , and rendered in black-comedy style in Libya . 
But there is a strong belief across the region that the costs of removing autocracies , as high as they might be , are low compared to the damage inflicted by the current rulers . 
In short , freedom is worth the price . 
In Libya , four scenarios may negatively affect prospects for democratization : civil\/tribal war , military rule , becoming stuck in transition , and partition . 
Given the high price Libyans have paid , those scenarios should be prevented rather than cured . 
The civil\/tribal war scenario is the worst risk . 
Egypt s revolutionaries understood this . 
When sectarian violence erupted there following the removal of Hosni Mubarak , the revolutionary coalitions adopted the slogan , You won t gloat over this , Mubarak . 
Repressive dictatorships can not win free and fair elections . 
But they can use extreme violence to consolidate their control over the state , its people and its institutions . 
So , to win , Libya s Colonel Moammar Gadhafi has deliberately and successfully turned a civil-resistance campaign into an armed conflict . 
That will have ramifications in the post-authoritarian context . 
A study published by Columbia University on civil resistance has shown that the probability of a country relapsing into civil war following a successful anti-dictatorship armed campaign is 43 % , versus 28 % when the campaign is unarmed . 
According to the same study , which was based on 323 cases of armed and unarmed opposition campaigns between 1900 and 2006 , the likelihood of democratic transition within five years following a successful armed opposition campaign is only 3 % , compared to 51 % when campaigns were unarmed . 
Libya , of course , can survive the gloomy prospect of post-authoritarian civil war . 
But this requires containing tribal and regional polarization , as well as the rivalries between the Interim National Council -LRB- INC -RRB- and the Military Council -LRB- MC -RRB- , and between senior military commanders . 
Violent polarization has developed not only between Eastern and Western tribes , but also between some of the Western tribes . 
Last month , for example , armed clashes erupted between rebels in al-Zintan and the villagers of al-Rayyaniya , 15 kilometers away . 
Six people were killed a reminder of what can happen if violent polarization continues between neighboring towns and villages . 
Vendetta politics is not unknown in Libya , and , in an armed society comprising more than 120 tribes including around 30 with significant numbers and resources it can become extremely dangerous . 
Another negative scenario is military rule . 
Several figures from the free officers the group that plotted the 1969 coup against the monarchy are leading the INC. . 
They include General Abd al-Fattah Younis , General Soliman Mahmoud , Colonel Khalifa Haftar , Major Mohamed Najm , and others . 
Those figures hold a mix of historical legitimacy , for participating in the 1969 coup , and current legitimacy , for helping the 17th February revolution . 
They also belong to several large tribes , guaranteeing wide tribal representation if a military council were to take power , as in Egypt . 
Unlike Egypt , however , whoever takes power in Libya will not necessarily inherit poor economic conditions that could threaten their legitimacy and undermine their popularity . 
This might lead a group of senior officers to rule directly , especially if victory in Libya comes militarily . 
A move by army officers in Tripoli against Gadhafi and his sons might end the conflict , with military commanders getting the credit and the political capital . 
But four decades of military-based dictatorship may be enough for Libyans , a majority of whom never really benefited from their country s wealth or potential . 
When it comes to producing terrorists and undocumented immigrants two critical issues for Europe Arab military dictators have an inglorious record . 
Algeria in the 1990 s is a potent reminder of this , and Western governments do not want the vicious cycle of repressive autocrats producing violent theocrats and refugees to restart . 
Getting `` stuck in transition '' Getting stuck in transition is a third possible scenario , with Libya remaining in a gray zone neither a fully-fledged democracy nor a dictatorship , but semi-free . 
This means regular elections , a democratic constitution , and civil society , coupled with electoral fraud , skewed representation , human rights violations , and restrictions on civil liberties . 
Getting stuck in transition usually kills the momentum for democratic change , and widespread corruption , weak state institutions , and lack of security serve to reinforce a myth of the just autocrat . 
Vladimir Putin s rule in Russia illustrates this outcome . 
Unfortunately , a study published in the Journal of Democracy showed that out of the 100 countries that were designated in transition between 1970 and 2000 , only 20 became fully democratic -LRB- for example , Chile , Argentina , Poland , and Taiwan -RRB- . 
Five relapsed into brutal dictatorships -LRB- including Uzbekistan , Algeria , Turkmenistan , and Belarus -RRB- , while the rest were stuck somewhere in transition . 
Given Libya s lack of democratic experience , some view this as a likely outcome in the post-Gadhafi era . 
But Libya is not the only country that has tried to move from dictatorship to democracy with weak institutions and strong tribal identities . 
Albania , Mongolia , and India successfully passed more complicated tests and offer some useful lessons in democratic transitions under unfavourable conditions . 
The fourth scenario is partition , with the old three-province , Ottoman-style setup commonly mentioned : Cyrenaica -LRB- east -RRB- , Fezzan -LRB- south -RRB- , and Tripolitania -LRB- west -RRB- . 
Cyrenaica is Gadhafi-free , Tripolitania is not , and Fezzan did not fully join the revolution . 
But the administrative borders of these districts were never fully established , and they have changed at least eight times since 1951 . 
In 2007 , Libya had 22 sha biya -LRB- administrative districts -RRB- , not three . 
All of these scenarios will be affected by outcomes in Egypt and Tunisia . 
In the case of democratic transitions , a success nearby often helps at home . 
Either country , or both , could offer Libya successful transition models , erecting an important obstacle to military dictatorship or civil war . 
The views expressed in this article are solely those of Omar Ashour . 
www.project-syndicate.org The above may be quite true in Yemen and in fact , is but in Libya it 's a different story . 
What the people in the right-wing news media wo n't and never will talk about is the way Mohammar Qadaffy greatly helped the Libyan people after the 1969 revolution . 
For instance , the litteracy rate in Libya was 15 % in 1970 and today is 85 % while the poor gradually became less poor and hospitals , bridges and schools were built which otherwise would not have happened under King Idris . 
If the `` rebels '' triumph there with the help of NATO , Libya will only degenerate into another pro-Western Arab police state !! July 17 , 2011 at 12:39 am | Reply You talk about the 60s and 70s ... What about 21st century Gaddafi ? 
I noticed that you stand very quiet to the ` wonderful ' things he has done in the past years .20 % unemployment while Gaddafi supporting Migrant workers did all the jobs , yes that 's a wonderful gift he gave the Libyan people , and while western half of Libya and Tripoli prospered from the Oil Wealth ... the eastern part of the nation was ignored . 
When you have a lot of young , smart , bored , people feeling hopeless , that breeds rebellion . 
As for the Rebels in the mountains , that was caused by Gaddafi 's demand that they abandon everything about themselves for his culture . 
People do n't like that . 
July 17 , 2011 at 5:17 pm | Reply I agree with you on Libya . 
We have failed to recognize any good that Qadaffi has done in Libya and the region . 
We look for opportunities to make money for big business under the name of democracy . 
July 18 , 2011 at 2:09 pm | Reply What good can any man do that would justify the terrible things he 's done ? 
July 18 , 2011 at 4:11 pm | Reply And all of these possible outcomes are better than Libya with Ghadafi the way it was before ? 
July 18 , 2011 at 9:47 pm | Reply Also , this ... `` Comments are not pre-screened before they post . '' 
July 17 , 2011 at 10:29 am | Reply July 17 , 2011 at 11:12 am | Reply `` Global peace '' through indiscriminately bombing brown people in order to install a `` pro-Western '' dictator by means of lies spouted through social media . 
Is that what yo meant . 
You are so brain-washed by the TV and lying print media . 
Why do n't you ask Hillary Clinton and her `` techno experts '' what they are doing over at American University in Egypt concerning training young people to propagate lies through the internet to cause civil unrest in middle eastern countries . 
July 17 , 2011 at 11:35 am | Reply Thank you , Consitution Man . 
The way the right-wing thugs in Washington try to run things over there utterly nauseates me !!! July 17 , 2011 at 3:22 pm | well said , and dont forget that in Kenya just last NOVEMBER , the US amabassador to that country , the white supremacist bigot Michael rannenberger got caught RED HANDED trying to pay money to the citizens of Kenya who stage a revolt against the govt there ! 
July 18 , 2011 at 3:49 pm | July 17 , 2011 at 12:10 pm | Reply After the removal of Hosni Mubarak , the revolutionary coalitions wanted to show their world , You won t gloat over this , Mubarak . 
Today , Egypt still lacks an elected government and is lost in transition . 
With so many tribes that are scattered all over Libya , there would be tribal conflicts , if unity is unthinkable . 
Also an internal struggle between former members of the regime within the Transitional National Council and the Military Council could break out , if no consensus can be reached . 
I wish the Libyans the best of luck . 
July 17 , 2011 at 12:30 pm | Reply The problem in Egypt is , is that there are too many leftovers from the Mubarak regime which the right-wing thugs in Washington use to continue their control over that country and that they do not want changed !!! July 17 , 2011 at 3:27 pm | Reply If we were in the McCarhty era , you would be purged for your anti-Americanism ! 
July 17 , 2011 at 6:00 pm | RE : Option 3 Exploration -LRB- Global Public Square Option -RRB- I believe that there will never be a World War III and the reason why is because we as a human race have the option of charting our best possible course through not only the years nearly ahead but also those currently considered `` far away '' ... We stand at the _ logical _ center of Past , Present , and Future , but only within the `` here and now '' which has , as History serves , a ` limited shelf life ' before the ` Moments of Transition ' change to ` Moments of Reflection ' and finally emerge in the Natural Universe as manifestations of either -LCB- ? -RCB- 
_ Mother_Nature __ xOR __ Father_Time _ -LCB- ? -RCB- 
but seldom are both in complete agreement . 
ViSiBLe ~ 2.0 ~ EDITORIAL Page -LRB- Sunday evening edition -RRB- I also believe that Earth is sending a CLEAR message via Changing Weather Patterns that we humans are an `` Optional '' component of LIFE here on Earth . 
If we can not rectify the current level of CO -LCB- 2 -RCB- in the atmosphere then ` Mother Nature ' will do it for us . 
Do n't count on Father Time to shield us from her fury either . 
If we , the Human Race , are so `` Evolved '' then WHY do we not `` Evolve '' ???? -LRB- -LRB- -LCB- ten -RCB- -RRB- -RRB- -LRB- -LRB- -LCB- twenty -RCB- -RRB- -RRB- -LRB- -LCB- ? -RCB- 
40 -LCB- ? -RCB- -RRB- 
The head of the rebellion could sign the treaty giving them land in the East next to the borders of Egypt with Benghazi as their capital city and Gaddafi having the land to the West next to the borders of Algeria and Tunisia with Tripoli as his capital city . 
Thus , giving both the rebels freedom and democracy they desire and Gaddafi control and rule he desires . 
With this peace agreement , this will end the conflict and the Libyan economy will not be affected . 
July 17 , 2011 at 7:49 pm | Reply That 's a very good idea , Najm Abaza . 
Anyway , it 's better than a protracted war which will leave nothing behind but a lot of death and destruction !!! July 17 , 2011 at 10:47 pm | Reply Slow Down , you 're getting ahead of yourself and counting your chickens before they hatch . 
Gadhafi is n't going anywhere . 
He still has an iron grip on Libya . 
July 18 , 2011 at 10:24 am | Reply `` But there is a strong belief across the region that the costs of removing autocracies , as high as they might be , are low compared to the damage inflicted by the current rulers . 
In short , freedom is worth the price . '' 
There 's also a strong belief among those who believe in democratic change , that majority rule is absolutely critical . 
Something RARELY discussed in the media , even among propagandists like Omar Ashour , if the majority of the population supports the current `` regime '' , how is it that a well-armed rebellion minority can seek democratic change with outside foriegn influence attacking the interests of the majority ? 
July 18 , 2011 at 1:19 pm | Reply Democracy is not predicated on majority rule , but the rule of free logic . 
The idea is that majority rule can work because a majority will function logically , or will at least elect representatives who will emphasize logic . 
July 18 , 2011 at 10:52 pm | Reply good point . 
Let 's go back to 3 MAR 2011 . 
All leaders of signif . 
Nations , same day `` Gadaffi must go '' very very interesting the WHY and more interesting WHO convinced the others ????? July 19 , 2011 at 12:24 am | Reply One islamo-fascist regime may our may not replace another Islamo-fascist regime . 
America has nothing in common with these woman-stoning neanderthals . 
July 18 , 2011 at 1:36 pm | Reply Sharia law does not lend itself to becoming a democracy , they will become a state governed by islamic clerics . 
There is no appeal of a decision under sharia law . 
By dethroning their leaders we are helping radical islam to prosper . 
July 18 , 2011 at 2:27 pm | Reply 3 -RRB- Enhanced Paranoid Delusions -LRB- like his pucking coffee was being spiked before he cleared out his armories cause they literally tried the same stunt with this `` suspect '' but he actually wanted to leave the country -RRB- 4 -RRB- A vaccine program -LRB- fist degree Murder Hayden , Cheney , Muller , W , Obama -RRB- Back on the block Obama stands up and says : I can not believe you are speculating that I am causing these obvious symptoms using my `` extraordinary '' super power , since a skunk works scientist made them sort of run parallel , well , to the naturally occurring ones . 
so your proof can not be conclusive unless someone broke `` ordinary '' law ! 
Well , I better really go with what is ordinarily possible -- and what I am lawfully able to speak about - cause I do not want to get wrapped up into this since I am a potential enemy for life now for no apparent reason ! 
A political weapon and force that is more destructive than pure violence because not having the ability to separate - and conclusively convince -- what consequences the state is causing vs what is naturally and ordinarily occurring -- is the ultimate form of control that absolutely no dictator has and no man should have . 
The only question Watson is why this sad and sorry excuse of a man still looks in a mirror . 
July 18 , 2011 at 2:53 pm | Reply THE ARAB DICTATORS ARE MADE BY THE WEST , AND THEY DID GREAT HARM TO THE ARAB NATION . 
IT IS TIME TO BURN THOSE GARBAGE AND BEE FREE OF THE WEST AND ITS BABY ISRAEL LONG LIVE THE ARAB SPRING . 
DOWN WITH ALL ARAB LEADERS GANG OF SICK MASS MURDERERS FROM SADAM TO ALASSAD , QADAFEE , SALEH . 
KHALIFA AND DOWN WITH IRAN , HIZB ALAH , RUSIA , CHINA YOU SOON WILL PAY FOR YOUR CRIMES July 18 , 2011 at 5:35 pm | Reply Simple solution : Restore the monarchy . 
King Idris has family ready to return to work . 
July 18 , 2011 at 7:32 pm | Reply If this King Idris was any good in the first place , why did n't he do anything for the Libyan people ? 
Besides , once the jerk gets back in , he 'll only become another stooge for the right-wing thugs in Washington to control !!! July 18 , 2011 at 8:44 pm | Reply Great . 
Another muslim whack-job on this thread . 
onesmallvoice makes one big fart . 
His voice is probably not the only thing on him that is small . 
July 18 , 2011 at 8:56 pm | King Idris was a wonderful rules . 
He brought in law and order , universal healthcare and education and there was prosperity for all . 
This is the rules Libya needs now and needs tomorrow . 
July 19 , 2011 at 6:56 am | work ? 
no -- pleasure -LRB- s -RRB- , egocentrical fortune collectors and and and , no way i would say . 
July 19 , 2011 at 12:20 am | Reply 1st 2nd 3rd 4th way things will go down , America will pay for these worthless morons . 
The rise of the planet of the apes is not just a stupid movie . 
July 18 , 2011 at 8:38 pm | Reply July 19 , 2011 at 6:57 am | Reply How about 4 for how Muller seized control of your joke of a board ... July 18 , 2011 at 8:48 pm | Reply In fact , what happen will be combination of the Four together , or in sequence . 
It will take a strong military man to take over . 
Democracy does not grown on tree . 
It must be started with soil , seed , step by step gardening and testing . 
Democracy overnight is impossible . 
July 18 , 2011 at 10:41 pm | Reply I 'd hope it would be little more than a repositioning of Benghazi as the Libyan capital over Tripoli . 
In fact , that 's what they should out-and-out do with the legitimacy they are given . 
July 18 , 2011 at 10:55 pm | Reply We should never forget the slaves . 
Nobody can help them to get free , because whoever holds them , plans to hold on to them afterwarts too . 
July 19 , 2011 at 12:00 am | Reply there will be no after Gadaffi ... God is on his side ! 
The Lion of the desert July 19 , 2011 at 1:57 am | Reply This article on the surface appears to be thoughtful , but it is cursed with a couple of glaring errors . 
Why no comparison to the dreadful experience in Iraq , with which the Libyan war bears so many similarities -- intervention based on lies , a relatively prosperous country ruled by someone deemed a `` bad guy '' by the West , and the fact that both countries did not have to answer to the IMF . 
Also , whereas the Egypt and Tunisia revolts had partcipation from large numbers of protestors , the rebels\/insurgents in Libya were and remain a small minority -- and the revolt or civil war only exists because of foreign\/Nato intervention . 
Ignoring the fact that a large majority support the current gov ' t or want nothing to do with the Nato rebels would also appear worth mentioning . 
July 19 , 2011 at 4:50 pm | Reply `` Why no comparison to the dreadful experience ... '' If you are going to use an interrogative , you must use a question mark . 
`` Also , whereas the Egypt and Tunisia ... '' You began a sentence with the adverb , `` Also , '' another grammatical error . '' . 
Ignoring the fact ... '' You just had to use the word ` fact ' without citing a source . 
Such citations are called ` opinions , ' for no majority threatened with public executions , torture , and beheading , will become the vocal majority until the rebels that you so blithely dismiss have their voices heard without their throats being cut . 
Unfortunately , you have supplied us with another predictable , poorly worded , anti-American rant . 
July 19 , 2011 at 9:23 pm | Reply I did find it quite amusing that you chose to spend your time focused on issues of grammar , while posting nothing of substance in regards to the facts and opinions stated . 
You apparently overlooked all of the other posts in this thread as , with few exceptions , they all contain errors of some sort . 
-LRB- The need for brevity , combined with haste , often results in less-than-perfect blog posts ! -RRB- . 
By the way , there is nothing `` anti-American '' about facing the realities of intervention in foreign countries -- our recent errors should not be blindly repeated . 
Lastly , I do not `` blithely dismiss '' the rebels\/insurgents in Libya . 
It is the Libyan people who do not support them , whether you like it or not . 
There are plenty of videos in recent weeks of massive demonstrations against Nato and in favor of the current Libyan gov ` t. Can you point us to anything which shows that the rebels\/terrorists\/insurgents have broad popular support -LRB- within Libya , that is , and not in Nato capitals -RRB- ? 
July 19 , 2011 at 9:52 pm | Reply `` an you point us to anything which shows that the rebels\/terrorists\/insurgents have broad popular support -LRB- within Libya , that is , and not in Nato capitals -RRB- ? '' 
You brought up the subject . 
the burden of proof is on you . 
What you do is typical of those in support of islmaic dictatorships and terrorism . 
You repeat the manta , `` Everyone else does it . '' 
You did the same erroneous cop-out with grammar . 
Rather than stay on the subjet to face your own mistakes , you pointed to the errors of others to rationalize your own . 
July 20 , 2011 at 12:21 am | Reply Godfrey you seem to be upset . 
Jjust someone does n't agree with you does n't mean they support islamic dictatorships and terrorism . 
I think it is a fair question to ask just where is the support that the rebels have ... We are told that they represent the Libyan people but they seem to be a small minority . 
If the US is trying to support a group that even the Libyans do n't want then we are only causing trouble . 
July 20 , 2011 at 5:47 am | Reply The question was not one of support . 
It was one of comparison . 
To believe that Libya has anything less than a razor to the throat of Libyans is naive in the extreme . 
Qaddafi has never lost an election . 
His image is everywhere . 
There is no public dissent -- none . 
Rather disingenuous to propose that for forty years , the whole populace has been of one opinion . 
CNN doers not report Libyans themselves , en mass , opposing the rebels , other than Big Brother soundbites . 
July 20 , 2011 at 10:29 am | Reply There it is and this why NATO should get the hell out and let them settle this their own way . 
Who pays the majority of the cost of NATO Shut up Hilliary -- come home Hilliary -- stay out of Libya it wont help it will only hurt NATO = North American Tax Organization . 
July 31 , 2011 at 3:00 pm | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
