BP gets `` wake-up call '' and $ 32 billion in spill charges LONDON\/HOUSTON | Tue Jul 27 , 2010 7:13 pm EDT LONDON\/HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc 's newly named chief executive on Tuesday called the Gulf oil spill a `` wake-up call '' for the entire industry as the company tallied up its losses and disclosed two U.S. investigations . 
Bob Dudley , who will replace gaffe-prone Tony Hayward as CEO on October 1 , said safety would be among his highest priorities as he tries to refurbish the oil company 's battered reputation . 
Image repair may become even tougher after BP said it would offset the cost of the spill against its taxes , costing U.S. taxpayers almost $ 10 billion . 
BP reported a second-quarter loss of $ 17 billion , including $ 32 billion in charges related to the oil spill , the largest in U.S. history . 
It also announced plans to sell $ 30 billion in assets over the next 18 months to help cover its liabilities . 
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Justice have launched `` informal enquiries '' into securities matters related to the spill , BP said . 
A Senate probe into whether BP influenced the release of the Lockerbie bomber added yet another source of friction . 
Senator Robert Menendez postponed a hearing on the matter , scheduled for Thursday , and accused BP and British officials of stonewalling . 
More than 5 million barrels of oil have spilled into the Gulf of Mexico since the undersea leak began in late April , according to U.S. government estimates . 
The spill , caused by an explosion that killed 11 people , has devastated communities and fragile ecosystems along the Gulf Coast , killing or injuring countless sea creatures and coastal birds . 
Private lawsuits have piled up . 
Attorneys hoping to lead the legal fight against BP are heading to the unlikely venue of Boise , Idaho , this week as a special judicial panel considers how to handle all the cases . 
BP 's U.S.-listed shares closed 1.7 percent lower on Tuesday . 
BP shares in London closed 2.6 percent lower . 
The company has lost about 40 percent of its market value since the explosion . 
Ted Parrish , co-portfolio manager of the Henssler Equity Fund in Kennesaw , Georgia , said the sheer size of BP 's quarterly loss had unsettled investors . 
Wall Street `` expected a big number , but to actually read the tape and see that number , it tends to shock people , '' he said . 
But aside from the spill , BP 's business is steaming ahead with underlying quarterly profits up 77 percent from the year before thanks to higher oil and gas prices and better refining margins . 
The stock had gained on Monday after reports surfaced that Hayward would be ousted as CEO after a series of public relations blunders , including complaining he wanted his `` life back '' weeks after the start of the spill . 
`` I believe that it is not possible for the company to move on in the United States with me remaining as the face to BP , '' Hayward told reporters on a conference call . 
`` So I think that for the good of BP , and particularly for the good of BP in the United States , it is right for me to ... step down . '' 
BP 's leaking well was capped two weeks ago after gushing up to 60,000 barrels per day into the Gulf , ruining fishing and tourism industries and polluting the shoreline with slimy goo . 
BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg said the company would take a hard look at itself in the aftermath of the spill : `` BP ... will be a different company going forward . '' 
The White House said President Barack Obama spoke with Svanberg on Monday but declined to say what was discussed . 
Dudley , who will be the first American to lead BP , was raised in Mississippi , a fact that seems to be working in his favor among some Gulf residents . 
`` I think people would be more comfortable with someone running BP -LRB- who -RRB- is from the Deep South , '' said Richard Angelico , a 66-year-old lifelong resident of Orleans Parish , Louisiana . 
`` Hayward was inept at public relations and speaking to people in southern Louisiana . '' 
Dudley said on ABC 's `` Good Morning America '' he expected no more oil to flow into the Gulf , but added : `` we 've got to really kill that well to be absolutely certain . '' 
BP could begin the final procedure to permanently plug the well late next week . 
Some investors and analysts say BP 's culture encourages greater risk-taking than rivals , contributing to higher returns . 
Critics have also blamed this culture for the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Dudley told a conference call with reporters that safety `` is going to be one of my highest priorities , in addition to the focus on making sure we meet our obligations around the Gulf Coast . '' 
The spill looks likely to leave a legislative legacy . 
The Senate may begin debating a slimmed-down energy bill as early as Thursday , and holding BP accountable for cleaning up the Gulf will be a priority . 
BP said it planned to sell assets worth up to $ 30 billion over the next 18 months to pay for its liabilities and create a leaner company with the potential for higher growth . 
Investment bankers said the assets BP could sell include its stake in Alaska 's huge Prudhoe Bay oil field and its interest in Pan American Energy in Argentina , as well as smaller assets in Vietnam , Pakistan and Colombia . 
Industry executives said it was a good time to sell assets as relative stability in the oil price in the past nine months makes it easier for buyers and sellers to agree to deal terms . 
BP agreed to a $ 7 billion sale of oil and gas fields to Apache Corp last week , which valued the assets at around $ 19.40 per barrel of oil equivalent . 
The rest of BP trades at an implied $ 7\/barrel , analysts at Morgan Stanley said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I did business with BP many years ago where my Company supplied them with pressure vessels and I found their practices unacceptable . 
I am surprised it has taken this long for them to get caught out . 
It is a very sad day when a gust of hot wind -LRB- Obama -RRB- and his cronies -LRB- the American people -RRB- can influence business so much in such a distorted fashion . 
As one commentator pointed out , Goldman Sachs deliberately polluted the world economy , being responsible for almost pulling down the entire system , yet they are only fined $ 550m -- after hearings and trials . 
Yet BP pollutes 4 states in one country and is ` fined ' $ 20b -- before any justice is permitted . 
Once again , the world bears witness to the arrogance of the US and unfortunately bears the brunt of its self centered attitude . 
Had this been a US company polluting the Greek or Australian\/NZ coastlines it would be a completely different story . 
May God help us from the Americans . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
