BP oil spill to cost U.S. taxpayer almost $ 10 billion LONDON | Tue Jul 27 , 2010 7:37 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil giant BP said it plans to offset the entire cost of its Gulf of Mexico oil spill against its tax bill , reducing future contributions to U.S. tax coffers by almost $ 10 billion . 
BP took a pretax provision of $ 32.2 billion in its accounts for the period , for the cost of capping the well , cleaning up the spill , compensating victims and paying government fines . 
However , the net impact on BP 's bottom line will only be $ 22 billion , with the company recording a $ 10 billion tax credit , most of which will be borne by the U.S. taxpayer , a spokesman said . 
BP 's UK tax bill will also be reduced , BP added . 
Analysts said BP could prompt more public and political anger in the United States by deducting all the costs , and especially the expected fines BP will face . 
In 2006 , Boeing Co decided to forego seeking a tax deduction for any of a $ 615 million settlement with the government in 2006 over ethics charges , under pressure from lawmakers . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin ; editing by Simon Jessop -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
`` Too smart for your own good '' must be a US saying and not heard in the UK . 
What a surprise who pays in the end for the mega rich corporation 's gross negligence . 
They spilled millions and millions of gallons in our environment , killed unknown amounts of wildlife , ruined thousands of people 's jobs and they get a tax credit out of it to the tune of 10 Billion dollars ? 
This is the way our once great country now works ? 
All of this but keeping the current tax breaks in place to help out the lower to middle class is just financially irresponsible ? 
This country is still great but its leaders -LRB- both sides -RRB- just plain suck and they are determined to continue to fool the American people until there is no middle class left -- just serfs and the mega rich . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
