NEW YORK | Mon Jun 15 , 2009 7:05 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - J.P. Morgan Chase & Co -LRB- JPM . 
N -RRB- and a group of hedge funds could wind up with the lion 's share of Six Flags Inc SIXF . 
OB if a proposal by the theme park operator is approved in bankruptcy court . 
In a securities filing Monday , Six Flags said it would give secured lenders a 92 percent equity stake in the company . 
They will also own $ 600 million of the company 's debt . 
That leaves the company 's unsecured creditors with just 8 percent of the company -- a markedly different stake than was previously outlined in an out-of-court plan . 
Talks with bondholders started late last year , but hit a number of roadblocks along the way . 
`` By the bondholders dragging it out with us over the six months , your business takes on more uncertainty , you get more risk factors and you find yourself having to do a bank deal , '' said Chief Executive Mark Shapiro in an interview with Reuters . 
Shapiro said he hoped the company would emerge from bankruptcy in six months , healthier with significantly less debt . 
Under an out-of-court plan in March , one class of unsecured creditors was to get an 85 percent stake in the company . 
In the current plan , that class would get a mere 1 percent . 
Another class of unsecured creditors would get 7 percent . 
`` If the bank lenders can get the plan through as currently contemplated , that will be an extraordinary deal for them , '' said CRT Capital Group analyst Joseph Stauff . 
A spate of interest payments and the H1N1 flu virus were among the factors that constrained Six Flags ' liquidity and drove the company into the arms of the bank lenders , Shapiro said . 
Six Flags was also facing a $ 300 million payment to preferred stock holders due in August that it said it could not pay . 
Shapiro said filing in June versus August saved the company between $ 45 million and $ 50 million in interest payments . 
Six Flags has not posted an annual profit since 1998 , but drew more than $ 1 billion in revenue in 2008 . 
New York-based Six Flags filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection Saturday morning , a move that was widely expected by analysts and industry experts . 
The filing followed a failed attempt to convert debt to equity . 
On Saturday , the company said its restructuring plan had been unanimously approved by its steering committee , which includes firms like Silver Point Capital and Eaton Vance Management . 
But many experts said the bankruptcy proceedings will likely be bumpy , as unsecured creditors try to get a larger piece of the pie . 
This group includes bondholders represented by the Bank of New York Mellon Corp -LRB- BK . 
N -RRB- and the Lake County , Illinois Convention and Visitor 's Bureau , which is owed more than $ 180,000 . 
`` The unsecured holders would get far less recovery than they would have expected , '' said Christopher Snow , an analyst with CreditSights . 
`` The management team put forth a plan that arguably serves to benefit the management and secured lenders at the expense of the unsecured lenders . '' 
On Monday , one creditor , Avenue Capital Management LLC filed an objection to , among other things , Six Flags ' use of cash collateral . 
Shapiro had no comment on the objection . 
Analysts expect the company 's management to survive the Chapter 11 proceedings . 
`` Since the bankruptcy is the result of capital structure issues rather than operating issues , it 's likely that the existing management will stay , '' said Mike Simonton , a credit analyst with Fitch . 
Much of the company 's $ 2.4 billion debt load was amassed from 1998 to 2005 , when the company bought parks and built roller coaster rides . 
The current management team was installed by Washington Redskins football team owner Daniel Snyder , who will continue as Six Flags ' chairman . 
