Paul Wood reports from Syria on al-Qaeda 's influence in the country Amid growing concern among some Western officials about al-Qaeda 's involvement in the Syrian uprising , the BBC 's Paul Wood - who has been back inside Syria - assesses the influence of Islamists in Syria 's anti-government protests . 
`` People are fed up with journalists , '' says the Free Syrian Army 's Lt Col Muleldine al-Zein . 
`` We are not extremists , although you try to portray us as such . '' 
He adds bitterly : `` The West still supports the regime as far as I am concerned . 
The US could take him out in a week , but they do n't want democracy for us . 
I do n't know why . 
They want the country to collapse . '' 
Outside , in this small Syrian town , the daily pro-democracy protest is going on . 
`` Men and women together , '' the colonel says , presenting the fact as another testament to the group 's moderation . 
Speakers make the usual calls to remember the revolution 's martyrs . 
There are the regular chants against President Bashar al-Assad : `` The Assad family are thieves '' is always popular . 
Despite the colonel 's remarks , the United States does want the Assad regime to fall . 
It is one of the small ironies of the Syrian uprising that the US and al-Qaeda are on the same side here . 
Both want the regime 's overthrow . 
Still , the US and other Western governments worry about who might replace Mr Assad . 
The regime lies all the time . 
They even lie about the weather . 
Are they telling the truth now that al-Qaeda is behind these bombings ? 
The bombings are done by the regime '' End Quote Abu Laila Rebel commander The al-Nusra Front emerged earlier this year in customary fashion , with an internet video . 
The Front for the Defense of the Syrian People , to give them their full title , say they are jihadis who have returned from other wars to fight here . 
The video was illustrated with shots of tough-looking men training with weapons , somewhere in the desert . 
`` We bring glad tidings to the Islamic nation , '' their spokesman Abu Mohammed al-Gulani , announced on the video . 
`` We are Syrian mujahideen . 
We are back from the various jihad fronts to restore Allah 's rule upon the Earth and avenge our people 's violated honor and spilled blood . '' 
We do not know if this video is genuine , but - another irony of Syria - this kind of thing serves the propaganda interests of both the global jihad movement and the Assad regime . 
Regardless , some outside observers believe the men of the Nusra Front do indeed represent the future in Syria . 
Alastair Crooke , a former British intelligence officer who studies Islamist militants , says : `` The numbers were quite small in the beginning , but I think it has grown in this time . '' 
He goes on : `` The point is that the hard element of the opposition , the armed , the combat-experienced part of the opposition that has come up from Libya or Iraq not only are at the vanguard , but are also pushing out all other forms of opposition . 
`` The only opposition that we are seeing in Syria at the moment is not peaceful protest . 
It is characterised by extreme use of violence . '' 
The recent car bombings in Damascus , which killed 55 people , are the result , says the regime . 
They blame the attacks on Islamists , maybe al-Qaeda . 
The Americans fear that might be true . 
The Syrian people have been calling for outside help at their protests One reason to think it is that Syria 's democratic uprising has rescued al-Qaeda from a crisis . 
Peaceful revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt made them look irrelevant . 
Now , perhaps , they are back in the game . 
And if so , to what extent ? 
We met Abu Laila , the commander of a small rebel group outside Homs . 
He was perfectly suited to Syrian government propaganda . 
He bore an uncanny resemblance to a young Osama Bin Laden - so much so , he told us , that he was usually asked to leave the room when foreign journalists arrived . 
Sitting in a room containing Kalashnikovs , sniper rifles , rocket-propelled grenades and homemade roadside bombs , he says he did , in fact , fight in Iraq . 
This was a matter of defending his tribe which is found in both countries , he said . 
He met al-Qaeda people in Iraq , he goes on . 
But , as it emerges during our conversation , he does not like al-Qaeda . 
He fears them and what they would do in Syria . 
And he does not believe the bombings in Damascus were done by al-Qaeda . 
`` This lie is being used again and again by the regime '' , he said . 
`` The regime lies all the time . 
They even lie about the weather . 
Are they telling the truth now that al-Qaeda is behind these bombings ? 
The bombings are done by the regime . '' 
Then he switched from Arabic , to say in stilted English : `` I 'm Muslim , I am not al-Qaeda . 
We do n't see any men from al-Qaeda in Syria , and we are not al-Qaeda . '' 
Many rebel fighters are deeply pious . 
But there is a moderate tradition of Islam here at odds with al-Qaeda 's harsh ideology . 
The suicide attacks and beheadings so familiar from Iraq have not , yet , come to Syria . 
Nevertheless , al-Qaeda is working to gain a foothold . 
One Free Syrian Army officer told me al-Qaeda figures have been visiting , trying to form new alliances . 
They made a direct approach to a cleric near the town of Qusair . 
Money , weapons and other support were offered , in return for allegiance to al-Qaeda . 
They turned him away . 
`` The Syrians did not stand up because they want to declare jihad . 
They stood up because they want freedom '' End Quote Wissam Tarif Pro-democracy group Avaaz A leading Lebanese militant allied to al-Qaeda fared worse . 
Walid Boustani had tried to declare an Islamic emirate in a Syrian town close to the Lebanese border . 
Some young men in the area joined up , but fell foul of his strict discipline . 
Their families killed him . 
In every battle the rebels fight , they are massively outgunned . 
But Western governments hesitate about arming them , in case the guns end up in radical Islamist hands . 
The former MI6 man Alastair Crooke worked in Afghanistan during the anti-Soviet jihad . 
`` At that time we also looked aside , '' he said . 
`` We did n't look at who our allies were or what their motives were when they joined in with us in trying to overturn or overthrow the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan . 
We looked away because confronting communism in Afghanistan was so popular . 
`` And as a result of that , we ended up with groups that were highly dangerous . 
We ended up with 9\/11 and with two decades of the war on terror and bombs in London . '' 
Wissam Tarif , of the pro-democracy group Avaaz , disagrees . 
The street protest still matters much more to the outcome in Syria than the armed groups . 
And , he says , the demonstrators want freedom , not another kind of dictatorship . 
`` The Syrians did not stand up because they want to declare jihad , '' he said . 
`` They stood up because they want freedom , and I do n't think the Muslim Brothers or the Salafis or any Islamist model can offer them the freedom they have been fighting for for 14 months . 
That 's another fiction and an unjustified fear from the West . '' 
Democracy is emphatically not what al-Qaeda is fighting for . 
The jihadis do not much like the Free Syrian Army , either , since they are fighting under the banner of democracy - rather than Sharia . 
Still , more than a year into the uprising , people are desperate for help from anywhere . 
A sign at this demonstration we attended this week said : `` If you do n't help us , we will die . '' 
One of the most senior Free Syrian Army officers inside Syria , Col Kasim Saad Eddine , stressed to me that his troops were fighting for democracy , not Sharia . 
But he said that if the West did not come to their aid , he worried the jihadis would find an opening . 
`` I tell the UN and the UN Security Council , the Syrian people ca n't take it anymore , '' he said . 
`` Our children killed ; our women raped ; our houses destroyed . 
If no-one helps us , we will turn to the devil himself . '' 
If al-Qaeda is here , and part of this struggle , the numbers are probably very small . 
We did not meet their supporters or see their influence in many months of traveling with rebel fighters . 
But that could change the longer this goes on . 
The jihadists thrive on chaos . 
And they will find plenty of that in Syria . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
