BP oil spill costs hit $ 1.6 bn BP said the total bill for the Deepwater Horizon oil spill has jumped by $ 350m in the last week BP has estimated the costs of the Deepwater Horizon at $ 1.6 bn . 
Workers clean up the oil washed ashore in Alabama . 
BP updated its shareholders this morning at the start of a crucial week for the company . 
It said the total bill had jumped by $ 350m in the last week , including payments of $ 25m each to the states of Florida , Alabama and Mississippi to help them fight the environmental damage of the disaster . 
About 51,000 compensation claims have been submitted , of which 26,500 have been paid . 
The oil multinational admitted , though , that it was `` too early to quantify other potential costs and liabilities associated with the incident '' . 
BP 's board of directors will meet today to discuss whether to bow to criticism and suspend its dividend payment for the current financial quarter . 
Barack Obama continued to pile pressure on the company over the weekend , calling for funds to be placed into an escrow account , where they would be ringfenced and used to pay compensation to those affected by the spill . 
Obama will visit the Gulf region today , his fourth trip to the region , in an effort to persuade the American people that he has a grip on the catastrophe . 
On Wednesday he will meet BP 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , in what may be a tense encounter - Obama recently said he would have sacked Hayward . 
But the real drama will come on Thursday , when Hayward appears at a congressional hearing . 
He has been summoned by the House energy and commerce sub-committee to answer questions about the Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
Shares in BP fell by 2 % this morning to 384p despite the phone call on Saturday between David Cameron and Obama , which had eased fears that BP was becoming a target for anti-British sentiment . 
Downing Street said Obama had insisted he had no desire to damage the value of BP . 
BP also reported that it had now collected about 127,000 barrels of oil since fitting a container on to the wellhead 10 days ago . 
This oil has been syphoned up to the surface into a tanker , rather than being released into the ocean . 
But it only represents a fraction of the total leak , which is now estimated to be as much as 40,000 barrels a day . 
The containment system will be modified within the next few days , which should increase the amount of oil that can be collected . 
