Flippantly putting the grave environmental tragedy of it all to one side for a moment , the Deepwater Horizon oil leak is n't just causing extensive damage to the Louisiana coastline . 
What about our accents ? 
Our lovely British accents ? 
Thanks to the BP link , they 've been destroyed too . 
Do n't know about you , but whenever I 'm around Americans , I tend to exaggerate my Britishness in a pathetic bid to win their approval . 
Those days are gone . 
The first time I visited the US , I ran into trouble at immigration . 
Half the group I was traveling with decided to get drunk on the plane , which probably would 've been fine with all the other passengers if it had n't been for the unrelenting cackling and yelping and removal of trousers . 
I was fairly drunk too , incidentally , but only because I was so terrified of flying I 'd decided to blot out the whole of reality by glugging myself into an inflight coma . 
From my slumbering perspective the flight was a warm 15-minute snooze . 
To the other passengers it must 've felt like a 30-year sentence in baboon prison . 
Upon arrival , we were identified as troublemakers and hauled off one-by-one for a comprehensive bothering . 
Instantly I realized my only hope of avoiding instant deportation was to behave like a minor royal not an aloof , chilly posho , but a genial gosh-what-a-wonderful-country-you-have Hugh Grant-type , one who smiles a lot while using slightly formal language . 
I apologised profusely by saying , `` I apologise profusely . '' 
The officer started out prickly one of his opening gambits was , `` You could be spending the night in jail , wiseguy '' , which simultaneously impressed and scared me but several minutes of profuse apologies and crikey-I 'm - sorry delivered in an embellished British accent appeared to disarm him , and I was released without being subjected to gunfire . 
That 's my recollection , anyway . 
Perhaps he just got bored with watching me grovel . 
But from that point on , my dial was set to 150 % British for the duration . 
I said `` Good day '' to receptionists and `` I beg your pardon '' to waiters . 
At one point I think I even said `` Toodle pip '' to a cabbie . 
Incredibly , rather than calling me a dick , they said they loved my accent . 
The US was a magic country where strangers liked me on the strength of my voice alone , unlike cold anonymous London where , rather than break their stride , pedestrians would blankly step on your face if you were dying on the pavement , quietly tutting at the blood on their shoes . 
On a subsequent trip I discovered mockney was just as useful , and deliberately roughed my accent down in gas stations or bars , saying `` blimey '' and `` bloke '' and `` bleedin ' ` ell '' , even if I was only asking the way to the toilet -LRB- sorry , `` bog '' -RRB- . 
This was even more popular than my Little Lord Fauntleroy act . 
Thank God I ca n't do a Liverpudlian accent . 
I 'd probably have adopted a Beatles persona in record shops . 
But now , as a company with the word `` British '' in its name pisses apocalyptic quantities of oil into the ocean , and CEO Tony Hayward pops up on the news to make tactless statements in a British accent , anglophilia is shrivelling . 
Things must be bad when gimpy Cameron has to reassure us that BP wiping its arse on the Gulf of Mexico wo n't disturb the `` special relationship '' between the US and the UK . 
Of course it will . 
Never mind that BP is an international company . 
Never mind that 39 % of its shares are held in the US , that half its directors are American . 
It 's got the word British in the title , and that 'll do . 
It genuinely feels like our fault . 
Like you , I 've never supervised the offshore drilling policy of a major oil company , but I ca n't help feeling responsible . 
It 's like watching a news report in which someone with your surname has been caught having sex with a hollowed-out yam . 
The disgrace is shared , however irrationally . 
And to be honest , the Americans are thus far admirably restrained about the whole thing . 
If a company called Texan Gloop belched a carpet of black gunk over Norfolk , we 'd be surrounding the US embassy and burning sarcastic effigies of Boss Hogg within minutes . 
And that 's just Norfolk : flat earth and windmills . 
Having vandalised Louisiana and laminated thousands of pelicans , the BP spill now threatens to disfigure the Miami coastline , corrupting its relentlessly cheery blue-and-yellow color scheme with a sea of rainbow black . 
Congratulations , people of Britain . 
Even though , strictly speaking , it is n't your fault . 
Clearly a rebrand is in order if we 're to maintain any national pride whatsoever . 
Trouble is , BP 's already had one : 10 years ago it changed its name from British Petroleum to BP following a merger with a US oil company . 
Since that 's not enough to dissociate it from Britain , Britain itself will have to change its name . 
It 'll still need to feel quintessentially British , mind . 
For the tourists , like . 
How about London Kingdom ? 
Let 's face it : to recoup our cultural value , it 's either that or we all head over there and start cleaning the mess up ourselves , while muttering `` blimey '' and `` gosh '' and doing our best to be charming . 
If you 've got a fly-drive holiday booked , start practising that Hugh Grant act now . 
Chances are you 'll need it . 
