Barack Obama compares oil spill to 9\/11 President 's comments on impact of BP oil spill are ridiculous and off-base , say relatives of World Trade Centre victims Monday 14 June 2010 18.00 BST Barack Obama has drawn criticism for comparing the BP oil spill with 9\/11 . 
Photograph : Reuters Barack Obama today risked the wrath of September 11 victim 's families by comparing the BP oil spill to the 2001 terrorist attacks , as pressure intensified on the White House to show greater urgency over the crisis . 
Ahead of a trip to Louisiana and his first televised address to the nation tomorrow , Obama said the spill the worst environmental disaster in US history would , like the 2001 terror attacks , continue to influence the country for decades to come . 
`` In the same way that our view of our vulnerabilities and our foreign policy was shaped profoundly by 9\/11 , I think this disaster is going to shape how we think about the environment and energy for many years to come , '' he told the US political website Politico . 
Some people who lost relatives in the attacks criticised Obama 's decision to compare an environmental disaster with a terror plot in which almost 3,000 people died . 
`` He 's off-base , '' said former New York fire department deputy chief Jim Riches , whose son died at the World Trade Centre . 
`` These were terrorist attacks , not something caused by people trying to make money . '' 
Jack Lynch , whose firefighter son Michael was killed in 2001 , said : `` To compare an environmental accident , if that 's what you call it , to a premeditated terrorist attack is ridiculous . 
Politicians have no sense of reality . '' 
Sally Regenhard , however , who also lost a son , said she could see some validity to the comparisons . 
`` Just like on 9\/11 , there were no plans for emergency preparedness , co-ordination of response , '' she said . 
`` It 's a failure of the system and the government . 
I 'm not offended by the comment . '' 
Protagonists in the oil spill disaster face a crucial week . 
Amid criticism that he has failed to show enough personal leadership , Obama is embarking on his fourth visit to the Gulf of Mexico and will spend two days visiting other states affected by the crisis Alabama , Mississippi and Florida . 
The president will address the US in a prime-time televised speech from the White House on the oil spill . 
On Wednesday , he is due to hold a crucial meeting with BP executives . 
In the Politico interview , Obama vowed to `` move forward in a bold way in a direction that finally gives us the kind of future-oriented , visionary energy policy we so vitally need and has been absent for so long '' . 
`` One of the biggest leadership challenges for me is going to be to make sure we draw the right lessons from this disaster . '' 
Obama said he could not predict whether the US would make a complete transition from an oil-based economy within his lifetime . 
`` Now is the time for us to start making that transition and investing in a new way of doing business when it comes to energy , '' he said . 
`` I have no idea what new energy sources are going to be available , what technologies might drive down the price of renewable energies . 
What we can predict is that the availability of fossil fuel is going to be diminishing ; that it 's going to get more expensive to recover ; that there are going to be environmental costs that our children our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren are going to have to bear . '' 
