The rise and fall of BP In its 100-year history , BP has been dogged by appalling accidents and an absence of diplomacy . 
Can it ever reinvent itself ? 
Andrew Simms reports Monday 14 June 2010 21.00 BST A boat glides through the heavy sheen of oil as it skims near the site of the Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Dave Martin\/AP As names go , the First Exploitation Company sounds like an inspired slight dreamed up by an angry anti- oil campaigner . 
In fact , it was the original title , coined in 1903 , of the troubled company we now know as BP . 
But then , public relations have never been its strong point . 
Over the course of a century BP , in its various guises , has managed to outrage everyone from revolutionary nationalist leaders in the Middle East to Britain 's supposedly closest ally . 
Now Barack Obama has ensured that BP is Public Enemy No 1 in the United States -LRB- tonight , he will make his first address to the nation direct from the White House to stress the point -RRB- . 
In the aftermath of the Deepwater Horizon disaster , BP is being freely compared in the US to those poster boys of corporate malfeasance , Enron and Worldcom . 
Beleaguered chief-executive Tony Hayward may not be Bernie Madoff , but hate mail and threatening phone calls have been directed at him and his family . 
Hayward is now reportedly undergoing training in front of a so-called `` murder board '' of legal experts to prepare him for the aggressive questioning he will face from the Congressional Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee in Washington on Thursday . 
BP 's share price is tumbling , as its expected liabilities from the spill estimated at anywhere up to $ 40bn -LRB- # 27bn -RRB- climb so high that the financial markets are giving the company 's debt a `` junk '' rating . 
Speculation over BP 's future has ranged from filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection to a possible takeover by one of its giant rivals , Exxon Mobil or Chevron . 
BP has come close to collapse before , and is a repeat offender in the US after earlier major accidents in Texas and Alaska . 
Internal company documents published last week by news website ProPublica revealed high-level concern that safety and environmental policies were being ignored . 
A BP report into the 2005 Texas City disaster , when a massive explosion at a refinery killed 15 workers , concluded there had been `` apparent complacency toward serious safety risk '' . 
But as well as accidents , an absence of diplomacy also dogs BP 's history . 
The company started out as a money-making scheme for William Knox D'Arcy a man who , according to BP 's own account , already `` led the self-indulgent life of a rich gentleman '' . 
He sought oil in Persia , modern-day Iran , helping to create many profound faultlines in the geopolitics of oil that we still live with today . 
The company 's first big break came when Winston Churchill , as first lord of the admiralty , persuaded the British navy to switch from coal to oil for its fuel , and chose what was by then known as Anglo-Persian Oil Company because he could not be sure of its foreign competitor , Royal Dutch Shell . 
-LRB- Current baiting of BP in the US about its British identity throws up an ironic footnote from this period : the name British Petroleum actually came from a German oil company working in Britain , which was expropriated during the first world war and resold . -RRB- 
From the outset , the company has never been slow to play hardball . 
In the early 1920s , it pushed its Persian refinery at Abadan too hard . 
The result was strikes by local workers and a crippling fire that slashed production . 
The British government was forced to bail the company out . 
After the second world war and still puffed with colonial arrogance , the company came up against a new and formidable force in Iran . 
Mohammad Mossadegh , son of a rich land-owning family , was a colorful character too openly emotional for British tastes , and seriously underestimated as a result . 
Compared with oil deals elsewhere in the region , Mossadegh thought Iran was being ripped-off . 
On becoming prime minister in April 1951 , he complained to US president Harry Truman that Iran `` was being ruined by the political intrigue of the British government and BP '' , and immediately nationalised his country 's oil industry . 
The international response was a boycott of Iran . 
But that was n't enough ; after prime minister Churchill overruled his ill foreign secretary Anthony Eden in 1953 , approval was given for a CIA-organised and funded coup against Mossadegh . 
BP is rather shy about publicising these events . 
In more than 1,700 pages of the official company history , the coup is described in just two sentences one of which merely mentions that the events can be read about elsewhere . 
The memory of such troubling events drove the newly anointed British Petroleum Company to diversify throughout the second half of the 20th century , dramatically increasing its oil extraction from Kuwait , Qatar and Iraq . 
It looked for oil in Malta , Papua New Guinea and Australia . 
It searched in Alaska , the Caribbean and the Rocky Mountains with little success , but had more luck in Nigeria and beneath the sands of Libya . 
In 1965 , it became the first company to strike oil in the North Sea . 
The discovery five years later of the Forties oilfield however the largest in the North Sea was triggered by an almost Monty Pythonesque fit of pique on the part of a BP company executive . 
Harry Warman thought the location for exploratory drilling , McNutt 's Half Dome , had a silly name and was a waste of time . 
He demanded they relocate , and BP got lucky striking enough oil to produce ridiculous riches , for a generation at least . 
This era of the oil industry , however , would live fast and die young : just over two decades later , in 1999 , UK oil production peaked , then began to decline at the rate of around 7 % per year . 
So the now multinational BP decided to try to become more than just a company that made a great deal of money by helping to liquidate the planet 's natural resources . 
It went for a makeover , promising it would go `` Beyond Petroleum '' in the new millennium . 
The PR company Ogilvy Public Relations Worldwide wrote admiringly about how `` the newly rebranded , global BP sought to position itself as transcending the oil sector '' . 
The company promised to go green and `` think outside the barrel '' . 
Ten years on , however , its executives are more likely to be found crying at the bottom of one . 
Far from going Beyond Petroleum , BP remains a company mired in the thick of it . 
Everywhere in this story , there is the whiff of the end of empire . 
But the last to acknowledge it are often those on the inside looking out . 
BP can either wither on the vine as an oil company or , this time , genuinely re-invent itself . 
For the imminent decline of global oil production is likely to make the recent banking crisis feel like an old-style Thanksgiving party . 
The only thing preventing that has been the oil industry 's blas reassurance that it could use enhanced techniques to safely exploit `` marginal '' fields such as where the Deepwater Horizon ultra-deepwater rig had been working . 
Those reassurances are now a giant stain on America 's Gulf coast . 
How we handle our declining global oil resources is , of course , a question of collective survival . 
Everything from our food and transport systems to the toothbrushes we use each morning depend on the sticky black stuff . 
And then there is the fact that , in the first quarter of 2010 , # 1 in every # 4 of dividends paid to UK shareholders came from just one sector oil and gas . 
BP alone accounts for about 12 % , or # 1 in every # 8 , of British pension payments . 
Our future has become hard-wired to BP 's . 
The problem is that Tony Hayward , apart from regularly saying the wrong thing at the wrong time , has turned his back on the green energy revolution . 
In a presentation he gave in 2008 , and acquired by Greenpeace , he revealed that the company allocated 93 % -LRB- $ 20bn -RRB- of its total investment fund for 2008 to the development and extraction of oil , gas and other fossil fuels . 
Solar power was allocated just 1.39 % -LRB- $ 0.3 bn -RRB- . 
The company 's own greenhouse gas emissions at that stage were about the same as the whole of Portugal . 
In June 2009 , it closed the London HQ of BP Alternative Energy , its renewables operation . 
Solar plants in the US and Spain were also closed , and it pulled out of virtually all wind power initiatives outside of the US . 
For the sake of a liveable environment and stable , flourishing economy , we now need a rapid transition away from our dependence on oil . 
This is happening already at a local level in Britain , with the flowering of the transition town movement , built around fossil fuel `` descent paths '' . 
And at a national and international level , proposals such as the green new deal aimed at the low-carbon re-engineering of everything from energy infrastructure to housing , transport and agriculture create vast opportunities for companies and governments that have the wit to see that change is necessary , inevitable and desirable . 
Should they fail this challenge , however , then the legacy of the First Exploitation Company seems certain to be environmental degradation and economic instability for generations to come . 
A version appeared on p10 of the G2 section of the Guardian on 14.10 BST on Tuesday 15 June 2010 Our selection of best buys Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
