BP survival fears as predicted cost of oil spill soars Deepwater Horizon oil spill disaster could end up finishing off the British oil giant Monday 14 June 2010 21.52 BST The board of BP have been meeting to discuss whether to suspend payment of this year 's dividend to shareholders . 
Photograph : Christopher Furlong\/Getty Images The Gulf of Mexico disaster was always going to hit BP in the pocket . 
But as the costs of the spill keep rising , it could end up finishing off the British oil giant . 
Until now , the City has fretted over the fate of BP 's dividend , supposed to be $ 10bn , due this year . 
Tony Hayward , BP 's chief executive , has stuck to the line that the company is able to meet all its obligations to its shareholders and to the clean-up effort . 
Even last week , the question had been not whether BP had deep enough pockets to keep making the dividend payouts , but whether it could afford to politically . 
But as the size and scope of BP 's liabilities grow with each passing the day , it is now no longer a question of whether BP can or should pay its dividend . 
It is increasingly whether it can survive . 
On Sunday , 54 Democratic senators demanded that BP pay $ 20bn into a ring-fenced account to make sure it met all its obligations for the clean-up and damages . 
The figure stunned the company , which backs most analysts ' estimates that these costs are likely to be nearer to $ 5bn . 
The point is , unlike with the financial crisis two years ago , there is not going to be a bail-out for BP . 
As Barack Obama has made clear , US taxpayers will not pay for the clean-up or compensation . 
Fund managers are already speculating that BP could attempt to draw a line under its liabilities by hiving off its US business in an attempt to save the rest of the group . 
Yesterday , the US investment bank Citigroup even published research in response to `` inquiries from clients '' over how plausible such a restructuring would be . 
The note concludes that it would not be easy , and BP insists that it is not planning such a move anyway . 
But the fear that the company may cut and run whether justified or not goes some way to explaining the demand that it deposits such a large amount into a ring-fenced account . 
The thing is , no one not BP , not the US senators knows how much this will end up costing the company . 
The fishing industry in the Gulf brings in $ 660m revenue each year . 
This pales into insignificance compared to the $ 65bn-a-year tourist industry in Florida , which has already been hit as oil pollutes its beaches , leaving them deserted . 
Tourism and fishing could suffer for years . 
BP says nothing has changed to justify a $ 20bn bill , but this is disingenuous . 
In less than a month , the size of the size has gone from 5,000 barrels per day to between 20,000 and 40,000 barrels . 
If BP estimated that the clean-up and damages would cost around $ 5bn , but the size of the spill has at least quadrupled , then the $ 20bn demanded by the US senators does not look unreasonable . 
This $ 20bn does not include civil penalties , where BP is liable for up to $ 4,300 for every barrel spilt if it is found to have acted negligently . 
If 40,000 barrels per day keeps flowing until August , when a relief well is hopefully completed plugging the leak for good , and BP does not improve on its current collection rate , this could add a further $ 14bn to the bill . 
In some respects , the estimates by senators , analysts and BP are irrelevant . 
Like the Deepwater Horizon oil rig , the US and BP are in unchartered territory . 
As Hayward recently remarked , the US is a world-leader in pursuing damages . 
But it is not in Obama 's interests for the company to go bust ; he will want it to remain a cash cow not for its shareholders , but to make good the damage which has been done however much or however long it takes . 
