2010-01-23
International search teams continued their work to find survivors , despite the Haitian government calling an official end to the rescue phase , and were rewarded by pulling Wismond Exantus from the remains of the Napoli Inn Hotel 11 days after the quake . 
Greek , French and US rescue teams were involved in the two-and-a-half-hour operation to bring him out . 
Meanwhile , organisers of the Hope for Haiti telethon in the US said it had raised more than $ 57m -LRB- ¬ # 35m -RRB- for victims . 
They said Friday night 's event had set a new record for disaster relief telethons . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-21
About 400,000 survivors will be moved to tented villages outside the capital , Port-au-Prince , with 100,000 people initially being sent to 10 settlements near the suburb of Croix Des Bouquets , Interior Minister Paul Antoine Bien-Aime announced . 
The International Organisation for Migration , distributing tents and plastic sheeting , warned that more permanent shelter would soon be needed by the 500,000 people living outdoors . 
In a bid to deliver greater quantities of aid , the US military was operating at four airports in the region - Port-au-Prince and Jacmel in Haiti , and San Isidro and Barahona in the neighbouring Dominican Republic . 
The US Coast Guard partially reopened the capital 's main sea port which was damaged in the quake . 
Four vessels had docked by Thursday evening . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-20
A strong aftershock rocked Haiti , sending screaming people running into the streets . 
Some buildings already weakened by last week 's quake collapsed . 
The magnitude 6.1 tremor struck west of Port-au-Prince at 0603 local time -LRB- 1103 GMT -RRB- . 
The aftershock hit as people were still being found alive in the rubble from the original quake . 
They included a five-year-old boy reportedly pulled from the ruins of his home by his uncle . 
Earlier a 10-year-old girl and her eight-year-old brother were found . 
More than 120 people altogether have been rescued by international teams . 
The US announced it was sending another 4,000 sailors and marines to Haiti for the earthquake relief effort , diverting them from deployments in the Gulf and Africa . 
Many victims unable to find treatment in Haiti , have crossed the border into the Dominican Republic . 
But the BBC 's Gary Duffy says the volume of patients is so great the hospitals there are struggling to cope . 
Haitian officials said the death toll from the quake was likely to be between 100,000 and 200,000 , and that 75,000 bodies had already been buried in mass graves . 
An estimated 1.5 million are homeless . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-19
The US presence in the country increased as Black Hawk helicopters dropped scores of troops into the grounds of the ruined presidential palace . 
The UN Security Council also voted unanimously to send a further 3,500 UN troops and police to Haiti , to maintain law and order . 
Officials said the general security situation was stable , but the BBC 's Nick Davis in Port-au-Prince said there were concerns that looting and violence were a growing threat . 
Meanwhile , doctors said they were having to carry out hundreds of amputations , with only basic medical equipment , because of the large numbers of people suffering gangrene or traumatic injuries . 
Medecins Sans Frontieres told the BBC their plane carrying 12 tonnes of medical aid was repeatedly denied permission to land at Port-au-Prince 's congested airport . 
Search and rescue teams received a boost when an apparently unharmed elderly woman , Ena Zizi , was pulled from the rubble of the capital 's Catholic cathedral , one of 90 people found alive in Haiti 's ruins so far . 
The BBC 's Christian Fraser said that while some markets on the road to Port-au-Prince were still open , their supplies were running low and becoming increasingly expensive . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-18
The leading US general in Haiti Lt Gen Ken Keen said it was a `` reasonable assumption '' that up to 200,000 people might have died in last Tuesday 's earthquake . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said he would recommend that the Security Council boost UN troop numbers in Haiti by 2,000 for six months , and UN police numbers by 1,500 . 
Meanwhile , almost a week after the earthquake violence and looting have broken out in parts of Port-au-Prince . 
Police fired shots to disperse looters in parts of the capital . 
UN police fired baton rounds to force a crowd back from the gates of the airport . 
The former American President Bill Clinton , who is in Haiti as a special UN representative , said that given the circumstances , it was understandable that there had been some disorder . 
Thousands of people were fleeing the capital , Port-au-Prince , with many leaving for the countryside in the hope of finding food and water . 
The BBC 's Mark Doyle came across what is left of a poor community in the hills above the capital , to find a group of people - their homes destroyed - trying to heat up some food scraps in a pan of thin soup , their only meal of the day . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-17
First reports from the epicentre of Tuesday 's earthquake suggested the damage was even more dramatic than in the capital . 
BBC correspondents said the scene in Leogane was `` apocalyptic '' , with thousands left homeless and almost every building destroyed . 
The UN said up to 80-90 % of buildings in Leogane , about 19km -LRB- 12 miles -RRB- west of Port-au-Prince , had been destroyed . 
In the capital , survivors were becoming desperate as they waited for aid being handed out by international agencies . 
But in a sign of hope , rescuers pulled a woman alive from the rubble . 
`` It 's a little miracle , '' the woman 's husband , Reinhard Riedl , told the Associated Press news agency after she was rescued from a luxury hotel . 
The Pan American Health Organization put the death toll at 50,000-100 ,000 , while Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive said 100,000 `` would seem a minimum '' . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , the first senior overseas politician to arrive in Haiti , said the US would be `` here today , tomorrow and for the time ahead '' , asserting that `` Haiti can come back even better and stronger in the future '' . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-16
Desperation among survivors of the earthquake led to rising fears over security in Port-au-Prince . 
There were some reports of gangs preying on residents and looting , and officials said thousands of prisoners were unaccounted for after the main prison was destroyed . 
Damage to the seaport , roads and other infrastructure still prevented the speedy distribution of food , water and medical supplies . 
Relief was arriving , but little had moved beyond the jammed airport . 
A spokeswoman for the UN Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs said aid workers were dealing with a disaster `` like no other '' in UN memory because the country had been `` decapitated '' . 
Interior Minister Paul Antoine Bien-Aime said 50,000 bodies had been collected , but the total number of dead could be `` between 100,000 and 200,000 '' . 
The UN launched an appeal for $ 562m -LRB- ¬ # 346m -RRB- intended to help three million people for six months . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-15
Many spent another day without food and shelter in the ruined capital . 
The BBC 's Andy Gallacher in Port-au-Prince said survivors were dying in huge numbers , and clean water , food and medical supplies were desperately needed . 
Shaul Schwarz , a photographer for Time magazine , told the BBC he had seen a roadblock formed with bodies of quake victims on a main road , south of the capital . 
He said he believed this was an `` act of anger '' on the part of people who were not getting help . 
Bottlenecks and infrastructure damage were said to be holding up aid efforts - with estimates of the number of dead put at as many as 45,000-50 ,000 . 
Dramatic stories of survival began to emerge . 
UK firefighters pulled two-year-old Haitian girl Mia from the rubble where she had been trapped for three days when her kindergarten totally collapsed . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon told of one UN staff member found alive beneath the rubble of the international body 's collapsed headquarters in Port-au-Prince . 
Estonian protection officer Tarmo Joveer , Mr Ban said , was only found after `` scratching sounds '' were heard and was kept alive by being `` given water through a rubber pipe '' . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-14
Thousands spent a second night in the open after the earthquake , as the search for survivors under the rubble went on after darkness . 
The first US aid planes landed at the airport serving the capital and US naval ships were on the way . 
EU states , Russia and China were among those sending rescue and medical teams by plane while pledges of aid were made by countries around Latin America . 
The BBC 's Andy Gallacher in Port-au-Prince said the situation in the capital was increasingly desperate with no sense of a co-ordinated rescue effort , scant medical supplies and aid only trickling in . 
Efforts to rescue survivors trapped in rubble were hampered by the lack of heavy-lifting equipment and much of the work was being done by individuals with simple tools or their hands . 
Officials at the UN said between 100 and 150 people from its 9,000-strong peacekeeping mission in Haiti were still missing after the earthquake . 
They included UN mission head Hedi Annabi of Tunisia and his chief deputy , Luis Carlos da Costa . 
Haitian President Rene Preval spoke of how he stepped over dead bodies and heard cries of those trapped in the parliament building . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-13
As dawn broke , the extent of the damage and the number of casualties started to become clearer . 
The Red Cross said up to three million people had been affected . 
Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive said he believed more than 100,000 people had died . 
Describing the earthquake as a `` catastrophe '' , Haiti 's envoy to the US said the cost of the damage could run into billions of dollars . 
Haitian President Rene Preval described the scene in the capital as `` unimaginable '' . 
`` Parliament has collapsed . 
The tax office has collapsed . 
Schools have collapsed . 
Hospitals have collapsed , '' he said . 
Speaking in Washington , US President Barack Obama vowed `` unwavering support '' for Haiti after what he called a `` cruel and incomprehensible '' disaster . 
UN officials said at least 14 people had died when the UN 's five-storey headquarters and two smaller buildings in Port-au-Prince collapsed . 
Around 100 were still thought to be missing , many feared to be under the rubble . 
People in the capital were lifting sheets on bodies to try to identify loved ones . 
--------------------------------
2010-01-12
The quake - Haiti 's worst in two centuries - struck at 1653 -LRB- 2153 GMT -RRB- . 
Phone lines to the country failed shortly afterwards . 
The US Geological Survey said its epicentre was 15km -LRB- 10 miles -RRB- south-west of Port-au-Prince , and that it was quickly followed by two strong aftershocks of 5.9 and 5.5 magnitude . 
The extent of the devastation was initially unclear . 
In a statement issued in New York , the UN said that its local HQ in Haiti had `` sustained serious damage along with other UN installations '' and `` a large number '' of personnel were missing . 
--------------------------------
