Saturday : The yacht Bob , owned by BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward , seen during the JP Morgan Asset Management Round the Island Race , near Cowes , Isle of Wight . 
AP If it 's any consolation to the residents of the Gulf of Mexico , BP CEO Tony Hayward did n't win the yacht race he attended this weekend . 
His 52-foot yacht , named `` Bob , '' finished fourth in its class . 
Nonetheless , the decision by Hayward to return to England to attend JP Morgan 's annual race around the Isle of Wight is the latest `` PR gaffe '' by the head of the oil giant blamed for the largest environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
`` I think we can all conclude that Tony Hayward is not going to have a second career in PR consulting , '' White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel told ABC 's `` This Week . '' 
As Hayward spent time sailing with his son during this Father 's Day weekend , President Obama golfed with Vice President Joe Biden . 
Emanuel did n't speak to the president 's choice of down time over the weekend . 
But he did show his disdain for BP 's head , who caused cringes last month when he said that he wished the crisis would end so he could get his life back `` To quote Tony Hayward , he 's got his life back , '' Emanuel said in the interview airing Sunday . 
Gulf residents were outraged by Hayward 's decision to take the day off . 
`` That 's the height of arrogance , '' said Sen. Richard Shelby , R-Ala . 
`` He is the CEO of BP and he testified in Washington before congressional committee the other day . 
Now he 's gone over to be on his yacht over in England . 
I can tell you that yacht ought to be here skimming and cleaning up a lot of the oil . 
He ought to be down here seeing what is really going on , not in a cocoon somewhere . '' 
But BP spokesman Robert Wine said the break is Hayward 's first since the Deepwater Horizon rig that BP was leasing exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers and setting off the undersea gusher . 
`` He 's spending a few hours with his family at a weekend . 
I 'm sure that everyone would understand that , '' Wine said . 
It 's questionable whether Hayward 's day off will change much of the clean-up effort on the ground . 
Thousands of boats are on the water trying to collect the oil -- either to use or to burn . 
About 50 miles off Louisiana 's coast , a newly expanded containment system is capturing or incinerating more than 1 million gallons of oil daily , the first time it has approached its peak capacity , according to the Coast Guard . 
BP hopes that by late June it will keep nearly 90 percent of the flow from the broken pipe from hitting the ocean . 
Defense Secretary Robert Gates told `` Fox News Sunday '' that not all of the 17,500 National Guard that are awaiting deployment have been put into operation . 
But even the Pentagon is limited in its ability to help . 
`` We have offered whatever capabilities we have . 
We do n't have the kinds of equipment or particular expertise . 
I have authorized the mobilization of up to 17,500 National Guard troops in the four states that are -- that are most affected . 
We have a standing offer . 
If there 's anything people think we can do , we absolutely will do it , '' Gates said . 
The spill is causing 35,000 to 60,000 barrels of oil to contaminate the Gulf of Mexico each day . 
Over 62 days , that 's anywhere from 2.1 million to 3.72 million gallons . 
But one scientist said it would take the spill more than 700 million years for the amount of oil in the Gulf to equal the amount of water -- about 650 quadrillion gallons . 
`` This is not the death of the Gulf of Mexico , '' George Crozier , director of the Dauphin Island Sea Lab , told the Mobile -LRB- Ala. -RRB- Press-Register . 
`` If you went Gulf-wide with this and stirred it up in the Gulf of Mexico , I 'm not sure we could find it . '' 
BP has also paid out $ 104 million to Gulf residents harmed as a result of the spill . 
It has also established a $ 20 billion fund , which Rep. Joe Barton , R-Texas , likened to a White House `` shakedown '' before retracting his comment in the face of outrage among his congressional caucus and others . 
Democrats have already put Barton 's apology to BP into advertising for its midterm elections this fall . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
