Massachusetts Rep. Ed Markey on Sunday released an internal BP document that shows the oil spill could spew 100,000 barrels a day into the Gulf of Mexico , far more than has been estimated in public accounts . 
The worst-case scenario is based on what would happen if the damaged wellhead were removed and not capped . 
The document showed a low-ball estimate of 55,000 barrels per day . 
Markey , who 's been a vocal critic of the oil giant , said BP has been unscrupulous since the start of the crisis . 
`` Right from the beginning , BP was either lying or grossly incompetent . 
First they said it was only 1,000 . 
Then they said it was 5,000 barrels . 
Now we 're up to 100,000 barrels , '' Markey said on NBC 's '' Meet the Press . '' 
`` It was their technology . 
It was their spill cam . 
They are the ones that should have known right from the beginning and , either to limit their liability or because they were grossly incompetent , they delayed a full response to the magnitude of this disaster , '' he said . 
BP spokesman Toby Odone on Sunday told Reuters that he did not believe the company had underestimated the size of the spill . 
`` We 've always said we would deal with whatever volume of oil was being spilled , and that 's exactly what we 're doing . 
We 've mounted the biggest spill response in history . '' 
Markey , the Democratic chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Energy and the Environment , said that BP knew long before the explosion at the Deepwater Horizon rig that it had problems with cementing , leaks in the blowout preventer and gas kicks . 
Adm. Thad Allen , the national incident commander leading the government 's response to the spill , said Thursday that the condition of the wellbore , or the hole drilled to reach the oil field , is still unknown and is the reason that other failed efforts to cap the well were n't more rigorous . 
`` This document raises very troubling questions about what BP knew and when they knew it . 
It is clear that , from the beginning , BP has not been straightforward with the government or the American people about the true size of this spill , '' Markey said in a statement released with the document . 
`` BP needs to tell us what it will do if the wellbore is compromised and 100,000 barrels per day of oil spills into the ocean . 
At this point , we need real contingency planning , '' Markey added . 
