European Union President Criticizes Obama 's Economic Policies Members of the European Parliament vote on a package of bills . 
The Czech prime minister 's comments about U.S. policies angered some legislators . 
-LRB- Christian Lutz - AP -RRB- BERLIN , March 25 -- The president of the European Union on Wednesday ripped the Obama administration 's economic policies , calling its deficit spending and bank bailouts `` a road to hell . '' 
The comments by Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek of the Czech Republic , which holds the E.U. 's rotating presidency , startled some U.S. and European officials , who are preparing for President Obama 's visit next month to several European cities , including Prague , the Czech capital . 
In an address to the European Parliament in Strasbourg , France , Topolanek abandoned diplomatic niceties and blasted Washington for approving a $ 787 billion economic stimulus package , which he said encouraged `` protectionist '' trade policies . 
He said the overall U.S. strategy for ending the recession would flood global markets with too many dollars and lead to bigger problems . 
`` All of these steps , these combinations and permanency , is the road to hell , '' Topolanek said . 
`` The United States did not take the right path . '' 
Topolanek 's critique came one day after his government was toppled by a no-confidence vote by opposition lawmakers in the Czech Parliament . 
Although he will remain prime minister for the time being , his shaky position at home raised questions about whether he could remain effective as the E.U. president until his country 's six-month term expires at the end of June . 
`` I think this was just an attempt to show he 's a force still to be reckoned with and not a walking-dead politician , '' said Katinka Barysch , deputy director at the Center for European Reform , a London research organization . 
`` For him to come out with his guns blazing does seem a bit odd . '' 
Topolanek 's words , however , underscored a fundamental divide that persists between the United States and many European countries over the best way to respond to the global financial crisis . 
U.S. officials have pressed their European counterparts to spend substantially more public money in an attempt to revive economic growth and global trade . 
Some countries , led by Germany , have strongly resisted , predicting that such a path could lead to unsustainable debts and runaway inflation . 
Luxembourg 's prime minister , Jean-Claude Juncker , who heads a coordinating body of countries that use the euro currency , said European countries had already spent enough to jumpstart their economies . 
`` The European stimulus plans are muscular , they are demanding , they are important in volume and in quality , '' Juncker said Wednesday in an interview with France 's Europe 1 Radio . 
He said there was `` no question '' that the European Union would reject requests from Obama to spend more . 
Obama begins his transatlantic mission next week with a stop in London for a summit of the Group of 20 leading industrialized countries . 
Many European leaders have said the primary goal of the summit should be to impose greater regulation and oversight on global financial markets , instead of more government spending . 
But the 27 member countries of the European Union have had difficulty expressing themselves with a single voice . 
Topolanek 's speech to the European Parliament angered some legislators , who rebuked him for presuming that all members of the European Union agreed with his harsh criticism of Washington , or the way he delivered it . 
`` You still have n't understood what the job of the E.U. presidency is , '' said Martin Schultz , a German legislator and leader of the Socialist bloc in the Parliament . 
Topolanek rushed back to Prague after his speech to tend to his fallen government . 
Other Czech officials played down his remarks and blamed translators for making them sound harsher than intended . 
`` I was there and listened to the speech in Czech and he never mentioned the word ` hell , ' '' Alexander Vondra , the deputy Czech prime minister , told reporters in Strasbourg . 
Correspondent Edward Cody in Paris contributed to this report . 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
