In this July 31 file photo , a boat motors through an oil sheen from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill off the Louisiana coast . 
AP It took U.S. and British teams three months to cap the well in the BP oil spill . 
A Florida lawmaker does n't want to find out how long it would take Cuba to cap a similar catastrophe . 
Rep. Vern Buchanan , a Republican who represents part of Florida 's western coast , has introduced a bill aimed at blocking Cuba from drilling a new deepwater oil well in the waters off its northern coast . 
Citing threats to his state 's tourism industry and environment in the event of a potential oil spill , Buchanan has expressed concern that the communist country -- and the Spanish company it has contracted for running the Chinese-built rig -- would be incapable of handling the kind of disaster spill that strained U.S. response teams last spring . 
The proposal would treat Cuba 's drilling industry kind of like Iran 's sanctioned energy sector . 
It would empower the U.S. interior secretary to deny an oil-and-gas lease , or exploration permit , to any company dealing with a country under U.S. sanction or embargo . 
Though vague , the language is directed at Spanish oil-and-gas firm Repsol , which is heading up Cuba 's new oil plans . 
The issue troubling Buchanan is that Cuba is looking to drill for oil even deeper than BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig , which exploded last April and sent millions of barrels of oil into the Gulf . 
Not only would Cuba 's well be deeper -- at 5,600 feet compared to 5,000 feet -- but Buchanan said it would be at the edge of Cuba 's territorial waters , 50 miles from the Florida coast . 
`` As we have learned from the Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , an oil spill can devastate a regional economy and impose serious long-term environment damage to precious natural resources , '' he said in a written statement . 
In the event of a spill , he said , `` quickly capping the well would be extremely difficult , if not impossible . '' 
Buchanan said the hypothetical oil slick would take `` just three days '' to reach Florida 's beaches , which drives its tourism economy . 
Buchanan spokesman Max Goodman called the bill `` very time sensitive , '' with drilling slated to begin within a year . 
His office suggested Cuba 's government could not be counted on to clean up another mega-spill . 
Asked whether Repsol would be able to step in , Repsol representative Kristian Rix told FoxNews.com the company `` adheres to the strictest safety measures '' and develops `` comprehensive accident response plans '' in every country where it does business . 
`` We have every confidence that our teams and equipment are well prepared to carry out operations safely and effectively , '' Rix , the firm 's international and financial media manager , said in an e-mail . 
A Spanish court began an investigation last year into a spill at one of Repsol 's Mediterranean rigs , though that leak was not anywhere near as colossal as the BP spill . 
For the new rig , the United States could not directly block Cuba from drilling in its own waters . 
But under Buchanan 's bill the U.S. could threaten Repsol 's projects elsewhere in U.S. territory . 
The company operates rigs near Texas and Louisiana . 
With his bill , Buchanan wants to compel Repsol to abandon the Cuba drilling to protect its other assets . 
The company earlier backed off a natural gas project in Iran after facing pressure from the United States over Iran 's nuclear program . 
Buchanan 's not the only prominent Floridian to warn about the danger of new international drilling near the Sunshine State 's shores . 
Former Sen. Bob Graham warned in a speech Jan. 14 that Cuba is planning other drilling projects with a Russian firm . 
According to an account of the speech in The Miami Herald , Graham said the United States should partner with Mexico to draft new international drilling safety standards in the Gulf . 
In addition , he said , Mexico should press Cuba to impose such standards . 
Graham said the BP spill should be a `` wake-up call . '' 
The BP spill dumped an estimated 4.9 million barrels of oil into the Gulf , hammering the coastline and offshore waters as well as the region 's fishing and tourism economies . 
Florida 's $ 60 billion-a-year tourism industry stood to suffer the most . 
A report put out last summer by the U.S. Travel Association said Florida 's losses over the next three years could amount to nearly $ 19 billion . 
Buchanan last expressed concerns about the Cuba project in a letter to President Obama in October . 
His bill has so far attracted just two co-sponsors -- both Florida Republicans -- but Goodman said the congressman is seeking bipartisan support . 
The Interior Department had no comment when asked Monday whether Secretary Ken Salazar was interested in attaining or exercising the authority Buchanan wants to give him . 
