June 9 : American voters find the Obama administration 's response to the BP oil spill lacking , and a majority thinks the administration is in over its head , according to a Fox News poll . 
AP American voters find the Obama administration 's response to the BP oil spill lacking , and a majority thinks the administration is in over its head , according to a Fox News poll released Thursday . 
Fifty-seven percent think the administration could have done more and reacted more quickly to the spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
That 's 20 percentage points higher than the 37 percent who think the administration did as much as it could as fast as it could . 
Not unexpectedly , most Republicans -LRB- 72 percent -RRB- think the administration could have done more . 
A majority of independents -LRB- 63 percent -RRB- , as well as a substantial minority of Democrats -LRB- 43 percent -RRB- , agree . 
And while many voters -- 36 percent -- think the Obama administration is `` up to the job '' of fixing the problem in the gulf , a 54 percent majority thinks the administration is `` in over its head . '' 
BP garners even less confidence : 25 percent think it 's `` up to the job '' and 68 percent `` in over its head . '' 
Just over half of voters -LRB- 51 percent -RRB- now disapprove of the job the White House is doing on the spill . 
Some 38 percent approve , down from 44 percent approval in mid-May , and 50 percent approval the week after the rig explosion . 
BP gets worse marks : 13 percent approve and 79 percent disapprove of how the company is handling the spill . 
A majority of Democrats -LRB- 60 percent -RRB- approves of how the Obama administration is dealing with the spill , while majorities of Republicans -LRB- 74 percent -RRB- and independents -LRB- 55 percent -RRB- disapprove . 
Large majorities of Democrats -LRB- 84 percent -RRB- , Republicans -LRB- 74 percent -RRB- and independents -LRB- 80 percent -RRB- disapprove of BP 's job performance . 
President Obama 's overall job rating holds steady this week : 46 percent of voters approve and 45 percent disapprove . 
In mid-May , 45 percent approved and 46 percent disapproved -LRB- 18-19 May 2010 -RRB- . 
While a majority of voters think the president has been `` compassionate '' in reacting to the spill -LRB- 60 percent -RRB- , far fewer describe his response as `` strong leadership '' -LRB- 42 percent -RRB- or as `` aggressive '' -LRB- 28 percent -RRB- . 
In the six weeks since the rig disaster , President Obama has visited the gulf three times and is expected to go again next week . 
Nearly half of voters -- 45 percent -- think he is spending the right amount of time working on the spill . 
That 's slightly more than the 40 percent who think he 's spending too little time . 
Only 4 percent say he 's spending too much time . 
For comparison , a month after Hurricane Katrina hit the gulf coast some 51 percent of voters thought President Bush was spending the right amount of time on hurricane relief , 27 percent said too little time and 12 percent said too much -LRB- 27-28 September 2005 -RRB- . 
The national telephone poll was conducted for Fox News by Opinion Dynamics Corp. among 900 registered voters from June 8 to June 9 . 
For the total sample , the poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points . 
Who 's responsible for the oil spill ? 
More people -LRB- 58 percent -RRB- point to BP for not being prepared than point to anyone else . 
Ten percent blame environmentalists for opposing drilling on land and in shallow water . 
Similar numbers put the blame on consumers for relying on large quantities of oil and gas -LRB- 8 percent -RRB- and the federal government for allowing the drilling -LRB- 7 percent -RRB- . 
In addition , more voters think the lesson learned from the BP disaster is that drilling should be done in shallow waters or on land so problems can be more easily addressed -LRB- 40 percent -RRB- than think it 's that drilling should be seriously limited in the future -LRB- 31 percent -RRB- or that it should be done in extremely remote areas -LRB- 14 percent -RRB- . 
The number in favor of increasing offshore drilling has dropped below half for the first time and now stands at 44 percent . 
That 's down from 54 percent three weeks ago -LRB- 18-19 May 2010 -RRB- . 
In early April , before the Deep Water Horizon oil rig exploded on April 20 , fully 70 percent said they favored increasing offshore drilling in U.S. coastal waters . 
Similarly , opposition has increased to 48 percent , up from 38 percent in mid-May and 22 percent in early April . 
The largest decline in support for drilling comes from Democrats . 
Just 28 percent of Democrats favor increasing drilling in the latest poll . 
That 's a 33 percentage point drop from the 61 percent who favored it in April . 
For Republicans , 62 percent favor it today , while 79 percent favored it before the BP disaster . 
There is a similar drop in support among independents : 52 percent favor it now , down from 71 percent . 
Spill Stirs More Heartbreak than Anger When asked about their personal reactions to the spill , more voters expressed heartbreak than anger . 
A significant number also worry about the economic fallout . 
Nearly 7 in 10 voters -LRB- 69 percent -RRB- are `` very '' worried about the economic impact of the spill and another 23 percent are `` somewhat '' worried . 
Most people -- 95 percent -- say they feel heartbroken about the people and wildlife affected by the spill -LRB- 76 percent `` very '' and 19 percent `` somewhat '' -RRB- . 
Fully 83 percent are angry at those responsible -LRB- 52 percent `` very '' and 31 percent `` somewhat '' -RRB- . 
Women react more intensely than men on both measures : Women are more likely to be very angry -LRB- by 7 percentage points -RRB- as well as very heartbroken -LRB- by 8 points -RRB- . 
