June 10 , 2010 - 5:41 PM | by : Brian Wilson Foreign companies possessing some of the world s most advanced oil skimming ships say they are being kept out of efforts to clean up the oil spill in the Gulf because of a 1920 s law known as the Jones Act -- a protectionist law that requires vessels working in US waters be built in the US and be crewed by US workers . 
Joseph Carafano of the Heritage Foundation has been studying the matter and wonders , Are we accepting all the international assistance in the maritime domain that we can , and is the Jones Act an impediment to that ? 
The Coast Guard and the Administration are quick to point out that some foreign technology is being used in the current cleanup effort . 
Including : - Canada s offer of 3,000 meters of containment boom - Three sets of COSEQ sweeping arms from the Dutch - Mexico s offer of two skimmers and 4200 meters of boom - Norway s offer of 8 skimming systems But that is largely technology transferred to US vessels . 
Some of the best clean up ships owned by Belgian , Dutch and the Norwegian firms are NOT being used . 
Coast Guard Lt. Commander , Chris O Neil , says that is because they do not meet the operational requirements of the Unified Area Command . 
One of those operational requirements is that vessels comply with the Jones Act . 
`` Yes , it does apply , said ONeil , I have heard no discussions of waivers . 
Waivers to the Jones Act were granted by the administration of George W. Bush in the days following hurricane Katrina . 
And today , the Obama White House said waivers might again be considered . 
If there is the need for any type of waiver , that would obviously be granted , said White House Spokesman Robert Gibbs . 
But , we 've not had that problem thus far . 
Democratic Senator Bill Nelson is not so sure about that . 
He s hearing from the folks back home in Florida , where they want all the skimmer ships they can get . 
He sent a letter to Admiral Thad Allen today which read in part : Admiral , I believe the orange mousse of oil that is now in Florida s waters is more than enough evidence that we need to take advantage of every appropriate global resource . 
Please advise as to whether we are taking full advantage of the offers of assistance from other countries . 
When asked about this by Fox News , Admiral Allen said , If it gets to the point where a Jones Act waiver is required , we 're willing to do that too Nobody has come to me with a request for a Jones Act waiver . 
After 50 plus days of oil flowing freely into the gulf , the question could be asked : Why do effective and proven foreign clean up ships remain on the sidelines ? 
Carafano believes it may have something to do with the Obama administration s close relationship with labor unions . 
Cause this is a big thing for unions , Carafano said . 
The unions see it as protecting jobs . 
They hate when the Jones Act gets waived , and they pound on politicians when they do that . 
So are we giving in to unions and not doing everything we can , or is there some kind of impediment that we do n't know about ? 
If the Obama Administration needs an example of what can happen when global assets are allowed to tackle a massive oil spill , they need look no further than Saudi Aramco s clean up of a massive wartime spill off the Kuwaiti coast in 1991 . 
Aramco summoned every available ship to assist in the cleanup . 
The company claims it recovered 900,000 barrels of oil in roughly three months . 
The industry views that effort as the gold standard in oil spill cleanups . 
FOX News covers the action from all the angles . 
Get constant updates from our in-the-field reporters and producers and read stories you 'll only see here . 
