June 8 : The Transocean Discoverer Enterprise burns off some natural gas as it takes on oil from the broken BP wellhead at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
GRAND ISLE , La. -- BP said Thursday that it plans to boost its ability to directly capture hundreds of thousands of oil gushing from a well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico by early next week . 
Kent Wells , BP 's senior vice president of exploration and production , said a semi-submersible drilling rig would capture and burn about 420,000 gallons of oil daily . 
Once on board , the oil and gas collected from the well will be sent down a boom and burned at sea . 
A drill ship already at the scene can process a maximum of 756,000 gallons of oil daily that 's sucked up through a containment cap sitting on the well head . 
The containment effort played out as BP stock continued to plunge amid fears that the company might be forced to suspend dividends and find itself overwhelmed by the cleanup costs , penalties , damage claims and lawsuits generated by the biggest oil spill in U.S. history . 
But markets were also beginning to heed warnings from analysts who said Wednesday 's 15.8 percent sell-off of BP shares in New York was an overreaction . 
BP shares dropped as much as 11 percent to a 13-year low at the open in London on Thursday , then recovered some ground by early afternoon , trading 6.1 percent lower at $ 5.39 . 
In New York , the stock opened 9.8 percent higher at $ 32.05 . 
BP has lost around half its market value since the spill began with the April 20 rig explosion that killed 11 workers and set off the spill in the Gulf . 
In the seven weeks since then , the company has lost half its market value . 
In a federal filing Thursday , the company said the cost of its response to the oil spill has grown to $ 1.43 billion . 
The latest slide came after Interior Secretary Ken Salazar promised a Senate energy panel to ask BP to compensate energy companies for losses if they have to lay off workers or suffer economically because of the Obama administration 's six-month moratorium on deep-water drilling . 
In an interview Thursday on ABC 's '' Good Morning America , '' Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu reiterated her call to end the moratorium , saying it will cause economic hardship in the region . 
`` Every one of these 33 deep-water wells employs , directly , hundreds of people and indirectly thousands , '' she said . 
Cleanup continued along the Gulf Coast . 
In Orange Beach , Ala. , reddish-brown globs of oil the size of credit cards littered the beach at the tide line as a blue farm tractor loaded with shovels and other cleanup equipment chugged down the beach . 
Dozens of workers in orange vests and blue jeans prepared to start their day combing the beach for oil . 
Shrimpers , oystermen , seafood businesses , out-of-work drilling crews and the tourism industry who have filed damage claims with BP also are angrily complaining of delays , excessive paperwork and skimpy payments that have put them on the verge of going under as the financial and environmental toll of the seven-week-old disaster grows . 
`` Every day we call the adjuster eight or 10 times . 
There 's no answer , no answering machine , '' said Regina Shipp , who has filed $ 33,000 in claims for lost business at her restaurant in Alabama . 
`` If BP does n't pay us within two months , we 'll be out of business . 
We 've got two kids . '' 
BP spokesman Mark Proegler disputed any notion that the claims process is slow or that the company is dragging its feet . 
Proegler said BP has cut the time to process claims and issue a check from 45 days to as little as 48 hours , if the necessary documentation has been supplied . 
BP officials acknowledged that while no claims have been denied , thousands and thousands had not been paid by late last week because the company required more documentation . 
At the bottom of the sea , the containment cap on the ruptured well is capturing 630,000 gallons a day and pumping it to a ship at the surface , and the amount could nearly double by next week to roughly 1.17 million gallons , said Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , who is overseeing the crisis for the government . 
A second vessel expected to arrive within days should greatly boost capacity . 
BP also plans to bring in a tanker from the North Sea to help transport oil and an incinerator to burn off some of the crude . 
The additional system will use equipment previously employed to shoot heavy drilling mud down the well in an attempt to stop the flow , although this time the process will work in reverse . 
Oil will flow in lines from beneath the blowout preventer , a stack of piping on the sea floor , to a semi-submersible drilling rig called the Q4000 . 
Oil and gas siphoned from the well will flow up the rig , where it will be sent down a boom , turned into a mist and ignited using a burner designed by Schlumberger Ltd. . 
BP opted to burn the oil because storing it would require bringing in even more vessels to the already crowded seas above the leaking well . 
`` It was going to become too congested , it was not the safest way to do it , '' Wells said . 
Testing on the oil-burning system should begin over the weekend , and full production should start early next week , Wells said . 
The government has estimated 600,000 to 1.2 million gallons are leaking per day , but a scientist on a task force studying the flow said the actual rate may be between 798,000 gallons and 1.8 million . 
A task force member said an estimate come Thursday or Friday . 
Crews working at the site toiled under oppressive conditions as the heat index soared to 110 degrees and toxic vapors emanated from the depths . 
Fireboats were on hand to pour water on the surface to ease the fumes . 
Allen also has confronted BP over the complaints about the claims process , warning the company in a letter : `` We need complete , ongoing transparency into BP 's claims process including detailed information on how claims are being evaluated , how payment amounts are being calculated and how quickly claims are being processed . '' 
Under federal law , BP is required to pay for a range of losses , including property damage and lost earnings . 
Residents and businesses can call a telephone line to report losses , file a claim online and seek help at one of 25 claims offices around the Gulf . 
To jump-start the process , BP was initially offering an immediate $ 2,500 to deckhands and $ 5,000 to fishing boat owners . 
Workers can receive additional compensation once their paperwork and larger claims are approved . 
BP said it has paid 18,000 claims so far and has hired 600 adjusters and operators to handle the cases . 
A Closer Look at the Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill Sign up for free e-mail news alerts from FoxNews.com and FoxBusiness.com . 
