10 January 12 18:37 GMT Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has blamed a foreign conspiracy for trying to destabilise Syria , as a mass uprising against his rule continues . 
The `` external conspiracy is clear to everybody '' , Mr Assad said in his first public remarks in months . 
He said elections could be held later this year but `` terrorism '' , he added , would be met with an `` iron fist '' . 
Meanwhile the Arab League said it held the government `` totally responsible '' for attacks against its observers . 
In a statement issued on Tuesday , Arab League chief Nabil al-Arabi denounced `` irresponsible action and acts of violence against the league 's observers '' in Syria . 
Mr Arabi said some monitors had been wounded in attacks by both pro-regime elements and by opposition supporters . 
Earlier , Kuwait 's state news agency said two Kuwaiti members of the mission had been slightly injured on Monday in the city of Latakia by `` unidentified protesters '' . 
They were discharged from hospital and have now returned to their duties , Kuna news agency said . 
President Assad 's speech , broadcast live from Damascus University , was his third televised address since protests against his rule began in March , and lasted nearly two hours . 
`` Regional and international sides have tried to destabilise the country , '' he said . 
`` Our priority now is to regain the security in which we basked in for decades , and this can only be achieved by hitting the terrorists with an iron fist . 
`` We will not be lenient with those who work with outsiders against the country . '' 
BBC world affairs correspondent Nick Childs says the speech was a riposte to those who are asking questions about the pressure under which Mr Assad is operating . 
It was a message that there will be no concessions and its main theme was that nothing is going to change as far as the Syrian response is concerned , our correspondent says . 
Syrian authorities say they are fighting armed groups , and that about 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed so far . 
In recent months , army deserters have joined the opposition and targeted government forces . 
A team of 165 monitors from the Arab League has been in Syria since December to monitor implementation of a peace plan that calls for an end to all violence , the removal of heavy weapons from cities and the release of all political prisoners . 
Opposition groups have accused the Arab League mission of serving to cover up the crackdown on the protests , which has continued despite the presence of the observers . 
Mr Assad said that there were no orders for security forces to fire on protesters . 
`` There is no order from any level about opening fire on any citizen . 
According to the law , nobody should open fire - only in self-defence or during a clash with an armed person . '' 
Reacting to the speech , the head of the opposition Syrian National Council , Burhan Ghalioun , said Mr Assad 's emphasis on restoring order `` means he is backing away from his own pledge to the Arab League plan '' . 
Mr Ghalioun said the anti-terrorist measures announced by Mr Assad `` undercut any Arab or non-Arab initiative to find a political solution to the crisis '' . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , a network of anti-government activists , said 35 protesters had been killed on Tuesday , including 17 in the eastern city of Deir al-Zour . 
The UN says 400 people have been killed by security forces since the start of the observer mission . 
Last month the UN put the death toll since March at 5,000 . 
In his speech , Mr Assad lashed out at the Arab League , which suspended Syria in November and imposed sanctions , saying : `` We were surprised Arabs did not stand with Syria '' . 
He said Arab countries that opposed Syria were under outside pressure , which was undermining their sovereignty . 
But , he added , Syria would not `` close its doors '' to an Arab solution as long as `` it respects Syria 's sovereignty '' . 
There were no obstacles to a multi-party system , he said , adding that it was a question of time . 
Mr Assad said he welcomed the idea of expanding the government to include `` all political forces '' . 
A referendum on a new constitution could be held in March , he said , paving the way for elections in May or June . 
Syria is ruled by the Baath party , dominated by President Assad 's family and the minority Alawite sect , an offshoot of Shia Islam . 
He took power in 2000 after the death of his father Hafez al-Assad , who ruled Syria for 40 years . 
`` I rule with the will of the people , '' he said . 
`` If I give up power , I will do so with the will of the people too . '' 
