Syrian President Bashar al-Assad : `` Nobody can deny the seriousness of these plots '' Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has blamed a foreign conspiracy for trying to destabilise Syria , as a mass uprising against his rule continues . 
The `` external conspiracy is clear to everybody '' , Mr Assad said in his first public remarks in months . 
He said elections could be held later this year but `` terrorism '' , he added , would be met with an `` iron fist '' . 
Meanwhile the Arab League said it held the government `` totally responsible '' for attacks against its observers . 
In a statement issued on Tuesday , Arab League chief Nabil al-Arabi denounced `` irresponsible action and acts of violence against the league 's observers '' in Syria . 
Mr Arabi said some monitors had been wounded in attacks by both pro-regime elements and by opposition supporters . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Istanbul We have heard much of this script before from Bashar al-Assad . 
The crisis in his country has been caused by a foreign conspiracy ; the protesters are terrorists ; he still has the support of the Syrian people ; and his government alone will implement reform . 
It was a rambling speech to a sympathetic audience . 
The president appeared relaxed , even managing a few jokes . 
But there was no flexibility in his view of the uprising , which is blamed entirely on other countries and internal enemies - not even the smallest acknowledgement that the protesters may have legitimate demands . 
It is possible he really believes this Orwellian narrative . 
Or it is possible he was shoring up his base , sticking to his guns to show them he intends to stay at the helm . 
He offered a timetable for reform , stating that a new constitution could be put to a referendum by March this year , with multiparty elections following two or three months after that . 
Given the turmoil in Syria , this is an impossibly tight schedule . 
Either the president is making a promise he knows he can not honor or he has lost his grip on reality . 
Earlier , Kuwait 's state news agency said two Kuwaiti members of the mission had been slightly injured on Monday in the city of Latakia by `` unidentified protesters '' . 
They were discharged from hospital and have now returned to their duties , Kuna news agency said . 
President Assad 's speech , broadcast live from Damascus University , was his third televised address since protests against his rule began in March , and lasted nearly two hours . 
`` Regional and international sides have tried to destabilise the country , '' he said . 
`` Our priority now is to regain the security in which we basked in for decades , and this can only be achieved by hitting the terrorists with an iron fist . 
`` We will not be lenient with those who work with outsiders against the country . '' 
BBC world affairs correspondent Nick Childs says the speech was a riposte to those who are asking questions about the pressure under which Mr Assad is operating . 
It was a message that there will be no concessions and its main theme was that nothing is going to change as far as the Syrian response is concerned , our correspondent says . 
I rule with the will of the people . 
If I give up power , I will do so with the will of the people too '' End Quote President Bashar al-Assad Syrian authorities say they are fighting armed groups , and that about 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed so far . 
In recent months , army deserters have joined the opposition and targeted government forces . 
A team of 165 monitors from the Arab League has been in Syria since December to monitor implementation of a peace plan that calls for an end to all violence , the removal of heavy weapons from cities and the release of all political prisoners . 
Opposition groups have accused the Arab League mission of serving to cover up the crackdown on the protests , which has continued despite the presence of the observers . 
Mr Assad said that there were no orders for security forces to fire on protesters . 
`` There is no order from any level about opening fire on any citizen . 
According to the law , nobody should open fire - only in self-defence or during a clash with an armed person . '' 
Reacting to the speech , the head of the opposition Syrian National Council , Burhan Ghalioun , said Mr Assad 's emphasis on restoring order `` means he is backing away from his own pledge to the Arab League plan '' . 
Anti-government protests have continued despite a heavy crackdown against them Mr Ghalioun said the anti-terrorist measures announced by Mr Assad `` undercut any Arab or non-Arab initiative to find a political solution to the crisis '' . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , a network of anti-government activists , said 35 protesters had been killed on Tuesday , including 17 in the eastern city of Deir al-Zour . 
The UN says 400 people have been killed by security forces since the start of the observer mission . 
Last month the UN put the death toll since March at 5,000 . 
In his speech , Mr Assad lashed out at the Arab League , which suspended Syria in November and imposed sanctions , saying : `` We were surprised Arabs did not stand with Syria '' . 
He said Arab countries that opposed Syria were under outside pressure , which was undermining their sovereignty . 
But , he added , Syria would not `` close its doors '' to an Arab solution as long as `` it respects Syria 's sovereignty '' . 
There were no obstacles to a multi-party system , he said , adding that it was a question of time . 
Mr Assad said he welcomed the idea of expanding the government to include `` all political forces '' . 
A referendum on a new constitution could be held in March , he said , paving the way for elections in May or June . 
Syria is ruled by the Baath party , dominated by President Assad 's family and the minority Alawite sect , an offshoot of Shia Islam . 
He took power in 2000 after the death of his father Hafez al-Assad , who ruled Syria for 40 years . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
10th January 2012 - 21:26 In short , I hope that the Syrian people can find the freedom that they 're looking for and I hope that they can do it with as little bloodshed as possible , although unfortunately Assad will scorch the earth before that happens . 
Also , I hope we -LRB- the West -RRB- stay the heck out of it . 
It 's their fight to win or loose on their own accord and it is n't our problem . 
10th January 2012 - 20:48 A collapse of the Assad regime will bring chaos , like that which followed the invasion of Iraq , rather than the relatively smooth transition of Tunisia . 
Assad is indeed correct . 
The Syrian people have conspired to remove him . 
He 's stating the obvious . 
In Syria , the will of the Syrian people , not the will of the ` West ' , will ultimately prevail ! 
10th January 2012 - 16:01 If only someone in Syria could stand up and say `` Syria for the Syrians - to hell with Iran , Hezbollah , Palestinians , Israel , Lebanon , interfering clerics , Saudi , the US and Russia . 
We have a fabulous country with a rich and vibrant culture . 
We will be a country that is for all Syrians . 
We will get our lost land back from Israel through negotiation and become a happy , prosperous secular democracy '' 10th January 2012 - 15:31 I believe that this Syrian Uprising is just another western `` color '' revolution . 
I believe this because Syria is an the west 's way in its bid to make war with Iran . 
What we are seeing in Syria is a deliberate and calculated campaign to bring down the Assad government so as to replace it with a regime more compatible ' with US interests in the region . 
10th January 2012 - 15:28 Here we go again ... Just like Lybia , Iraq , Eygpt , Iran and Tunsia yet another dictator and his cronies hanging on to power , corruption and oppression . 
Let 's hope the Syrian masses will prevail and over through thier tyrant as there seems to be only lip service from the Arab league , who no doubt have pictures of Gadaffi and Saddam still freah in thier minds . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
