Page last updated at 11:14 GMT , Thursday , 3 February 2011 -LRB- an error occurred while processing this directive -RRB- Michael Jackson 's mother said promoters ignored signs of stress in the singer Michael Jackson 's mother can go ahead with a lawsuit claiming the promoters of his This Is It tour were responsible for his death , an LA judge has ruled . 
Katherine Jackson 's suit argues that AEG Live pushed the singer too far in `` gruelling rehearsals '' . 
Jacko was due to perform 50 comeback concerts at the O2 Arena in London . 
His mother also claims AEG were responsible for hiring the doctor who is accused of the singer 's manslaughter . 
AEG had argued the case should n't be heard as Jackson was responsible for his own health . 
Michael Jackson died in June 2009 after suffering a cardiac arrest Jackson 's mother filed the lawsuit in September 2010 on behalf of herself and the star 's three children , Prince Michael , Michael Junior and Paris-Michael Katherine . 
She claims AEG ignored signs of physical stress which the singer showed in the months before his death , and that he was cold and shivering during the summer rehearsals for the tour . 
`` AEG insisted that he attend every rehearsal in a gruelling schedule , threatening that if he missed even one more they would cancel the tour , '' Mrs Jackson said . 
But entertainment giants AEG said nobody could have predicted that Jackson was going to die , or what Dr Conrad Murray 's actions would have been . 
The company 's lawyers said the singer himself had hired Dr Murray , who goes on trial in March 2011 for involuntary manslaughter . 
`` Michael Jackson was not helpless or incompetent , '' they said . 
But the judge dismissed their claims , setting a new court date of 22 March 2011 . 
He said : `` The question is did Michael Jackson witness the negligence and did he understand what was going on ? '' 
Jackson died in June 2009 from an overdose of the powerful anesthetic propofol , along with other sedatives and painkillers . 
The first of his sold out This Is It dates had been scheduled for the following month . 
When he made a brief appearance in the UK to launch the tour , Jackson himself said the shows would serve as a `` final curtain '' . 
